portrait of William Oldys From an Original Picture in the Possession of John
Tailor Esquire -- Engraved by Balston.

William Oldys Esqr.


THE BRITISH LIBRARIAN: Exhibiting a COMPENDIOUS REVIEW OR ABSTRACT Of our most
Scarce, Useful, and Valuable BOOKS IN ALL SCIENCES, AS WELL IN MANUSCRIPT AS IN
PRINT: With many CHARACTERS, Historical and Critical, OF THE AUTHORS, their
ANTAGONISTS, etc. In a Manner never before attempted, And Useful to all
READERS. With a Complete INDEX to the Volume.

Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere.
Hor. LONDON: Printed for T. OSBORNE, in Gray's-Inn. M.DCC.XXXVIII.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE vast Number of Books which the Pen and Press have produced, has made all
Lovers of Literature desirous of knowing, by some compendious Methods, what has
been written in the several Sciences to which they have appropriated their
Studies: And this Desire grows more importunate, as the Difficulty increases of
satisfying it; the Works of the Learned multiplying so much beyond the Accounts
which are given of them, and our Attention being engrossed to the Regard only
of some few Writers, by those very means, which might be used to give us a
tolerable notice of all, who any ways deserve it.

For several Attempts have indeed been made, in many Countries, to gratify in
some measure, this universal Curiosity; but in England, especially, by such
narrow and circumscribed Schemes, as have left many Impediments to the
Advancement of human Knowledge unremov'd. For through the Defect of such
Intelligence, in its proper Extent; how many AUTHORS have we, who are consuming
their Time, their Quiet and their Wits, in searching after that which is either
past finding, or already found? In admiring at the Penetrations themselves have
made, though to the Rind only, in those very Branches of Science which their
Forefathers have pierced to the Pith? And how many, who would be Authors, as
excellent as ever appeared, had they but such Plans or Models laid before them,
as might induce them to marshal their Thoughts into a regular Order; or did
they but know where to meet with Concurrence of Opinion, with Arguments,
Authorities or Examples, to corroborate and ripen their teeming Conceptions?

Again, had such Intelligence been dispersed in its due Scope and Latitude, how
many BOOKSELLERS, who would neither be imposed upon themselves, with mere
Transcripts of obsolete and obscure Works, for modern Compositions, nor impose
upon others, so much to the Discredit of their Trade, and, in the main, to
their own Disadvantage, either such injudicious Valuations of some old Books,
or so many immature Publications of new ones; when the same Subjects are
already more significantly handled at their very Elbows, but mourning in a kind
of Sackloth and Ashes, for that Revival, they might at a much easier Expense,
be preferred to; knew the Possessors but where, even in their own Shops to find
them? Nor yet would they impose upon themselves the Losses they often so
voluntarily do, of turning those very Pieces to Waste-paper, which to some
Reader or other would be most acceptable, knew the one how to communicate, and
the other, how to compass the Contents thereof.

Lastly, how many READERS, who would not be glad of attaining to Knowledge the
shortest way, seeing the Orb thereof is swollen to such a Magnitude, and Life but
such a Span to grasp it? How many, who have not some Curiosity to know the
Foundations of those Tenets upon which they so securely trust their
Understandings? Or where the Footsteps of those Precepts and Precedents may be
found, which have given Direction to so many modern Performances? Who would not
embrace the most likely means to detect the vile Grievance of Plagiarism, and
deter so many disadvantageous Repetitions of the same thing? What Reader would
not think it convenient to be apprized of the Worth of Authors, before he gave
them place in his Study or Esteem, by some previous Characters or little
Analysis of what is comprised in them? And who would not find it commodious to
have the opportunity of revising the Library of which he is, he has been, or
may be possessed, in faithful Portraits thereof, at such Times and Places in
which he cannot come at the Originals? In a word, if he be ignorant, who would
not covet to enlarge his Knowledge? If he be knowing, who would not willingly
refresh his Memory? And yet all the Expedients we have to accommodate the
Curious with so many Desiderata, are only some superficial Catalogues, either
of Authors, rather than their Works, or of the Works of Authors only, in some
one peculiar place of Education, or in some single Science; or else, those
which have been most cursorily taken of some particular Libraries; and also a
few Extracts, limited to the Recommendation only of some modern Writers.

As for our CATALOGUES of Books, they are generally, and indeed necessarily,
through the great Charge and Hurry which attend the making and printing them at
proper Junctures, so short and defective, that we cannot often understand, by
the two or three Words they bestow upon a Volume, the very Title, nor sometimes
the Size, nor frequently the Time when it was printed, much less the Matter
treated of therein: So that many Gentlemen, who live remote from the Places
where our Sales and Auctions are made, are, by the blind and doubtful
Informations which these Catalogues afford them, both led to overlook some
Books which they have most occasion for, and to give Commissions for the
Purchase of others, by which they are utterly disappointed, as answering in no
wise their Expectation. Nay, many who have Opportunities even of being present
where such Libraries are disposed of, do still, after Examination, commonly
meet with no less Disappointment. For the bare and naked Titles of Books,
especially so contracted, are insufficient to explain them at best, or when
their Contents are ingenuously designed to be signified by the Titles; but, on
the contrary, the Titles of many are often mere Paradoxes, Enigmas, and even
Contrarieties to the Subjects or Arguments maintained in them; and are so
disguised, many times, through Artifice, by the Authors, Editors, and Booksellers
themselves, to deceive the Purchaser, and catch him by the Purse. This Deceit
will last as long as Books, if the other Expedient of Extracts is not more
effectually put in execution, than it has hitherto been done.

For EXTRACTS indeed would have prevented all these Inconveniences, had they
been employed in a Scheme, only as comprehensive, as it is obvious to be
suggested. But though it is above fifty Years since such Extracts of Books were
first published in England, yet do all, or the greatest part which have been
here made, respect only the Works of a few contemporary Writers; as if it were
a shame not to be ungrateful, and trample those Predecessors into Oblivion, by
the help of whose Learning and Abilities, the Moderns have improved their own.
But this is a very partial and pernicious kind of Flattery, so to celebrate and
compliment the Learning and Genius of the present Times, that Posterity may not
believe any before them worthy of their notice: For those who extend not their
Knowledge beyond their own Age, must not only lose the noblest Inheritance of
their Ancestors, but instruct their Successors to imitate their Example, and
deal the same measure to the present, which these have dealt to the past.

For these Reasons, and many others, in which an intelligent Reader might
forestall us, we think it high time to begin with an Undertaking which may
include both those Expedients to their full Advantage, in a Catalogue more
complete, as to the Titles of Books, which alone would be no inconsiderable
Improvement upon what has been done, and an Extract more unlimited, as to the
Times in which they were written, than have hitherto appeared among us; so as
to facilitate the most useful Researches of the Living, by a general Register
of, or Directory to the most notable Particulars in the Labors of the Dead.

And the more directly to prosecute this Attempt, it is comprehended under the
Title of the BRITISH LIBRARIAN: For not only because Matters of our own
Observation are generally most applicable to us, or because the running into
Books of all Countries, would make it a Work of which we could never hope to
see any End, or tolerable Progress; but chiefly because our Pains and Respect
are principally due to our own Country; because also such Service thereunto has
been most neglected; and because the Language thereof is most extensively
useful to our own People, we shall confine ourselves to our own Authors; and
some indeed of those Foreigners likewise, who are either become as it were
naturalized among us, by Translations, or have deserved to be so, by treating
of English Affairs.

By calling this Work of our LIBRARIAN a compendious Review or Abstract, we
propose not always a minute and entire Epitome of every Book, which would make
a Scheme of this Compass so tedious and voluminous, that we know not whether
our Readers or ourselves would be first wearied in going through it. Besides,
excellent Authors, so served, would never satisfy curious Readers; and those
Authors who cannot claim that Character, would either not deserve such
distinction, or not be suffered, by the Attention which others, equally
deserving, would also demand, to exact such particular Cognizance, in a Work of
such a general Nature. Our Business therefore cannot be so much to delight
Readers with the Flowers of Books, or satisfy them with a smooth Contexture of
all the Reasons and Arguments in them, as to point out those Heads or Topics,
which, like so many Streams and Rivulets that severally arise in the Provinces
of Literature, may best direct them to the Fountains themselves, where every
Reader will extract those Parts, and those Proportions, which no Epitomist can
do for him. So that by this Compendium of Hints and Advertisements concerning
the most observable Persons and Places, Times and Things, which have been
spoken of in the Writings of Men, is intended a Promptuary only, to the Search
of those Writings, as the most ready means to expedite the Attainment of what
every one is seeking. For as the excellent Lord Bacon complains, " De Augment.
Scientiarum, Lib. 3. cap. 5.
learned Men want such Inventories of every thing in Art and Nature, as rich Men
have of their Estates." Here then, we hope to supply that Want, by giving not
only such Inventories of all those things, but, at the same time, a Reference
to the Observations in their Authors which have been further made on them; and
not only that, but oftentimes what has been observed even of the Authors also.
And this more expressly, after presenting first of all their Titles, commonly at
length, in a manner as agreeably diversified as the Authors will conveniently
permit; sometimes with Reasons for the Choice of them; a transient View of the
Drift or Design, and Contents of those we revive; some Notice of their Vouchers
and Authorities; some Sketches of their chief Arguments or Examples; some
Indication of their Method, and Instances of their Style, occasionally, as they
yield Matter most likely to be serviceable; with Characters also sometimes
subjoined, which others have given of them. And in this treatment of good old
Authors, we hope for the same effect, as in the pruning of good old Trees, in
which the Gardener does not pride himself with the Twigs which he cuts off, or
throws together, but expects that the Operation will be a means of making the
Stocks themselves, from whence they grew, shoot forth with fresh Vigor, and
reward, with better Fruits, the Hands that shall gather them.

By our most Scarce, Useful, and Valuable Books in all Sciences, we intend the
most considerable of all Times, from the most Ancient we can procure, to the
most Modern, in all Sizes, even Pamphlets as well as bound Volumes. And here
our Scheme is so copious as to admit not only of many which have been long
buried in Darkness by their great Age, but some, in a manner so young, as never
yet to have seen the Light of Publication, being only in the Press, or but
going to it; and that, in a Method, as may be hence gathered, more satisfactory
than they are usually notified to the Public. And because we have received
hopes from some eminent and judicious Persons, who approve of this Undertaking,
that we shall be favored from time to time with several useful Manuscripts
which have long lain disregarded, we propose to enrich our Collections with a
short Account also of one or more in every Number.

For as to the Method of Publication, we find it most commodious, that we may
better admit the Communications of such as please to oblige us with their
Correspondence, that it should be Monthly, and in such a miscellaneous manner
as may yield the greatest Variety; so that every Number may be a little
Pocket-Library, describing Folio's, Quarto's, Octavo's, Pamphlets and
Manuscripts: By which different Sizes, Readers, of different Circumstances, may
be the easier suited in the Purchases they are inclined to. Then also, as much,
generally, as Opportunity will allow, of the various Sciences in every Number,
for the like Reason, that Readers of different Studies may the sooner be
informed of what they are enquiring after. For a Publication Topically
digested, or Chronologically, would be impracticable, unless a Man had all the
Books in the Kingdom together at once, to methodize, before he set out: And
then it would be very inconvenient, by attracting only one Set of Readers to
that one Branch, and making all the rest wait till the Course of their
respective Studies arose; by which they would yet lose many pertinent
Digressions upon their own Subjects, which would occur in the different
Sciences; for they interchange, and some Subjects are often to be found in
Books of all Sciences, while other Books would be denied admission under any
one of them, because they do not distinctly profess any, or directly treat of
all. Moreover, the Sale of some Sciences would, in that case, be so
unproportionable to others, that it would be a great Discouragement to the
Undertaking, and render the Edition of the whole, in many parts, incomplete.
Besides, this abstracted Revival of Books, independent of each other, as to the
Subjects, was never objected to any other Schemes of Abridgment, which have
been, or are carried on, in Latin, French, or English; the Readers well
knowing, how easily they may be directed to what they want, by Tables and
Indexes annexed to every Volume.

Thus we are not under any Anxiety about what Authors we shall commence with,
or with whom we shall conclude, since that which is looked for in this Number,
may arise in the next: Nor are we under any Apprehension of being misconstrued
to pledge our own Judgment for the Merits of all the Authors we shall revive,
since whatever they are essentially, it is the Application of them, the Use to
which they are converted, that makes them effectually good or bad; wherefore,
it is in the Readers Power to make few Authors unworthy of such Revival.
However, we shall use our best Endeavors to please them, and always be
submissive to better Judgments: So that if any Improvement of our Undertaking
shall come to hand, we shall gratefully acknowledge, and cheerfully pursue it;
if not, and the Encouragement of the Public shall be proportionable to the
Industry we bestow upon this Scheme, we hope that any Imperfections in our
execution thereof, will bear no proportion to the Benefits which may
universally flow from it.

The CONTENTS of No 1.
I. GILDAS his Epistle to the Britains, lamenting their Ruin, through the Vices
of their Princes and their Pastors: Written above Eleven Hundred Years since.
Octavo. II. WILLIAM of OCCHAM 's Dialogue concerning the Spiritual and Temporal
Power: Written above Four Hundred Years since. Printed on the black Letter.
Octavo. III. W. PRYNNE 's Chronological Vindication of our Kings Supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, from the Reign of Lucius to the Death of K.
Richard I. Folio. IV. The second Tome of his Chronological Vindication, etc.
from the first of K. John to the Death of K. Henry III. Folio. V. The History
of K. John, K. Henry III. and K. Edward I. or Third Tome, which completes the
said Chronological Vindication. Folio. VI. JOHN WICLIFFE 's Poor Caitif: A fair
MS. on Vellum, illuminated, and composed above Three Hundred and fifty Years
since. Octavo. VII. RICHARD ARNOLDE 's Chronicle; or the Customs of LONDON.
Printed in the old English Letter. Folio. VIII. DR. WILLIAM CUNINGHAM 's
Cosmographical Glass, containing the Principles of Cosmography, Geography, and
Hydrography: Being the first Book published on this Subject in England: Adorned
with Maps, Tables, etc. Folio. IX. DR. JOHN COTTA 's Discovery of the Dangers
of ignorant Practisers of Physic in England; in three Books. Quarto. X. DR.
THOMAS POWELL 's Human Industry, or History of Manual Arts; under twelve Heads.
Octavo XI. M. KEMPII Bibliotheca ANGLORUM Theologica, cum Appendice, De Regia
Societate LONDINENSI. Quarto. XII. An Historical Account of the ENGLISH STAGE,
showing the ancient Use of our Dramatic Representations. Octavo.
N.B. The Second Number, to be published next Month, will contain a greater
Variety of Books: And the Communications of such choice Pieces, either in MS.
or Print, as we have been, or shall be favored with, will be distinctly and
gratefully acknowledged in the last Number of the Volume.

The CONTENTS of No II.
XIII. EARL RIVERS his Translation of The Dictes or Sayings of the
Philosophers. Printed by CAXTON. Folio. XIV. Sir JOHN FROSSART 's Chronicles of
England, France, Spain, etc. during the Reigns of King EDWARD III. and King
RICHARD II. Translated by Sir JOHN BOURCHIER, Lord BERNERS, etc. Folio. With a
large Account of the Author. XV. JOHN BALE 's Acts of ENGLISH VOTARIES;
comprehending their unchaste Practices and Examples for 1200 Years. Octavo.
XVI. WILLIAM WEBEE 's Discourse of ENGLISH POETRY; with his Judgment for
reforming our VERSE, and Character of our POETS, down to the middle of Queen
ELIZABETH 's Reign. Quarto. XVII. Dr. L'ESPAGNOL 's Notable History of the
CONVERSION of the ENGLISH, under the LIFE of St. WALBURG the Virgin Abbess, and
Daughter of St. RICHARD the King. Written in French. Octavo. XVIII. GERARD
MALYNES Maintenance of FREE TRADE, according to the Three Essential Parts of
Traffic. Octavo. XIX. JOHN TILESON 's HONOR'S GENEALOGY: or the Arms of the
Ancient and late Kings of ENGLAND. With the several Degrees of all our
Nobility, their Creation, Succession, Matches, Issues and Arms, in their proper
Colors, from the Entrance of WILLIAM the CONQUEROR to the latter End of King
CHARLES I. A fair Manuscript. Folio. XX. JONH WEBSTER 's EXAMINATION of
ACADEMIES; setting forth the Insufficiency of Scholastic Learning, and
Expedients for reforming the same. Quarto. XXI. Dr. JOSEPH GLANVILL 's PLUS
ULTRA, or Advancement of KNOWLEDGE since the Days of ARISTOTLE; giving a
particular Account of many Modern Improvements therein. Octavo. XXII. ELIAS
ASHMOLE 's Institution, Laws and Ceremonies of the most NOBLE ORDER of the
GARTER; adorned with many curious Cuts. Folio. With some Account of his further
Designs in Honor of the said Order, from a MS. of his own, never printed.
The CONTENTS of No III.
XXIII. WILLIAM CAXTON's Translation of VIRGIL's AENEIDOS. Folio. Inscribed by
him to Prince ARTHUR. XXIV. HUMPHRY LHOYD 's Translation of the HISTORY of
WALES, augmented and published by Dr. DAVID POWEL, and dedicated to Sir PHILIP
SIDNEY. Quarto. XXV. RICHARD HACKLUYT 's Voyages, Traffics and Discoveries of
the ENGLISH NATION; in Three Volumes. Fol. XXVI. EDWARD BREREWOOD 's Enquiries
touching the DIVERSITY of LANGUAGES and RELIGIONS, through the chief Parts of
the World. Quarto. XXVII. Sir JOHN FINETT 's Observations touching the
Reception, Precedence, Treatment, Punctilios, Contests, etc. of FOREIGN
AMBASSADORS in ENGLAND. Octavo. XXVIII. Sir WILLIAM DUGDALE 's ORIGINES
JURIDICIALES: or, Historical Memorials of the English Laws, Courts of Justice,
Inns of Court, Law-Writers, etc. With a CHRONOLOGY of the Lord Chancellors,
Justices, etc. Folio. XXIX. Dr. ROBERT PLOT 's NATURAL HISTORY of
STAFFORDSHIRE. Folio. XXX. A COLLECTION of ROYAL GRANTS from the Beginning of
King HENRY VIII. to the latter End of King WILLIAM III. A fair MS. in Folio.
XXXI. Mr. THOMAS HEARNE 's Collection of Curious DISCOURSES, written by eminent
ANTIQUARIES upon several Heads in our ENGLISH ANTIQUITIES. Octavo.
The CONTENTS of No IV.
XXXII. WILLIAM CAXTON's Translation of the ORDER of KNIGHTHOOD, Inscribed to
King RICHARD III. Quarto. XXXIII. Sir THOMAS MORE's English WORKS. Dedicated to
Queen MARY. Folio. XXXIV. THOMAS TWYNE 's Translation of H. LHUYD's Breviary of
BRITAIN. 8vo. XXXV. Dr. THOMAS JAMES his CORRUPTION of SCRIPTURE, COUNCILS and
FATHERS by the CHURCH of ROME, etc. Quarto. XXXVI. The YOUNGER BROTHER's
APOLOGY: or a Father 's free Power disputed, for the Disposition of his Lands
to any of his Children. Quarto. XXXVII. REGINALD SCOT's Discovery of
WITCHCRAFT, and many other like Impostures, for the Undeceiving of Judges,
Justices, Juries, etc. Quarto. XXXVIII. The VALE-ROYAL of ENGLAND: or County
Palatine of CHESTER, illustrated by W. SMITH, W. WEBB, and published by D.
KING, with Sculptures. Also Mr. CHALONER 's Account of the ISLE of MAN. XXXIX.
Sir THOMAS BODLEY 's LIFE, LETTERS and STATUTES, for the Foundation of the
Public LIBRARY at OXFORD. 8vo. XL. The Lord Chancellor FORTESCUE 's Difference
between Absolute and Limited MONARCHY. Published by the present Judge
FORTESCUE, with his Learned NOTES. 8vo. XLI. The Antiquities and Practice of
the Courts of EXCHEQUER, MS. by the Lord Chief Baron GILBERT. Quarto.
The CONTENTS of No V.
XLII. CICERO 's Book of Old AGE and FRIENDSHIP; with the Declaration wherein
true HONOR consists: Translated by the EARL of WORCESTER: Printed by CAXTON,
and dedicated to King EDWARD IV. Fol. XLIII. Sir THOMAS ELYOT 's Book, named
the GOVERNOR: Dedicated to King HENRY VIII. With new Remarks upon the Author,
and some Notes upon his remarkable Story of Judge GASCOIGNE's committing the
PRINCE of WALES to Prison. XLIV. HENRY Earl of DERBY's HISTORICAL and POLITICAL
COLLECTIONS, relating to some Years of Queen ELIZABETH 's Reign; copiously
extracted from the MS. Volume in Folio, 1589. To which is added, an Abstract of
Queen JANE 's Letter to GEO. BOOTH Esquire declaring her safe Delivery of Prince
EDWARD. XLV. WILLIAM BURTON 's Description of LEICESTERSHIRE: Dedicated to
GEORGE Marquess of BUCKINGHAM. With some Remarks upon the Neglect of Authors
in regard to this County. XLVI. RICHARD VERSTEGAN 's RESTITUTION of decayed
INTELLIGENCE in ANTIQUITIES; concerning the most noble and renowned ENGLISH
NATION: Dedicated to King JAMES I. With some Admonitions recommended to the
next Editor of this Book. XLVII. The FOUNDATION of the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD:
With an Account of the FOUNDERS and BENEFACTORS of the COLLEGES; the TIMES when
they were founded; NUMBER of the STUDENTS, etc. XLVIII. The FOUNDATION of the
UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE: With an Account of the FOUNDERS and BENEFACTORS of the
COLLEGES; TIMES when they were founded; NUNBER of the STUDENTS, etc.
The CONTENTS of No VI.
XLIX. SIR THOMAS WRIOTHESLY's COLLECTIONS: Containing the Institution, Arms,
and Characters of the KNIGHTS of the GARTER. With Draughts of the ancient
Ceremonies used in the ORDER of the BATH. Adorned with the Pourtraits of
several NOBLE PERSONAGES, etc. Folio. MS. L. The EARL of NORTHAMPTON's
Defensative against the Poison of supposed PROPHESIES; grounded, either on
Dreams, Oracles, Revelations, Invocations, Judicial Astrology, etc. to the
great Disorder of the Commonwealth. Dedicated to Sir FRA. WALSINGHAM. Quarto.
LI. JOHN WEEVER 's ancient FUNERAL MONUMENTS in GREAT BRITAIN, etc. With the
dissolved MONASTERIES therein; Their FOUNDERS, etc. Also the Death and Burial
of certain of the ROYAL BLOOD, the NOBILITY and GENTRY of these Kingdoms, etc.
Illustrated with Historical Observations. With a Discourse perfix'd, on Funeral
Monuments, in several Chapters. Folio. LII. Dr. JOHN BULWER's ARTIFICIAL
CHANGELING, historically presenting the FASHIONS and CUSTOMS of all NATIONS, in
altering and disguising the BODIES of MANKIND: Enlivened with Figures of such
affected Deformations: With an Appendix of the Pedigree of the ENGLISH GALLANT.
Quarto.
POSTSCRIPT, containing the Author's Acknowledgements for several curious
Pieces both in Print and MS. described in this Collection.

A copious INDEX to the whole Volume.

THE BRITISH LIBRARIAN.
No I. for JANUARY, 1737.
I. A Description of the State of Great Britain; written Eleven Hundred Years
since, by that Ancient and Famous Author, GILDAS, surnamed the WISE; and for
the Excellency of the Work translated into English, etc. with a Picture of the
Author prefixed, W. Marshal, sculp. Printed by John Hancock, 12o. 1652. pages
327. besides the Introduction, etc.
THIS being the most ancient British Historian extant, demands the first Place
in our British Library. Some Particulars relating to the Author, with the
different Editions and Character of his Work, we refer to the bottom of the
Page We shall not here trouble our Reader with distinguishing two other Persons
of the same Name with our Author, since none of their genuine Works remain, at
least in History. It Is enough to observe that this GILDAS, called Badonicus,
because said to be born at Bath, for his singular Prudence and the Severity of
his Morals, was surnamed the WISE; that he was Monk of Bangor; flourished in
the middle of the sixth Century, and lived to about the end of the third part
thereof, as may appear by this Treatise De Excidio Britanniae, the only one of
his writing extant, as Arch-bp Usher assures it to be. He wrote it in Latin, in
a Style according to that Age, harsh and perplexed enough; and the first
Edition of it, published by Polydore Virgil in 8vo. London, 1525. and dedicated
to Cuthbert Tonstal Bp. of Durham, was from an incorrect Copy; reprinted at
Basil 1541. and at London 1568. This last Edition, or another much about the
same time, which John Josseline gave of it from another MS. is but little more
perfect than that first, which was remitted into the Bibliotheca Patrum: But
the latest and best is in Dr. Gale's Collection of ancient English Historians,
3 vol. Fol. Oxon. 1684. who had the advantage of a more ancient and better
Copy, as Bp. Nicholson observes. The Life of Gildas is written at large by
Caradoc of Lancarvan, and by an Anonymous Author, published by John a Bosco in
Biblioth. Florent. also more briefly in Bale, Pits, and Fuller's Worthies;
which last wonders, not without Reason, that Gerard Vossius should attribute a
Comedy in Plautus to this our Gildas, upon such slender Grounds as he there
mentions. As to his Character, Milton tells us, That Gildas is every way
preferable, in speaking of the British Wars, to the Saxon Writers, and a good
Reason he gives for it: because Gildas was nothing conceited of the British
Valor, whereas the Saxons ever magnified their own Deeds. Vide Mils. Hist. of
Brit. Lib. 3.
. But the Subject Matter of this Epistle to the Britains, and his Method of
handling it, may be best gathered from the Arguments he briefly touches upon,
under distinct Heads in the following Order.

1. Of the Island, its Situation and Extent; the number of its Cities, the
Magnificence of its Buildings, and Fertility of its Soil. 2. The Disobedience
of the People, both in Religion and Government; their monstrous Idols before
the Introduction of Christianity, and their Character by Porphiry, for their
detestable Tyrants. Then he proposes to recount their Sufferings under the
Roman Emperors, not from the British Authors, they being destroyed by their
Foes, or transported by their Exiles; but from foreign Accounts. So passes to,
3. The Subjection of the Island, and how tamely she received the foreign Yoke.
4. Of her Rebellion under Queen Boadicia; her neglect to secure her Conquests
by Sea and Land; and final Overthrow; which introduced, 5. Her second
Subjection and dreadful Slavery, till, 6. Her second Relief by Christianity;
which produced 7. Her Persecution under Dioclesian; and, 8. Many holy Martyrs;
as, Alban of Verolam, with Aaron and Julius of Carlisle, besides many others not
here named: also of their triumphant State till, 9. The Arian Heresy; and 10.
The Usurpation and Tyranny of Maximus, followed by, 11. The Invasion of the
Scots and Picts. 12. Their Expulsion by the Romans; 13. The Re-invasion by
those Neighbors; 14. And second Deliverance by the Romans, who having taught
the Britains to arm themselves, and fortify their Country, take their last
Farewell. 15. Of the third wastful Spoil by the aforesaid Enemy. 16. And by a
devouring Famine. 17. Of their pitiful but fruitless Address to the Roman
Consul Agitius. 18. Of the brave Resistance to which some of them were driven
by Necessity; and the Victory they obtained against their Enemies, by whom they
were forsaken, though not by their Iniquities. Therefore, 19. Of their Vices, and
the Licentiousness which followed their Peace and Plenty: Their Choice of
wicked Princes, and the Corruption of their Pastors. 20. The sudden Alarm of
their inveterate Enemies. 21. And new Calamities by Pestilence. 22. Of their
Councils to redress themselves. 23. And Invitation of their far most cruel
Enemy the Saxons to aid them against the Northern Powers. 24. Who totally waste
and spoil the Country. 25. The miserable State of the fugitive Britains; their
gathering head under Aurelius Ambrosius; Battle with and Victory over the
Saxons. 26. Of the last Victory obtained by the Britains against them at the
Siege of the Mountain of Bath (or Badon-Hill) forty four Years and one Month
after the landing of the Saxons, and also the Time of my Nativity, says Gildas.
In this Article, the most observable of all the rest, as being now entered into
the times of his own Knowledge, our Author first bewails, and sharply reproves
the Depravity of the British Rulers in general; next, gives particular
Characters of five of them; beginning with the Tyrant Constantine then living,
his Perfidiousness, the Murders he committed under the Habit of the Saintly
Amphabale, his Adulteries and other Impieties. Then proceeds to Aurelius
Conanus, whom he reproaches in like manner: With equal Severity he scourges
Vortiper, a wicked Son of a good King. Nor does he less chastise Cuneglasse,
that golden Butcher, as his Name inports; and concludes with the like
Execrations against that Dragon of the Island, Maglocune, who surpassed many
Tyrants, as in Power, so in Mischief. Here he subjoins the Menaces denounced
against these and such like wicked Princes, by the sacred Oracles of Holy
Scripture. After which follows a Transition from the Civil to the
Ecclesiastical Corruptions; and here he inveighs against the Vices of the
Clergy no less freely than he had done against those in the State; which, with
several Examples from the New Testament and some Fathers of the Church,
concludes this his Epistle to the Britains.

This Translation of the said Epistle, appears to have been made near the first
Entrance of the Scottish Line upon the Throne of England Though this Translation
of Gildas was made at the Beginning of K. James's Reign, we meet with no
earlier Edition of it in Print than that published 8vo. 1638, and it was not
improbably re-published now again in 1652, on account of the sharp and
Christian Reproofs therein of Kings and Priests. The Editor says, That in
rendering this into English, much Faith has been observed; by which you may
discover the Author still the same, though in his Apparel fashioned to the
Time; in perusing of whom, the Reader shall find that, Impiety is the great
Destroyer of Empires, and that Kingdom which remains most immaculate from Sin,
stands safest from Ruin.
, as the Editor tells us, and while the Translator was under some Confinement,
as he informs us himself in his large Introduction to the Inhabitants of the
Island; which further contains, chiefly some Apologies for Gildas, as to his
using so much Scripture Application, and that, not according to the vulgar
Version, as Polydore Virgil has observed; with an Answer also to this Author's
erroneous Observation upon the Dioclesian Persecution from Gildas himself. Then
he strives more favorably to interpret the Invectives wherewith Gildas has
been accused to have aspersed the Britains by Sir John Price; as that our
Author having already recorded their praiseworthy Deeds in his Chronicle,
cited by Henry of Huntington, intended now to admonish them of their
reproveable Actions only in this Epistle, according to what Gildas says in his
own Prologue to it: "That he does not now determine so much to report the
Dangers of the bloody Battles of most valiant Soldiers, as the Perils of
slothful Men." In like manner, the Translator excuses the Character of so much
Barbarity given to the Scotch, Picts, and Irish by our Author, as also his hard
Censures of the Saxons and English; so descends from the ancient Union of these
Nations, to that which was then on foot between the English (including the
British) and the Scotch; and because of K. James's Descent from the Blood Royal
of these three Nations, concludes with a Motion to unite also the Titles of his
Dominions under the general Name of GREAT BRITAIN.

II. A Dialogue between a Knight and a Clerk, concerning the Power Spiritual
and Temporal. Imprinted at London in Flete-Strete, in the House of Tho.
Berthelet, near to the Cundite, at the Sign of Lucrece: cum Privilegio: without
Date or Name of the Author. 52 Pages 8vo Although this Dialogue is undated, it
may appear to have been printed at the Beginning of our Reformation; and though
the Author's Name was not yet published to it, it is well known to have been
written by that famous Clerk and Schoolman WILLIAM of OCCHAM, so called from
being born in a Village of that Name in Surrey, as Camden and others have
observed. It was written by our Author so early as the Year 1305, if the MS.
Note on the Copy before me is right. There was another Edition of it afterward
in 1540, wherein it is said to be written by William of Occham, the great
Philosopher, in English and Latin. [ Extat. Lat. in Goldast. Monarch. T. Ed.]
The Author was Scholar to John Duns Scotus, and afterward, his Antagonist. In
their grand Scholastic Controversy, Scotus was distinguished Father of the
Reals, and Occham of the Nominals. Occham, flushed with his Success, undertook
Pope John the 23d, and gave a mortal Wound to his Temporal Power over Princes.
He got a good Guardian, Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor, whose Court was his
Sanctuary, but he was excommunicated by the Pope; and the Masters of Paris
condemned him for an Heretic, and burnt his Books; which Fuller conceives to be
the Cause why Luther was so versed in his Works, which he had at his Fingers
ends; being the sole Schoolman in his Library whom he esteemed. The Pope being
afterward, it seems, reconciled to him, he was restored to his State with the
Repute of an Acute Schoolman. Fox, in his Book of Martyrs, Ed. 1576. fol. 376.
says, that in the Time of K. Edward II. " Gulielmus Occham was a worthy Divine,
and of a right sincere Judgment, as the Times would then either give or
suffer." The same Historian further, fol. 393. mentions this Dialogue, as of
Occham's Writing, though it appeared without the Name of its Author. He there
also mentions another of his Books, called his Questions and Distinctions; and
quotes John Sleidan's History in his Commendation; who, telling us the said
Occham flourished in the Year 1326. gives us an Abstract of another of his
Books, on the Authority of the Bishop of Rome. These two last, with two more of
his writing, were printed abroad, between the Years 1491 and 1496, as appears
in Corn. a Beughem's Incunab. Typographiae, 12mo. Amst. 1688. p. 100. As for
the Author's Death, some place it in 1330, others seventeen Years later. See
Leland, Bale, Pits, Fuller, Dr. Cave, Du Pin, etc.
.
THis notable little Tract was written to silence the Clergy, and answer their
unreasonable Expectations, that the Pope might exercise a Jurisdiction over the
Temporalities of Princes, and the Church be exempted from contributing of its
Riches in time of need, either for the Relief of the Poor or the Security of
the Nation where they abide; as may appear by the following Abstract thereof.

CLERICUS begins with complaining how much the Ecclesiastical Rights are
invaded, and what wrongs the Clergy endure against all Law. MILES asks him,
what Law is? And he answers; the Ordinances of the Popes, and Decrees of the
Fathers. MILES allows that what they have heretofore ordained in Matters of
Temporality, may be Law to the Clergy, but not to the Laity; none having power
to ordain Statutes of Things, over which they have no Lordship; therefore, that
he, lately, laughed heartily, when he heard that Pope Boniface VIII. had made a
new Statute, that he himself should be above all secular Princes and Kingdoms;
and that he needed but to put it into Writing, and all things were his: If he
would have my Castle, my Town, my Field, my Money, or the like, he need but to
will, to write, and decree it, and he is entitled to those Things. Then CLERICUS
would derive this Authority from Christ himself: To whom it is said in the
Psalms, Ask of me and I will give Nations to thine Heritage, and all the World
about to thy Possession: And of whom it is written, 1 Timothy 2. That he is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Then he argues from the Faith of Holy Church, that
Peter was ordained Christ's full Vicar for himself and Successors, so has the
same Power over Temporalities as Christ had. But here MILES distinguishes two
States of Christ; one of his Humility, the other of his Power and Majesty: The
former, from the Time that he took Flesh and Blood to his Passion; the latter,
after his Resurrection; when he said, All Power is given to me in Heaven and
Earth: That Peter was ordained Christ's Vicar for the State of his Humility,
and to follow him in those Things which he did in that State, or to exercise
that Power which he, as mortal Man, did; and not that which after his
Glorification he received. Here it is proved from Scripture that Christ neither
had, nor pretended to a temporal Kingdom; and that Peter had not by his
Commission the Keys of the Kingdom of Earth given him, but of Heaven; that he
was Christ's Vicar in the Godly Kingdom of Souls, and not in Temporal Lordship
of Castles and Lands: And this again is proved out of St. Paul. Then CLERICUS
flies to another Argument; for seeing it allowed that Holy Church may correct
Sins, he infers, that he who has to do in the knowledge of Sin, must know and
deem in Right and Wrong; and since there is Right and Wrong in Temporal
Matters, the Pope ought consequently to rule and deem in Temporal Causes. But
MILES having showed the Absurdity of this Sophism, and that Right and Wrong in
Temporal Matters, are to be judged by Temporal Laws, proves this also out of
Scripture; where even in case of the People's Disobedience to those Laws, it
appears the Clergy are only to admonish and warn them that they be subject to
Princes, and in another Place that every Soul shall be subject to the higher
Powers; which excepts not the Clergy themselves. "And if you will needs be
knowing in such Causes, says he, because Wrong and Sin are linked together; it
belongs to you to know and deem in Causes of Wedlock; I pray will you therefore
say it follows, that you shall know and deem of all that belongs thereto, for
the knitting of the Deed?" So advises him not to intermeddle in the Judgment of
Things which concern Temporality; "For so much as ye usurp and take upon you
that which belongs to others, it is right mete that ye suffer as ye do." Then
CLERICUS asks if he can deny that the Temporal Power should be serviceable to
the Spiritual? MILES allows the Temporality should be so far serviceable to
them, as to find those who worship and serve God all that is necessary for
them; that in the old Law they were handsomely provided for, but not thereby
ordained any Temporal Kingdom or Lordship; for what kind of Lordship was
appointed the Ministry, may appear from four or five Places of Scripture here
quoted: from whence it is demanded, "Lo to whom does Christ and his Apostle
Paul liken you? To Workmen, to hired Men, and Oxen; and not to Kings. I pray
you, be Workmen, and hired Men, Lords of Things? Then it seems that
Temporalities are granted you to help your Living, and for Charge of Spiritual
Administration, and not for Lordship: And of the Spiritual, it is written in
the Law of Moses; there ye be likened to an Ox that threshes; for which it is
enough to take his Meat, though he fill all the Barn with his Travail." A
little farther CLERICUS is for allowing Princes to enjoy their Temporalities,
"And let them suffer us, says he, in Peace with ours." But MILES cannot allow
this to be any ways reasonable. For, says he, we are to see the Wills of our
Forefathers fulfilled, who gave you these Temporalities so plentifully, that
you should dispose both of them and yourselves to charitable Purposes, to the
Health of our Souls and the Honor of God, to praying for the Dead and
relieving the Wants of the Living; "But ye do nothing so; ye spend away your
Temporality in sinful Deeds and Vanity; ye recke not for Honesty, no nor for
your own Law, nor for Deeds of Mercy and Charity, but in folly, and bobance,
and in liking of this World, ye dispend all that was given you for an holy
Intent. Shall not his Wages be stopped who will not do Deeds of Knighthood? He
that holds of another, and does not his due Office and Service, he shall lose
and forgo his Fee." Here he brings in the Example of K. Joas, who would not let
Joidas receive any more of the Ecclesiastical Revenue, but apply it to the
Reparation of God's House; and concludes this Argument with observing, "That ye
have received all such Lordships and Riches as the Wages of holy Chivalry, and
to the Intent to have Cloth and Food; with which two, the Apostle says, he
held him paid; and all the overplus, besides Cloth and Food, ye ought to spend
in Deeds of Mercy and Piety, as on poor People, that have need, and on such as
be sick and diseased, and oppressed with Misery: And if ye do not so, then must
we have to do therewith; for then it falls to us to take heed of your
Temporality, that ye beguile not and deceive the Quick and the Dead." CLERICUS
observes, that King Joas did not apply the Money to his own Use, but to that of
Holy Church. "But nowadays ye take our Goods, which ye spend not to the Use
of Holy Church, but on your busy and unruly Soldiers, and on Ships and Engines
of War." MILES answers, "That neither does the King apply it to his own Use,
but for your Safeguard, the Defense of Holy Church, and of your Goods and
Chattels. That if the King's Power should fail, the Gentry, such as are needy
and had prodigally consumed their Substance, would turn to yours, and destroy
all you have; therefore that the King's Strength is to you as a strong Wall,
and his Peace is your Peace: That by giving a little Portion to him, you buy
your own Safeguard: But as ye have always been unkind for the Goodness he has
done, so now ye complain against what is your own Profit: That if Kings at
their own Costs and Peril are to defend you, and you to rest, in Idleness and
Luxury, eating, drinking, and solacing yourselves, then you only are Kings, and
they your Slaves." Then he proves from Scripture again, that the Church, or
Riches of it, should not be spared when Christian People are in Danger; "The
Ghostly Temple, which is Mankind, being of more worth than the Temple that is
made of Lime and Stone." CLERICUS objects that if those things which are once
given to God may be taken away again, then all Vows may be made void. But MILES
distinguishes, that what he has said is not to withdraw such Gifts, but to
apply them to those Uses for which they were first given. Then CLERICUS would
allude from the Words of our Savior, how free the Clergy were from paying
Tribute to Princes. But MILES argues, that the Example he produces, and the
answer therein given, was for Christ, and not for you; however grants, that
Clerks in their own Persons should be free, but not such as lead their Lives as
lewd Men. Yet, though some may be thus freed in their Person by the Privilege of
Princes, shall your Fields have now the same Freedom? And he who had before a
yearly Tribute from them, lose it afterward in you? The Commonwealth must be
defended at the Cost of the Commonalty; and whatever Part thereof enjoys this
Defense, it is most agreeing with right, that he set his Shoulder and help to
bear the Burden: Then if Possessions are as rightly subject to the common
Charge as to the yearly Rent, he shall be under Charge whoever owns them. If ye
talk of Prescription; we answer, in as much longer as this Freedom, or
Exemption has been allowed by the Benignity of Princes, so much the sooner ye
should be ready to pay your Part where need requires it; but both holy Writ and
civil Powers abolish this Prescription, as appears by Examples here cited.
CLERICUS thinks it hard that Kings should resume the Privileges granted by
their Predecessors. But MILES urges that any particular Privilege, however long
or firmly granted, must submit to general Occasions; and, if it be found
hurtful to the Commonwealth, may be repealed in time of need, as Solomon, in
some Matters of Theft, changed somewhat even of God's Law CLERICUS would
insinuate, that it was Emperors who established these Things, and that they
might guide the Reins of the Law, but not Kings. MILES looks upon this as a
kind of Blasphemy, proceeding either from Ignorance or Envy; so draws an
Instance from France and the Empire, showing how distinctly and independently
the one exercises its Power from the other. That as the Emperor may make Laws
over all his Empire, and add or diminish as he thinks good; so may the King of
France either utterly repel the Emperor's Laws, or change, or clearly banish
them, and at his Pleasure ordain new ones. This he concludes with several
Examples from Scripture, proving the Subjection of the Clergy to their Princes;
as how by anointing, they acknowledged them to be their Princes and Rulers, how
they guarded, attended on, and prayed for them as such, insomuch that CLERICUS
cannot forbear breaking off the Conference, with observing that it was drawing
toward Night, but he would answer it all in the Morning.

AFTER this manner ends this ancient and remarkable Treatise, thus published in
English, with express Privilege, by K. Henry's Printer, no doubt to forward
and strengthen the Reformation then in its Infancy. But if the Reader would see
this Argument, on the King's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, as it more particularly
regards the English Nation, deduced from a vast Variety of our most authentic
Instruments and Records, we must refer him to Mr. Prynne's voluminous
Collections on that Head, in three Volumes Folio, of which we shall here next
take a short Survey, because of the Affinity of the Subject, and its being
traced from the earliest times; however the Author is thereby ranged in this
Number before some others who were earlier Writers.

III. The first Tome of an exact Chronological Vindication and Historical
Demonstration of our British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman, English Kings
supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in, and over all Spiritual or Religious
Affairs, Causes, Persons, as well as Temporal, within their Realms of England,
Scotland, Ireland, and other Dominions; from the original Planting of Christian
Religion therein, and Reign of Lucius our first Christian King, till the Death
of King Richard I. A. D. 1199, etc. By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher and Reader
of the Honorable Society of Lincoln's End. Printed for the Author, by Tho.
Radcliffe, Fol. 1666. Pages 1251, besides Dedication, etc.
IT has a large graved Frontispiece, wherein the Author appears presenting his
Book to K. Charles II. and the Pope with his Miter falling, etc. with abundance
more of Figures attending on them, that take up an Explanation of two Pages.

Then follows a Copious Dedication to the King, wherein the Author
acknowledges, that his Obligations to his Majesty, his Father and Grandfather,
by virtue of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, together with his Majesty's
conferring on him without his Solicitation, the Office of Keeper of the
Records in the Tower with an honourary Pension, as also his Majesty's
Encouragement and that of some honorable Lords, engaged him in this Herculean
Task.

After this, we have his Epistle to the Readers, especially of the Long Robe,
wherein he says, I here present you with the first Tome (though not first Book,
by way of Introduction to the whole Work, reserved till last) of an exact
Chronological Vindication, etc.

In this first Tome or second Book, the Author has chronologically set forth,
1. The original preaching and planting of Christian Religion in our Island. 2.
King Lucius his Conversion to Christianity, with his supreme Exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. 3. The Roman Emperors Claim and Administration
thereof while they governed this Isle, especially Constantine the Great, Son of
Helen, the first Christian Queen, and of the Pope's forged Donation from that
Emperor. 4. The same supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction exercised by our
British Kings upon all emergent Occasions after the Desertion of the Romans,
till the Expulsion of the Britains by the Saxons. 5. The Conversion of our
Saxon Kings to Christianity by Augustine the Monk, by whom the Pope began his
Encroachments upon our British Bishops, Kings, and Churches, with their
Resistance thereof; also the Claim and Practice of the said Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction by our Saxon Christian Kings, till supplanted by the Danes. 6. The
like claimed and exercised by the Danes; likewise by Edward the Confessor, and
Harold, with their Opposition of Papal Impositions. 7. The said Sovereign
Eccesiastical Authority claimed and executed by our first Norman Kings, till
the end of King Richard I. wherewith the Author concludes this Tome, including
many Oppositions made against the Popes and their Instruments, particularly,
Anselm, and Tho. Becket; with the Practices of other Popish Prelates against
their Kings. 8. Also the Institution of Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics in
England, Ireland, and Scotland; the Subordination of those in Ireland and
Scotland to those of Canterbury and York, with the Contests of these two
Primacies against each other. 9. Instances of the Popes, Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Monks, Nuns, etc. their Pride, Covetousness,
Ambition, Worldliness, Simony, Perjury, Treachery, Hatred, Malice, Bribery,
Injustice, Corruptions, Incontinency, Abuses of Excommunications, and other
Ecclesiastical Censures; their great Neglect of all religious Duties, Contempts
of their own Canons, Bulls, Decretals, during these Kings Reigns, with the
Endeavors used to redress them. 10. The Attempts of Popes and Prelates to
introduce their Canon Laws and Decretal, to advance their Authority, and
trample down our Municipal Laws, Kings Prerogatives, and People's Liberties,
with the Banishment thereof out of the Realm. 11. A Vindication of the Right of
our Kings to the Sovereign Feodal Dominion of England, Ireland, and Scotland,
and Refutation of the forged Claims thereto by the Popes, etc. 12. The Bulls,
Letters, of several Popes and Legates, to our own and other Princes, to advance
their Authority, oppress, fleece, and invade their Realms, under pretense of
relieving the Holy Land against the Saracins; to tax, censure, command, or
absolve at Pleasure, and wreek their Malice on those who complied not with
their Impositions. 13. Their canonizing Anselm, Becket, and other Prelates, as
Saints, Martyrs, etc. and adoring them more than God or Christ himself, for
their Treasons against their Princes, to advance the Miter above the Crown, and
encourage the like Rebellions by the Examples of these sainted Traitors, and
the Pilgrimages to their Shrines. 14. The intolerable Pride, Insolence,
Oppressions, Rapines, etc. of our Popish Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergymen,
when promoted to the highest Secular Offices, and trusted with the Temporal and
Spiritual Sword, which made them double Tyrants; with the Canons of the Popes
and Censures of Popish Writers against such their worldly Employments in former
Ages. 15. The true original Ground of erecting most Monasteries by our Kings
and others, to expiate their Adulteries, Rapes, Murders, or Impieties, merit
Salvation, save or redeem their Souls from Purgatory. With the Uncleanness,
Whoredoms, Adulteries of Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks, Nuns, through the
Prohibition of Marriages; and of the ancient Suppression of Monasteries (for
such Impurities) by our Kings. 16. The Grievances and Complaints of foreign
Princes against Popes and their Legates Usurpations, Extortions, unjust
Sentences, Excommunications, Interdicts, Deprivations relating to our Kings, or
registered in our Histories. 17. Transcripts of many Laws and Charters of
Christian Princes, evidencing their Sovereign Prerogative over all
Ecclesiastical Affairs and Persons, as exemplified in the Chartae Antiquae, and
other Rolls in the Tower of London; all other their Records and Writs before
King John relating to their Ecclesiastical or Civil Government being long since
perished, except some Copies of them in some old Leiger-Books, belonging to
Monasteries or Historians already printed. Wherefore, this first Tome consists
chiefly of Historical and other Collections, and some Charters of our Kings not
formerly printed: whereas, all succeeding it (especially 3, 4, 5,) will be
almost wholly made up of useful, pertinent, and rare Records, not hitherto
published, unknown to most Antiquaries and Lawyers; "which, through God's
Assistance, by your kind Acceptance, says our Author, of the Tomes now
published, I shall be encouraged to communicate to the World with all possible
Expedition, for the Honor of our King, Kingdoms, Church and Religion."

At the End of this Volume is an Advertisement to the Reader, intimating that
the late dreadful Fire (of London) having in three Days space turned 88
Parishes and their Churches, with the Cathedral-Church of this glorious City,
to Ashes; and among other Losses and Mischiefs to the several Companies of the
City, most of all endamaged the Company of Printers and Stationers, most of
whose Habitations, Storehouses, Shops, Stocks and Books were not only consumed,
but their Ashes and scorched Leaves conveyed aloft and dispersed by the Wind to
Places above 16 Miles distant, to the Admiration of Beholders; and that among
Millions of other Books thus suddenly destroyed, while our Author was busy in
securing the public Records of the Kingdom, his Printer's House with most of
the printed Copies of this Tome, then finished at the Press (all except the
Tables to it) as likewise the second Tome formerly published, and of the first
Book, and third Tome (wherein he had made some Progress) were there burnt
together with it; not above 70 of them being rescued from the Fire, to the
Author's Damage near 2000 l. wherefore he did not print his intended Tables for
so few Copies of this Tome, till God should enable him to re-print it,
especially since the Pages of the reprinted Volume (by reason of some
Additions) will vary from these already printed, so make the Tables unsuitable
thereto.

IV. The second Tome of an exact Chronological Vindication and Historical
Demonstration of our Kings Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, etc. from the
first of King John 1199, to the Death of King Henry III. 1273. By W. Prynne,
etc. Printed for the Author, by Thomas Radcliffe. Fol. 1665, with the same Cut
as before. This Vol. has 1070 Pages, (allowing 224 which it begins at, wanting
or mis-printed,) besides an Appendix.
THis second Volume, which was first printed, is dedicated to Edward Earl of
Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, etc. who appears therein to have been a
principal Encourager of this Work.

The Author has prefixed to this Tome a brief necessary Introduction of 80
Pages, to supply the want of his larger Introduction comprised in the first
Book of the first Tome, not yet completed, and over-large to be annexed to
this, as he at first designed.

This Tome, as those intended to succeed it, principally consists of memorable
Records (in the Tower of London) not formerly published, intermixed with
Historical Passages out of our most ancient Historians of the Romish Religion
writing in or nearest these Times. They are printed in their proper Dialects,
the better to be communicated to foreign Countries, and prevent all Cavils
against their Translations. All the said Records are carefully compared by the
Author himself with the Originals, which may serve to correct, ratify and
illustrate many obscure Passages in our Historians, Chronologers, and King
John's printed Charter, and supply many observable Defects of Bulls, Patents,
Writs, Records, Transactions, relating to the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of our
Kings.

In his Preface to his Readers, he speaks of others who had cursorily handled
the Subject, as, Sir Ed. Coke, Sir John Davis, Sir Christopher Sybthorp, and
his learned Friend Sir Roger Twisden; but never before chronologically and
historically vindicated and demonstrated by any Lawyers, Antiquaries,
Historians, Chronologers, or Divines. Then he gives his Reasons for praeponing
this second Volume, in point of Publication before the first. The Uses and
Benefits of it to our Kings and their Officers of State, Prelates, Divines,
Judges, Lawyers, Nobility and Gentry in both Kingdoms, and all Professors of
the Protestant Faith, or Romish Religion.

The brief necessary Introduction sets forth, what Sovereign Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction is; the Claims of Popes and Bishops of Rome; their fictitious
Titles; their Practices and Doctrines; the pretended Monarchy of St. Peter, and
the imaginary Succession of the Popes, with their Claims, and the Grounds
refuted from their own Practices, and Assertions of their own Writers.

The Contents of this second Tome beginning Book 3. Cap. 1, p. 227. are, many
Evidences of King John's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, with his strenuous Defense
of the Rights of his Crown against Papal and Prelatical Usurpations till 15
Years of his Reign.

Of his unworthy Prostitution of his Rights, his Crown, and Himself, after so
many glorious Contests, to the Usurpations of Pope Innocent, and his own
traytorous Clergy. Of his resigning his Kingdoms by a Charter to the Pope, with
the Validity thereof; his Oath of Homage and Fealty to the Pope. His Opposition
of his encroaching Bishops and rebellious Clergy, who stirred up the Barons
Wars against him, after they had forced him to resign his Crown and protested
against his Unkingly Actions, though the Effect of their Procurement, etc.

The Succession of King Henry III. His Coronation, Oath, Homage, and Compliance
with the Pope against his own Will and his Nobles. Their Complaints against the
Popes and Clergy's Exactions both in England and Ireland; with the chief
Eclesiastical Transactions therein, during the first 20 Years of his Reign.

Many Records, Patents, and Historical Testimonies of this King's Supreme
Jurisdiction in all Ecclesiastical Affairs in England and Ireland. The
intolerable Proceedings of Popes and their Agents to the Prejudice of the King
and his Realms. Encroachments of the English and Irish Prelates upon the King's
Temporal Courts, Rights, Dignity, and Liberties; with the principal
Ecclesiastical Affairs of England and Ireland, from the 21st to the End of the
40th of the said King Henry III.

Evidences from Law Books and Records, manifesting this King's Ecclesiastical
as well as Temporal Supremacy. The Pope's Encroachments on his Prerogatives and
his Subjects Properties, with their Oppositions; with the illegal Usurpations
of our Popish Prelates and Ecclesiastical Synods upon the King's Temporal
Rights, Courts, Crown, Dignity, and People's Privileges; with the Prohibitions,
Writs, and Mandates issued to restrain them; and other ecclesiastical
Transactions between the King, Pope and Court of Rome, from the End of the 40th
of Henry III. till the Expiration of his Reign, A. D. 1272.

Then follow several large Indexes; 1. Of Authors quoted in this Tome. 2. Of
the English and other Abbeys, Priories, etc. 3. Of English and Welsh
Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, etc. Elections, Actions, Treasons, and all
things relating to them in this Tome. 4. Of the Irish. 5. Of foreign
Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, etc. herein mentioned. 6. Of the English, Irish,
and other Archdeaconries, Deaneries, Archdeacons, Deans. 7. Of the English and
other Earls. 8. Of Chief Officers of State in England and Ireland. 9. Barons,
Knights, and other principal Persons. 10. Popes of Rome. 11. Romish Cardinals.
12. Legates, Nuncio's, Agents in England and Ireland, or other Dominions. 13.
Cities, Castles, Churches, Parishes, etc. 14. Of the principal Matters, with
the Names and Actions of our own and other Kings, Emperors, etc. 15. Of sacred
Texts occasionally abused by the Pontificans, or used to refute their
Corruptions.

V. The History of King John, King Henry III. and the most illustrious King
Edward I. wherein the ancient Sovereign Dominion of the Kings of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, over all Persons in all Causes, is asserted and
vindicated, against all Encroachments and Innovations whatsoever. The Mistakes
in some printed Statutes, Canonists, Law Books, Histories, and other Matters of
Moment are rectified and rescued from Oblivion. Collected out of the Ancient
Records in the Tower of London, and now published for the better Advancement of
Learning, Maintenance of the King's Supremacy, the Subjects Liberties, and the
Laws of the Realm. By William Prynne Esquire a late Bencher, and Reader of
Lincoln's- Inn, and Keeper of his Majesty's Records in the Tower of London.
And finished a little before his Death. London, printed by T. Radcliffe, etc.
Fol. 1670.
THE Dedication, by the Author himself, to the Earl of Anglesey, Sir Harbottle
Grimston, Sir Matthew Hale, Sir Edw. Atkins, Sir Wadham Windham, Sir Richard
Ramsford, Sir Robert Atkins, and the rest of the Worshipful Readers of
Lincoln's- Inn, is dated from his Study in Lincoln's- Inn, July 28. 1668.

In which he calls this third Tome by the same Title with the former; and
prefixes what concerns the Reigns of King John and King Henry III. but by way
of Appendix to his second Tome. But the principal or chief Subject Matter of
this Volume comprises the Reign of glorious King Edward I. The whole consists,
chiefly, of such Records, Writs, Prohibitions, Bulls, Patents, Epistles,
Procurations, and Negociations during their Reigns, not formerly published, as
are proper for the respective Cognizance of the said Patrons, and may assist
them in the Discharge of their honorable Places, and Trusts of Judicature, to
which they are most of them advanced through his Majesty's Favor, for their
Defense of his Supreme Ecclesiastical Authority. After this he apologizes to
them for his Delay of this Volume, and some seeming Redundancies. Then gives
them an Account what Rolls he had read in the Pipe-Office, and other Treasuries
of Records in the Exchequer; particularly the Great Rolls in the Pipe-Office,
from 29 to 34 inclusive of K. Henry II. soon after the Murder of that
Arch-Rebel, as well as Archbishop Thomas Becket, and discovering several Fines,
imposed by the Judges on sundry Persons, estreated into the Exchequer, being
the ancientest Records of this kind, and not before taken notice of, he here
presents them in his Dedication, etc.

Next follows, as in his former Volumes, his Address to the ingenious Readers,
especially Professors and Students of the Common Law and English Antiquities,
in near twelve Sheets; dated from his Chamber in the Tower, Aug. 18, 1668. And
this is followed by a Table of the Chapters and their Contents in this third
Tome: Which is again succeeded by a short Prologue; wherein having shown the
Causes of his omitting in his second Tome, and Appendix, sundry pertinent
Records, during the Reigns of King John and King Henry the Third; he here
presents them in a distinct Chapter, before he proceeds to the Reign of King
Edward the First, with brief Observations on, and from some of them; therefore
begins with

Book V. Chap. I. Which contains sundry Records, Bulls, Writs, Prohibitions,
Attachments for Suits in Courts Christian, not formerly printed; and some
Historical Passages during the Reigns of King John and Henry III. relating to
their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England and Ireland, their Transactions
with Popes, their Legates, Nuncio's, Delegates, Prelates; with their Attempts
against Regal Rights, Prerogatives, Liberties, Properties; and the Oppositions
of these Kings, their Nobles, Parliaments, Councils, and Judges against them,
beginning thus; -- Tome 2. Page 227. Line 3. after Christians, insert -- King
John was no sooner possessed of the Realm of England, etc.

This additional Part of King John ends Page 37. And there commences the like
Additions of King Henry III. which begin thus -- Tome 2. Page 370. Line 43.
after Videbant, insert -- Upon the untimely Death of King John by Poison, Anno
1216, etc. which ends Folio 133. b. In the next Page begins

Chap II. containing several Records and Historical Passages, evidencing the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of our renowned King Edward I. in, and over all
Persons, Causes Spiritual, as well as Temporal, in England, Ireland, and other
his Dominions. His Oppositions against the Papal, Prelatical Usurpations on the
Rights of his Crown, Laws, Subjects Liberties, etc. The chief Transactions,
Bulls, Letters, between him and the Pope's Court of Rome, from the beginning of
the first to the End of the tenth Year of his Reign; with some other
Particulars to the End of p. 297. The next Page begins

Chap. III. comprizing several Evidences out of our Records and Histories of
King Edward I. his Sovereign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, etc. in England,
Ireland, and Scotland, and his other Dominions, with the Popes and Bishops
various Encroachments thereon, and the Oppositions made by himself,
Parliaments, Councils, Judges, etc. With the Negotiations between him and the
Popes, Cardinals, Court of Rome; and the Successions of Bishops in England,
Ireland, and the Popes in Rome, from the beginning of the eleventh to the End
of the twentieth Year of his Reign, to p. 548. The next Page begins with

Chap. IV. containing King Edward I. his Claim and Exercise of Sovereign
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, over all Persons and Causes, within England, etc.
His Oppositions, Prohibitions, Edicts against the Popes, Bishops, and other
Clergymen's Usurpations thereon; especially Pope Boniface the Eighth, his
Constitutions prohibiting all Clergymen under Pain of Excommunication, to grant
or pay Taxes or Subsidies to any King, and for Kings to demand or receive them
without the Pope's precedent License: And his Bulls concerning his Sovereign
Dominion, Title to the Realm of Scotland, and other Kingdoms. The Negotiations
between King Edward, the Popes, and the Court of Rome; with the Successions of
Popes, English and Irish Bishops, and other Church and State Affairs,
faithfully collected out of the Records and Histories, from the beginning of
the twenty-first to the End of the thirtieth Year of his Reign, ending p. 979.
The next Page begins

Chap. V. containing the Imprisonment and Death of Pope Boniface the Eighth.
The Letters, Bulls, Negotiations between King Edward I. and that Pope's
Successors, with their Succession in the Sea of Rome. This King's Acts of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the Churches, Prelates, Clergy of England,
etc. His Prohibitions, Statutes, Edicts against papal Provisions, Exactions,
and prelatical Usurpations upon the Rights of his Crown and Temporal Courts.
The Succession of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and other Prelates in England,
etc. with other Particulars relating to their public Affairs, from the
beginning of the thirty-first Year of King Edward I. till his Death in the
thirty-fifth Year of his Reign. Collected out of the Records of those Years,
and other Historians, ending p. 1203.

Then follows (p. 1204.) a supplemental Appendix to the Reign of King Edward I.
in which is recited such Writs of Prohibition, Epistles, Bulls, and other
Records, as the Author discovered too late to be inserted in their proper
Places of this Historical Vindication; which are here ranged in an Historical
Order, and each referred to its proper Place in the said last Reign, according
as their Dates, or other Circumstances directed him, together with the Pages
and Lines where they most properly may be inserted in the next Edition. With
this Supplement the whole Work finishes at Page 1307. Then comes an
Advertisement to the Readers, informing us of fourteen several Tables he had
made to this third Tome, in an Alphabetical and Chronological Method, after the
Manner of the preceding Volume: And we are referred to such Tables in this
last Volume also, at the End of its Table of Contents. But such Tables or
Indexes were omitted, at least in a very fair Set of these scarce and elaborate
Books, whence this short View of them is extracted This last Volume of Mr.
Prynne's said Records was designed, by him, to have borne the same Title with
the two former, as may appear in the Book itself; but the Author dying just
before it was published, those who were concerned in the Edition called it The
History of King John, etc. in hopes that appearing (under that more general
Title,) in the Shape and Disguise of an entire Work, it would go off the more
readily, as Bishop Nicholson has suggested; but with what Propriety, or Regard
to the Subject, is left for others to consider. It Is certain that neither of
the three Volumes have been so sufficiently used by, or even known to
succeeding Writers of, or upon our English History, as such copious Materials,
so carefully collected, do deserve. One Reason, no doubt, is, the Scarcity of
the two former Volumes; which are advanced to such an extraordinary Price, that
it is well known, the Complete Set has been sold for Thirty Pounds. Another
reason for their having lain so much in Obscurity, might be, some public
Punishment the Author once underwent, for writing another Book, but in the
former Reign, and long before he was Keeper of the Records; for which he yet
had a handsome Recompense assigned him by the Parliament, however it might
leave some Distaste to his Name upon the Minds of many; as we may elsewhere
observe. The last cause of their Neglect may be, that artful Disregard which
has been insinuated of these Collections, to abate the Curiosity of the Laity,
and dissuade their looking into them. The Right Reverend Author last quoted,
speaking of those two Tomes which perished in the Fire of London, adds, "And no
Man has hitherto thought it worth his Expense and While to give us a new
Edition from any of the few that escaped: His Third has enough, in all
Conscience, to satisfy any reasonable Reader, and supersede his Enquiry into
the State of the Case, in either former, or following Ages." Engl. Histor.
Library, last Edit. Fol. 165.
.

VI. Here bigynneth a Tretys that suffisith to each Chresten Man to lyven after.
MS. on Vellum, containing 119 Leaves, 8vo.
THis Work is introduced by the Author in the following Words; This Tretys
compilid of a pore Caitif, and nedi of goostli Help of all Christian People, by
the greet Merci and Help of God, schal teache simple Men and Wommen, of good
Will, the rit wey to hevene; if they wole bisie hem to have it in mind, and
worche year after; without Multiplication of many Bookis, etc.

After this Preface, follows a Discourse on Belief, introducing the Apostle's
Creed, which is commented upon; next the Ten Commandments, with a Comment also,
and the Charge of them; to which is prefixed the Author's Prologue. Then the
Paternoster, with its Prologue and Comment. This is followed by The Council of
Christ; the Virtue of Patience; a Treatise of Temptation; the Charter of
Heaven; of Ghostly Battle; the Name of Jesu; the Love of Jesu; of Meekness; the
Effect of Will; active and contemplative Life; the Mirror of Maidens, in five
Chapters, with the Prologue of Chastity: At the Conclusion of which Mirror are
these Words; Here eendyth this Book that is clepid the Pore Caitif. And here,
by a kind of Prologue on the Contrariety between God and the World, is
introduced a short Treatise of Four Errors, that is, Worldliness, Fleshly Lust,
False Covetousness, and Vain Glory. This is succeeded by the Mirror of Sinners,
with a Treatise How every Man should comfort and strengthen his Soul by seven
Gifts of the Holy Ghost; after which we have the Seven Deadly Sins and Seven
Virtues against them, and the whole concludes with the Mirror of Matrimony This
Book, in the Possession of a Person not more curious in collecting such
Antiquities than willing to impart them for the Service of the Public, is
written in double Columns very fairly, in the old Hand used above three Hundred
Years since, and in many Places beautifully illuminated. It Is in its original
Binding, with silk Clasp-Bands; on the brass Part of one whereof, is engraved
the usual Abbreviation of Jesus Christ. We find not that it ever was printed,
but that singular Care has been taken to preserve it in MS. It has been
constantly attributed to the famous JOHN WICLIFFE, who died in 1384: See the
Reverend Mr. Lewis's Life and Sufferings of him, 8vo. 1723. p. 163. where, in
the Catalogue of Wicliffe's Works, he mentions a Copy of it, or some Parts of
it, to be in the Lambeth Library; and in the same Life, Page 356, that there is
one Copy of it in the public Library at Cambridge, bound the first in several
Volumes of Wicliffe's Tracts, and another in 12mo. entitled The Poor Caitif's
Treatise; and that another Copy of it, or Part of it, in St. John's College, is
entitled Wicliffe's Exposition on the Catechism.
.

VII. In this Book is contained the Names of the Baylyfs, Custose, Mayers, and
Sherefs of the Cite of London, from the Time of King Richard the First; and
also the Artycles of the Chartour and Lybartyes of the same Cite; and of the
Chartour and Lybartyes of England: with other dyvers Matters, good and necessary
for every Cytezen to understond and know This is the only Title, which appears
in two fair Copies of this very scarce old Book, which I have seen; and the
said Title is at the Head of the Calendar or Table of Contents, which is
printed in double Columns, as most of the Book also is. But it seems to want
the first Leaf, which might contain a more general Title, and possibly the Name
also of its Author. For the first Signature in both those Copies is A 2, the
Book not being numerically paged at top, nor has it any Printer's Name, or Date
when printed. The late Mr. Hearne in his Copy has entitled it, The Customs of
London, or ARNOLDE 's Chronicle: And in some Catalogue I have seen it is
called, after the Title of the second Chapter, The Articles of the Charter and
Liberties of the City of London, by one Arnold a Citizen of London, who lived
1519: Whence probably that Copy might want the whole first Chapter; at the End
whereof (which gives it the Name of a Chronicle) it appears plainly to be
continued down to the 12th, or rather, one Year being mis-printed twice over,
the 13th of Henry the 8th, which was 1521; in which Year this small Folio was
probably printed. There is the Name of R. A. and Richard Arnolde mentioned in
many Forms of his Instruments, as a Citizen Haberdasher and Merchant of London;
who might be the Author of this Collection; which has (among some few Matters
of Digression) several notable old Instruments and Memorials in it: And though it
may have been seen by some few Antiquaries who have written of this Metropolis,
yet is a Work, for the generality, so little known, that Bishop Nicholson and
others, who have attempted to give Accounts of our Historical Writers, are
utterly silent hereof.
, etc. Fol.
THis Book cannot be better described than by a recital of the several Chapters
in the Table or Calendar prefixed; only we shall abridge some which are clogged
with a Superfluity of Expression, customary in the Times when it was written,
and enlarge others with some Particulars from the Body of the Work itself: And
so the Contents will appear as follows.

The Names of the Baylyfs, Custos, Mayres, and Sherifs of the Cite of London,
from the Time of King Richard the First. -- The Artycles of the Charter and
Liberties of the Cite of London, being 112. -- Copy of the hole Charter of
London, of the first Grant, and of the Confirmacion of divess Kyngis. -- The
Act for Correccyon of the Errors and wrong Judgmentis in London. -- The Act
for Trees above 20 Years growying to pay no Tythys. -- The Charge of every Ward
in London at a Fyveten. -- The Ordinance for Assyse of Bread in London. --
Copy of Pope Nicholas his Bulle for the Offryng to the Curatts of the
Parysshens of the Cite of London, in Latin and in English, 1453. -- Pope
Innocent's Letter for the same. -- The Composycyon of all Offryng in London and
Suburbys, 1457. -- The Ordinance for Brokers ocupyeng in London. -- The Nombre
and Names of all the Paris Chirches, and all other Chirches in London and
Suburbs. -- The Ordinance for wullen Clothe in London. -- Articles desired by
the Comouns of London for Reformacyon of Thyngys to the same. -- The Charge of
the Quest of Warmot in every Ward. -- Artycles of the good Governaunce of the
Cite of London. -- Artycles of Preesters and other Mounkes in the Cite of
London. -- Against the Perel of Fire. -- The Oath of the Bedel of the Ward, --
of the Constables, -- of the Sherefs Sergeauntys, -- of Frankpledg of Foryners,
-- of the Scavangers, -- of every Freeman made in the Cite. -- For Brokers in
London. -- Ordynance for the Assyse of tall Wood and Bellet in London. --
Marchaundyses whereof Scavage ought to be taken in London. -- These Thyngis
that longyth to Tronage and Poundage of the King in the Cite of London. -- The
Form of making Oblygacyons in diverse Manners. -- Of making Quytauncys in
diverse Manner. -- Byllys of Payment in dyverse Manner. -- Letters of Atorne. --
Endentures. -- Letters of Lycens. -- Of Sale. -- Of Exchange. -- Of Awarde by
Arbytrement. -- Copy of the Kyngys Proteccyon Ryall. -- Another Form. -- Copy
of the Kyngys Chartour grauntyd for Offenses. -- Fourmes of Supplycacyons to
the King and other Lordys. -- Of Complayntes to the King, etc. -- The
Ordinance of the Cite for Tenauntes of Houses, what Things they shall not
remove at their departing. -- Copy of the Oath gyven to the Mayre and
Aldyrmen, etc. the Time of King Herry VI. -- The Nombre of Paris Chirches
Towns and Bishop Chyrches and Sherys in England, and the Compass of the
Land. -- Copy of a Carte compasyng the Circuit of the World and the Compace
of every yland comprehendyd in the same. -- The hole Pardon of Rome granted by
dyvers Popes. -- The vii Ages of the World from Adam. -- The vii Ages of Man.
-- Copy of a Letter sent out of the Land of Messye into the Land of Garnade
before the Conquest thereof 1486. -- Copy of a Letter from the Soudane of
Babylon to the Pope 1488. -- The Oracyon of the Messanger to the Pope. -- The
Craft of Graffynge and Plantynge of Trees and altering of Frutys as well in
Colors as in Taste. -- A Treatise of the 4 Elementys and 4 Seasons etc. and of
the canyculare Days. -- The Craft to make a Watter to have Spottys out of
wullen Cloth -- The Form and Mesur to mete Land by. -- The general Curse to
be declared 4 Times in the Year. -- The Article in the Bull of Pope Nicholas
1453, for the Oblacyons in London every Offeryng-Day. -- A Provysion by Act of
Parliament to bring King Herry VI. out of Dett 382000 l. (herein it appears
the King's Livelihood was but 5000 l. per ann. and that the yearly Expense of
his Household was 24000.) -- The Craft to make Cork for Dyars. -- To make
Ypocras, Clarey, Braket. -- Gunpowder. -- Orchell. -- Pygell to keep Sturgen.
-- Veneger shortly -- Percely to grow in an Our space. -- The Mesours and
Reckenyng of Rennyshe Wine in Antwarpe and Dordreyght and Burdeux, with the
Gawge of the same. -- The Weight and Manner of being of Irne and the Dyfference
of the Weyghtes in England. -- The Act of Parliament to compelle the Jugis of
Spyrituall Law to grant any Party the Copy of the Lybell for any Cause. --
The Rate of the Kyngis Custume and Subsyde of Marchaundyses regystred in the
Escheker. -- The Composicyon betwayne the Marchaunts of England and the Town
of Antwarp for the Costis of there Marchaundysys brought to the said Town, and
havyng thens. -- A Ballade of the Notbrowne Maid. [Note, this curious old
Ballad has been revived by Mr. Prior.] -- The Reckoning to bey Wares in
Flaunders. -- The Office that belongs to a Bishop or to a Preyst. -- Copy of
the Chartour of the Forest of England. -- The Artycles of the Chartour and
Lybarties of England called Magna Carta. -- Narracion of them that been shreven
and not contryte. -- The Valewe and Stynt of the Benefyce of Saint Magnus at
London Bridge yearly to the Person An. 1494. -- Copy of a Save-Conduyte. --
Copys of Certificats in dyvers Manners. -- The Copy of Spycery (Drugs, etc. and
the several Prices.) -- The Reckoning for Grocery Ware. -- The Craft to make
Ynk. -- The Servycys (or Courses and Bill of Fare in the Feast) at the
Stallacyon of the Bishop of Ely, Morton. -- The Way from Calyce to Rome
through France. -- The Copy of a Testament 1473. -- The Craft to make Soepe.
-- To brewe Beer. -- The Patrons of all the Beneficis in London. -- The
Temperalities of dyvers Deanryes Archedekenys and other Placys of Religion. --
The Corodyes in all the Abbeys of England. -- The Weight of Essex Chese, and of
Suffolk, in England, and the Weight in Antwarpe and Barough. -- The Charge and
Cost of making Heryng and Sprots at the Coeste. -- Copy of a Letter to my
Lord Cardynall. -- The Laws and Belyve of the Sarasyns (from Sir J.
Mandevyle.) -- The yerly Rentes of London Bridge. -- The Artycles upon which
to inquire in the Visitacyons of Ordynaryes of Chirchys. -- The Artycles found
by the Inquysytours at the Visitacyon last done in the Church of Saint Magnus.
-- A Compleynte made to King Herry the VIth by the Duke of Gloucester upon the
Cardynal of Wyncester. -- Artycles that the Kyngis Counsel conceyved of the
Grefe that my Lord of Gloucester had surmysed upon my Lord of Wynchester
Chauncheler of England. -- The Answer of my Lord of Wynchester unto the Grefe
of my Lord of Gloucester. -- Copy of the Reconysaunce by which both Lordis
were bounden to abide the Arbytrement of the Kyngis Counsel, An. 4 Hen. VI.

VIII. The COSMOGRAPHICAL GLASS, conteinyng the pleasant Principles of
Cosmographie, Geographie, Hydrographie, or Navigation. Compiled by William
Cuningham, Doctor in Physic. Excussum Londini in Officina Joan. Daii,
Typographi. Anno 1559. Folio, pages 202. besides Dedication, Preface, and
Index; with many curious wooden Cuts.
THis scarce and learned old Treatise, so remarkable both in Beauty of the
Print and Ornaments, and Rarity of the Subject, for a Book of such Antiquity,
has a Frontispiece from a neat wooden Cut, wherein those Sciences, leading to
the Studies here treated of, are represented, with some of the Ancients who
were eminent therein: And at the Bottom of the said Title are these six Lines;
In this Glass, if you will behold
The sterry Sky, and Earth so wide;
The Seas also, with Winds so cold;
Yea and thyselfe, all these to guide:
What this Type mean, first learn a right;
So shall the gain thy Travaill quight.


In his Dedication to Robert Duddeley, of the most noble Order of the Garter
Knight, Master of the Horse to the Quene's most excellent Majestye, etc. he
tells his Lordship, that Men may behold, in this Glass, the Heavens with her
Planets and Stars, the Earth with her beautiful Regions, and the Seas with her
merveilous Increase; and that if his Lordship will take this Work into his
Tuition, he shall be boulden'd to present him with others of his Labors, the
particular Titles of seven whereof he here recites Though this Dr. Cuningham of
Norwich had been a Traveller, yet being bred a Physician, it may be looked upon
as somewhat extraordinary, that he should set forth a Book upon this Subject,
so much more copious and elegant than had hitherto been published; and also
write so many others as he here mentions; the Names whereof are, An Apology; A
New Quadrat, by no Man ever published; The Astronomical Ring; Organographia;
Gazophilacion Astronomicum; Chronographia; and Commentaries in Hippocrates de
Aere, Aquis and Regionibus: The Author being now no more than twenty-eight
Years of Age.
.

After this Dedication, follow some Latin Verses by Dr. Gilbert Barckley, and
Tho. Langley of Cambridge, in Praise of the Author and his Work: At the Back of
which is a wooden Print of the Author in his Doctor's Habit.

Then follows his Preface, setting forth the Benefits of these Cosmographical
Studies. Herein he tells us, they are daily more and more perceived; for what
Country or Island is not in our Age searched out? So exemplifies in Vesputius
Americus. And concludes the said Preface with observing, that by this Glass,
"such as are delighted in travailing as well by Land as Water, shall receive no
small Comfort; and the other sort, by it may also protract and set out
particular Cards for any Country, Region or Province, or else the universal
Face of the Earth in a generale Map. And that the Precepts might seem facile
and plain, I have (says he) reduced it into the Form of a Dialoge; the Names
of the Personages indede fained, but yet most aptly serving our Institution. In
which SPONDAEUS (representing the Scholar) makes Doubts, asks Questions,
objecteth; yea and, sometime, digresseth not from the Imaginations of the
gross witted. Unto which, PHILONICUS (supplying the Office of a Teacher)
answers to all Objections and gives Praecepts. What Diligence I have given
in time of the Printing, to the Correction hereof; and also in devising sundry
new Tables, Pictures, Demonstrations, and Praecepts; that you may easily judge
by readyng of the same Work. Also what Charges the Printer has sustained,
that his good Will might not be wanting, that shall be evident, conferrying his
beautiful Pictures and Letters with such Works as herto has been published.
And thus I leave the with my COSMOGRAPHICALL GLASS; requirying that these my
Travayles and Labors be not rewarded with Ingratitude or ill Report. And if
for the Difficulty of the Work, any Error escape; remember I am the first
that ever in our Tongue have written of this Argument, and therefore am
constrained to find out the Pathe, etc." At Norwich, the 18th of July, 1559.

The whole Work is divided into five Books, in the first whereof, after some
general Heads, leading to that Knowledge in Arithmetic and Geometry, which is
requisite for this Art, he defines Cosmography and Geometry: Then gives you
three Figures or Pictures; the first representing Cosmography, by a Globe of
the Heavens, containing the Earth; the second, Geography, representing the
Earth and Waters only; and the last, Chorography, or the Representation of some
one Town or City, which he illustrates by an accurate Map of the excellent City
of NORWYCHE, as the Form of it is, says he, at this present 1558; with many
Alphabetical References to an Explanation, at the bottom, of the principal
Places set forth in the same, (which Map has been looked upon as a very great
Curiosity:) Hence he proceeds to define what the World is, and to show that it
is made of two Parts. The Number also of the Heavens; with the Errors of some
Ancients. That only eight Heavens were found out by the Egyptians, that Ptolemy
found out the ninth, and Alphonsus the tenth: So gives us a Figure of the
Celestial Sphere. Next he describes what a Center is, what the Axis, and what
a Diameter; what the Poles are, what an oblique Sphere, how a Sphere differs
from a Circle. The Number of Circles in a Sphere, what the Horizon is, the
Division of it, with Figures of the several sorts; what the Meridian is, the
Zenith, Antipodes, the Equinoctial; with the Use of the Horizon, Meridian, and
Equinoctial Circles: What the Zodiac is, and the Ecliptic, what a Sign is, what
a Degree, and what a Minute; with the Septentrional Signs, Meridional Signs,
and the Use of the Zodiac. A Table of many notable fixed Stars, with their
several Names, their true Longitude, Latitude, and Declination, faithfully
rectified unto the Year 1559, profitable for finding out the Latitude of any
Country or Place. Then we have the two Declinations of every Planet
distinguished, with the Diversity of the Sun's Declination from Ptolemy's Time
to ours, and the Manner how to find out, by a Quadrant, the Sun's Declination.
After which we have a Table, in two Parts, of Declination of the Ecliptic, in
Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds, from the Equinoctial; answering to the Sun's
greatest Declination, 23 Degrees, 28 Minutes; being the true Declination of the
Sun in this (our Author's) Age, which Table is more copiously useful than
Orontius, or Doctor Record's Table, and yet not so prolix as Erasmus
Reignholt's. Next we have the Poles of the Zodiac explained, what the Summer
Tropic, and what the Winter is. Whence the four Seasons of the Year are
derived, what the two Colures are, the Artick Circle, and the Antartick
defined, from Proclus, as most of the other Distinctions are. Thus PHILONICUS
having learned his Scholar what the six greater Circles of the Sphere are, and
what the four lesser, gives him the reason why they are so distinguished from
John de Sacro-Bosco. Then representing these several Parts together in one
Figure or Picture, he concludes his Account of the Celestial Sphere, and so
proceeds to that which comprehends the Elementary Region, observing why it can
consist but of four Elements; their Order and Situation, the Division of the
Air, where Comets, Hail and Snow are engendered, what the Earth is, Diversity of
Opinions touching its Form, Objections against its Rotundity answered from
Cleomedes, also from the Example of two Eclipses of the Moon, and Observation
of some Stars, with Reference for further Proof to Ptolemy, Philo, Aristotle,
Reignholt, Orontius, John de Sacro-Bosco, and Master Record; who does almost
repeat all their Arguments, in his Castle of Knowledge. Here, joining together
all the Parts which have been severally before treated of, in one Type or
Figure of a complete Sphere, representing both the Heavens and the Earth, he
concludes with making his Scholar give him a Recapitulation of what he had
learnt in this first Book; so proceeds to

The second Book, etc. in which is plainly expressed the Order and Number of
Zones, Parallels and Climates; also sundry ways for the exact finding out of
the Meridian Line, the Longitude and Latitude of Places, with many other
Precepts belonging to the making of a Carte or Map. After an ingenious
Introduction of this Book, and Repetition of what is taught in it, the Author,
seeing the Matter thereof chiefly depends upon Dimension and Mensuration, first
shows what Dimension is; what a Point, what a Line, what a Platform, and what a
Body is. Then gives us a Table of Measure; the quantity of Helvetian and of
English Miles; the different Signification of Longitude, both in Astronomy and
Cosmography; what Latitude is; how to find out the Circuit of the Earth and the
Vertical Point, with the Diversity of Opinions about the Circuit of the Earth:
Then, of what Parts are habitable, and what not. Of the Zones, and the Error of
Polybius; the Objection of some being uninhabitable answered; of the
Inhabitants, who are distinguished by the Diversity of their Shadows, as, the
Amphiscii, or double-shadowed; the Ascii, or People without Shadows; the
Heteroscii, or those who have their Shadows on one Side, as we who have our
Shadow directly North, and the Antipodes, who have theirs to the South; lastly,
the Periscii, who have their Shadow going about the Horizon. Here follows a
Table of Shadows, showing their Proportion to the Gnomon (it being divided into
60 parts) for every Degree of the Sun's Altitude; and also the quantity of the
Shadow in every Country, Region and City, through the universal Earth, when the
Sun is in the Equinoxial and Solsticial Points. Then returning to the Zones, he
shows how they differ from Climates, with Ptolemy's Division of Climates; next,
what Parallels are, exemplified in a Figure. The number of Climates, also in a
Figure; and Quantity both of them and Parallels; with a Table containing the
number of Parallels and Climates, with the Elevation of the Pole-Artic, and
Quantity of the longest Day and Night answering hereto. Of South Parallels, and
the Reason why Avicenne thought the Air most temperate under the Equinoxial;
which introduces a Conjecture where Paradise was seated, and Lyra's
Interpretation that the Fiery Sword was the burning Zone, with a Conjecture
where Hell is seated. After which, we have Glarian's Manner of finding out the
Noon-Stead or Meridian Line, and four other Methods also of finding the same.
The Order of finding the Height of any Planet or fixed Star in the Noonstead
Line by Night. Then follows a Table of the Sun's Meridian Altitude above the
Horizon, calculated for every Degree in the Zodiac, respecting the Elevation of
the Pole-Artic, at Norwich 52 Degrees 10 Min. and the Sun's Declination 23 Degrees.
28 Min. The manner to find out the Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon, and
the Latitude of any Region, City or Town, several ways; especially by the
Astronomy-Ring. Of finding the Longitude of any Place, according to the
Ancients, by Eclipses of the Moon. That Atreus found out the time of Eclipses.
The Cause of the Moon's Eclipse. A Calculation of such Eclipses of the Moon as
shall happen from the Year 1560 till 1605; applying the Time of their Beginning
in Years, Days, Hours and Minutes, unto the Meridian of Norwich exactly, which
is 22 Degrees and 30 Minutes, from the Canary Islands: with the Figures of all
the said Eclipses. How to find the Longitude of Regions by an Eclipse. How to
turn the Hours of the Day into Degrees and Minutes of the Equinoxial, with a
Table for that purpose. Apian's Way of finding out the Longitude of Places by
the Jacob's Staff, etc. The Method to be taken when the Moon is West, or East
of the Star; further illustrated by an Example of finding the Longitude of
Norwich. Another Method of finding the Longitude of any Region in every Place
as well by Day as Night, and at every Hour, by means of a little Clock, such as
they used to wear in the fashion of a Tablet; whereof were then made as
excellent without Temple Bar as any which were brought from Flanders: with the
Particulars of this Experiment ends this second Book.

In the third Book is expressed the making and Portraiture of the Face of the
Earth, both in Carts particular, and also universal: with diverse Things
incident thereto. Here having shown what a chief Requisite the Art of Drawing
or Delineating is in the Study of Cosmography, and what noble Rewards the
Ancients had in store for the Inventors of Science; when they not only gave
them abundance of Treasure, but also deified them for the same: The Author
descends to explain what an Island is; what a Peninsula; an Isthmus; a
Continent; then exhibits them all in a Map together; with an Answer to an
Objection against the Form of the Terrestrial Globe; so begins with teaching
the Manner of making a particular Carte for any Region, and here draws up a
Table of the Quantity and Proportion of the Equinoxial, or any great Circle, to
every Parallel, North and South therefrom. Hence we are led to a particular
Example, containing the whole Process in making a Map of England, and showing
how the Work chiefly depends on the Meridian Line, appointing thereby the
Longitudes; and by Parallels of Climates, whose use in a Carte is to limit the
Latitude from the Equinoxial: This is illustrated by a Draught or Figure. From
hence we are taught how to describe three or four Regions in one Map, or as
many as are contained in one eighth Part of the Earth; and after the particular
Instructions for this Operation, we have the Form also thereof delineated to
the Eye. So we proceed to the Composition of a Map for one half of the Earth,
whereof also we have a Draught. And this is followed by the Method of making a
Map for the whole Earth, which we are again further acquainted with by lineal
Representations: And here we have a Table of the Segments and Parts of the
Equinoxial, drawn in a plain Platform, answering to the Circumference of
Parallels. A little further is another Table of Regions and Cities subject to
the Signs and Planets. Then we have the Figure of an Instrument, serving to
make a Map, without knowing Longitude or Latitude, which is here called a
Geographical Plain Sphere, by which not only the Distance of one Place from
another may be found in the Map, but of the Places themselves, in Miles also
from one another; as by a Demonstration here figured out appears: And with this
Experiment ends the third Book.

The Fourth Book lays down such necessary Principles and Rules as are to be
observed in Hydrography, and Navigation. Herein it is proposed not to show the
minute Difference of one Vessel from another, nor their Names, nor their
Burden, but how to correct the Errors in guiding and directing them. And first,
we have a Division of the Waters, from the general Name of the Ocean, down to
Lakes and Ponds. The Cause of Spring and Ebb Tides. Cause of Ebbing and
Flowing. How to find the Age of the Moon at all times. The Epact, with a Table
to find it. A Table of the Sun's rising and going down throughout the Year;
whereby to find how long the Moon shines every Night. A Table showing how long
the Moon shines in our Horizon. Another showing in what Places, chiefly on the
English Shore, the Moon makes full Seas. How to know the exact Time of Ebbing
and Flowing, with a Table for finding out Ebbs and Floods in the Coasts of
England, Scotland, Ireland, Dutchland, and France. A Description of the Wind.
The Number, Division, and Nature of the Winds. The new Division of the Horizon
into 32 Parts, by the learned Hydrographers, seemingly in our Author's Time;
who here disposes them into a Type or Figure. Of the Mariners Compass, unknown
to the Ancients, found out by Gemma, and a Draught of it. The Praise of the
Needle; the Observations of Jofrancus in what Places it has erred. How to
correct the Needle in Daytime, by help of the Sun; in the Night, by some fixed
Star. Of the Errors in describing the Shipman's Chart, and the way how to sail
by Longitudes and Latitudes. How to direct a Ship to any Port. How to know the
Form of the Lode-Star; and to know in what Place they are who are driven from
their Course. With these Discoveries and Directions in Cosmography, Geography,
and Navigation, our Author ends this fourth Book.

The Fifth Book describes the Parts of the Earth, particularly according to
late Observations; with the Longitudes and Latitudes of Regions, Provinces,
Islands, Cities, Towns, Villages, and Hills: Also the Commodities, Natures,
Laws, Rights, and Customs of many Countries, and their Inhabitants. This begins
with a particular Description of Europe, containing Christendom and part of
Turkey; beginning with Ireland, as Ptolemy does: In which, after a short Account
of the Products and Character of the People, and Dimensions of the Island, he
notes the chief Places, with their Longitude and Latitude: So proceeds to
England, which is treated of in the same manner. Then Scotland, Iceland,
Corsica, Sicily, Sardinia, Majorca and Minorca, Gades, Euboea, Crete, the
Cyclades and Sporades. In such like particular manner also, of Spain, France,
and Germany, both higher Where our Author mentioning Heydelberg, says he was
genteelly entertained at that University by D. Joan. Langius, T. Erastus,
Physicians; and D. Balduinus, Reader of the Civil Law, besides diverse others,
at the time of his Commencement.
and lower; besides Italy, Rome, etc. So ends this Chapter of Europe with a
particular Description of Greece. Then follows the like Description of Africa,
and the principal Places therein. Asia, after the same manner, is next
described; and lastly, such parts of America as are by Travail found out, which
concludes the whole Work. After the Index follows an Extract of the Queen's
License to John Day and his Assigns, for the Term of his Life, for the sole
Printing this Book; as also, for the space of seven Years, all such Books as he
has printed, or shall print. But we have not yet met with any more of this
Author's Writing, printed by him, how many soever he had ready for the Press;
which perhaps may be accounted for, from the Emblem in the last Page of this
Book, which shows us the Figure of Death on a Monument, and Virtue in the Shape
of a Tree, flourishing out of it.

IX. A short Discovery of the unobserved Dangers of several sorts of ignorant
and unconsiderate Practisers of Physic in England: profitable not only for
the deceived Multitude, and easy for their mean Capacities, but raising
reformed and more advised Thoughts in the best Understandings: with Directions
for the safest Election of a Physician in Necessity. By John Cotta of
Northampton, Dr. in Physic, 4to. 1612. pages 135.
THIS Tract was the Product chiefly of that ten Years Observation and
Experience which our Author had in Northamptonshire, as he informs us in his
Dedication to the Gentry thereof, among whom he was first introduced by his
honored Friend, Sir William Tate, as therein also appears. Not but the said
Frauds and Corruptions in Physic were epidemical enough to have moved him to
the like Animadversions, had he resided in any other part of the Nation. For as
he says, in his Epistle to the Reader; "So infinitely do the numbers of
barbarous and unlearned Counselors of Health at this time overspread all
Corners of this Kingdom, that their confused Swarms do not only every where
cover and eclipse the Sunshine of all true Learning and Understanding, but
generally darken and extinguish the very Light of common Sense and Reason."
Therefore, both in duty to the common Good, and to the Solicitations of his
Friends, he presents us with "this needful Detection of harmful Succors, and
necessary Council for safe Supply." He proposes to suit the meanest Readers
with the Plainness and Simplicity of a familiar Style; and to keep the Current
of the Text clear from all Quotation of ancient Languages, referring only the
learned to the Margin; which latter, he has observed through every Page. His
Method further, is to illustrate his general Cautions and Rules with particular
Cases and Reports, drawn chiefly from those Parts where he now practiced and
resided, as an Inducement to read, and an Enticement to continue, Example being
neither least pleasing nor least profitable to the Vulgar.

The Work itself is opened with an Introduction, showing, how desirable, but
how difficult it is, to meet with an able Physician, through the variety of
Causes and Circumstances to be considered in Diseases, and the Application of
Remedies; with the ill Consequences of the common Neglect and Ignorance herein,
and the monopolizing of Cures to the Prerogative of this or that Secret, to the
Contempt of the due Permutation of Medicines and the Increase of Diseases, both
beyond their own Nature, and the Constitutions of the Sick. Here, among those
Things, the indiscriminate use of which he discommends, are mentioned Tobacco,
and Quicksilver, and even Cassia, and Rhubarb, which being indiscreetly, out of
time and place dispensed, bring Mischief instead of Good; with other Instances
here produced, both of internal and external Remedies, most sovereign and
renowned in themselves, which yet do bring forth effects unworthy of
themselves, and all because such a promiscuous and unskilful Rabble of the
meanest Mechanics, Women, Priests, Witches, Conjurers, Jugglers, and
Fortune Tellers, are suffered to become Medicine-Mongers, and make a gainful
Traffic of Homicide it self. That not only the Simple but those also of better
Sort are deluded to encourage such Pretenders, on account of some casual
Success; but, says our Author, "As in Military Designs, oft-times a bold and
foolhardy Enterprise, above and beside Reason, and beyond Expectation,
produces an excellent and admired Good in the happy Issue; yet it is not
commended, or in any case permitted, as being very dangerous in ordinary
Practice, or Custom of Warfare: so likewise, diverse Events of Medicines prove
good, whose bold Use and rash Prescription is dangerous and unskilful" He
concludes this Chapter with observing, That as improper Remedies are, for the
most part, worse than Diseases, and unlearned Physicians, of all bad Causes of
Diseases, are themselves the worst; it is not therefore a needless Learning,
more studiously to know the Good from Ill and Ill from Good; beginning with the
last first, in

Chap. 2. Of the Emperick. Herein is described, what an Emperick is; in what
his Defects consist. The Assistance of Invention; of Experience, and what a
circumscribed Guide of it self. "For as it is with the Soldier in the Field,
let his own special Experience in Arms be never so ancient, so true, so sound,
yet without a more general Understanding or Theory, and a more enlarged
Knowledge than his particular and limited Experience can bring forth, he must
be lamely fitted to many sudden and often before unforeseen Occurrents, which the
perpetual Mutability and Change of Circumstances in Warfare must needs produce.
The Field, the Enemy, the Time (not always the same) require a diverse and often a
contrary Consultation, Design, and Manner, wherein one particular Experience by
it self, cannot but be much wanting, because the same Thing or Action seldom or
never happens again the same in all Circumstances; and one Circumstance alone
commonly altering the whole Condition. As it is in Military Affairs, so is it
in the Assaults of Diseases, where the Fight and Wrestling of Nature is not
always in the same Part, nor in the same Form or Manner, nor with the same
Disease, nor of the same Period: All which Circumstances in the same Subject
cannot happen always to any Sight or Sense the same, which makes Experience;
yet are ever present in the general Notions of the Understanding, whereby the
prudent and wise Man does make supply, though Experience fail." Besides, many
Diseases arise in the Body of Man which are scarce seen in a Man's Life, and in
which, Experience can give no Prescription. Here are mentioned, the French
Disease and the Scurvy, strange to us once, and the English Sweating-Sickness,
so now. To these are added, some more singular and uncommon Accidents, as
Rulandus his Report of the Golden Tooth which grew naturally in the Mouth of a
Child. Also another Child, in Hollerus, who thrust its hand out of its Mother's
Navel for 15 Days, and was afterward born alive, and the Mother safe. Also,
Brasavola's Cure of the Soldier who had almost half his Head cut away with part
of his Brains. Hence he descends to several Examples and Cases of his own
Observation in Northamptonshire; and concludes, from them, that every Day
almost, may pose bare and naked Experience, especially when Empericks apply it
to similar Appearances: "For, with the Wise, the like, is much unlike the same;
and it is a chief Point in all Learning, truly to discern between differing
Similitudes and like Differences. Many Accidents fall out seeming alike, yet
have no Affinity; and again, in Show the same, yet indeed, contrary. Contraries
have often, in many things, Likeness; and Likeness, Contraries, easily deceiving
the Unwotting and Unlearned." This again is proved by many Instances, tending
to demonstrate the Imperfections of their Practice, who use no light of
Judgment or Reason, but the only Sense of their own Experience. With regard
also to whom, our Author says a little further, "I would it were a Slander, in
these days, that Good Will and excellent Medicines, put to death more Lives
than open Murder;" and thinks "it would be happy, if at length, the common
Inconvenience and public Scandal might beget a Law, and Law bring forth
Restraint." Here also we have many Instances how helpless or hurtful good
Medicines are, when applied without Distinction of proper Circumstances,
Concomitancies, etc. intended to caution us against putting any confidence in
the Excellency of any Remedies, without Advice for the right Dispensation of
them, and consequently, against relying upon the many Books of Physical
Receipts and Apothecaries Shops in print, which were then divulged in all
Places; wise and discreet Men knowing, that Things without Reason in
themselves, are by Reason and Wisdom to be guided.

Chap. 3. is Of the Practice of Women about the Sick; common-visiting
Counselors, and Commenders of Medicines. Wherein, as vulgar Pretenders were
before exclaimed against, for want of proper Education and Knowledge, Patients
are, for the same Reason, warned against consulting with Petticoat
Practitioners; who are rather advised to prescribe Rules of Conduct to
themselves, than Physic to their Friends; as what would free them from the
Unhappiness of having their Hands so commonly in others Mishaps, to the
Dishonor of their own Sex; by intimidating the Sick with Doubts, and
dissuading them, if not from Physic absolutely, yet from the regular
Composition and Use of it; from all that is not of their own making, or of
which they have not had Trial; as their own Ointments, Plasters, Cear-Cloths,
etc. often beguiling them with the dangerous Flattery of harmless and palatable
Medicines, proving, that old Eve will never be worn out of Adam's Children; and
not seldom rendering it incredible that such mean sort of People can get
acquaintance with such dangerous Medicines as are here also specified; but that
Quacksalvers, Bankrupt Apothecaries, and fugitive Surgeons, who every where
overspread the Kingdom, are compelled for gain, to communicate such Secrets,
whereby desperate Ingredients and Experiments grow vulgar Medicaments.
Therefore,

Chap. 4. Treats of Fugitives, Workers of Juggling Wonders, and Quacksalvers.
Under this Head, we have a running Description of the Impostors here named.
"Among these Men, says he, "credulous Minds may see Things invisible, Beggars
are enabled to sell Gold to drink, that want Silver to make them eat. Aurum
Potabile Our Author, Dr. Cotta, (who was educated at Cambridge) here reflects
upon Dr. Fra Anthony, who at this time was noted for his Universal Medicine
called Aurum Potabile, whereof he published a Book about four Years after, and
our Author an Answer to it, as may be seen in Athen. Oxon.
, the Natural Balsamum, the Philosopher's Stone, dissolved Pearl, and the like
inestimable Glories and Pride of Art and Nature are their professed ordinary
Creatures, and the Workmanship of their Hands; in whose hands are nothing but
Idleness, Theft, and Beggary." He concludes this Head with intimating, that
Pretenders to such uncommon Performances, are to be suspected of wanting even
common Sufficiency. That God has not ordained Wonders and Miracles to give
supply to our common Needs, or to answer the ordinary Occasions of Life; nor do
Truth and Sufficiency receive their just Trial by rare Works, or casual Events,
but by an habitual and continual Proof and Exercise in their daily, ordinary,
and proper Subjects and Occurrents.

Chap. 5. is, Of Surgeons; and such as esteeming well of themselves for the
Exercise of their Hands in Wounds, Amputations, etc. arrogate a Privilege in
the Practice of Physic; and even undertake to educate and institute
Physicians, as an Undergrowth to themselves; and that thus also the World is
furnished with Factors for the Grave. Hereof he produces Examples, manifesting,
by the Practice of these Barber-Surgeons, how confident Ignorance will be, and
how powerfully it will infatuate the Distressed. And here again is arraigned,
the Custom of giving the same Medicine to different Constitutions. Whence, says
our Author, "How can he who considers the Disease and not the Person, in curing
the one, but in danger the other?" A little farther he lays down the plain and
uncontrolled Difference between the Learned and the Unlearned in the Faculty;
and shows how the Learned has a Prerogative in three Parts to himself, and an
equal Part with the Unlearned, in the fourth; yet allows, that in many
desperate Cases, the Ignorant by their Blindness, their Boldness, and their
Luck, may be the only fit Instruments. Here we have also Examples how wondrous
Good often issues out of devilish and dangerous Acts; yet if the Unskilful fail,
the hopeful Use of any other Means is commonly thereby overrun, and the
Happiness of After-health by better Council, frustrated. Hence we are led to

Chap. 6. Of Apothecaries: To whom thus much is allowed; That if any may have
Prerogative to be Physicians by the Excellence and rare Choice of Medicines, it
is most proper unto them. Nay, it is further allowed, that for the excellent
Preparation and Knowledge of Medicines, they sometimes may excel some
Physicians themselves. "But above and beyond the Preparation; the right and
judicious Dispensation is truly worthy, commanding and directing therein safe
and prudent Use. This Skill requires an Understanding able to raise itself
above both the Medicine and the Maker, unto the Great Maker of them both, and
from his general Decree and Council in the Administration of all things in
Nature, to levy and limit Circumstances, Proportion, Time, Place, Quantity, and
Quality, according to the manifold Purposes and infinite Uses for the
Preservation, Conservation, and Continuance of Health and Life to Mankind." So
far as the Apothecaries keep within their own proper Bounds, they cannot be
denied a worthy Esteem; but if the Pride and Mastership of the Medicine stir
once in them the Ambition of Medication, they will be justly condemned. A
little further the Question is proposed, whether a Physician should be both
Surgeon and Apothecary himself. And it is allowed that in Judgment, Skill,
Knowledge, and Ability of Direction, it may be requisite; but the particular
Execution should be divided to others, whose continual Exercise therein makes
them fitter for it; and this Chapter is concluded with some further Remarks to
the same Purpose.

Chap. 7. Of Practisers by Spells. Among the Arguments here used against these
Deluders, is this, "If the faithful and devout Prayer of Holy Men, to which the
Promise of God and Blessings of Men are annexed, has no such Assurance or
Success of necessary Consequent, without laborious Industry and the use of good
Means, how can Religion or Reason suffer Men who are not void of both to give
such impious Credit unto an insignificant and senseless Mumbling of idle Words,
contrary to Reason, without Precedent of any truly wise or learned, and justly
suspected of all sensibe Men?"

Chap. 8. Of Witchcraft in the Sick, etc. Herein are various Arguments
advanced, to prove there are many things whereof few Men, many whereof no Man
can attain the Reason, yet every Man knows to have a Reason in Nature. That
Casualty often apts Consequences to Dreams, yet it is no Proof of Truth to trust
in them. That Women in their Sleep have foreseen or foretold many Things which
have come to pass, but this makes their Dreams no Oracles; and many vain Men
have confidently predicted such Things as have happened, yet are not taken for
Prophets. In like manner, some who have possessed themselves with Witchcraft
and the Opinion thereof, have seemed to know Things above their Knowledge, and
That Knowledge above and beyond all Reason has been true. Yet neither is this
any Dispossession of themselves of this Spirit of Folly, nor just Proof or
Accusation of any one to be a Witch. Our Author does not deny or defend
devilish Practices of Men and Women, but desires only "to moderate the general
Madness of this Age, which ascribes to Witchcraft whatsoever falls out unknown
or strange to a vulgar Sense." Therefore, concerning Diseases, there are here
set forth some strange and particular Cases, which had undergone unjust
Imputations of this kind; and one especially, of a Gentlewoman, whom certain
Witches, lately executed for Sorcery, confessed to have bewitched; though her
Malady was only a natural Complication of diverse Disorders, chiefly convulsive,
which produced a Concourse of Accidents, seeming of monstrous and wondered
Shapes. Upon this, says our Author, I grant the voluntary and uncompelled, or
duly and truly evicted Confession of a Witch, to be sufficient Condemnation of
herself, and therefore, justly has the Law laid their Blood upon their own
Heads; but their Confession, I cannot conceive sufficient Eviction of the
Witchcraft itself; and this Topic is conluded with Arguments and Cautions
further to the same Purpose.

Chap. 9. Of Wisards. These are described to be a sort of Practitioners, whom
our Custom and Country call Wise Men, and Wise Women, reputed a kind of honest
harmless Witches or Wisards, who, by good Words, hallowed Herbs, Salves, and
other superstitious Ceremonies, promise to allay and calm Devils, Practices of
other Witches, and the Force of many Diseases. But these being much of the same
Nature with those before mentioned to use Spells, are referred unto them, and
dismissed with a short History of our Author's Observation.

Chap. 10. Of Servants to Physicians and ministering Helpers. Our Author
concludes his Number and Distinction of Empericks with this Tribe; who are such
as either by often serving Physicians, or conversing with them and viewing their
Practice, or by Employment from their Directions, or by Attendance about the
Sick, engross to themselves supposed special Observations and choice Remedies;
and with such small Ware, taken upon credit, set up for themselves. Here the
Insufficiency of such apish Imitation is descanted upon, and this kind of
second-hand Use of other People's Practice; showing, in several Aphoristical
Observations how unsafe such Experience in Physic is; as "how necessary it is,
That Man should be in himself a Master of Knowledge and sincere Judgment, who
shall be able truly to make right Use of another's Experience." And even "That
which Experience has once, or often times known and found to do good, must not
therefore, in necessity, still do the same good, except the same Reason of the
good, do, in each Circumstance, again commend and command it; which only they
can judge and examine who are wise and learned." With other like Reflections
therefore on this preposterous Practice; and a Detail of such Abilities and
Application as are requisite for attaining a sufficiency in this Profession,
our Author concludes this Chapter, and therewith the First Book of this
Treatise: The foregoing Extracts from which, being sufficient to give a Taste
of the Performance, we shall, for brevity sake, only give the Titles of the two
ensuing Books, which are as follows.

Book II. Chapter 1. The Methodian learned Deceiver, or Heretic Physician.
Chapter 2. Of Beneficed Practisers. Chapter 3. Of Astrologers and Ephemerides
Masters. Chapter 4. Of Conjectors by Urine. Chapter 5. Of Travelers. Which
ends this Book.

Book III. The true Artist, his right Description and Election. In two
Chapters, which concludes the whole.

X. Human Industry: or a HISTORY of most MANUAL ARTS; deducing the Original,
Progress, and Improvement of them. Furnished with variety of Instances and
Examples, showing forth the Excellency of Human Wit. Printed for H. Herringman,
1661, in 8vo. 188 pages.
THE Author of this learned Book has, with great Labor, joined many dispersed
Rarities of Art under several Heads; with much Modesty, brought a great deal of
Reading into a little Compass; and, withal, omitted to prefix his Name to it.
Yet, in justice to his Memory, we have been obliged with it by another Hand
Anthony Wood ascribes it to Dr. Tho. Powell, Canon of St. David's, who was,
says he, an able Philosopher, a curious Critic, and well versed in various
Languages. He died in London, Dec. 31, 1660.
. There is a short Preface or Advertisement to the Reader, seemingly by the
Bookseller, in Commendation of the Work; wherein he says, You will imagine
yourself, even among the Mechanic Arts, to be conversant in the Liberal. Though
from the Defect of the alphabetical Catalogue, intended at the beginning, of
the principal Authors mentioned in this Work; with some Errors in the Table of
Contents, and the Omissions in the Index of any Reference to the Pages; we
might, alone, without any other Knowledge of the Author, or the time when he
died, have presumed he did not supervise the Press, yet are those Imperfections
of little moment, because the Work is concise.

The Book itself is divided into twelve Chapters, in the following Order.

I. Of the Invention of Dials, Clocks, Watches, and other Time-Tellers. Here,
speaking of the Division of Time, he tells you, whence the Name of Horae or
Hours, was derived according to Macrobius, and how the Day was divided into
twenty-four Hours according to the Egyptians; of the Clypsidrae or
Water-glasses; of the Way to make the Motion of Time visible and audible, first
by the Invention of Sun-Dials; with an Observation from Busbequius, that the
Turks have no Distinction of Miles or Hours; and that among the Persians, their
Bellies were their Dials; upon what Defects the Invention of Engines by the
Trochilic Art, or that of Wheels arose, and that Severinus Boethius was the
first who contrived any Engine of this sort. Then as to their Variety; some
being mute, some vocal, some so small as to be worn in Rings, for making
whereof, in Italy, our Countryman George Whitehead is celebrated by Schottus in
his Itinerary. Then of Andrew Alciat's Clock, which was both Larum and
Tinder-Box. Of Astronomical Clocks; that at Prague, serving also as an Almanac:
That at Strasburgh, more particularly described in Coriat's Travels. The
strange alphabetical Globe of our Countryman Linne, a Jesuit of Liege, which in
a Water-glass would turn to an Index every Hour, according to the Accounts of
Kercher, de magnete, and Gassendus in the Life of Peiriscus. The no less
strange Cork of the said Kercher, which, with Seeds of the Heliotrope in it,
would also in Water keep Course with the Sun. He gives us one more Description
of a Saddle-Clock, at Dresden, from Morysin's Travels: So concludes this Head
with a Latin Epigram, by Tho. Campian, on a Watch, with the Translation by H.V.
i. e. Vaughan. And an Observation from Tycho Brahe on a Defect in all Clocks
and Watches; in Watches, for that the first half Hour goes faster than the
last, because Springs, wound up, move faster in the beginning; and in Clocks,
the last half Hour is faster than the first, because their Weights move flower
at first, and accelerate as they draw nearer the Earth.

II. Of some curious Spheres, and Representations of the World. This Chapter is
introduced with a Praise of Archimedes, and Claudian's Epigram on his
Celestial Sphere, with a Translation of it by Mr. Nath. Carpenter. Of King
Sapor's Glass-Sphere. The Emperor Ferdinand's silver Heaven, which he presented
to Solomon, as mentioned by Paul Jovius Sabellicus, and Dubartas. Among the
Moderns, Cornelius Van Drebble of Alcmar, is much admired: He lived in England,
had a gold Chain sent him by the Emperor, and was Regi Jacobo a Mechanicis,
King James his Engineer: He presented that King with a Perpetual Motion, which
is here described; and a Draught or Figure of it, referred to in Mr. Tho.
Tims's Philosophical Dialogue. He is praised by Marcellus Vrankheim, in an
Epistle, and his said Microcosm by Grotius, in a Latin Epigram, which you have
here recited with Vaughan's Translation: So concludes with an Account of
Erasmus his gold Ring, which had a Celestial Sphere in it, and some Devices of
Janellus Turrianus of Cremona, with which he used to recreate the Emperor
Charles V. as his brazen Heavens, his little Armies of Horse and Foot, his
wooden Sparrows, Iron-Mill that turned itself, and would grind as much Wheat in
a Day as would suffice eight Persons, with his Waterworks, whereby he drew up
the River Tagus to the top of the Mountain of Toledo, as we have it in Strada's
History of the Low Country Wars.

III. Of sundry Machines, and artificial Motions by Water and Air. In this,
having admired the wonderful Creation of the greater World and the lesser, and
instanced how many useful Machines and artificial Motions have been framed
after those two primary Automata that God himself made, he enumerates several
Engineers, ancient and modern, who have been famous for such Works; then
proceeds to treat, first, of Wind-Motions, whereof, after mentioning what
Baptista Porta and Marinus Mersennus had written upon this Subject, he gives
Examples in the wooden Dove of Architas, the wooden Eagle of Regiomontanus, and
his Iron Fly, the sailing Chariot of Simon Stevinius, which would carry eight
or nine Persons above forty Miles in two Hours. 'Twas in the fashion of a Boat,
with four Wheels and two Sails. It was much admired by Peireskius according to
Gassendus; and here are two Epigrams of Grotius upon it, with their
Translations. Then we have Accounts of Statues, walking and speaking, and the
artificial Animals which Luitprandus saw at Constantinople; the Statue of
Albert Magnus, Friar Bacon's brazen Head, and the vocal Image in King Richard
the Second's Reign, whereof Sir R. Baker speaks: Then of Cornelius Van
Drebble's Organ, which would play of itself, in the open Air and clear
Sunshine, but be silent in the Shade: The Mill that would saw Boards without
Hands, at Dantzick; and such another, which Dr. John Dee saw at Prague, as he
mentions himself. Then he speaks of the Wind-Guns, Aeolii Scopoli, to discharge
without Powder, and Aeoliae Pilae or Wind-Balls, to blow up or kindle Fires;
and Wind-Spits, according to the Account of Cardan. Then he comes to
Water-Motions, and here mentions the curious Mills at Thoulouse and Dantzick,
from the Accounts of Golnitz and Morison; also the Mint at Segovia, which
performed the several Operations of coining by a Water-Engine, as Sir K. Digby
relates; the Statues in the Duke of Florence's Garden, with their various
Motions and Harmony, also the Birds at Tivoli which sing by the same Hydraulic
Art. Of Water-Organs, and the vast Scenery of Woods, Beasts, Waters, and
Shipping in the Roman Amphitheatres. The Versatile Dining-Rooms, where every
Course is eaten in a different Chamber, the Guests never removing from their
Seats. Next is mentioned the portable Palace, carried to France for the
Interview between Henry VIII. and Francis I. which so many Writers have spoken
of (though we think not that it is here placed under its proper Head) and lastly
a more distinct Account of Memnon's Statue, its musical Property, even when it
was broke; and the Conjecture of Kircher that it was made by Talismanic Art Of
this Art see Marcil Ficinus de Vita coelitus comparanda, Jos. Scaliger Epist.
and Gregory's Opuscula.
, though he shows that such Effects might be produced by Mathematical Contrivance
in his Oedipus, where more Examples may be seen of Pneumatical Devices among
the Egyptians in their Temples.

IV. Of the Art and Mystery of Writing, with the Instruments.

This he begins with showing what a vast number of different ways the Alphabet
may be joined according to Clavius. That the Chinese have 40000 Letters
according to Purchase, and that the Indians admired this dumb Commerce, so as to
believe that Letters were Spirits, or a kind of Internuncii between the
Correspondents; and to this sense quotes Tho. Readi Inventa adespota. Of the
Invention attributed to Cadmus by the Phoenicians, as we have it in Ausonius
and Hermannus Hugo. Of the admirable Perfection which the ancient Librarians
arrived to in the Art of Writing, and several Examples of their Performance in
Miniature, particularly that of Fra. Alumnus, according to the Testimony of
Genebrand and Sim. Maiolus. Pliny's Account of Homer's Iliad in a Nut-shell,
and Cicero's Confirmation, however Lancelotti reckons it among his Farfalloni.
Of Tho. Sweicker, the Dutch Writer with his Feet, and how choicely some Copies
of his said Writing are kept, according to Fell. Platerus; and of an English
Woman who wrote in the same manner. Of Brachygraphy or Shorthand for Speed and
Privacy; invented by Mecaenas according to Dion, and used by Cicero. Of Julius
Caesar's invention, which was a kind of Cryptography, by Transposure of the
Alphabet. That the Instruments are active and passive; being those wherewith
and those whereon we write. And first, of those whereon we write, as Stone, on
which the old Jewish Law was wrote, and some antique Danish Records, as
mentioned by Seldom in Marmora Arundell. Then on Leaves of Trees, as the Sybils
Books and the Indians, whence the word Folio. On Lead, as in Job, and the Poems
of Hesiod in Pausanias, and on the inner Rhind of Trees, whence the words
Liber, Caudex and Codex. On Papyr Reeds, as in Isaiah, whence Paper; which Reed
was called Biblus, whence Biblia. On Tables of Brass, as the Roman Laws; on
Waxen Tables, whence Tabellarii or Letter-Carriers; which Tables are mentioned
in St. Luke and in Isaiah; and in the Septuagint called Box-Tables, also
sometimes made of Cedar-Wood. Of the Invention of Vellum and Parchment by
Eumenes King of Pergamus. And lastly, of our modern Paper, with Lord Bacon's
Observations on the Excellence of the said Invention. Of the Cotton Paper in
Mexico, and Silk Paper in the East Indies. Next of the Active Instruments, as
the Finger of God on the Tables of Stone; Graving Tools for Metals, and
Diamonds for Glass; the Stylus for Waxen Tables; the Reed, called Calamus
Scriptorius and Arundo, for writing on the Papyr Seggs about Memphis, as
mentioned in Martial; and lastly, the Quill of a Bird's Wing for Parchment and
Paper, called by Ausonius, Fissipes, from the Slit made in it to let down the
Ink; and four Lines in its Praise by Barlaeus de Penna; with the notice taken
of these three last in an old Chronicle. Of writing with corroding Waters, by
the Cutlers of Damascus, on the Turkish Scimeters, and of the long lasting of a
Pen, in the Example of Dr. Holland's the Physician of Coventry, wherewith he
translated all Pliny's Natural History into English; which therefore was
preserved by a Lady, as a great Rarity in a Silver Case; and Ovid's Silver Pen,
which being found in some Ruins, was given to the Queen of Hungary in 1540,
according to Mr. Sandys, in the Life of that Poet.

V. Of Printing and Printing-Presses. Here we have the Commendations of Pol.
Virgil, Cardan, and Read before mentioned, in Prose and Verse, of this Art. The
Contention of higher and lower Germany for the Invention of it. The general
Voice for Mentz, and John Guttemberg, or Fust The learned Dr. Will. Cuningham,
who was in these parts of Germany, in or before the Year 1559, and conversant
with the most learned Men there, says in his foregoing Treatise, fol. 181.
"That at this City of Mentz was the Art of Printing first found by John
Faustus, in the Year of Christ our Savior 1453."
, about the Year 1440, according to Polydore. The Evidence of the Tully's
Offices cited by Salmuth upon Pancirollus, another Instance from the Library at
Francfort; with the Opposition of Adrian Junius, who would carry it from the
High Dutch, and make the Town of Harlem its Birthplace, and Laurence-John (
Coster) the Inventor, from his Rudiments thereof carved out of the Barks of
Trees, which Junius saw in that Town; with his Account how John Faustus stole
away Coster's Letters and Utensils, and settling at Mentz printed the Doctrinal
of Alex. Gallus 1440. Also the Description over Coster's House, justifying the
same, and Pet. Scriverius his Confirmation thereof, with Jo. Scaliger's Account
of the first Printing from Wooden Tables. That the Chinese may plead Antiquity
for the Invention, according to P. Maffaeus, and that they have practiced the
Art above 500 Years, as Trigaultius affirms, but differently from the
Europeans; for they do not compose by Letters, but make for every Leaf a Table,
with Characters on both sides, as Gonsalvo Mendoza observes. So that the
Invention of the modern manner may still be allowed in honor of the Germans.
Our Author then mentions a Latin Poem written in praise of this Art (which it
well deserves, being the Preserver of all other Arts) by Mrs. Joan. Elizabeth
Weston, one of the Muses of England. And lastly gives a description of
Christopher Plantin's Printing House, his twelve Presses, and near 100 sorts of
Characters, besides Frontispieces, etc. and tells us that the first
Printing-Press in England was set up in Westminster-Abbey, by Simon Islip, An.
1471. where William Caxton first practiced the Art, as Stow affirms in his
Survey of London.

VI. Of the Art of Limning and Painting. This Chapter commences with Praises of
the Art by Sir Henry Wotton, St Gregory, etc. The Reason why Death's Dance was
painted in the Church at Basil. How simple the Art was at first, according to
Aelian, but increased to ten Colors, as Bulenger observes; who it was added
the Ethick part of Painting, and first expressed the Passions. The Excellence
of Apelles and Protogenes, Zeuxes and Parrhasius, the Virgin Lala and Rene King
of Sicily. Of some modern Rarities; as, the representing in one Piece several
Faces according to different Position or Standing, by pleated Paper, and
indenting or folding of the Table; others that showed the Head of a Spaniard
one way, another way, that of an Ass; a third in the Chancellor of France's
Cabinet, which presented many little Faces, his Ancestors, to the vulgar Eye;
but, through a Perspective, the single Portrait only of the Owner, according to
Sir Rich. Fanshaw in the Epist. before his Translat. of Pastor Fido. Of
Painting in Oil; with the Art of Sculpture and Engraving. Of other Perspective
Pieces. The Art of Myron, and Imagery of Lysippus. Of Michael Angelo and his
three Perfections; Albert Durer, Vandick, so famous in London, who attained to
great Wealth by his Art; and Paul Rubens, whose Table of the Last Judgment was
valued at five thousand Florins. Of Annealing or painting in Glass, and
Bulenger's erroneous Opinion that it was known to the Ancients, from a Distich
in Martial. Of the Egyptian Pictures stained in Linen Cloth. Pictures woven
in Cloth, as in Carpets and Tapestry-Work, first taught by the Babylonians,
according to Pol. Virgil, and rivaled by the Arras-Workers in Flanders. Of
Mosaic Work, with colored Stones, Metals, and Glass, in all Figures, known to
the Ancients according to Pliny and Bulenger de Pictura and Statuaria. Lastly,
of the Picture of Laoco mentioned in Virgil and Pliny, preserved in the Palace
at Rome, and admired by M. Angelo.

VII. Of the Art of Spinning and Weaving, with the several Materials of
Garments. After a Word or two on the Invention of this Art ascribed to Minerva,
we are informed of a rare self-moving Engine at Dantzick, which would weave
four or five Webs at a time, and without human help work night and day; which,
yet in favor of the poor Weavers, was suppressed, and the Inventor secretly
destroyed, according to Lancelotti. He next speaks of the primitive Attire of
Fig Leaves, and Paul the Hermit's Suit of Palm-leaves; the Skins of Beasts;
Arachne's Excellence in Spinning; the several sorts of Materials whereof Cloth
is woven, as the Nettle-Cloth, that of the Palm-leaves, of the Bark of the
Maguei among the Mexicans, which bears the Coco, here described from Du Bartas;
and of the Pumpion brought from Mecha, whereof Peireskius had a kind of Silk
woven, as Gassendus relates in his Life, besides which there is no Sericum
Vegetabile, according to our Author; for that Silk properly is made by and from
the Silkworm, as Julius Scaliger against Cardan shows; of which Pliny inserts
many a moral Lesson among his Observations. It is next observed, that Pamphilia
first wove Silks; that the Emperor M. Aurel. Antoninus first wore them in
Europe; and that the Worm was first brought into this Quarter by certain Monks
in Justinian's Time. That in the Summer-Islands there are large
beautiful-colour'd Spiders, which spin perfect raw Silk, as Oviedo and Captain
Smith relate. Of other Garments, made with Hair, such as the Prophets wore:
Grograms of Goat's Hair; whereof Busbequius gives a more particular Account;
and Chamlets of Camel's Hair, as we may further read in Aelian. Of Flax and
Hemp; that they were first dressed in Egypt, and that the Egyptian and Jewish
Priests wore their Vestments thereof; also of Cotton which grows in Balls on
certain Shrubs. Next of the fine Linen made in Holland and Cambray, whence
called Hollands and Cambricks, which Adrian Junius describes to be as white as
snow, as fine as Lawn, and as dear as Silk. Of the Sea-Wool, spoken of by
Tertullian, as fine as Silk according to La Cerda, which is made of the downy
Substance growing out of the large Shellfish called Pinna. Also a kind of
Stone-Cloth made from certain Stones here named, which are beaten into small
Fibers or Hairs, and so woven; it is called by Langius, Salamander's Wool,
having the property of resisting Fire. Ferdinand Imperatus had of it in his
Museum, and Callimachus hung up a Taper of it in the Temple of Minerva,
according to Salmasius. But there is a Vegetable of the same property called by
the Greeks Asbastos, which Pliny calls Linum vivum or incombustible Flax, and
says the Carcasses of Kings were wrapped in it, when they were to be burned, to
preserve their Ashes for the Urns. Podocatter, who wrote de Rebus Cypriis in
1566, had of this Cloth, which was seen by Tho. Porcacchius as he relates in
his Funeral Rites. Ludovicus Vives saw the like at Lovain, as he also relates,
and Baptista Porta, at Venice, as may be read in his Not. Magia. Metals were
also wrought into Cloth: such were the Attalic Garments, called by the
Italians, Vest di Brocato di Oro; and when the marble Coffin of Mary, the Wife
of the Emperor Honorius, was dug up at Rome in 1544, though her Body was consumed
and turned to dust, all but her Teeth and Bones, her golden Apparel was fresh;
out of which, was extracted 36 Pound weight of pure Gold, as Aldrovand records
in his Musaeum Metallicum. The Sidonians had also such Vestments, as may be
seen in Virgil, Aen. xi. But the strangest of all, was that kind of Wool
mentioned by St. Hierom and Paulus Diaconus to have rained down from the Clouds
about Artois in Flanders, whereof Cloth was spun to the great Enrichment of the
Country: So that as there was once Coelum escatile, as Salvian speaks of the
wonderful Manna, in like manner there was now Coelum textile, as we may term
it; the Sky affording both Food and Raiment. To this Chapter is joined an
Appendix of The Plumary Art. Here it is observed to what Perfection this Art
was arrived in Florida, and other Parts of the West Indies; where such Birds of
Orient Plumage abound, as the Phenicopter, Parrot, and Tomincio: With the
manner how they strip the Quills, and paste on the Feathers in all Shapes and
Shades. What delicate Works of this kind Ferdinand Cortez, saw in the Emperor
Motizuma's Palace at Mexico. That Cardinal Paleotti had the Picture of St.
Hierom of this Workmanship; and that certain Friars had learnt the Art. That it
was not unknown even to the Ancients. That St. Hierom mentions it; also Julius
Fermicus, Prudentius, and Seneca. That these Plumes surpass all the Beauties of
the Pencil, not only in Luster but Duration, and foil the Art of Painting.

VIII. Of the Art of Music, with the Instruments, etc. From the Pythagorean
Notion of Music in the Spheres, the Delight of Man's Soul in Harmony is here
accounted for, according to Macrobius; also from the Body of Man, which is a
living Organ, and Life itself, the Lesson which his Soul plays thereon. That
vocal Music is most delightful. That Pan devised the Imitation of this musical
Pipe in the Throat of Man, with a Syringe or Reed, though Lucretius ascribes it
to the whistling of the Zephyrs in the Reeds. That in Imitation of them the
Shank-bones of Cranes were used, whence came the Flute: Not but musical
Instruments were in the World before Pan's Time; Jubal being the Inventor of
the Harp and Organ. That the Egyptian Mercury invented the Lyre or Lute, by a
Tortoise-shell he found on the Nile-side, to which some Nerves hung, reaching
from end to end, whereof Du Bartas has taken notice. That Terpander increased
the Lyre from three Strings to seven, Simonides added an eighth, and David
mentions a ten-string'd Instrument, who invented many sorts; but all are
divided into such as are founded either by the Breath or Hand. Since his Time
many have been the Improvements. Leander Alberti in his Description of Italy
relates that he saw a pair of Organs, in which, Men would think they heard Boys
and Men distinctly sing their Parts in Concert; and another Pair in the Duke of
Mantua's Court, made all of Alabaster, which gave a loud and full Sound; also
another very musical Pair at Venice, made all of Glass, which are mentioned by
Moryson in his Travels. Pope Sylvester the Second made a Pair that would play
without any other Organist than warm Water: Such Hydraulics, frequent in Italy,
are sounded also with cold Water. Gaudentius Merula, de Mirab. Mundi, mentions
an Organ at Milan; the Pipes whereof were made of various Materials, as Wood,
Brass, Whitelead, and imitated various musical Instruments. Speaking next of
vocal Music, natural and artificial, the Scarcity of good natural Singers is
observed, occasioning the Supply of musical Instruments for Delight, and to
appease the Cares of Life. Hence we are led to an Appendix, Of the Power and
Efficacy of Music. The Commendations of Orpheus by Horace and Claudian, and of
Silenus by Virgil; with Tho. Randolph's Exhortation to Music, finely
illustrating the Force thereof upon Rocks and Trees. Thus leaving things
inanimate, he proceeds to Instances of the Regency of Music over Creatures,
rational and irrational; among other Authorities he produces that of Henry
Stephens, who says (in Pref. ad Herod.) that he saw a Lion at London, which
would forsake his Food to hear Music. The Delight which Deer and Elephants
take therein; and that the Ass only is not pleased with it. That Birds likewise
are affected with Music, and Hawks tamed therewith. That it rules also in the
Water, as in the famous Story of Arion and the Dolphin; and was expected to
prevail over Hell itself, as in the attempt made for the Recovery of Eurydice,
with a Compliment to Spenser out of W. Brown's Pastorals, attesting that if
Orpheus had been but half his equal, he had not left her in those infernal
Regions. Then for rational Creatures, here are many Examples produced to show,
how Music has all our Passions at Command; how Courage and Fear have been
raised by it; how Anger has been stirred up, and allayed by it; how it
exhilarates and enlivens the Spirits, inspires Devotion, Chastity, and
Civility; with an Instance of the effect of Dactyls and Spondaics. That Music
has also power over the Body, to keep it from drooping and weariness, and cure
it of Maladies; of this latter we have many particulars, as the Cure of the
Plague in Homer by Music; of the Frensy, by Zenocrates; of the Sciatica, from
the Experience of Theophrastus; and some Aches, as reported in France: The
poisonous Bite of the Tarantula in Italy; that kind of Frensy, called St. Vitus
his Dance, in Germany, in which, upon hearing of a Fiddle, the Patient dances
till he is tired and cured; as Skenkius observes. Hence we proceed to the
Music of Speech and Eloquence: Of the Grecian Orators, who had the power of
Fire and Water, to inflame and extinguish; to make Peace and War. Then of some
Moderns, as Savanorola, who managed the Commonwealth with his Tongue, and
Ugolin the Friar, who, by a Sermon, moved his Audience to beat their Enemies.
And if plain Speech has such power, how much more must Words joined with
Harmony and Numbers? Here we have a Summary of all the forementioned Effects of
Music in some Verses of Du Bartas; which is followed by Baptista Porta's nice
Attempt to ascribe the wonderful Effects of Music to the Virtues of the
several sorts of Trees, whereof the Instruments are made, which, says he, have
a secret Property to cure Diseases more than the Sounds that are made of them.
But our Author thinks him mistaken, because bare Words have power over Men's
Minds and Spirits; so shows us, more distinctly, from Scaliger, how the
Vibration or trembling of the Air, by Music, affects the Spirits of Man. This
is further strengthened by the affinity between the Soul and Music, observed
by Aristotle and Macrobius, and the Argument of its being no wonder that every
Creature, which has a living Soul, should be taken with Music, since the Soul
of the Universe, whereof every particular Soul is a Part, is made of Harmony.
This Head is concluded with an Example of the Force of Eloquence in Pericles
from Val. Maximus, and in the Philosopher Hegesias, who so pathetically set
forth the Evils of Life, that his Auditors resolved to kill themselves,
according to Cicero.

IX. Of the Invention of Glass, and Glass-Works. We are here informed of the
Ingredients whereof Glass is made; by what Accident it was invented, from Pliny
and Josephus; the Properties of it, how fluid and ductile while hot, how hard,
clean, and clear when cold; how broken by Poisons, excessive Cold, or Heat. How
Art in forming of it imitates the Creation, it being made with the Breath of
the Mouth. How preciously it is esteemed of in some Countries, where it is
exchanged for Gold, according to Pigafetta. Where the best are made, near
Venice, and how. Though ours is so brittle, that an Artist at Rome, in Tiberius
his Time, could make it malleable and flexible, and that he was secretly made
away, lest the Knowledge of his Art should make Gold contemptible. Then we come
to the Uses of Glass in Cups and Vessels, Looking-Glasses, Telescopes,
Microscopes, Thermometers, Spheres, Spectacles, whereby old Eyes become young,
small Objects are magnified, things invisible seen, and things behind us
brought before, and those done in our Neighbor's Houses, or Enemy's Tents,
brought to our Knowledge without the help of Magic; for which we are referred
to Baptista Porta. Then we advance more to Particulars, as that Cornelius Van
Drebble, that rare Engineer of Alcmar, who lived here in K. James's Court,
invented the Microscopes, whereby we discover the subtilest Objects, and the
smallest: And that Sanctorius, a famous Physician of Padua, invented the
Thermometers, which, in a Man's Chamber, discover the Temper of the Air,
whether hot or cold, moist or dry, or inclining to either. That Telescopes, for
discovering things a-far off, were invented by Jacobus Metius of Alcmar, as Des
Carts tells us, and perfected by Gallileo Gallilei the Florentine; which will
represent Objects thirty times bigger than the apparent Quantity, and a hundred
times nearer than the apparent Distance. By these, new Stars have been
discovered, and new Worlds in them; the Moon brought down to Examination, and
found to be another America. By these Telesius has given us his Selenographia,
or Description of the Countries and Provinces there; and Van Drebble saw not
only the Hills and Plains, but the Forests, Cities and Buildings in this Lunary
World; as Gassendi has written in his Life of Peiresk. And as for
Burning-Glasses, we have here the Account of the Roman Ships fired by
Archimedes at Syracuse, from Plutarch's Life of Marcellus; and those of
Vitalianus fired by Proclus with such Glasses; who thereby defended
Constantinople as Zonaras records; and those wherewith our learned Countryman
Roger Bacon Vir tam vastae doctrinae, ut Anglia imo Orbis, ea re nihil haberet
simile aut secundum. Vossius de Artibus popular. Artis Magnae, Lib. 10.
offered the Pope to annoy the Turks more than all the Galleys of Italy, or an
Army of a Hundred Thousand Men could do, as Gaffarel from others relates.
Kircher indeed could never hit upon the Experiment, or hear of Glasses that
would burn above fifteen Paces distance; but Baptista Porta declares there is a
way to make Glasses that would burn things at any distance, and Dr. John Dee,
in the Preface to his Monas Hieroglyphica, that it may be made to calcine
Stones and reduce them to powder. After this we come to a Remark or two on the
Spheres of Archimedes, which represented the Motion of the heavenly Bodies, and
is described by Claudian; with the Distinction of Kircher, that the outside
only was of Glass; yet Peter Ramus speaks of two Glass Spheres at Paris, like
those of Archimedes. Next we have an Observation on the Amphitheatre of Glass
in Pliny, which was a kind of Fossile, or Obsidian Glass found in Aethiopia,
black, transparent, and easily wrought; of which was built the stately Tomb in
Alexandria, by Ptolemy, for Alexander, as Strabo relates. Herodotus also tells
us this kind of Glass was wrought hollow, to case or enshrine dead Bodies, that
they might be seen. The specular Stone was of this kind but brighter, and like
Crystal: It was also used to shelter Fruits from blighting Colds. But this kind
of Stone is returned by Pancirollus, inter non inventa. Leander mentions a
complete Galley of Glass at Venice, and Glass Organs: James Howel saw such a
Galley at the Murano, as he writes in his History of Venice. As Glass is
diaphanous and passive to Objects, so it is also reflective, and beats back the
Objects which fall upon it, when the backside is lined with Tinsoil, or Leaf of
Tin-silver, or other Metal; and thus Looking-Glasses are made, wherewith many
strange Feats may be performed, even to the Suspicion of Magic and unlawful
Arts.

X. The Invention of Shipping, Sailing, and the Mariner's Compass. This
Invention of riding on the blue Roads with wooden Horses, as the old comic Poet
phrases it, was highly bold as Horace expresses it, and no less useful as all
the World have found it. The Motives to such Hazard are shown from the Book of
Wisdom, to be Desire of Gain in Man, and a Willingness in God, that the Works
of his Wisdom should not lie idle. But we shall admire such Boldness the more,
in considering the Simplicity of Sailing in the first Ages, when the Egyptians
made their Boats of Reeds and Rushes, according to Pliny and Lucan; such was
that in which Moses was preserved, such is spoken of in Isaiah; also among the
Indians, according to Herodotus. The old Britains had their Naves Vitiles, says
Pliny; the Irish their Corraghes, being made of Wicker covered with Leather,
not much bigger than a Basket; such Strabo says he sailed to Egypt in; such
were those which Caesar learnt to make of the Britains; and such were used by
the Babylonians, as testifies Herodotus: And they were so light that the Master
could carry them on Shore, as they carried him at Sea, like the Arabian
Fisherman, whose Tortoise-Shell was his Shallop by Water, and his House by
Land, as Dubartas has it from a Latin Epigram. Such like also, for lightness,
the Egyptians use on the Nile, and Boterus mentions such again in the
West Indies, where they have also their Balsa's, or Bulrushes rafted together,
and row to fish in the main Sea upon them, as may be read in Acosta. The
Indians have likewise their Canoes made out of one Tree hollowed, and in
Greenland, Boats shaped like a Shuttle, covered with Seal-Skins, and rib'd with
Bones of Fishes, as Purchase describes. Pet. Gellius in his Description of the
Thracian Bosphorus, speaks of a Ship he saw, laden with Arabian Merchandise,
which had no Iron in it, but was sewed together with Cords, covered with Rosin
of the Frankincence-Tree, and her Tackling made of the Tree which bears the
Indian Nut, which Mr. Geo. Herbert describes. But the Tyrians are reputed the
first who improved Shipping with Masts, Sails, etc. and Ovid tells us that
Jason was the first Contriver of Ships, and that his famous Argo was stellified
by Astronomers. The Shellfish called Nautilus, gave the first Hint of framing
a Ship, according to Pliny, as the flying of the Kite did of the Stern;
afterward they were magnificently made, as that Cedar Galley built by
Caligula, which had Halls, Rooms, and Gardens in it: and that of Ptolemaeus
Philopater, who built one two hundred eighty Cubits long, fifty two Cubits from
the Bottom to the upper Decks; had four hundred Banks for four thousand Rowers,
with Gardens and Orchards at top of it, as Plutarch relates in his Life of
Demetrius. But the Improvement of Navigation without Sails or Oars, so as never
to be wind-bound, was more commendable. We have the Account in Vitruvius that
for this end the Ancients had in their Ships three Wheels on each side, with
eight radii, a Span long, projecting from each Wheel, and six Oxen within
turning the same, which casting the Water backward, moved the Ship on with
great Speed. They had also an Instrument in those Ships, called Carrum,
dividing the Hours of the Day. Lord Bacon, in his Novum Organum, speaks of
Boats in England to sail under Water; and Julius Scaliger, of a Ship he could
make that would steer herself. This Chapter ends with the famous Representation
of a Naval Fight in Claudius Caesar's time, mentioned by Suetonius, and
Juvenal's Account of the Earthen Boats used in Egypt. So we proceed to the
Appendix, of the Mariners Compass, wherein we are informed that John Goia, or
Flavius Goia of Amalphi in Campania in the Kingdom of Naples, first invented
the Compass, who is therefore celebrated by Du Bartas. By what Stars Pilots
were directed before the said Invention, and Travelers in the Deserts of
Arabia, and how they were obliged to stop when the Sky was clouded, therefore
our Author says of the Loadstone, as Rablais of the Millstone, that it is the
most precious of all others. Then follows Claudian's Description of the Magnet,
its two Properties of Attraction and Direction, which gave Invention to the
Mariners Compass, whose Needle, touched therewith, points its Lilly-Hand to the
North, in any part of the World. The Inhabitants of Taprobana having not the
Pole Star to sail by, carried certain Birds on board, which being set at
liberty, flew by natural Instinct to the Shore; so gave direction to the
Sailors, according to Pliny. The Syrians and the Bactrians, according to
Curtius, traveled by the Guidance of Stars; but the Arabians, says Lud.
Bartema, in certain Wooden Boxes on their Camels, have the Loadstone like the
Compass, to steer their Course by over the Deserts. Some ascribe this Invention
to the Chinese; and Dr. Gilbert, de Magnete, lib. 1. affirms that Paulus
Venetus brought it first into Italy, An. 1260, having learnt it from them.
Ludovicus Vertomanus reports, that he saw about the Year 1500, the Indian Pilot
of his Ship, sailing in Java, steer by a Compass, made as in Europe. This Head
is concluded with a Remark, that our Compass is not yet brought to due
Perfection, for that the Magnetic Needle does not yet point exactly to the
North in all Meridians, to the cause of much Error in Navigation. Van Helmont
professes a way to rectify this Inconvenience, which, though somewhat fanciful,
as appears by our Author's Account of it, it is yet to be wished some Devices
might be found to amend that Imperfection.

XI. The Art of Cicuration and taming of wild Beasts. It appears by the
Introduction of this Chapter, that we have not the same Title to this Book
which our Author intended, and that he had called it Historia Naturae Subactae;
therefore thinks this Chapter no Digression. He begins with a Quotation from
the New Testament, showing, that every kind of Beast is tamed by Mankind; gives
seveval Examples of the Elephant, and refers to many Stories of their
Officiousness and Docility in one of Lipsius his Epistles; and of the Lion out
of Pliny; that Tigers drew the Coach of Bacchus, from Silius Italicus; and that
of Heliogabalus, as Lampridius relates. Martial mentions the same in Domitian's
time; that the fierce Byson, and Stag were taught to do the same; and at Walton
upon Thames, our Author saw four Stags draw a small Coach. Lipsius in his Notes
upon Tacitus, speaks of Dogs drawing a Chariot at Rome; and Textor, of
Ostriches that drew the Coach of the Emperor Firmus. The Emperor Maximilian the
second, had a Deer which would receive a Bridle and a Rider, and run against
the fleetest Horse, as Mich. Neander relates. Martial mentions also a Deer used
to a Bridle, and Camden in his Annals of Q. Elizabeth, that Sir Hierom Bows
brought from Muscovia certain Does of admirable Swiftness, which being yoked
and coupled in a Coach, would carry a Man with great Speed. Next we have an
Account of tame Panthers, Leopards, and Lions to hunt with, as the King of
Cambala's, which Aelian mentions, and Scaliger; and Mr. Moryson speaks of
Leopards so tame, that they would leap up behind the Huntsman on his Horse, and
sit like a Dog, and soon dispatch a Heart, which shows the Excellence of Man's
Abilities to subdue other Creatures; but as Xenophon observes, it is far easier
taming any Creature than Man; and Seneca has a Reflection to the same purpose,
that no Creature is so wayward, fierce, and untractable as Man. We have next an
Account from Strabo, of a Crocodile that had been tamed, and Dragons mentioned
by Seneca to have crept tamely upon Men's Tables, among their Cups; and of a
four-legged Serpent in Cairo, grown familiar and harmless. Many Instances of
Birds; as, Ostriches drawing a Coach; Eagles enured to fly at Fowl like Hawks;
a Crow taught to fly at Partridges, and Wild-Ducks made Decoys. Of Sea-Animals;
the Mannti, or Sea-Cow is instanced, from Peter Martyr; the Seahorse, from Leo
Afer; and the Fish called Reversus, by which the Indians caught others, as is
related by Bodin, in his Theatrum Naturae, also by Purchase and P. Martyr.
Pliny's Dolphins, which would suffer Correction like Setting-Dogs, as Oppian
also testifies, and of Otters taught to drive Fish into the Net, according to
Cardan. Also several Examples of Wild Beasts tamed for Sport and Pleasure, as
well as Service; such were the Dancing Camels which Leo saw, and the Elephants
which danced on the Ropes, in Seneca, with the manner of teaching them upon a
hot Floor, from Sandys in his Travels. The Elephant Busbequius saw at
Constantinople, which danced and played at Ball. The Bear which danced to the
Music of his own Tabor, and then begged for Reward, seen by Neander. The Dance
of Horses at the Marriage of the Duke of Florence, attested by Sir K. Digby;
and the Ass seen by Leo in Africa, which would vie Feats with Banks his Horse,
that rare Master of the Caballistic Art. Here we have a Story of the dangerous
Effects of such Dancing Horses among the Sabarites, when their Enemies the
Crotonians brought Music into the Field of Battle, from Diodorus Siculus,
Aelian, and Pliny. To show that a Baboon has played upon the Guittar, and a
Monky at Chess, we are referred to Balt. Castilione. Of Birds, are mentioned
the Talking Starlings, Pyes and Crows at Rome; Cardinal Ascanio's Parrot would
say the Creed, and another in Spain which would sing the Gamut, as John Barnes
an English Friar relates, in his learned Book de Aequivocatione. Many of these
Examples are sum'd up by Martial in his Book of Shows, Epig. 105 which is here
recited, with a Translation. Lastly, it is observed how Animals will learn the
Language of their Country, so far as is necessary for their Direction, as
Elephants, Horses, and Mules, which Claudian has taken notice of; and that Dogs
have been trained for the Wars by the old Britons and Gauls, as Strabo and
Camden relate; so have Bulls, Bears, and Lions, according to Lucretius, here
cited. This, with some other Citations from Grotius, Plutarch, and Origin,
showing that the Wit and Reason of Man reduces all other Creatures to his
Service and Subjection, concludes this Chapter.

XII. Of certain Sports and Extravagancies of Art. In this last Chapter of the
Book, it is set forth, that as Nature has her Ludicra, so has Art; and that Art
as well as Nature is never more wonderful than in smaller Works: That St.
Augustine admired as much at the Tooth of a Moth as that of an Elephant. So we
descend to Particulars, as the Ivory Ants of Callicrates; the little Ivory
Chariot, Horses and Driver of Myrmecides, to be covered with the Wings of a
Fly; and the Ship with all her Tackling, which a Be could hide, according to
Pliny and Aelian. Next are Vulcan's Nets, mentioned out of Ovid. The Wagon and
Oxen of Glass, which might be concealed by a Fly, in Cardan; and the neat
little Wooden Lock, mentioned by Leander Alberti; which introduces the rare
Workmanship of Mark Scaliot a Blacksmith of London, in his Iron Lock and Key
and Gold Chain of forty three Links, all drawn by a Flea, and all, with the
Flea, weighing but one Grain and a half; as witnesses John Stow in his Annals,
who saw it. Scaliger also mentions a Flea with a Gold Chain, and Leo Afer such
a Chain, for which the Artist had a Suit of Cloth of Gold bestowed upon him by
the Sultan. Hadr. Junius saw at Mechlin, a Basket made of a Cherry-Stone, which
held fourteen pair of Dice, whose Spots were visible. Then we have notice taken
of the precious Stone in a Ring, representing Phaeton, his Chariot and Steeds,
tumbling into the River, as mentioned in Galen; and Geo. Whitehead's Ship, with
all her Tackling, moving of itself on a Table, with Rowers, a Woman playing on
the Lute, a Whelp howling, etc. as affirmed by Schottus, in Itin. Italiae;
also, Gafferell's Account, in his Unheard of Curiosities, of the Clock at
Leghorn, which had on it a Company of Shepherds playing on the Bagpipes, with
others dancing by Couples thereto, in Time and Measure. Here is also mentioned
the Chain, in Cardan, so little and so light, that when it fell to the Ground,
it would not break, though made of Glass; and the Iron Spider in Walchius's ninth
Fable; to which our Author applies the Verses in Dubartas, celebrating the Iron
Fly of Regiomontanus; also the Bear and Lion of Gold (presented to the
Landgrave of Hesse) each a Middle-Finger's Length, and both weighing but a
French Crown, for which the Artist was rewarded with three thousand Crowns.
This is followed with Claudian's Epigram de Quadriga Marmorea, and the
Translation; and the whole Book concludes with a Reference to many more
Instances of the like nature, in John Tradescant's Ark at Lambeth, and the
Archives of several Princes and private Persons, who have their Pinacotheca's
and Technematophylacia to preserve all Rarities; more particularly that of
Bernard Paludanus a Physician in Holland, upon which here is an Epigram quoted,
and Information of another among Grotius's Poems to the same purpose.

XI. Charismatum Sacrorum Trias; sive BIBLIOTHECA ANGLORUM THEOLOGICA, etc.
Lib. III. cum Appendice, DE REGIA SOCIETATE LONDINENSI. Labor and Studio M.
MARTINI KEMPII, etc. 410. Regiomont. 1677. Pages 668.
THis English Theological Library may well recommend itself to the Notice of
the British Librarian, seeing the Author, who was Historiographer to the
Elector of Brandenburg, has so sincerely intended therein the Honor of the
British Nation, and has common-placed, so succinctly and, for the generality,
so methodically, above sixteen Hundred Writers of Divinity in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, under some of the most considerable Heads. But being
written in Latin and printed abroad, at Koningsberg in Prussia, it seems not to
have yet made sufficiently its way among some of our Readers, to whom it might
have been useful in several respects; and possibly that, among the rest, of
inspiring an Ambition to give us a more enlarged and perfect Plan upon this
Subject: For, strictly speaking, though such a spiritual Army, of all ranks; is
here mustered up, many who were eminent among us are omitted, and several
enlisted who little deserve such Distinction; some also, who were Writers in
different Sciences, are not very properly perhaps introduced here; and, of
most, we have only the bare Names, with the shortest Reference to those Parts
of their Works, which concern the respective Topics, under which they are
assembled. But the Author's Aim was Variety and Dispatch; and rather to bring a
great number of Writers into a little Compass, than either to appear severely
scrupulous in his Choice, and always distinctly acquainted with their
Characters, or to make his Readers constantly so with the Editions of their
Works. The Book will however be very serviceable to any Reader or Writer upon
the Subjects herein treated of. It will yield Matter of Recollection to those
who are even most conversant in our Theological Authors, and to those who are
most inquisitive after them, continual Directions for further Satisfaction. The
Author neglected no Advantages to render it thus far useful; he seems to have
consulted our Catalogues very diligently, which specify those English Authors
who have written upon the several Parts of Scripture, and other Points of
Divinity; and further, for his purpose, to have made good Use of his Time while
he was in the Library at Oxford, among several of the Books themselves which
they refer to, as also of the Conversation he had with Mr. Boil, and other
learned Men in England, particularly Dr. Thomas Barlow, afterward Bishop of
Lincoln, who was himself an Ecclesiastical Library.

As for the Method and Contents more particularly of this Work; after the
Author's Dedication to the Elector aforesaid, and a learned Epistle to the
Reader, he opens it with a copious Preface, concerning the different Versions
and Editions of the Bible in England, with notice of those among us who have
written any Discourses thereon, or Books to explain it, as Annotations,
Lexicons, Criticisms, Chronologies, Chorographies, and the like. Then he begins
his first Book with the English Commentators on the Old Testament; goes
distinctly through all the Parts or Books thereof, and through all the Chapters
of every Book; and therein tells us, what English Author has written upon any
of the said Books, Chapters, or Verses in them. The like he does in his second
Book by all the English Commentaries, Observations, and Sermons on the New
Testament; comprising a Book in every Chapter, and the Writers on each Chapter
in a Paragraph. Thus having got over near half the Volume we come to the last
Book, which is divided into Twenty-one Chapters; the first Six of which,
comprehend chiefly his Systema Theologiae Positivae, and the English Authors
treating of the several Branches therein; which, for brevity, we shall refer
to. Then we come, in the Seventh, to those Englishmen who have written of the
Church and its Government, Ordination, Representatives, Revenues, Polity,
Schisms, Ceremonies, Festivals, Sabbath, Music, and oeconomic State;
particularly, Matrimony, Polygamy, and Education. The 8th is of the Writers on
the four last Things. 9. Those who have wrote of Polemical Divinity. 10.
Against Atheists, Jews, Turks, and Infidels. 11. Against Popery. 12. Against
the Socinians, Anabaptists, etc. 13. Against Enthusiasts, Libertines,
Antinomians, and Arminians. 14. Against the English Sectaries, Puritans,
Separatists, Brownists, Independents, Fanatics, Presbyterians, etc. 15.
Against the Quakers. 16. On School Divinity. 17. On Practical Divinity. 18. On
Casuistical Divinity. 19. Of the improved Editions of the Fathers in England.
20. Of our Politico-Ecclesiastical Historians. And lastly, 21, of the English
Councils.

Then follows the Appendix, containing an epistolary Discourse upon the Royal
Society, written in his native Tongue; no Author having published, in Germany,
any thing upon the Institution, Progress, and Purpose of that laudable Order:
With a List of the Fellows of the said Society; and Verses at the end.

XII. HISTORIA HISTRIONICA: An Historical Account of the ENGLISH STAGE; showing
the ancient Use, Improvement, and Perfection of DRAMATIC Representations in
this Nation. In a Dialogue of PLAYS and PLAYERS. 8vo. 1699. pages 32.
WHen this Pamphlet was published, there was a Controversy on foot about the
Stage; and while others wrote to show what it then was, our Author, as a Topic
not touched upon, observes what it had been. He apologizes to those who may
imagine his Subject trivial, by producing a Player, who was a Saint; and
referring to Examples of Merit in the Discourse itself: "If the major Part of
them (as he concludes his Preface) fall under a different Character, it is the
general Unhappiness of Mankind, that the most are the worst."

The Dialogue is held between Lovewit and Truman an old Cavalier, who knew the
Stage in the Reign of K. Charles I. From these we learn, how much the Actors
before the Civil Wars surpassed their Successors: Why they did not now revive
Ben Johnson's Plays. Where, before the Wars, the Town supported five
Play Houses at once; and in which of them they always acted by Daylight: That
now the Plays in two Houses only, would hardly draw an Audience, without a
Signior Fideli or a Monsieur L'Abbe. That Edward Allen built a Playhouse, also
Dulwich College in 1619. Then we have a little History of the Actors during the
Rebellion; showing how honorably they served in the King's Army. Next, how
they returned to acting, but privately; and, in Oliver's Time, at
Holland-House. How the Companies revived after the Restoration. Where Scenes
were introduced by Sir W. Davenant. When Women first acted. A Character of Mr.
Collier's Book against the Stage. That our ancient Plays were of religious
Subjects, in many Examples from Stow, Sir W. Dugdale, Fitz-Stephens, Lord
Bacon, the Play of the Pardoner and Frene, etc. When Queen Elizabeth first had
Players, and of Noblemen's Companies. The first Comedy that looks like regular.
Sir George Buck's Encomium on acting of Plays in his Time. When Theaters were
first erected in London. Of the Prohibition of Plays from Hollinshed; and
Statutes for their Regulation, 39 Eliz. cap. 4. and 3 Jac. 1. cap. 21. The two
Ordinances of the Long Parliament, October. 22, 1647. and Feb. 11. the same Year,
to suppress them. That Cock-fighting was also prohibited by one of Oliver's
Acts, March 31, 1654. But the Old Cavalier not allowing these as Laws, takes
leave of his Correspondent, and so concludes the Dialogue.

The End of Number I.
XIII. The Dictes or Sayengis of the Philosophres: Translated out of Frenshe by
ANTONE Earl of RYVYERS, etc. Enprynted by William Caxton at Westmestre. Folio,
1477. 75 Leaves This is a Title gathered from what the Translator mentions in
his Preface, and the Printer, in his Conclusion of the Book; for the Art of
Printing had not yet arrived at the Distinction of Title-pages in Form.
Further, we may remark of this antique Specimen of that, then, new Art in
England, that if it is not our first Book printed here, it may be the second,
though printed so late in the Year abovementioned as November; and though some
other smaller Work might be printed by Caxton the same Year. For though the
Knowledge of two, printed before it, by him, is descended to us; yet one is
expressly said to be printed abroad, and the other has no place mentioned where
it was printed. Dr. Conyers Middleton observes, "It has been generally asserted
and believed, that all Caxton's Books were printed in the Abbey of Westminster;
yet we have no Assurance of it from himself, nor any mention of the place
before 1477." Which Observation is plainly drawn from the Date of this Book,
and it appears thereby to be the first, at least now in being, which was
printed at Westminster; "So that he had been printing several Years without
telling us where." See the said Doctor's Origin of Printing in England, 4 to.
Cambr. 1735. p. 20. We are informed there is in being a fair MS of this
Translation, and, what some may think yet a greater Curiosity, an Illumination
in it, representing King Edward IV. his Queen, and the Prince, with the Picture
also of this Antony Wydeville Earl Rivers, presenting Caxton to the King. But
more particularly of the printed Book, we observe, it is performed on a good
thick Paper, in which may be discerned its Maker's Mark to be somewhat like a
Pair of Horns, with a Flower over them. The Pages have no Numbers at top, nor
Signatures, or Catch-words at bottom; these being more modern Improvements in
Printing, at least in England. The Division of the Chapters is seldom by any
larger Space than the other lines; only the three first lines of every Chapter
being shorter than the rest, leave room, toward the Margin, for the initial
Letter, which is always a small one; and the second Letter of the Word which
begins every Chapter, is always a Capital. As to Orthography, the same Words
are not always spelled alike, and several of the Proper Names are much obscured
by the old Manner of spelling them, especially after the French Copy: and as to
Pointing, there are but two sorts of Stops used; the one, a little Dash, the
other, a little Cross; and seldom either used as a Period at the End of a
complete Sentence, it being thought sufficient Distinction to allow a little
longer Space there than between other Words, and to begin the next Sentence
with a Capital. More Observations might hence be made on the Rudiments of
Printing in England; but to those who are not curious after such Inquiries,
possibly the greater Number, these may be enough. Of the noble Earl Rivers, who
translated this Book, much might be written: therefore we shall only observe
here, that he published one or more Books after this, and refer those who would
know more of him to the Chronicles, and especially to Dugdale's Baronage; where
it may appear what a Man of superior. Merit and Dignity he was among many
eminent of his Name; also how he was barbarously put to death in June 1483, at
Pontefract in Yorkshire, by the Procurement of Richard Duke of Gloucester, then
Protector, being aged about 41 Years, as we compute from the Account of his Age
at the Death of his Mother Jacquett Duchess of Bedford in 1472, as it stands
upon Record in the Escheats.
.
THE first Page of this Book begins with the Earl's Preface or Introduction.
Herein he observes, that every human Creature is subject to the Storms of
Fortune, and perplexed with worldly Adversity, of which he had largely had his
Part; but having been relieved by the Goodness of God, he was exhorted to
dispose his recovered Life to his Service. And understanding there was to be a
Jubilee and Pardon at St. James's in Spain, an. 1473. he determined upon a
Voyage thither: so in July the same Year, set sail from Southampton; when, a
worshipful Gentleman in his Company, named Lowys de Bretaylles, lent him to
pass over the Time, this Book of the Sayings of the Philosophers, in French,
which had been translated from the Latin by Messire Johan de Teonville, Provost
of Paris. The Earl was very much affected with the wholesome and sweet Sayings
therein of the Paynems; and finding how "it speaks universally to the
Example, Weel, and Doctrine of all Kings, Princes, and to People of every
Estate; lawdes Virtue and Science, blames Vices and Ignorance;" though he could
not then, nor in all that Pilgrimage, oversee it well at his Pleasure, through
the Dispositions that belong to the Taker of a Jubilee and Pardon, and the
great Acquaintance he found there of worshipful Folks, he intended at a more
convenient Time to be better acquainted with it. Remaining in this Opinion
after the King commanded him to attend upon the Prince, and having then
leisure, he translated it into English, which had not been before done: But as
there were diverse Copies of this Book, differing from each other, he concludes
with intimating his hopes, that he shall not be censured for that which he has
followed; or his Translation judged of by those which vary from it.

The Work itself opens with the Sayings of Sedechias; so goes on with those of
many eminent Ancients, as Homer, Solon, Hyppocrates, Pythagoras, Diogenes,
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Alexander, Ptolemy, Seneca, St. Gregory, Galen, and
some few others; all whom have a Chapter a-piece bestowed upon their Sayings.
But the concluding Chapter comprehends the Sayings of several Persons; first,
of those whose Names are remembered, and lastly, such as are anonymous; from
which, as the Apopthegms of most of those Ancients are now more directly
translated from the original Languages, in which they were delivered, we shall
only give this one Example.. "There came before a King three Wysemen; the one was
a Greek, the other a Jewe, and the therde a Sarasyn; of whom the said King
desirid, that ych of them would utter some good and notable Sentence. Then the
Greek said, I may well correct and amend my Thoughtis, but not my Words:
Then the Jewe said, I have mervayll of them that say things prejudicial,
where Silence were more profitable: And the Sarasyn said, I am Master over
my Words, or it be pronounced; but when it is spoken, I am Servaunt thereto.
And it was asked one of them; Who might be called a King? And he answered, He
that is not subgett to his own Will.

At the end of the Translation of this Work, there is a remarkable Chapter
added of three Leaves (which concludes the whole Volume) by William Caxton, or
in his Name: For, as it contains a Translation from the French, of those
Sarcasms of Socrates, against the female Sex, which our noble Translator of the
rest, had purposely passed over, in the proper Place, under the Chapter of that
Philosopher; the Reader is left to judge, if the said Earl seriously intended
to favor the Fair, by such an Omission, in the middle of his Book, whether his
Printer would probably make so free as to publish it, of his own accord, though
in his own Name, more conspicuously at the end of it. If it is a piece of
Finesse, it is artfully enough conducted, to expose them more notoriously,
under the Notion of forbearing to do it at all. We never read that the Case has
been so interpreted, nor can say, in what Vein or Air Master Caxton's Apology
for the said Addition was written, or is to be read; but there are in it the
following Expressions. "I find that my said Lord has left out certain and
dyverce Conclusions towchyng Women! wherein I mervaylle that my said Lord has
not wreton them, ne what has mevyd him so to do, ne what cause he had at
that Time: But I suppose that some fair Lady has desired him to leve it out of
his Book; or else he was amerous on sum noble Lady, for whose Love he would
not set it in his Book; or else for the very Affectyon, Love and good Will
that he has unto all Ladies and Gentylwomen, he thought that Socrates spared
the Sothe, and wrote of Women more than Truth. For if he had made fawte in
writing of Women, he ought not, ne should not be belevyd in his other Dyctes and
Sayings. But I apperceyve that my said Lord knows verily, that such
Defautes ben not had ne founden in the Women born and dwelling in these
Parties, ne Regyons of the World. Socrates was a Greek, boren in a far Contre
from hens, which Contre is all of othre Condycions than this is; and Men and
Women of other Nature than they ben here in this Contre; for I wot well, of
what somever condition Women ben in Greece, the Women of this Contre ben right
good, wise, playsant, humble, discrete, sobre, chaste, obedient to their
Husbondis, true, secret, steadfast, ever besy, and never idle, attemperat in
speking and virtuous in all their Workis, or at least, should be so. For
which Causes so evydent, my said Lord, as I suppose, thought it was not of
necessite to set in his Book the Saiengis of his Auctor Socrates touching
Women. But for as much as I had commandment of my said Lord to correct and
amend whereas I should find fawte; and other find I none, sauf that he has
left out these Dictes and Saynges of the Women of Greece; therefore in
accomplishing his Commandment, for as much as I am not in certain wheder it
was in my Lordis Copye or not My Lord's Words are, under the Chapter of
Socrates -- "And the said Socrates had many Seyinges against Women which is not
translated."
, or ellis peradventure that the Wind had blow over the Leef, at the time of
Translacion of his Book, I purpose to write the same Saynges of that Greek,
Socrates, which wrote of the Women of Greece, and nothing of them of this
Royame, whom I suppose he never knew; for if he had, I dar plainly say, that
he would have reserved them inespeciall in his said Dictes. Always not presumyng
to put and set them in my said Lords Book, but in the End, aparte, in the
Rehersayll of the Werkis, humbly requiryng all them that shall read this Lytyl
Rehersayll, that if they find any Fault, tarrette it to Socrates, and not to
me, etc." Thus much may suffice of the Apology for the Addition aforesaid,
which at the same time gives an Example of the Language or Manner of Expression
in those Times.

XIV. Here begynnith the first Volum of Sir JOHN FROYSSART; of the Chronicles
of England, France, Spain, Portyngale, Scotland, Bretaine, Flaundres, and
other Places adjoyndinge. Translated out of French into our maternall
English Tongue by JOHN BOUCHIER Knight, Lord Berners; at the Commandment of
our most high, redouted Soveraygne Lord, King HENRYE the VIII. King of
England, etc.
AT the Conclusion of this Volume it is said, "Thus ends the first Volume of
Sir John Froissart of the Chronicles of England, etc. Translated by Johan
Bourcher Knt. Lord Berners, etc. Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, by
Richard Pynson Printer to the Kings Noble Grace; and ended the 28th Day of
Jan. 1523." In the last Page of which Volume is a wooden Print of the
Translator's Coat of Arms. And the said Volume contains 322 Leaves, besides the
Translator's Preface, and Table of Contents, being 451 Chapters. Herewith is
usually bound the Continuation of the said Chronicle; having this Title: Here
begins the third and fourth Book of Sir JOHN FROISSART, of the Chronycles
of England, etc. Translated, etc. by JOHAN BOURCHIER Knt. Lord Berners, Deputy
General of the Kynge's Town of Calais, and Marchesse of the same; at the
Commandment, etc. of King HENRY VIII. etc. With a Print of the King's Arms at
the back of the said Title Page.

This Volume concludes with these Words, " Thus ends the third and fourth
Book of Sir John Froissart of the Chronicles of England, etc. Translated out of
French, etc. by John Bourchier Knt. Lord Berners, Deputy General of Calais,
etc. at the high Commandment of K. Henry VIII. etc. which two Books be
compyled into one Volume, and fynysshed in the said Town of Calais the 10th
Day of March, in the 16th Year of our said Soverayne Lords Reign. Imprinted
at London in Fletestrete, by Richard Pynson Printer to the Kings Most Noble
Grace: And ended the last Day of August, the Year of our Lord God 1525." In
the last Page also of this Volume is the like Print of the Translator's Arms.
It contains 319 Leaves, besides the Translator's Preface and Table of Contents,
being 249 Chapters: The whole together, being printed on a large black Letter,
makes a thick Volume in Folio.

The Translator, in his Preface to the first Volume, having spoken much in
Commendation of History, and having among the rest diligently read the four
Volumes of Sir John Froissart, he judged them necessary and proper to be
rendered into English, since they treat of the famous Acts done in our Parts,
etc. and specially redound to the Honor of Englishmen; which Chronicle begins
at the Reign of K. Edward III. and continues to the beginning of K. Henry IV.
containing the Space of threescore and fourteen Years, that is from 1326 to
1400. He then bespeaks the favorable Reception of his Labor as to his not
following his Author word for word, since he trusts that he has kept to the
true Sentence (or Sense) of the Matter, and for naming all Persons, Countries,
Cities, Towns, Rivers, or Fields, as he found them in French. And though he has
not given every Lord, Knight, or 'Squire his true Addition, yet trusts he has
not swerved from the true Sentence of the Matter. And where he has named the
Distance between Places, by Miles and Leagues, they must be understood
according to the Custom of the Countries where they are named, being in some
Places longer than in others. This is the Sense of his said Preface; after
which follows

The Prologue of Sir John Froissart; which is the first Chapter. Herein we are
informed, That he proposes to take his Foundation out of the true Chronicles,
compiled by that Right Reverend, discreet and sage Master John le Bell, sometime
Canon in St. Lambert's of Liege, who with great Diligence, Charge and Cost,
through the Encouragement and Intelligence he received from Sir John of
Haynault, continued it all his Days. Further, That our Author Froissart always
inclining to these Studies, frequented the Company of diverse Noble and Great
Lords, as well in France, England, and Scotland, as other Countries, and had
Knowledge from them of the Adventures that befell, especially since the great
Battle of Poitiers, where King John of France was taken Prisoner, before which
time he was but young: Yet took upon him as soon as he came from School, to
write and recite the said Book, and bare the same compiled into England, and
presented the Volume to Philippa of Haynault, the Queen of England, who
received it to his great Profit and Advancement. But because the same Book
might not be sufficiently correct, he enterprised this History on the aforesaid
Ordynance and true Foundation, at the Instance and Request of a dear Lord of
his, Sir Robert of Namure, Knight, Lord of Beaufort. And this is the Substance
at his Prologue Further of this Author, Sir JOHN FROISSART, and his CHRONICLE,
we have taken the pains to give our Reader the following more perfect Account,
chiefly from his own Words, than has hitherto been drawn together by any other
Writer.

He was born at Valenciennes, as himself tells us, Vol. II. (of this Edition)
fol. 29. and in the Year 1337, as we gather also from his own Words. For he
came first over into England when Edward Prince of Wales and his Princess were
going to their Government of Aquitain, Vol. II. fol. 319. b. Which by his own
Account (in the French Copies) was in 1361 (but according to our English
Translation, Vol. II. fol. 305. the Year following) being then aged 24 Years.
The Interest through which he came recommended to the English Court, and his
laudable Undertaking to enlarge and continue John le Bel's History, chiefly, of
the English Conquests in France, soon brought him into familiar Conversation
with Persons of the greatest Distinction. He was made one of the Clerks of the
Chamber to Queen Philippa, Wife of King Edward III. as he tells us himself; was
afterward knighted; and, being an Ecclesiastic, well beneficed in the Church.
After he had been here about five Years, in which Time he had traveled almost
all over Scotland, and was well known in King David's Court, Vol. II. fol. 158,
161. b. we meet with him at Bordeaux, when the Prince of Wales's Son,
afterward King Richard II. was born there, Anno 1366. He intended to have
waited on the Prince in his Expedition to Spain, but was sent back by him to
continue his Attendance on the Queen his Mother, Vol. II. Cap. 200. He seems to
have staid not above two Years in England, before he left this Kingdom for a
long Time, being absent about Twenty Eight Years. In which space he probably
obtained his Ecclesiastical Preferments abroad, being Canon and Treasurer of
Chimay in Heynault, and of Lisle in Flanders, also Chaplain to Guy of
Castellon, Earl of Blois, as he mentions, Vol. II. fol 242. And Rector of
Lescines on the Mount, near Mons in Heynault, according to Le Laboureur's
Introd. a L'Hist. de Cha. VI. p. 69. In all this Time he continued his
Chronicle, from the Reports of the most credible and intelligent Persons, he
met with in every Prince's Court to which he removed, and he seems to have
given Copies of the several Parts as he finished them, to his Patrons; for many
Quires thereof finely illuminated, were in the Custody of Louis Duke of Anjou,
in 1381, intended by the Author to be sent to the King of England. Le Laboureur
Hist. de Cha. VI. en la Vie de Louis Duc d' Anjou. But our Author admires none
of those Courts, so much as that of Gaston Earl of Foix, at Ortaise in Bearn,
which was the grandest Market in Europe for Tidings or News, especially of all
Martial Adventures. Here he was courteously entertained in 1388, for twelve
Weeks, and to that Earl he presented his Collection of Wenceslaus of Bohemia,
Duke of Luxemburgh's Book, called Meliader or Songs, Ballads, Rondeaux and
Virelays, which that Duke had composed, Vol. II. fol. 30. He returned not into
England, till King Richard was arrived from his Expedition in Ireland, ib. fol.
252, and the Peace was concluded for four Years between England and France, ib.
fol. 251. b. which was in 1396; when he delivered Letters of Recommendation to
the said King, from the Earl of Heynault and other Foreign Nobles; and was
welcomed by his Majesty, As one who had been, and is of the English Court, ib.
fol. 252. b. Then he presented the King with a Book, fairly illuminated, which
he had engrossed, and bound in Crimson Velvet, with Silver Buttons and Clasps
gilt, and golden Roses, containing all the Matters of Amors and Moralities,
which in Four and Twenty Years before, he had compiled, ib. fol. 255. b. and
251. b. One Copy of this Book, finished two Years before, Pasquier saw in the
Royal Library at Fontainbleau, as Monsieur Bail has remarked. He continued
moving about with the Court, sometimes to Eltham, Kingston, ^hene, Windsor,
etc. ib. fol. 258. And was in this Court more than a Quarter of a Year
together; and the King received him kindly, because he was Clerk and Servant in
his Youth to King Edward and his Queen. And when he departed out of England,
which seems to be the same Year, King Richard sent him a Goblet of Silver gilt,
and in it a Hundred Nobles, ib. fol. 319. We may presume he ended his Life when
he left off his Chronicle, from his expressing himself, upon the Delight he
conceived in contemplating the Merits of his Subject, in these Words. "The
which excellent Matter, as long as I live, by the help of God, I shall
continue; for the more I follow and labor it, the more it pleases me." Thus
much of the Historian; as to his Translator, with his other Writings and
Actions, we refer to them in Bale, Dugdale's Baronage, and Wood's Athen. Oxon.
Now a Word or two of the History, and we have done.

And first we observe, That though the whole Chronicle from the beginning of
King Edward III. to King Henry IV. passes currently under the Name of Sir John
Froissart; yet that there is a fine old MSS of it in England, beautifully
illuminated with Historical Figures, particularly of Sir John Froissart,
presenting his Book to the Kings of England, France, etc. which, in the very
Title, distinguishes the Work to have been begun by John le Bell, and continued
to the Battle of Poictou, and that then after his Death, it was compiled and
finished by the Venerable Sir John Froissart, which is agreeable to what he
says in his Preface. So that though Froissart might here and there correct or
augment that first Part, as he also intimates; yet what he composed begins but
at the Year 1356. This Observation, with that above from his own Words, of his
not coming so early into England, as some have suggested, who would from his
Authority advance the Order of the Garter up to the Year 1344, may clear him
from disagreeing with our Authentic Records, and antedating the Institution
five Years, as Mr. Ashmole has objected; the Error, if any there is in the said
Account, being more probably John le Bel's, and, perhaps, the Printer's rather
than his. But here that we are speaking of MSS, we must not forget one among
those of Isaac Vossius, Canon of Windsor, entitled, L'His toire de Froissart,
plus ample, and plus correct que les Imprimez, 2 Vol. Folio. From these, or
others still preserved both in England and France, it has been long and much
desired, that we might have a more accurate Edition in French, or Translation
in English, than we have yet had. It Is true, the Author himself might not be
always exact in the naming of so many Persons and Places as he has introduced;
seeing he received his Intelligence from such Variety of Informers, in such
distant Parts, and so much from the Speech rather than the Writings of Men: Yet
surely his Copies owe little Correction to the Press, having undergone the same
Corruptions, which Books so much treating of English Affairs, have usually
suffered by being printed in France, especially in the Names of Families, Towns
and Lordships: And Mr. Seldom has observed in his Tit. of Hon. p. 635. That the
Numerals in Froissart are also lamentably corrupted and misprinted. Yet whoever
will have the Patience to compare his Work, says Mr. Anstis, Ord. of the Gart.
Vol. II. p. 98. with the Coaevous Records published by Mr. Rymer, will from
that Essay only, be so far satisfied of his Integrity, as may induce him
passionately to wish for a New Correct Edition: And if this Author has not
hitherto received the Honor of being printed at the Louvre with some other
Historians, according to the Proposal of the learned Monsieur du Fresne, in Le
Long, Bibl. Hist. p. 235. upon the National Motive of praising his own Country
too little, and ours too much, see La Popeliniere, Hist. des Hist. lib. 8. and
Bodin Meth. Hist. c. 4. These Reasons, with the extraordinary Dearness of the
printed Copies, should excite some learned Person of this Kingdom, for the
Reputation of our own Country, to collate the MS Copies, compare the Facts with
Records, and contemporary Writers, and correct the miserable Mis-spellings, in
the several Impressions, of their Surnames, who abundantly signalized their
Valor, in Justice to the Merits of these celebrated Persons, and in Honor to
their Posterity. The most Ancient of these Impressions in French, seems to be
that printed by Ant. Verard a Bookseller of Paris, Folio, without Date. The
next was that printed also at Paris by three several Persons, that is, The
first Volume by Fra. Regnauld, the second and third by Michael le Noir, 1505.
The fourth by John Petit, 1518. The Copy of which Edition, now before us, bound
in Two Tomes, Folio, has the Arms of many of the Nobility, mentioned therein,
drawn with a Pen in the Margin. There was another Impression at Paris, by Ant.
Couteau, also bound in Two Volumes Fol. 1530. This was that chiefly used by
Denis Sauvage, Historiographer to King Henry II. of France, in the Edition he
revised and corrected from many Copies and Abridgments; which was printed at
Lions, by John de Tournes, Fol. 1559. and again, at Paris, in Folio 1574. with
Marginal Remarks, and Annotations at the End of every Book. He finds fault with
the preceding Editors, several Parts of whom he may have rightly corrected, but
is himself liable in many Places to Correction; notwithstanding he has been so
preferred, that a Copy of his Edition, has been sometimes sold in England for
Ten Guineas. We could wish that most of the Errors in these French Editions,
were as truly corrected in the English one, as Bishop Nicholson imagined they
were. In three of the Editions we have seen, neither the Books nor the Chapters
are divided alike; so that it is very tedious and confusing to find, in one of
them, the References of the other. Though Froissart's Method is somewhat
diffuse and interrupted, yet the Epitome we have of him in Print, is scarce
worth mentioning, however drawn up by Sleidan, such a Skeleton he has made of
it, 12o Franc. 1584, etc. and with such Partiality, to the prejudice of the
English, has he so diminished it; according to the Censure of our Learned
Humphrey Lhuid in Comment. Brit. Descrip. fol. 27. And yet it has been
translated into English, by P. Golding, and printed in a Quarto Pamphlet 1608.
But, we shall now leave it, with our Wishes of better Treatment, in the
Character and Recommendation of Montaigne; who, in his Essay upon Books,
describing the Sincere Historian, who has nothing of his own intermixed, but
only diligently collects and impartially records all Things without Choice or
Prejudice, leaving entirely to his Reader's Judgment the distinguishment of
Truth, says, "Such, for Example, was honest Froissart; who has proceeded, in
his Undertaking, with so frank a Plainness, that having committed an Error, he
is not ashamed to confess and correct it, wheresoever it has been pointed out;
and who represents to us, even the variety of Rumors which were then spread
abroad, and the different Reports made to him; which is the naked and
unaffected Matter of History, and of which every one may make his Profit,
according to the Proportion of his Understanding."


. Then he proceeds to the Chronicles, divided under the many Chapters
beforementioned, of all which, though we cannot here precisely give the bare
Titles, we shall yet point out such Parts, as most respecting our own Country,
may revive the Knowledge of many neglected Particulars, which will much
illustrate the History thereof.

He begins therefore with a short Recital of some of the most valiant Knights,
to be mentioned in the Sequel of this Work. So proceeds to some Observations on
some of King Edward IIId's Predecessors. The Parents of this King Edward. The
Occasion of the War between the Kings of France and England. The beheading of
Thomas of Lancaster, with 22 other Knights and Lords. Queen Isabella's
Complaint to her Brother of France against Sir Hugh Spencer, and his procuring
her Banishment out of France. Her repairing to the Empire, and Arrival in
England with Sir John of Heynault. Her besieging the King her Husband at
Bristol. The Sentence passed on Sir Hugh Spencer, and his Son-in-Law the Earl
of Arundel. The Execution of Sir Hugh Spencer. Coronation of King Edward III.
Robert de Bruce King of Scotland, his Defiance of King Edward. The Dissension
between the Archers of England and Heynault. Of the Scots and their Manner of
War. The King of England's Journey against the Scots. His Marriage with
Philippa of Heynault. The Death of King Robert. Execution of the Earls of Kent
and Mortimer. Berwick taken by King Edward. The Counsel he received to make War
with the French. The Battle of Cagaunt between the English and French.
Alliances made by King Edward in the Empire. Made Vicar General of the Empire.
Defies the French King Sir Walter Manny's first entering France; and the French
entering England. Cambray besieged by King Edward. The intended Battle between
England and France at Vironfosse, in which five Kings were present; how the
French were dismayed by a Hare, whence the Creation of Knights of the Hare by
the Earl of Heynault. How King Edward took the Arms and Title of France. The
great Sea Fight gained by the English against the French at Sluse. Of the Siege
of Tournay by the King of England; and the Scots regaining great Part of
Scotland the while. King Edward's third War with the Scots. His Affection for
the Countess of Salisbury. Many brave Acts of Sir Walter Manny. The Feast made
by the King for the Love of the Countess of Salisbury. He enters Bretagne with
a great Army, and the Waste he made there. Establishes the Order of St. George
at Windsor, to commence the next St. George's Day 1344. The Conquests of the
Earl of Derby in Gascoigne. The King's victorious Progress through Normandy. The
famous Battle of Cressy, and Siege of Calais. The taking of the King of Scots
at Newcastle. Calais taken. The Death of King Philip of France, and Coronation
of his Son John 1350. Acts of the Prince of Wales in 1355. The Battle of
Poitiers. King John taken Prisoner there. The Prince of Wales's Bounty to James
Lord Audley, which he bestowed on his 'Squires. The French King brought into
England. The King of Scots Releasement. King Edward's hostile March through,
and Conquests in France 1359. The Form of the Treaty of Peace before Chartres.
The Death of Henry Duke of Lancaster. Coming of the Prince of Wales to
Aquitaine. Death of King John, and Succession of Charles V. of France. Acts of
Sir John Chandos. The Prince of Wales's Conquests for the restoring Don Peter
King of Castile. The King of France's Defiance of the King of England. The
Battles and Conquests in France which ensued, under the Earl of Cambridge, Earl
of Pembroke, Sir Robert Canol, Sir Thomas Felton, etc. The Death of Queen
Philippa in August 1369. Sir John Chandos slain. The King's Letter sent into
Aquitaine, for the Prince of Wales to restore the Levies made there by his
Officers. The Truce between England and Scotland. Sir Robert Canol's Actions in
France. Limoges taken by the Prince of Wales. He leaves the Government of
Aquitaine to the Duke of Lancaster, who marries King Peter's Daughter. The Earl
of Pembroke's Government in Poitiers; taken Prisoner. Death of David King of
Scotland 1373. Actions of the Earl of Salisbury, W. Nevyll, Philip Courtnay,
and diverse others in France. Truce between the French and English. The Death of
the Prince of Wales at Westminster, and of his Father King Edward III. 1377.
Richard crowned. This is followed with some Invasions by the French, and
Revolts from the English in France; loss of the Castle of Berwick, and recovery
of it by the Earl of Northumberland, with new Wars in Scotland. The Alliance of
Navarre and England. Death of Evan or Owen of Wales. Overtures of Marriage for
King Richard. Earl of Buckingham's Progress in France. The Earl of Cambridge's
Voyage to Portugal, and the Rebellion of Wat Tyler. The Marriage of King
Richard with the King of the Romans Daughter. The Alliance between the English
and Flemings, and of Pope Urban's Bulls sent hither to destroy the Clementines.
The Bishop of Norwich's Expedition to war against them. The Flemings
discomfited by the English. Then, with the Marriage between Heynault and
Burgoign, and the Truce between England, Scotland and France, till the
Expiration thereof in 1385, our Translator concludes his first Volume.

The two last Books, according to the said Translator's Division of them, begin
with the Victualling of Gaunt, during the Truce, by Sir John Bourchyer Governor
thereof. The arming of the English against the French. The Preparations of the
Scots to enter England. Inroads of the French and Scots at Northumberland. Sir
Richard Stafford slain by Sir John Holland. Edinburgh taken by the King of
England. Acts of the French and Scots in Wales. The Voyage of our Author Sir
John Froissart from France to Gaston Earl of Foix in Bearn 1388, for Historical
Intelligence. How the late Princess of Wales prevailed on the said Earl to
moderate the Ransom of the Earl of Armignac. The Portugal Embassy into England.
The Duke of Lancaster's Expedition at Breast and in Galicia. The French King's
Preparations to enter England, and how frustrated. Sir Simon Burley's Counsel
to remove St. Thomas his Shrine at Canterbury to Dover. The English Exploits in
Flanders. Besance taken by the Duke of Lancaster. Sir John Holland's Combat
with Sir Raynold de Roy. Of the Discords in England among the Nobles,
occasioned by the Duke of Ireland; and between the Archbishops. Sir Simon
Burley beheaded, and Sir Thomas Trivet's Death. The Council for reforming the
King and the Realm. The King advised to make War upon his Uncles. Sir Robert
Tryvylyen beheaded. The Duke of Ireland put to flight by the King's Uncles. Sir
Nicholas Bramble beheaded. The General Council at Westminster. Further Progress
of the Duke of Lancaster with the King of Portugal against the Spaniards and
French. How the French regained what he had won in Galicia. The King of
Castile's Overtures to match his Son with the Duke's Daughter, and the Truce
which ensued. The Feat of Arms by Sir Thomas Harpyngham, and Sir John Bars.
The Earl of Arundel's Exploit near Rochel. New Preparations of the Scots and
English for Battle. The State of Queen Isabella of England, and how King
Richard was put in the Tower. Sir Henry Percy's Attempt against the Scots to
recover his Pennon taken by Earl Douglass before Newcastle. Earl James Douglass
killed. Sir Ralph Percy wounded. Victory of the Scots against the English near
Ottebridge, and Sir Henry and Sir Ralph Percy taken. Sir James Lynsey taken by
the Bishop of Durham. The Earl of Arundel's Voyage to Rochel. The Entry of
Queen Isabella into Paris. The Truce sealed by King Richard and his Uncles for
three Years between England and France. The Enterprise of the French and
English into Barbary against the Saracens. The Feast in England during the
Siege there. The great Assembly at Amiens on the Treaty of Peace. The said
Truce renewed. The Form of the Peace. The Duchy of Aquitaine given by the King
to the Duke of Lancaster and his Heirs. The Death of Queen Anne of England. Our
Author's Arrival in England, and Present of a Book to the King. The Reception
of the Duke of Lancaster at Aquitaine. Four Kings of Ireland, brought to obey
King Richard. His Embassy to treat of a Marriage between Lady Isabel the French
King's Daughter, and himself. The Duke of Lancaster's Re-marriage. The Peace
between France and England continued, and the King of England married to the
Daughter of France. The Order of the Marriage. The Duke of Gloucester's subtle
Attempts to destroy the King his Nephew. Discovered and Apprehended. The Death
of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Earl of Arundel. The Earl of Derby
banished by the King out of England for Ten Years, and the Earl Marshal for
ever. The Answer of the Duke of Lancaster, to the Message sent by his Son the
Earl of Derby; also of the Duke's Death, and how it was taken by the King. His
Majesty's Obstruction of the Earl of Derby's Marriage with the Duke of Berry's
Daughter. The King's Preparations to march into Ireland. The Message of the
Londoners, etc. by the Archbishop of Canterbury to the Earl of Derby to return
into England. The Earl's Arrival with great Power. King Richard's Resignation
of the Crown to the said Earl of Derby and Duke of Lancaster. The Coronation of
the said Henry Duke of Lancaster. The French King's Displeasure, at the Tidings
of King Richard's being taken, and of the Army he raised to send into England.
The Death of King Richard, and Renewal of the Truce between England and France.

This is a Summary of the principal Heads relating to our English Affairs in
this Chronicle; which, as those of most Note, have been drawn into the Titles
of the Chapters, but cleared here from the Foreign Matter wherewith they are
there much interrupted, and might, by those who would go through the whole
Volumes, and make a more minute Table of Contents, be augmented from the
Chapters themselves; which contain many other Particulars of memorable Persons
and Circumstances, in this Period of our History.

XV. The First Part of the Acts of ENGLISH VOTARIES, comprehendynge their
unchaste Practices and Examples by all Ages, from the Worlds beginning to the
Year of our Lord 1000. Collected owte of their own Legendes and Chronycles;
by JOHAN BALE, (at the End said to be) Imprynted at London, by Abraham Vele,
etc. 1551. containing 78 Leaves 8vo. To this is joined, The Second Part, or
Contynuacyon of the ENGLISH VOTARIES; comprehendynge their unchaste Examples
for 200 Years space; from the Year One Thousand, from Christ's Incarnation, to
the Reign of King JOHAN; Collected of their own Writers, by JOHAN BALE.
Imprynted at London, for J. BALE, 1551, etc. Cum Privilegio ad imprimendum
solum. 120 Leaves 8vo Though the first Part of these English Votaries, was
Collected by our Author John Bale, in the Year 1546, and the Second Part, in
1550, as appears in his Conclusions of them: yet neither of them were printed
till the Year 1551, which was the Year before he was made Bishop of Ossory. In
this Edition was probably published the Author's Dedication to King Edward VI.
however wanting in our Copy, which is otherwise a very fair and perfect one:
because, in the Edition printed on a larger Black Letter, by John Tysdale, Anno
1560, which was after that King's Death; we find such a Dedication of Bale's to
his said Majesty, and also because we see, at the End of the Epistle to the
Second Part, even of the first Edition, there is a Wooden Print of our Author,
presenting his Book to the said King Edward. In this Dedication we observe,
that Bale designed to publish Two Parts more of these English Votaries, or
Historical Examples of the abominable Corruptions among our Bishops, Monks,
Nuns, etc. which would have deduced the said Collections down to his own Time:
For his Words to the King displaying the Scheme of the whole, by showing what
these two Parts already published do, and what those to be published were to
treat of, are as follows. "How the great Adversary of God, Antichrist, has
sens Christ's Ascension, wrought in his wicked Course, to deprave these two
Ministrations (the Explanation of God's Word, and Government of the People) and
to cause them to serve his most blasphemous and filthy Affectes; the First Two
Parts of my English Votaries, here present, does plentiously show; and my hope
is, that the Two Lattre Parts which will, God willing, most spedily follow,
shall declare it yet much more at large. I have therein decreed, for difference
of the Books; and apt Arguments of the Matters contained in them, to give them
Four several Titles; of Rising, Building, Holding and Falling. For the First
Part treats of their Uprising to Mischief by the old Idolaters in the Reign
of Perdicion: The Second Part shows of their hasty Building by the
hipocritishe Monks to establish the wicked Kingdom of Antichriste: The Third
Part will declare the crafty upholding of their proud Degrees and Possessions,
by the wily and subtle slaightes of the Four Orders of Friars: And the Fourth
Part shall manifest their horrible Fall in this latter Age, by the grounded
Doctrines of the true Preachers and Writers."
.
IN his Preface to the first Part, our Author says, of the Popish Clergy, That,
"Not only have they commanded unto us Whoremongers, Baudes, Bribers,
Idolaters, Hyprocrites, Traitors, and most filthy Gomorreans, as Godly Men and
Women; but also they have canonized them for most holy Saints; set them up
gilt Images in their Temples, commanded their Vigils to be fasted, appointed
them Holy Days, and the People to do them Honor with Even Songs, Hours,
Processions, Lights, Masses, Ringings, Singings, Censynges, and the Devil and
all of such Heathenish Wares. They have done by us, as their old Predecessors
the Idolatrous Priests did by the ancient Romans; they have set up a Sort of
lecherous Gods to be worshipped in our Temples, to be our Advocates, and to
help us in our Needs. Instede of Jupiter, Saturn, Mercurye, Mars, Juno,
Proserpina, Diana and Venus, which did all their Feats in Whoredom, as the
Poets verefyeth; they have given us, Wenefryde, Cuthbert, Dunstane, Oswalde,
Anselme, Becket, Brigide, Audry, Modwin, Edith, Osith, Ethelburge, and a great
Sort more of unpure Workers out of Marriage."

The first Part begins with Three Chapters on Marriage, showing how it was
instituted by God, contemned by Satan, and appointed to the Priesthood in both
Laws. Next, of this Island, and its being inhabited before Noah: Of whom it was
called Albion. Of the Samothites, of Brute, the Druids, and their Chastity.
More particularly of Priests married and unmarried among the Hebrews; and of
Christ allowing Matrimony. That the Apostles and first Preachers were married.
And that Britain was first converted by married Men. Of the Introduction of
Christianity. And how it was first corrupted with Bishops and Archbishops, by
the Romish Church. Of the first Spring of Monkery in Britain, and the Heresies,
arising therefrom, of Pelagius and Leporius. Of St. Patrick, that he was the
Son of a Priest, and conversant with Women. Of Saints that were begotten in
Whoredom, and how grievous Women were to them. The Legend of St. Ursula and her
Companions, appointed to marry. The Inconstraint of those devoted to Religion.
Of the Entry of the Saxons, and a New Christianity. The selling of English Boys
at Rome. The Entrance of Augustine and his Monks. How they were disturbed by
Women. Their first Spiritual Provisions here. Their Preparations for
Antichrist. The Test of Augustine's Apostleship. The beginning of the English
Church with Tyranny. What the British Church was before. The Approach of
Antichrist to his full Age. The Chastity of his Mass-Mongers. The Contempt of
Marriage, with the ground of the Fables, that the Men of Dorsetshire and Kent
had Tails. Of the Strife about the Easter Celebration and other Ceremonies.
Other Religious Examples dissuading Matrimony. Of the Toys sent by Pope
Boniface to King Edwin and his Wife Ethelburge. The ghostly bestowing of their
Vows. Of St. Erkenwald and Osith, with their Nunneries. The Perfect Age of the
Beast, at the coming of Theodorus, etc. Sealings to the Beast's Obedience. Of
the Chastity, Monks, Monasteries and Penance of those Times. The Foundation of
their Purgatory. The Chastity of Cuthbert and Doctrine of Colfride. Fall of
Kingdoms and Rise of the Papacy. The old Prophesy of Merlin disclosed. Acts of
vowed Virginity. A Spiritual Conveyance of St. Audry (to Wilfryde Bishop of
York, for whom she jilted two Princes her Husbands.) And of our Author's
Treatment at Rippon. Of Kings becoming Pilgrims, and their Wives, Nuns. Great
Experiments of Virginity and Chastity. When Images were first admitted, and
where English Monks become Apostles to Antichrist; particulary of Wenefridus,
or Boniface the great Apostle of Germany. Of Kings deposed, and certain
Miracles. The Doctrine of Boniface, with the Sale of Whores. The Monasteries of
Fulda and Floriac. Why Oxford was to be mischievous to Kings; and of Alcuinus
his Monks who all died in a Night. Of Englishmen punished at Rome, and the
renewing of Rome-shot or Rome-scot. The English Monk's Paramour, or Pope Joan.
How the Popes from that Time were chosen. Of Holy Water, and a Book against
Marriage. The miraculous Transportation of Odulphus into Germany. Of Bishop
Elphegus and his Injunction about Marriage. Other Monkish Stories in Derogation
of Marriage. Of Archbishop Odo's Frantic Tricks and Legerdemain with the Host.
Monkery augmented by Dunstan. The Legend of his Harp sounding of itself. How by
Sorcery, he terrified King Edmund. How he displeased King Edwin, and of
Alfgina's Love for him. How he kept the Kings of England under, with the
Apostolical Swords and Bishoprics he had for that Purpose. What Rule was at
Rome in those Days. The Chastity of Holy Church there. A Pope's Bastard made
Pope. Three Whores made Goddesses by King Hugh, and their Bastards preferred in
the Church. Dunstan's Power to dissolve Priest's Marriage. King Edgar's Penance
for his Adultery with Wilfrith; his Religious Foundation and Grant. Dunstan's
Insolence to him; and his further Submission. Of Editha, and the Miracle he
wrought upon her. The Synod in 969, wherein the Clergy were restrained from
Women; and Dunstan accused of Ill Rules: Edgar's Accusation of the Clergy and
Defense of Dunstan. His clearing Wales of Wolves, and increasing them in the
Church. Bishop Ethelwold's Commission from the said Synod, and Bishop Oswald's.
Dunstan a King-Maker. Monks expelled; and Priests, with their Wives and
Children restored. Dunstan's speaking Idol. Here Thomas Cromwell is alluded to
for the Detection of such Impostures. Verses in Memory of that pretended
Miracle. That Idol crowned by Canute. An Example of Claustral Chastity, in the
Monks Bastard imposed by Queen Elgine on her Husband Canutus for her own Child.
Dunstan vexed with the Disputes of his Enemies, argues the House down upon
them. Dunstan's Death. The Order of Monks established, Anno 1000. The Mischiefs
which ensued, by the Invasion of the Danes, which with a Conclusion of three or
four Leaves, ends this First Part.

The Second Part, after the Preface and Epistle to the Reader, begins with, The
Ringleader of our Votaries, in some Account of Pope Sylvester II. and his
Stone-Offering; which our Author found registered in an old MS. Chronicle at
Calais, 28 Years past. Other Examples of the like Sacrifices Further Account of
this Sylvester, and his Sorcerous Proceedings. Of the Elections of Popes
henceforward, and the Emperors. Of Masses, Purgatory and Church Music. Other
Histories of the Priests and Monks in that Age. Of the Nunnery of Barking given
to Wilfhilda, and her Miracles. The Virtue of St. Ives Water, and St.
Walstane's Miracles. Canutus his Superstitious Buildings, through the
Instigation of Archbishop Achelnotus; and the Burden of the Land with
Rome-shot. The Story of the Emperor Henry IId's Sister, and his Chaplain, whom
she conveyed from her Chamber on her Back, through the Snow to prevent his
Footsteps being discovered, with the Emperor's Speech (having seen them) at the
Gift of a Bishopric to the one, and an Abbey to the other. The Adultery,
Murders, and Treason of Queen Emma, and how after she had profusely endowed the
Church, she could walk over burning Plough-Shares. Of St. Edward and his
Chastity. The Poverty of the Papacy; when the Name of Cardinals came into Use;
and of Swanus Earl Goodwin's Son. Of Palumbus a great Worker of Spiritual
Knaveries, and Heyla the Witch and Bawd of Berkeley. Other unchaste Examples in
the Priesthood, verefying that they laugh at Letchery, who frown at Marriage;
and that never yet came Plague of Mischief to this Realm, which the Prelates
have not turned to their private Commodity, and sported thereat in the End.
Instanced in the promoting the Danish Race to the Crown of England; the Story
of Duke Robert of Normandy, and Arletta the Mother of William the Conqueror of
England, to the great Misfortune, Shame and Undoing thereof in those Days. Of
Stigandus Bishop of Sherborne; and the riotous State of other Bishops. William
of Durham's expelling the Priests and their Wives for Monks; and of Oliver or
Elmer the flying Monk of Malmesbury. Of St. Frideswide's Church. Of Pope
Nicholas, and the Freedom given to Westminster for the Sanctuary of Whores and
Rogues. Of Berengarius, and the Synod of Winchester. Lanfranc and his
Legerdemains. Bishops changing their Seats and Titles. Old Walter Bishop of
Hereford, murdered by a Wench he would have debauched. Of Cicely, King
William's Daughter and Thurstinus. How Hildebrand, by Sorcery and Murder,
obtained the Papacy. Others of his mischievous Practices. An Act of
Condemnation for Priests Marriage, with the Mischiefs ensuing, and by whom
resisted. Married Priests baited with a Bull. The Treason of Prelates, Bishop
Walter's Ambition and violent Death. The Dispossession of the Priests at
Durham, by the Monks. The Vision of Boso, and the Gallantries of Earl Tostius's
lusty Chaplain in Tinmouth Church. The Miracles of Archbishop Lanfranc. Of
Bishop Osmond and his Ordinary, called the Use of Sarum. Of Kenred the gelded
Priest. The Tribute paid by Priests for their Wives. Variance among Bishops for
married Priests. Of the Signs in the Heavens manifesting the Mischiefs of the
Age. Robert Bloet Monk of Evesham, his Simony for the Sea of Lincoln; and the
Superstition of Roger Earl of Shrewsbury, and Hugh Earl of Chester. Of Bishop
Herbert, who built Christ Church at Norwich. The Robbery, Symony and Sacrilege
of the said Herbert. Other anointed Prelates of the same Race. Of Wulstane the
misbegotten Bishop of Worcester. Of Stephen Hardynge and his Cysteans.
Hildegarde's Prophecy, with other Examples. The first Fit of Anselm with King
William Rufus: Another Instance of his Arrogance. His Flight to, and Reception
at Rome; his Devotion and Prayer for Women; other Practices of his. A wonderful
Overthrow of the Temporal Power. Acts in the Councils of Rome. Anselm made Pope
of England. The Chastity of Anselm and Death of King William. King Henry
marries a Votary without Dispensation. Anselm's Wiles, and Randolf's Treason.
The chaste Proceedings of diverse Holy Prelates. Priests Marriage condemned by
Anselm. The Acts of Anselm's great Synod. Penalties for those who infringed
them. Abbots deposed, and Priests in Norfolk deprived. Old Latin Rimes of a
Monk against married Priests, found by our Author at Ramsey Abbey. The
resistance of York Diocese against depriving the Priests of their Wives. The
Synod at London against Sodomy; and the general Curse published, and dissolved.
Anselm's Contention with the King; debated at Rome. Our Author's Observations
on his Writings and Epistles, especially to the Sisters. The first Order of
Tippet-Men, or Secular Priests. Anselm brings the King's Power in Subjection.
Another Synod of Anselm for dissolving Priests Marriages. The closing up of
Anselm's unsavory doings. The Philosophy of the Pagans brought in and
Scholastic Disputations; with John Baconthorp's Caution against such subtle
Sophistries. Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury's insolent Outrage against the
King. Of Pope Calixtus and the Head Church of Wales. King Henry's Children and
Courtiers drowned, and to what ascribed. That Archbishop Celsus had both Wife
and Children. John de Crema the Pope's Legate, condemned Marriage, and was
caught in Fornication. How the King deceived the Bishops in their Proceedings
against the married Clergy. Of the several Swarms of Monks; where and when they
entered here; as the Benedictines, and Canons of St. Augustine, or black Monks,
and Canons: the Cisteans, or white Monks; St. Robert's Friars; the Gilbertines;
the Premonstratensers, or white Canons; and the Charter House Monks. Of King
Stephen and the Coronation Oath, which the Clergy made him take. The Rebellion
of the Bishops against the King. The King imprisons the Canons Wives of Paul's.
Another Council held against Priests and their Wives. Of some crafty Wits and
Schoolmen in the Universities. The Pope's Laws rejected by King Stephen, and
some Disputes about the Sacrament. The Marriage of Priests, and how differently
judged of at Norwich, in the Story of St. William of Norwich, and that of our
Author's Wife, who was imprisoned by the Magistrates there, in 1545, for being
married to a Priest, who had been a Preacher among them, and whose Doctrines
they called erroneous, heretical and seditious. "But this, I protest unto them,
says our Author, who am her Husband indeed, that I will be able to defend my
Doctrine, when they shall not be able to justify their most cruel and wicked
Example in defending of the Bishop of Rome's Tyranny: I am depely in their
Books, Men say, therefore let them not blame me, if they be in my Books
again, etc." Of Tundalus, his Visions, and the Priests Imposture with Crabs and
Candles, to pass over the Graves of the dead, for their Spirits. Of Pope
Adrian, who had a Monk to his Father. St. William of York, St. Wulfrick, and
St. Robert. The Marriage of Mary, the Abbess of Ramsey. The beginning of the
Order of Gilbertines. Of a Nun at Watton in Yorkshire, begot with Child by a
Monk, with Verses thereon, by Nigellus Wereker in Spec. Stultorum, and how the
Nun was compelled to castrate him. Of the Chastity of other Monks and Nuns in
that Age from the said Nigellus. Of Malcolm, St. Edward, and Abbot Eldred.
Peter Blesensis, his Reprehensions of the Enormities of the Clergy. The lusty
Beginnings of Thomas Becket. His Amors at Stafford, and Prevarication at
Clarendon. Prefers Antichrist to his King's Obedience. The Articles he strove
for against the King; and for which he was admitted the Pope's Martyr. Upholds
the Pope's Church by opposing the Waldenses; with their Opinions and
Punishment. His traitorous End and Advancement above Christ. The false Miracles
and Canonization of Becket. Of King Henry II. The Aid he granted toward the
Holy Wars. Renounced Obedience to the Pope. Made Lord of Ireland, Peter Pence
there reserved to the Pope. Scotland also subjected to the Crown of England, by
Pope Clement III. A Patronage proved lawful to five married Priests. Diverse
Examples of Priests in that Age having Wives. St. Goodrick's Remedies for
keeping the Vow of Chastity. A Council at Rome against Sodomites. Character of
John of Salisbury, Bishop of Carnote; and his Character of the Pope and his
Ministers. The insatiable Gluttony of Bennet's Monks, and their abominable
Letchery. Of a Traitor and a Thief who were English Votaries. A Crown of
Peacock's Feathers sent by the Pope to King Henry. Hugh Bishop of Durham, made
both an Earl and Chief Justice. A Monk strangely swallowed up by a great Fish
for his indecent Curiosity. The foolish Fondness of another Monk at the Grave
of King Arthur and his Queen. King Richard sent on a Pilgrimage, and William
Longcamp the Chancellor of England, and Bishop of Ely governs the Realm. The
Bishop taken and dies, and is lamented by an old Crucifix. Antichrist detected
by Abbot Joachim. Geffery Archbishop of York excommunicated, and Bishop Novaunt
wounded. Of Poisons provided by Priests; with their Revelations and Visions. A
Bishop and an Archdeacon taken in the Wars. Fulco's Advice for the Marriage of
King Richard's three vicious Daughters, and which of them the King bestowed on
the Church. Two Archbishops rebuked for College Building. A letcherous Votary
assoiled at Rome for Money. With this Abomination, which our Author found in an
old Book of Confession and Absolutions sought at Rome, and a reference to more
Instances of the like nature, in that other Book called Poenitentiarium
Romanum, he ends this Second Part: After which follows his Conclusion, wherein
he mentions also the two other Parts, which were to continue this Work to his
own Time; but they it seems were never published.

What we here have, is a diligent Collection from a great Variety of many
Foreign, as well as our own most ancient Historians, both in Print and MSS,
whom he has particularly cited at the End of every Story or Chapter, and also
given a general List of them to either Part. Some of them are very scarce to be
met with in Print, or never were printed; and, perhaps, scarcely now to be
recovered in Manuscript. The Book in the whole may be useful upon many
Occasions; though to be read with some Grains of Allowance; the Zeal of its
Author's Mind for the Reformation requiring, sometimes, itself, perhaps to be
reformed, for making him a little too violent in his Sentiments, and gross in
his Language.

XVI. A Discourse of ENGLISH POETRY: Together with the Author's Judgment
touching the Reformation of our English Verse. By WILLIAM WEB Graduate.
Imprinted at London by John Charlewood. Quarto, 1586.
THE Author of this very scarce Pamphlet, consisting of five Sheets and a half,
dedicates it to Edward Suliard Esquire whose Sons were under his Tuition, and who
had been presented by him with some other Work before, which was a Translation
of some Poetry belike, from, or into Latin. In his Preface, To the Noble Poets
of England, he observes, that though Books of, or tending to Poetry were, then,
more numerous than any other English Books, yet that " Poetry has found fewest
Friends to amend it; those who can, reserving their Skill to themselves; those
who cannot, running headlong upon it; thinking to garnish it with their
Devises, but more corrupting it with fantastical Errors." Therefore the chief
end of his Writing this Discourse is, to propose a Reformation of English
Poetry, "by having some perfect Platform, or Prosodia of versifying ratified;
either in Imitation of the Greeks and Latins, or, where it would not well abide
the touch of their Rules, through the like Observations, selected and established
by the natural Affectation of the Speech But this Project, though we find it was
proposed and attempted by other prime Wits of these Times before, such as Sir
Philip Sidney, Sir Edward Dyer, Spenser, Dr. Gabriel Harvey, and others, not
succeeding; our end of reviving here, or reviewing this Discourse, is chiefly
for the sake of those Characters, which our Author has given in it, of the
ancient, and more especially the English Poets, from Chaucer and Gower, down to
the most considerable of those who flourished at the Time of this Publication;
that the critical Reader may better know, whether the Opinions held of them in
those Days, and ours, correspond; and better judge, from the Conclusions we
form upon the Writings of our Ancestors, what liberty Posterity will take with
our own.
."

In the Discourse, having spoken in general of Poetry, what it is, whence it
had its beginning, and in what esteem it has always been, according to Plato,
Aristotle, and Spenser in his Shepherd's Calendar, which our Author thinks
inferior neither to Theocritus nor Virgil, and therefore zealously wishes for
his other Works abroad, especially his English Poet, which his Friend E. K. did
once promise to publish; he then shows the Opinion that was held of the Power
of Poetry; how Alexander and Scipio were delighted with it. So proceeds to
enumerate the most memorable Poets among the Ancients, as Orpheus, Amphion,
Tyrtaeus, Homer, Ennius, and Empedocles; with the Comic, Tragic, and Pastoral
Poets among the Grecians; and in like manner the Latin Poets; more particularly
of Virgil; then of the Epigrammatic, Elegiac, and Historical Poets. Of Ovid,
Horace, besides many others, and also, as not inferior to some of them,
Palengenius, Mantuan, and, for a singular Gift in a sweet Heroical Verse,
matches with them, Christopher Ocland, the Author of our Anglorum Praelia.

Hence he descends to the English Poets: And here observes, that he knows of no
memorable Work written by any Poet in English, till twenty Years past; though
Learning was not generally decayed at any time, especially since William the
Conqueror; as may appear by many famous Works written by Bishops and others;
yet that Poetry was then in little Account, the Light of the old Greek and
Latin Poets which they had, being contemned by them, as appears by their rude
versifying, wherein they thought nothing to be learnedly written in Verse,
which fell not out in Rhyme, either by the middle Words of each Verse sounding
alike with the last, or every two Verses ending with the like Letters. The
Original of which tinkling Verse is ascribed by Mr. Ascham to the Hunns and
Goths. King Henry I. surnamed Beauclerk, is here next spoken of, his Name being
a Proof that Learning in this Country was not little esteemed of at that rude
Time; and that among other Studies it is probable such a Prince would not
neglect the Faculty of Poetry. But the first of our English Poets here
mentioned is John Gower in the Time of King Richard II. a singular well learned
Man, whose Works our Author wishes were all whole and perfect among us, as
containing much deep Knowledge and Delight. Chaucer the God of English Poets,
next after, if not equal in Time, has left many Works both for Delight and
profitable Knowledge, far exceeding any other that as yet, ever since his Time,
directed their Studies that way. Though his Style may now seem blunt and coarse,
yet in him may be seen the perfect Shape of a right Poet. By his delightsome
Vein he so gulled the Ears of Men with his Devices, that though Corruption bore
such a sway that Learning and Truth could scarce show themselves, yet without
Control might he gird at the Vices and Abuses of all States, and gall them
with very sharp and eager Inventions; which he did so learnedly and pleasantly,
that none therefore would call him in question, etc. Lydgate, for good
Proportion of his Verse and meetly current Style, as the Time afforded, is by
our Author thought surely comparable with Chaucer, yet more occupied in
superstitious and odd Matters than was requisite in so good a Wit; which though
he handled them commendably, yet the Matters themselves being not so
commendable, his Esteem has been the less. The next of our ancient Poets he
supposes to be Pierce Ploughman, who is somewhat harsh and obscure, but indeed
a very pithy Writer, and the first our Author had seen who observed the
Quantity of our Verse without the Curiosity of Rhyme. Then he comes to Skeleton
in the Time of Henry VIII. who as he obtained the Laurel-Garland is, with good
right, granted the Title of a Poet, being a pleasant conceited Fellow, and of a
very sharp Wit, exceeding bold, and would nip to the very quick where he once
set hold. After him is mentioned Master George Gaskoyne, as painful a Soldier
in the Affairs of his Prince and Country as he was a witty Poet in his Writing;
in whose farther Commendation, he cites the Words of E. K. upon the ninth
Eclogue of the new Poet. Here he passes over diverse, as the old Earl of Surrey,
the Lord Vaux, Norton, Bristow, Edwards, Tusser, Churchyard, W. Hunnis,
Haiwood, Sand, Hill, S. Y. M. D. because they would make his Discourse too
tedious. But observes, that the Earl of Oxford may challenge to himself the
Title of the most excellent, among the rest of the Lords and Gentlemen in her
Majesty's Court. Hence he proceeds to the Translators; among whom he shall ever
account Dr. Phaer the best, for his Virgil, as far as half the tenth Book of
the Aeneids, the rest being no less commendably finished by that worthy Scholar
and famous Physician T. Twyne: Equal with him he joins Arthur Golding, for his
Labor in Ovid's Metamorphoses, who, for his further profiting this Nation and
Speech in all good Learning, is here greatly extolled. The next Place is given
to Barnaby Googe, besides his own Compositions, for his Translation of
Palengenius his Zodiac; and he is followed by Abraham Flemming, with whom he
would join another of his Name, who had excelled as well in all kinds of
Learning as in Poetry especially, were his Inventions made public. Here he
apologizes for not being particular on the Translators of Seneca, Ovid, Horace,
Mantuan, and many others; also the Students of the Universities and Inns of
Court, because he has not seen all he has heard of, nor dwells in a Place where
he can easily get knowledge of their Works. One however he may not over-slip,
and that is Master George Whetstone, a Man singularly well skilled in this
Faculty of Poetry. To him is joined Anthony Monday, an earnest Traveller in
this Art, in whose Name our Author had seen very excellent Works, especially
upon Nymphs and Shepherds, well worthy to be viewed, and to be esteemed as very
rare Poetry. With these he places John Graunge, Knight, Wylmot, Darrel, F. C.
F. K. and G. B. But here, has reserved a Place purposely for one, who if not
only, yet principally deserves the Title of the rightest English Poet that ever
our Author read, that is, the Author of the Shepherd's Calendar. And finds none
fit to couple with him, unless Gabriel Harvey, for his much admired Latin
Poetry, his Reformation of our English Verse, and beautifying the same with
brave Devices, though chiefly hidden in hateful Obscurity, and the Author long
since occupied in graver Studies. And if he were to join Harvey's two Brothers,
the one a Divine, the other a Physician, is assured, they would much adorn the
Art, if they would set their hands to it.

After his Judgment of the Poets, he speaks of the English Poetry in its Matter
and Form; what Verse is, the Arguments of primitive Poetry, the Comic, Tragic,
and Historic; the Use and End of Poetry from the Testimony of Horace. With his
Advice, of letting things, feigned for Pleasure, nearly resemble Truth, how
duly observed by Chaucer. Others of Horace his Rules, with the Translation of
Sir Thomas Elyot of Reading lascivious Poems, and what good Lessons some
Readers will pick out of the worst of them. Examples to this purpose, from
Plautus, Terence, Ovid, and Martial, by Sir T. Elyot. Of Heroic Poetry, and
that we have nothing answerable to Homer and Virgil, imputed to our not having
had a timely regard to the English Speech, and curious handling of our Verse,
though now it has had great Advantages of Eloquence from some rare and singular
Wits; among whom, that Master John Lilly has deserved most high Commendations,
as one who has stepped further therein than any before, or since he first began
the witty Discourse of his Euphues. Whose Works surely in respect of his
singular Eloquence, and brave Composition of apt Words and Sentences, let the
learned examine and make Trial thereof through all the Parts of Rhetoric in fit
Phrases, in pithy Sentences, in gallant Tropes, in flowing Speech, in plain
Sense; and surely, in my Judgment, I think he will yield him that Verdict which
Quintilian gives of both the best Orators, Demosthenes and Tully: That from the
one nothing may be taken away; to the other, nothing may be added: But for a
closer Example, to prove a former Assertion, of the Fitness of our Language to
receive the best Form of Poetry, we are referred to the Examination of Dr.
Phaer's Translation of Virgil with the Original, from both which, here are
several Examples laid before us, and our Critic thinks, that the like
Inference might be drawn from the Comparison of Ovid's Metamorphosis, with
Golding's Translation.

Next our Author treats more particularly of the Pastoral Poetry or Eclogue:
Here having spoken of Theocritus, Virgil, and others, he comes to one of our
own Country, comparable with the best in any Respect, even Master Spenser,
Author of the Shepherd's Calendar, who would, he thinks, have surpassed them,
if the Coarseness of our Speech (that is, the Course of Custom which he would
not infringe) had been no greater Impediment to him, than their pure Native
Tongues were to them. Here we have a little Comparison between Virgil's
Eclogues and Spenser's, and the Commendations of E. K. upon the English Poet.
The subject Matter, and use of his said Calendar, and our Author's Apology for
what had been objected against something in his sixth Eclogue, showing it is
the foolish Construction, and not his Writing that is blameable. To these
Writers of Pastorals, are joined those who wrote Precepts of Husbandry in
Verse, after the manner of Virgil's Georgics; such as that Book ^f Tusser, a
Piece surely, says he, of great Wit and Experience, and withal very prettily
handled. And he thinks that this Argument has been so little treated of in
Poetry, because so many have written of it in Prose. As for a Translation of
the Georgics, it appears that Abr. Flemming in his Version of the Eclogues, did
make some Promise thereof, and that our Author Web did perform the like; but
it seems not that either of their Works were printed. Thence, from the Subject
of our English Writers, he passes to the Form and Manner of our English Verse;
censures our barbarous practice of Rhyming; what is understood by Rhyme, and
how improperly that Word is applied. The first beginning of Rhyme. Rules to be
observed in framing our English Rhyme. Next we come to the several kinds of
English Verse, differing in Number of Syllables, where it is observed the
longest Verse in length, our Author has seen used in English, consists of
sixteen Syllables, not much used, and commonly divided, each Verse equally into
two, rhiming alternately. The next in length is of fourteen Syllables, the most
usual of all others, among Translators of the Latin Poets, which also often is
divided into two Lines; the first of eight Syllables, the second of six,
whereof the sixes always rhyme, and sometimes the others. But to avoid
Tediousness and Confusion, repeats only the different sorts of Verses in the
Shepherd's Calendar, which contains twelve or thirteen several sorts, differing
in Length, or Rhyme, or Distinction of the Staves. After these Examples we have
some Remarks, on the natural Order of Words, or Position in English Poetry, and
that the quantity of our old Verse of fourteen Syllables, runs much upon the
Iambic: With further Observations upon Rhyme. Gaskoyne's Instructions for
versifying. Of some rare Devices and pretty Inventions in Composition, as in
the Song of Colin, sung by Cuddy in the Shepherd's Calendar, framed upon six
Words, prettily turned and wound up together. Not unlike John Graunge's Device
of making the last Words of a certain Number of Verses fall into Sense: And
that there were several delicate Performances in this Nature of Echoes,
privately passing among the finest Poets of our Author's Time. We have
something also after the manner of the Acrostic, from the Compositions of W.
Hunnis. Then he proceeds to the reformed kind of English Verse, in Imitation of
the Greeks and Latins, which many had attempted to put in Practice, and this
Part takes up three Leaves, in which among other Things, he observes the
Hexameter to be the most famous Verse; and that the first who attempted to
practice it in English, was the Earl of Surrey, who translated some part of
Virgil into Verse; but without regard of true quantity of Syllables. Here he
repeats the famous Distich in Hexameter, common in the mouths of all Men, which
was made by Master Watson, Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, about
forty Years past; and two more in the Gloss of E. K. upon the fifth Eclogue of
the new Poet: That the great Number of the like kind made by Mr. Harvey, were
not unknown to any, and his own Translation of the two first Eclogues of Virgil
in the like sort of Verse, is by our Author here exhibited. After which
Examples in Hexameter, he comes to the Elegiac Verse with Examples, and lastly,
in like manner of the Sapphic, with an Example thereof in his Version, from the
fourth Eclogue in the Shepherd's Calendar, of Colin's Song, sung by Hobbinol in
praise of the Queen. To the whole is annexed, The Canons or General Cautions of
Poetry, prescribed by Horace, first gathered by Geo. Fabricius Cremnicensis;
and at the End, a short Epilogue, in which for the rendering our Poetry equal
with the best in other Tongues, he gives us hopes of framing some apt English
Prosodia; but hopes first to enjoy the Benefit of some others Judgment, whose
Authority may bear greater Credit, and whose Learning can better perform it.

XVII. Histoire Notable de la Conversion des ANGLOIS, des Saints du Pays, des
Monasteres, Eglises and Abbayes, des Pelerinages, des Apparitions des Esprits,
and des Saints Relics; rapportee soubs la VIE miraculeuse de Saint
VAUBOURG, vierge Abbess: Illustrees d'amples Annotations and Discourse
Historiques, par JEAN L'ESPAGNOL, Docteur en Theology. A. Douay, 8vo. 1614.
Page 792.
THIS Notable History of the Conversion of the ENGLISH; of the Saints of the
Country; of Monasteries, Churches and Abbeys; of Pilgrimages, Apparitions of
Spirits, and holy Relics; comprehended under the miraculous LIFE of St.
WALBURG, the Virgin Abbess; illustrated with copious Annotations, and
Historical Discourses, by Dr. JOHN L'ESPAGNOL, who was the Grand Prior of St.
Remy of Reims; treating of some Persons, who, for the Holiness of their Lives,
and the Magnificence of their Religious Foundations, were, as Natives of this
Island, an Honor thereto in Foreign Parts, near a Thousand Years since; may on
several Accounts, merit the Notice of the British Librarian; being such a
Rarity, as to have much escaped the Knowledge or Observation of those, who have
attempted to enumerate and characterise the Writers of our Ecclesiastical
History, or the Lives of our Saints. The true Searchers after such Antiquities,
are not to be prejudiced, to the rejection of any solid Facts therein, by the
religious Delusions of those Miracles, in which they are sometimes envellop'd
and conveyed; well knowing, that no such ancient Histories from Popish Writers,
would be any ways secure from misleading us, if some difference were not to be
allowed, and Distinctions practiced in Reading them: but on the contrary, if in
such Subjects, the Reader imitates the Refiner, he will not spurn at Knowledge,
because it comes in the Ore, but separate the Dross, and embellish the little
Gold that he finds.

After the Author's Dedication, To the most Illustrious and Religious Princess
Renee de Lorraine, Abbess of St. Peter of Reims; and his Verses to the most
Illustrious and Reverend Lewis of Lorraine, with other Verses in Praise of his
Work, both in Latin and French; we have the Author's Prayer to St. Walburg, in
which we shall forbear to criticize upon his Etymology of her Name, Valburga,
forte quasi validum burgum, and pass to the Preface; from whence we learn that
our Author gathered his Materials for the said Life, from the Extract which
Surius has made thereof, out of an ancient anonymous MS, which our Author
thinks might be written either by St. Wilibauld, who did compile an Account of
her Life, according to the Testimony of Molanus, or by Wolfhard a Religious
German, who also wrote on the same Subject, according to Surius and Cardinal
Baronius. He has also collected something from what has been written of her, by
George Wicelius, and from a Tract composed by Philip Bishop of Eyst, at the
Request of a Queen of Hungary; and says the Latin MSS. of the said Philip and
Wolfhard upon this Subject, with others, were printed at Ingolstad, in 1603;
through the Care of Henry Canisius, and that he has been furnished with several
other little Fragments and Memoirs from other Historians, who are cited in
their proper Places. After this Preface of two Leaves, we have a Summary of the
Chapters in this Life and Miracles of St. Walburg; at the End of that is a
Table of the Annotations and Discourses, deduced from, and referred to in the
said Life: This is followed with some Approbations of the Work, by two Foreign,
and two English Doctors at Reims, whose Names are William Gifford and Matthew
Kellison: And lastly, An Extract of the King's Privilege for printing the said
Book, and securing the Property to the Author.

The chief Contents of the Life itself, which is comprised in 62 Pages, are the
holy Expedition of Winfred or Boniface, out of England into Germany to
establish the Christian Faith; with an Account of those who accompanied him,
among whom were St. Tecla, St. Lioba, etc. An Account of St. Richard King of
(or, in) England and his two Sons, St. Wilibauld and Winibauld, their devout
Piligrimages. Of Winibauld's receiving Religious Orders from his Uncle St.
Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz; and also the Government of seven Churches and
Monasteries, and his Brother being constituted Bishop of Eyst, with their joint
Labors in the Propagation of the Faith. How after the Death of the Queen their
Mother, they sent over for their Sister St. Walburg. Of the Oratory and
Monastery, her Brother Winibauld built near his own, at Heydenheim, for her and
her Virgins. Of his Death in the Year 760, aged 60 Years, having been 10 Years
Abbot of his Monastery; with his Epitaph. Of the Miracles of St. Walburg in her
Lifetime; her Death in 776, aged 70 Years, and Burial in her own Monastery. Of
the removal of her Body by Bishop Odger to Eyst, and her Relics reposited in
a Monastery of Benedictines, built for that Purpose. Of many Cures performed
upon the removal of her Relics, with a Prayer to God and St. Walburg, by the
Author. Of the Churches built by the Earls of Flanders, Kenemberg and
Mount-Beliard, in Honor of her Relics. How renowned she was also in France,
in the Diocese of Reims, chiefly in the Village called after her own Name, near
Attigny; because some part of her Body was brought thither, by Charles the
Bald, Emperor of Germany, and King of France, who founded a Church in Honor of
her, which being afterward demolished by the Norman Infidels, that Chapel was
built, which stands, says our Author, at present in its Place.

The rest of the Book, to the End, consists of Annotations, or distinct
Discourses, occasionally enlarging upon several Parts of the Life, in
Thirty-Four Chapters. Among which the chief are: Of the Conversion of the
ancient English, and of the Marriage of the Faithful with Infidels. Of St.
Gregory the Great. Of St. Boniface and St. Wilibauld. Of St. Richard. Of
Pilgrimages, with the Arguments in favor of them. Of the Spiritual Graces of
St. Walburg. A Meditation in Honor and Praise of her. Of her Monastery, and a
Transition to that of Font Evrauld. The Force of the Examples of our Superiors.
The frequent Effects of Riches. Of the Apparition of Spirits, and why Heretics
admit not thereof. Many Causes assigned for their appearing, with Examples and
Histories, when, where, and to whom they appear. Of the Changes in Churches,
Abbeys and Monasteries; of Seculars, Regulars and other Orders, Habits, etc. Of
the Oil which distilled from the Bodies of St. Walburg, and other Saints. Of
the Translation of their Relics. Relics of one Saint in diverse Places. Of
Miracles. The Observance of Festivals. The Relics of Saints, with Arguments
for the Veneration of Relics. Of Churches; the Signification of the Word; to
what End they were built; the Custom of building them opposed by Reformers. Of
the ancient practice of building them in honor of Saints: Of the Popes,
Prelates, and Kings of England, as well as other Countries, who have founded,
built and adorned them: That the Expense thereof obstructs not other Charities,
nor impoverishes the Builders: The antipathy of Catholics and Reformers about
Churches. The Conversion of Idolatrous Temples into Churches: Of the
Immunities, Franchises and Liberties given to the Church: The Rights of
Sanctuary established, and carefully preserved in the Temples of the Ethnics:
The Abuses thereof, a Cause of their Reformation: Punishments of the Violators
of Church Rights; and of Princes who have been dissuaded from molesting the
Church. The last Two Chapters are upon the Patrons of Persons and Places; and
the Doctrine of certain religious Women. This, with an Epistolary Address to
the Female Devotees of St. Peter of Reims, and a large Alphabetical Index of
the most remarkable Persons and Matters in the whole Volume, concludes this
uncommon Piece of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, in which there are several
Particulars of Note and Honor to our own Country.

XVIII. The Maintenance of Free Trade, according to the Three Essential Parts
of Traffic; namely, Commodities, Moneys, and Exchange of Moneys, by Bills of
Exchanges for other Countries, etc. By GERARD MALYNES, Merchant, 8vo. 1622.
Pages 105.
THIS little Work was written in Answer to a Treatise newly published, entitled
Free Trade, or the Means to make Trade flourish; wherein, its Author had
omitted to handle the predominant part, namely, the Mystery of Exchange between
us and other Nations; his only Scope being to have the Moneys of the Kingdom
enhanced in Price, and the Foreign Coins, inconveniently, made current in the
Realm at high Rates: And because the said Treatise was published at the Time
when King James had referred the consideration of this important Business to
Henry Viscount Mandeville, Lord President of the Privy Council, with others of
Knowledge and Experience, among whom, our present Author Mr. Malynes was
called, and did certify his Opinion; he, therefore, dedicates this Answer to
his Majesty.

In his said Dedication, he lays down, Traffic to be the Preheminent Study of
Princes, because the Sacred Wisdom has approved this Axiom: "That a King is
miserable, how rich soever he be, if he reigns over a poor People; and that a
Kingdom is not able to subsist, how rich soever the People be, if the King be
not able to maintain his Estate." He concludes with observing that, Worthy of
Commendation are those, who can, by Providence, preserve the Treasure of Kings
and Commonwealths; worthier are those, who both, by honest and lawful Means,
can preserve and augment them; but worthiest of all Immortal Praise are those,
who can, and do, by easy, just and politic Means, enrich Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, and thereby fill the Prince's Coffers with standing Treasure, to
serve in Time of War, when Arms are necessary, and the Time of Peace, more
fitting wholesome Laws. "In the Theorick Part of which Study, I have, says he,
these forty Years spent much Time and Charges, at the Pleasure of Great
Personages: And albeit nothing did encounter me but Ingratitude, yet my
Constancy to spend the Remainder of my Days therein, in hope of Practice, is as
immovable, as the Continuance of my daily Prayers, etc. to multiply your
Majesty's Days, as the Days of Heaven." The knowing and ingenious Author of
this scarce and curious Tract, who thus spent Forty Years in the Study of Means
to enrich his Country by Traffic, was a Person of such considerable Note for
his Abilities, that he was often called to the Council Table, both in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, and King James's, for his Opinion in Mercantile Affairs. He
was appointed one of the Commissioners of Trade in the Low Countries, for
settling the Value of Moneys about the Year 1586. He was afterward a
Commissioner also at Home in the Year 1600, for establishing the true Par of
Exchange; and upon the Laws, enacted in the fourth Year of King James, for the
making of good and true Cloth, he exhibited a Demonstration to the Lords of the
Privy Council, showing the Weight, Length and Breadth of all sorts of Cloths;
and that Weight and Measure do control each other; whereby the Merchant, who
buys the Cloth, may be enabled to find out the Fraud and Deceit of the
Clothier: We find also that he published several other Books, besides this
above abstracted; as, near Thirty Years before it, The Canker of England's
Commonwealth; also England's View; and that he now had under the Press, a
Volume entitled Lex Mercatoria, or The Ancient Law Merchant, wherein the
dangerous Rocks to be avoided in the Course of Traffic, and the Means thereunto
conducing, are manifested, for the Preservation and Augmentation of the Wealth
of these Kingdoms, according to Jus Gentium; the Knowledge whereof is of such
Moment, that all other Temporal Laws, without it are not complete. He writ
also, The Royal Merchant of Great Britain, which he had now in MS. and,
perhaps, others, which we have not leisure at present to enquire after.


In his preliminiary Discourse, he distinguishes the Three. Essential Parts of
Traffic, namely, Commodities, Money and Exchange, to be, the First, as the
Body, which upheld the World by Commutation and Bartering, till Money was
devised; the Second, as the Soul in the Body, infusing Life to Traffic, by the
Means of Equality and Equity; the Third, as the Spirit and Faculty of the Soul,
being seated every where, corroborating the vital Spirit of Traffic, and
directing or controlling, by just Proportions, the Prices and Values of
Commodites and Moneys. A little further, he tells an Ingenious Tale, which he
applies to the Force of Exchange by inferring, That the Author of the Treatise
of Free Trade, is like the Novices mentioned in that Tale, who perceiving two
great Whales to have assaulted the English Ship of Traffic; the one being the
Wars in Christendom, and the Pirates, and the other, more gentle, being the
Policy of Princes and States, has published the Causes of the Decay of Trade
in England, and the Means to make the same flourish, without observing the
operative Power of Exchange, which is the Rudder of the Ship of Traffic,
fastened to the Rule of the Equality of Moneys, according to their Weight and
Fineness.

The Treatise itself containing many observable Particulars is divided into
five Chapters; the First whereof, is on, The Causes of the want of Moneys in
England. This Chapter begins with some Remarks on the Undervaluation of Money
in Exchange, with an Instance of the Value of Realls, and the Par of Exchange;
when Dudley Earl of Leicester went Governor of the Low Countries in 1586.
Whence it is concluded, That, if the Low Exchange were not, the Gain would
prove to be imaginary; that when the Exchange answers the true Value of our
Moneys, they are never exported, because the Gain is answered by Exchange,
which is the Cause of Transportation; so that Exchange is still predominant,
and strikes the stroke; and though the Price rises and falls according to the
plenty or scarcity of Money, yet Moneys are overruled thereby: for if you
enhance the Coin, the Exchange controlls it, and rises accordingly; if you
undervalue it, the Exchange in like manner falls, to the end that the Value
thereof should be answered by the public Measure, and to prevent all Abuses in
the Price of Commodities, and Valuation of Moneys either Real or Imaginary,
according to the Custom of the Place, by device of the Bankers. That this was
seriously observed in 1576, by the Lord Keeper Bacon, Lord Treasurer Burghley,
Secretary Walsingham, with other Counselors of State, besides many Persons of
Experience, as Sir Thomas Gresham, Richard Martin, Master of the Mint, and many
more here named; who found that the Bankers or Exchangers for their private
Gain, had brought in Twenty Inconveniences, which are here particularized: By
which it may be seen, says our Author, of what Importance the Operation of
Exchange is, and wherein the Endeavors of Sir Thomas Gresham, thinking to rule
the Exchange of England, by plenty of Money, proved fruitless, which might have
been performed with more facility by Direction. Here we have Foreign Examples
from Bodin, of Bankers having their Goods confiscated, and being indicted as
Cozeners, seeing that in a short time with 24000 Pounds, they had gotten
2400000. This is applied to the Kingdom of England, and in what Case it would
have been more sensible of the like Loss; since, though Queen Elizabeth's Coffers
were stored with seven hundred thousand Pounds Sterling, before the Wars with
the Earl of Tyrone in Ireland, more than double that Sum had been spent
therein. The Second Cause of our Want of Money, is next imputed to the
superfluity of Plate in private Hands. Under this Head, is observed the great
Quantity of Silver consumed in Silver Thread, Spangles, etc. upon late
Examination found, to amount to above fourscore thousands Pounds yearly;
whereas the Plate made in London, is only fifty or sixty thousand Pounds worth.
Here we have the several Opinions given to Charles IX. of France, upon his want
of Money, after the Parisian Massacre; some, under color of suppressing Pride,
advising him to prescribe every Man what store he should keep, and melt down
the rest. Others, that he would imbase his Money under the Standard of Plate,
so bring Plate to be turned into Money. This is followed by another Example, in
our Henry VIII. who priviledg'd his Nobles to make base Money of their own
Plate, which fell ^ut to the prejudice of the Commonwealth, and was but a shift
for the Time to himself. Then we have a more particular Account of Gold and
Silver Thread, both as to what the Author had recommended in his England's
View, about making it at home, and the Reasons why, by late Proclamation, the
Foreign Manufacture thereof was encouraged. The Third Cause of our want of
Money, is ascribed to the Consumption of Foreign Commodities, or the buying
them, proportionably, dearer than we sell our own, which he has proved (in his
Canker of England) to proceed from the Abuse of Exchange. Here we have the
Causes of the overballancing of Commodities, and the Effects by which the
English Merchants are bereaved of two essential Parts of Trade in three. And
here we see the Advantages which Foreign Trade has over ours, and how our
Commodities are fallen in Price; that French Wines are dearer to us, by the
Money of the Realm's being undervalued in Exchange; and that the less Sterling
Money we reckon in Exchange with them, the more is the gain of our Commodities.
The Fourth Cause is the Want of Money, (according to the Treatise our Author
answers, for these Causes he takes from thence) is the great Want of our
East India Stock at home; but our Author expected the ready Money sent in Reals
of Plate to be employed in the said Trade, would rather have been mentioned,
not but he thinks this East India Trade, which began with us in England,
immediately after the great Jubilee Year 1600, might be very profitable
hereafter. He gives us an Instance in Pepper; which, if it cost but Twopence
halfpenny the Pound in the Indies, and Ten Shillings employed therein, will
require but 35 Shillings for all Charges to deliver it in London, where it is
usually sold for above Twenty-pence; it follows there must be great Gain, which
will increase when the Parties shall be united in true Love: Whereas the Loss
we suffer by the undervaluing of our Money in Exchange, yearly, is greater than
all the Moneys employed yearly for the East Indies; wherefore he is for
encouraging this Trade, and the rather for that the Hollanders found Reasons,
which are here produced, for continuing the same. Here we have also some
Observations upon our Riches, since the Discovery of the West Indies. The Fifth
Cause of our Want of Money, imputed to the Wars of Christendom causing
Exportation, and the Pirates hindering Importation of Money, is next examined.
Here our Author argues, that if the Pirates did not take some of our Money, it
follows not that the same would come to us in Specie; and a^ to the Exportation
by Wars, he answers to the Argument, that the Rix-Dollar being raised in many
Places of Germany, should draw abundance of Money into the Mints of those
Countries, that Money inhanced is never carried to the Mint, but runs away like
Posthorses, every Man fearing to lose by the Fall. We have here several other
Remarks upon these Dollar, and the Alterations of their Value from the Year
1575; and the Chapter is concluded, with Advice to note the Valuation of
Hamborough, where it has been at fifty-four Stivers the Dollar, which makes the
Exchange above forty Shillings of their Money for Twenty of ours. "And though we
have raised the Price of Exchange from Twenty-four Shillings, Nine-pence, to
about Thirty-five Shillings, shall we rest here and go no further? And shall we
be like Men that halting in Jest, become Lame in Earnest?"

Chap. II. Shows the Causes of the Decay of Trade in the Merchandise of
England, by an Examination also of several Heads in the manner aforesaid, as
First, The Want of Money. Secondly, Extortionate Usury. Thirdly, Litigious
Lawsuits. Fourthly, Free Fishery of Foreigners in his Majesty's Seas; with the
Reasons of our own Merchants in favor of that Liberty, as if England could not
maintain a Sea and Land Trade together; also several Examples, how other
Princes neglect not the Advantage to be made of their Seas, but both encourage
their own Subjects to fish in them, and make other Nations pay Duty for the
like: Which have long determined the question of Mare Liberum, allowing the
Freedom of the Seas for Navigation, where it does not prejudice the distinct
Dominion of Princes concerning their Fishery. Fifthly, The Abuses of our
Drapery. Here we have a particular, that the dressing and dying of them, were
insisted on to be done in England in 1616, and that then 64 Thousand Cloths
were exported; with a Digression of our Author's upon the envious
Interpretation of his Studies for the welfare of the Kingdom, particularly in
his Invention of Farthing Tokens, which are yet found most commodious to
prevent the waste of Silver, and relieve the Poor. Sixthly, The Policies of
Merchants in monopolizing the Exportation of Cloths. Seventhly, The false
making of our Cloth. And here we have the Inconveniences of engrossing in Trade
further laid open. Eighthly, The Exportation of the Materials of Wool, and the
Customs or Impositions laid upon Cloths at Home and Abroad. Ninthly, The Wars
in Christendom, and Pirates, occasioning the fall of Wool from 33 to 18
Shillings the Tod, and the inconsiderate Barter of it Abroad. Tenthly, The
immoderate Use of Foreign Commodities, which concludes this Chapter.

Chap. III. Of Governed Trade and therein of Monopoly. Here we have some
further curious Observations upon the Exchange of Money, and among others the
Proverbial Character in Bodin of a Man of Experience and distinguishing Head,
when they say, Il entend le Par; also a Syllogism, upon the Undervaluation of
our Money, and a Comparison of Exchange to the Assay of Money. Commendations of
Master Hussy, Governor of the Merchant-Adventurers, in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, for the great Pains he took in settling the Parity of
Exchanges, however the true Remedy to rule the Course of them, was but lately
found out. The Opinions of mercantile Men upon the best Methods of Traffic,
with our Author's Discussions thereupon; as, Whether Foreign Nations should
come and fetch our Wares? And whether there should be no Societies or
Corporations of Merchants? Which though our Author is for allowing, under
Government, in appointed Places, because they may, by such Order, be removed,
or recalled; and for that no Nation trafficks so much in the bulk of staple
Commodities; insomuch, that two Years before the taking of Antwerp, all the
Wares in Christendom vented there, in one Year, being valued, the English
amounted to four Parts in six: Yet we must not flatter Companies or Societies,
says he, in their unadvised or irregular Proceedings; for a Society may become
a Monopoly, when some few Merchants have the whole managing of a Trade to the
hurt of a Commonwealth, and when many others might also negotiate for the
common good. Here we have a Definition of a Monopoly, and an Approbation of the
Custom in the City of Noremberg; where they receive all the Manufactures of the
People, and paying these weekly, sell those for a reasonable Profit. This is
followed with some Observations on the Royal Commodity of Tin, which above 100
Years past, was sold for 40 Shillings the Hundred, when the best Velvets were
sold for 10 Shillings the Yard. Also of the Abolition and Re-establishment of
Prae-emption, whereby the Wealth of the Kingdom has been since increased 600
Thousand Pounds Sterling, and his Majesty received for his Benefit 150 Thousand
Pounds. Also how the Importation of Spanish Tobacco, gains the Kingdom many
Thousand Pounds yearly. Next we have his Opinion upon Joint Stocks in
Companies; and lastly, the general Intention of all Grants, by Letters Patent,
for New Inventions; with Reflections upon those, especially relating to Alloms,
rendering the Commodity dearer to the Subject, and cheaper to the Transporter
or Stranger; which he resembles to the Silver Mines of the Duke of Brunswick,
maintained at his own Charge, called the Wildman; which cause him to coin
Dollars, having his Arms on one side, and a Savage Man on the other, holding a
burning Candle in his Hand, with this Inscripton, Aliis inserviendo, consumor.

Chap. IV. Of want of Government in Trade. And herein he sets down the Errors
in Trade, committed by Merchants, relating to Cloths, and the making over their
Moneys beyond Seas. Then he proceeds, First, To enumerate the Defective Means
and Remedies, no less than Thirty-five, which have been tried these 350 Years,
and next, to show, wherein they have been found fruitless, and that the
decrease of Wealth in a Kingdom, may be comprehended under these Heads: The
selling our Native Commodities too cheap, buying Foreign Wares too dear, and
exporting our Money in Specie, or exchanging it for Money by Bills; and how the
Undervaluation thereof causes it to be exported or hinders the Importation.
This leads us, in the last Place, to

Chap. V. Of the Remedies for all former Causes of the Decay of Trade. Here he
begins with his Remedies, First, For the undervaluing our Money, by overvaluing
Foreign Coin; and these are, by the Reformations of Exchange here proposed, in
causing the Value of our Money to be given in Exchange; which would out off the
Gain had by the Exportation of it, and make Foreign Coin not to be received
above Value. More particularly, how, this recovery of England's Wealth is to be
effected by Proclamation, and by public Tables, fixed up at the Royal
Exchange; like those kept at Dover in the Time of King Edward III. to receive
the Passenger's Money, and by Exchange in Specie for it beyond Seas; which made
them leave their Moneys in the Realm. Further also, by taking warning from the
Inconveniences of inhancing Moneys; in several Examples of King Henry VI. who
raised the Ounce of Sterling Silver from 20 to 30 Pence, and King Edward IV.
from 30 to 40 Pence. And King Henry VIII. his raising the Angel Noble from 6
Shillings and 8 Pence, to 7 Shillings and 4 Pence, and afterward to 7
Shillings and 6 Pence, whereby every Ounce of Sterling Silver was worth 45
Pence; yet there was nothing effected thereby, the Money still altering beyond
Sea. Wherefore Wolsey had power given to alter the Valuation from time to time
as he saw cause. Soon after, it is shown how the Turks, Persians and Russians
are, by keeping the Price of their Exchanges above the Valuation of their
Moneys, more politic than we. Hence the Question is resolved, whether it is
more expedient to raise the Price of Exchange or the Valuation of Money. Next
he shows how the want of Money has sunk the Price of Plate, from 5 Shillings
and 8 Pence to 5 and 2 Pence, and what would be the Conseqence of its rising.
Here he recommends all wrought Plate to be tried and marked, also all Silver
Thread from abroad; and that they should receive our Wool in Exchange for it.
The Consumption of Foreign Commodities or over-ballancing of them, is referred
to the Considerations upon the Abuse of Exchange before: And the excessive Use
of Tobacco, to the Limitation of Spanish Tobacco lately established, that the
Plantations of Virginia and Bermudas may be advanced thereby. The want of Money
through the Wars and Piracies, is comprised in the Reformation of Exchange and
the Policy of Rewards. Thus having, to the Causes of the want of Money, joined
some Means for supplying it; he comes to the Remedys also for the Decay of
Trade: And here, Secondly, Under the Head of Usury, to be remedied by Money
procured as before directed, he recommends the Custom of setting over Bills of
Debt from one Man to another; and a Stock to erect Pawn-Houses; and for
principal Towns to take in Money upon the Adventure of their own or other Men's
Lives; as at Venice, where a Man, for three or four Hundred Pounds, shall be
sure of one Hundred Pounds a Year for Life. The Third Cause of Decay in Trade,
ascribed to litigious Lawsuits, our Author thinks there can be no shorter
Course to remedy than is used upon Proof and Specialities, if the Pleadings and
Issues be joined according to the first Institution; whereby the Matter of Fact
may appear before a Jury: For touching the Matter of Law, it, being separated,
makes a Demurrer to be determined by the Judge. Here he commends the Course in
Germany, to take down litigious Humors, where a Fine of Twelve-pence in the
Pound, or more is paid, to the Emperor or Magistrates, for so much as is
claimed of the Defendant more than can be proved to be due, besides further
Charge, if he be found to proceed upon Revenge. As for the Differences between
Merchants, he refers to his Lex Mercatoria; as also the Fourth Remedy, in
behalf of the Fishing Trade. The Fifth upon making Cloth abroad, is partly
redressed by the late Proclamation, to prohibit Exportations of that kind. And
the Rules of our Author for the true making of Cloth, may be a Remedy for the
Seventh Cause of Decay, as also to the Eighth; but the Sixth, concerning the
Policy of Merchants, is recommended, for the general and not particular Good,
to the Inspection of a Committee; so that other Merchants may upon reasonable
Considerations be admitted of the said Companies. The Ninth Cause is partly
handled in the First, and as to Bankrupts, some Remedy is assigned also before,
in setting over Bills of Debt; and the Defects in the Statute against them, is
to be remedied by the Authority of Chancery, to the Commissioners appointed to
examine the same. The Remedy to the Tenth and last Cause of our said Decay, the
Immoderate Use of Foreign Commodities, consists, as was observed before, partly
in reforming the Abuse of Exchange, whereby such Abundance is imported, and
partly in restraining the Affectation of the Vulgar, to imitate their
Superiors, by their being deprived of their Ill Examples. Our Author concludes,
That all these Causes of the Decay of Trade in England, are mostly comprised in
that One, the Want of Money, whereof the Abuse of Exchange is the Efficient
Cause; which made him project so easy a Remedy; whereby the Kingdom shall enjoy
the Three Essential Parts of Traffic, under Good and Politic Government, which
will effectually produce a Free Trade.

XIX. HONOR'S GENEALOGY: or The Arms of the Ancient and Late KINGS of ENGLAND
and GREAT BRITAIN; with their different Supporters and Badges of Regalitie:
With the several Degrees of all the NOBILITY of this NATION, at, and since the
Conquest, Saxons and Normans, viz. The Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, by Fee, Writs of Summons and Patent; their Creation, Succession,
Matches, Issue and Arms: With some Observations of their several Places of
Honor and Trust; and what else is remarkable in any of them. By JOHN TILESON,
Esquire Anno 1647. MS. Folio. Pages 304 This spacious and beautiful MS. bound in
Blue Turkey Leather, with the Leaves gilt, Writing very fair, and Arms of our
Kings, with near seven hundred of our Nobility from the Conquest, all blazoned
in their proper Colors; is to be seen among the MS. Collections, in the Hands
of Mr. Thomas Osborne, for whom this British Librarian is printed. The Author's
Name was first written Tilson, but, by Correction, as it is above. We find that
his particular Friend, or Patron, was John Lord Byron, whose singular Favors
to him, has, says he, fol 299. for ever obliged me to himself and Family. Though
he mentions none of the Nobility, created later than the Year 1645, and the
Date in the Title Page of the Volume, is but two Years later; we observe, by
his mentioning the Death of Francis Lord Cottington, fol. 288, That he must
have writ the Conclusion of this Book, at least, so late as the Year 1652. If
some few Mistakes have escaped in the Blazonry, or in the Historical Account of
the Alliances and Issue, they are not greater, perhaps, than what might be
reasonably expected in any other Heraldical Work, where such Distinctions are
undertaken; especially in such Extent of Time, and, consequently, such Variety
of Families.
.
ABOUT the Margins of this Title Page, we have the Arms of Twenty of our Kings
before the Conquest, painted in their proper Colors; that is, from Egbert down
to Harold, who lost the Kingdom to William the Norman. And the Preface, is A
Discourse concerning the Nobility of England, according to the Laws of England.
The beginning whereof, for a Taste of the Author, we shall here give in his own
Words. "As in the Body natural, for the Preservation of the whole, the
different Temperature of Humors, and Offices in several Members, are
requisite: So likewise in the Body Civil, or Politic, different Estates and
Degrees among Men have been judged as necessary. And as the Elements cannot be
intermingled one with another, except it be by an unequal Proportion and
Temperature: So Civil Societies cannot possibly be preserved, but by a certain
Inequality; which is apparent by the different Forms of Government, observed
and established in all Countries: And the ancient Policy of this Realm of
England, being governed by Royalty, ever since it was known to be an inhabited
Piece of Earth, has admitted of a Threefold Division of Persons, viz. King,
Nobles, and Commons; which has been a Government very Ancient, and fully
understood, both by Magistrates and People; and rooted in Men's Affections both
by long habituated Exercise, and the well approved Benefits received thereby."

After this, he proceeds to distinguish the several Degrees, or Titles of
Honor; and first of the King, and his Sovereign Power. That many of his Rights
are termed Flowers of the Crown; in which respect Bracton, speaking of them,
says, The King's material Crown is adorned with Flowers. Also, that some of his
Rights are by positive, or written Laws; others by right of Custom. And that
the Regalia, or Ensigns of Royalty, especially the Crown, Scepter, Purple Robe,
and Golden Ball, are as old among us, as King Arthur, according to the
Testimony of Leland. Next he shows, That the Nobility, comprehend the Prince,
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons; as the Commons, consist of
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Artificers, and Laborers. Which last are
not here further spoken of, this Work confining itself to the superior
Nobility. Therefore, having given us the Derivation of Nobilitas, from the Word
Nosco, as one known, or notable for his Virtue, or the reward of it, he
distinguishes, why they are called Peers, and the whole Body of them the
Baronage; what difference there is in their Parliament Robes; how they are
tried by the whole Body, and in what Cases they retain both their Christian and
Surnames; then descends more particularly to their several Degrees. Here we
see, That the Title of Prince, was called by the Saxons, Aetheling: That the
Normans only called him the King's Son, and the first begotten of the King of
England, till King Edward I. summoned his Son Edward to Parliament, by the
Title of Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester; and Edward III. created his Son
Duke of Cornwall, since which this Title has been appropriated to the King's
first Son. That as for the Title of Duke, it was first of Charge and Office,
not of Dignity, after the Abolition of the Roman Government here; and that this
Degree in the Days of Constantine was inferior to that of Comites; moreover,
upon what Conditions this Title of Duke was conferred, as also that of Earl, or
what Qualifications were required in them; namely, Faithfulness and Valor
approved, with the Protection of Widows and Orphans; that People, under their
Regiment, might with Joy continue in Peace. That the Title began under Otho;
but in England, not before King Edward III. created his Son Edward aforesaid,
and also his two other Sons; from which time we have had Hereditary Dukes. That
the Marquess was not known to us, till King Richard II. made his Minion Robert
Vere Earl of Oxford, Marquess of Dublin; and became not till then a Title of
Honor, for before, those who governed the Marches, were commonly called Lord
Marcheres. The Title of Earl, some think to be derived from the Germans, who
had their Comites according to Tacitus; but others think it came from the
Romans, and that before Constantine the Great, the Name of Comes was not used
as a Title of Honor. That after the dissolution of the Roman Empire, this
Title of Earls was retained by our English Saxons; and the Danes termed them by
a Word, signifying Honorable, which, somewhat mollified, agrees with what we
at present call them. That they became not, before the Normans got footing
here, Feudal, Hereditary and Patrimonial, as appears by Domesday-Book. After
that, they were created with the Additional Name of a Place, and Assignment of
the Third Penny of the Shire, as appears by the Empress Maud's Creation (the
most ancient Form which has been seen) of Geoffrey Mandevill, Earl of Essex.
And King John was the first we meet with, who used the Cincture of a Sword in
their Creation, and they waited at his Table there with it by their Side. It
was the next Age before the Imposition of a Chaplet, Cap of Honor with a
Circlet of Gold came up, which after that, as at this Day, was turned into a
Coronet with Rays or Points. The Earls Palatine were reckoned most Honorable,
and Hugh Lupus held the Earldom of Chester, as freely by the Sword, as the King
held England by the Crown. To which was added, the distinction of bearing the
Sword at Coronations; called Curtana, which being blunt betokened Mercy. This
Earl ordained Barons and Abbots to serve in his Parliament, who with him made
Laws for the Government of his County. Earldoms of Title without Place, as the
Earl Marshal of England, began under King Richard II. who gave that Title to
Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham. As for Viscounts, it is also an old Name of
Office, but a new one of Dignity; not being known among us for a Title of
Honor before King Henry VI. who created John Lord Beaumont, Viscount Beaumont.
Here it is remarked, That after a Man is created an Earl or Viscount, or any
other Title of Honor above them, his Title becomes parcel of his Name, and not
an Addition only, and in all Legal Proceedings he must be styled by that
Dignity. Lastly, We come to the Barons. And here it is observed that our ancient
Britons did not acknowledge the Name, and that in the English Saxon Laws it is
not seen: That in the Saxon Glossary of Alfricus, among the Vocables or Terms
of Honor; Dominus is translated Laford, which we have contracted into Lord,
and the Danes called their Free Lords, who equaled the Barons of our Time,
Thani. And that in a Fragment of the Laws of Canute, was the first mention of a
Baron with us; yet therein, according to the Varieties of Copies, is
indifferently read, Virones, Barons, and Thani. The Service of these Barons
appears from the Laws of William the Conqueror, into which those Ordinances of
Canute are translated in the Norman Tongue, where it being ordained, That the
Heriot or Relevies should be moderate, and those of an Earl, mentioned, it
appears that some of those Accoutrements (for the Wars) to be raised by the
Barons, were but half in proportion; as, four Horses, two Swords, four Spears,
and four Targets; but for the rest, only one Helmet, one Coat of Mail, and in
Money only 50 Mances or Marks of Gold, which are but a fourth Part. Also after
the coming of the Normans, Valvasors and Thanes were ranged in Degree next
after Barons; and our learned Interpreters have thought the Dignity of Barons
was comprehended under the Valvasores Majores, afterward called Capitanii, and
that the like Dignity was, by the English Saxons before the Conquest called
Thanes, according to Lambert in his Perambulation of Kent. Neither was the Name
of Baron then granted to be of great Honor, some Earls having in those Days
their Barons under them, of which here are Examples produced. A few Years after
they were accounted Barons, who held an entire Barony, consisting of 13 Knights
Fees and one Third, which amounted to 400 Marks yearly: A Knight's Fee
consisting of 12 Carves of Land, a Carve of 8 Oxgangs, an Oxgang of 15 Acres.
These Baronies were held, some of the King, and those who had them of this
Value, were taken for Barons by Fee, to which was annexed a Dignity with
Jurisdiction; which the Court Barons in some sort prove. In King Henry IIId's
days, there were reckoned in England 150 Baronies. But this Dignity attained to
its highest Honor after that King in the 49th Year of his Reign, summoned a
select Number to the Parliament, and they of the most ancient Families and
excellent Qualifications, and decreed that none other should come; which his
Son Edward I. also constantly observed. Hence they were only accounted Barons,
whom the King by such Writs of Summons did call to Parliament. And it is
observed, to the great Glory of this King Edward, that he did always direct his
said Writs to those of the best Families, and whose Wisdom and Virtues were
answerable: But passed over their Sons after their Death, if they were not
equal to their Parents in Understanding and all other commendable Qualities.
Here we have some curious Questions debated upon this Head, as, Whether a
Barony by Writ, may descend from the Ancestor to the Heir? Whether it may
descend to the Heir Female, who is nearer akin than the Males? And whether, if
it may descend to such Females, their Husbands may assume the Style and Dignity
of such a Barony. Herein are Arguments produced on both sides of these
Questions, after which follow others, to compound the Controversy, by our
Author. So from the Nature, Quality and State of Barons by Writ, he passes to
Barons by Creation, begun by King Richard II. And for the Explanation of this
Dignity, here also are some Questions resolved. Then he proceeds to discourse
of Barons by Tenure; or such as held any Honor, Castle, or Manor, as the Head
of their Barony, by Barony, or Grand Serjeanty: That they were Spiritual and
Temporal, the former of whom having lost their Seat in Parliament, 17 Car. he
says nothing more of them; but of the Temporal Barons by Tenure, having shown
that such there were, he lays down some Arguments and Examples to determine the
Question, Whether after alienating the Lands by which they hold, they can
retain their Title and Dignity? Thus having touched upon the Original, Nature
and different Degrees of our Peerage, he concludes, with some Observations upon
their Privileges, this his Preface, consisting of Twenty-six Pages.

The Work begins with a Display in one Leaf, of the Arms of our Kingdom under
its different Governments, in five several Scutcheons, representing in their
proper Colors, those of the Saxons, Romans, Britons, Danes, and the Normans in
the middle. So we turn over, and begin with the Nobility under William the
Conqueror; and first with Edgar Etheling, who was Earl of Oxford before, and at
the coming of the said William into England. A short Account being given of
this Earl, and his Arms painted on the side of it, we have two other
contemporary Nobles treated of after the like Manner, in the same Page; and
this regular Method of Historizing three Noblemen in every Page, with the
Blazonry of their Arms in the Margin, except where the Pages and Scutcheons are
not filled up, which is very rare, is pursued through every Reign. That of the
Conqueror, taking up 28 Pages, consequently gives account of 84 Noblemen. After
this, the Noblemen of every Reign, are led up by the Arms of every King then
reigning, in the middle of a Blank Leaf, and nothing more written under them
than the Name of the King. We observe no Quarterings in the King's Arms, from
the Conquest, till we come to Edward III. nor any Supporters of, or Badges over
them, till then: But from hence they constantly appear, changing with the
several Lines or Races of the said Kings. In the Reigns of William aforesaid,
King James, and King Charles, are the greatest Number of Noblemen; in which
last, Baron Sutton is the last mentioned; and in the Reigns of Henry IV.
Richard III. Henry VII. Edward VI. Mary and Elizabeth, especially as this last
reigned so long, there are the fewest Noblemen mentioned. Other Observations
upon this MS. and Deductions from them, might be made; but at this Time, these
may suffice in this Place.

XX. ACADEMIARUM EXAMEN, or The EXAMINATION of ACADEMIES. Wherein is discussed
and examined the Matter, Method and Customs of Academic and Scholastic
Learning, and the Insufficiency thereof discovered and laid open. As also some
Expedients proposed for the Reforming of Schools, and the perfecting and
promoting of all kind of Science: Offered to the Judgments of all those who
love the proficiency of Arts and Sciences and the Advancement of Learning. By
JOHN WEBSTER. Quarto, 1654. Pages 110.
THE Author Dedicates this Tract to Major General Lambert, having had
experimental Knowledge and Trial of his Abilities, for the reforming of
Academies, and of his sincere Affection and unparalled Love to Learning.

In his Epistle, To all who truly love the Advancement of Learning in the
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, or elsewhere; he anticipates several
Objections, which might be raised against so private a Person as himself, for
undertaking thus freely, to handle an Argument of this public Nature and
Consequence. And one of them, where he suggests he should be looked upon as a
Leveller; he answers, by saying, "He must needs so far own Levelling, that he
holds plain Dealing to be a Jewel, and that plain Ways seem to him most secure
and comfortable: That the Prelacy, though it sought to bow him, could not break
him: That though the Presbyterian Pride did seem to threaten him, it could not
hurt him; and the Independent Forms could never inform him beyond the Basis of
a better Building than Man can erect. That the spoil of Academies could never
please his Mind, nor should they fill his Purse. That he was no Dean, nor
Master, President, nor Provost; Fellow, nor Pensioner; nor had Tithes
appropriate, or impropriate; Augmentation, or State Pay. That all the Levelling
in these Times, had not mounted him, nor could they make him fall lower: And he
that would raise himself by the Ruins of others, or warm himself by the burning
of Schools, he wishes no greater Plague than his own Ignorance, or that he may
ever gain more Knowledge than to live to repent." There are certainly many good
Observations in the Book; and if a few Animadversions might by Critical
Examiners, be made upon his Style in some Places, and, perhaps, his Choice of
exceptionable Matter, or the Efficacy of his Expedients, for the Reformation
proposed; yet the Work will still demand regard for the eminency of the
Attempt, and a Subject of such great Importance, may render the most imperfect
Hints in it so, to Heads which can raise out of them more effectual
Improvements. But indeed, this Matter is not feebly recommended by the Author
himself, as in other Parts of the Work, so in the Conclusion of the Epistle,
wherein having informed us, That he intends not to asperse the Person of any,
nor to traduce or calumniate the Academies themselves; but only the Corruptions
which Time and Negligence have introduced there, and simply to attempt some
Reformation, not Eradication of their Customs and Learning: "He adds, which,
though I have, peradventure, but weakly managed, yet I hope my poor Mite, with
the Candid and Ingenious, will be accepted; for the rest, I value them not; and
I entreat the more able to supply, what my want of Strength has left
incomplete. I have rather intended this as an Essay, to break the Ice to some
more able Judgment, than as sufficient of itself to perform what is aimed at;
because I have neither performed what I should have done, nor what I could, but
only traced out some few clear Things, as a guide to higher and more noble
Undertakings."

After some Verses, by his Friends, in praise of the Author and his Work, he
enters upon it, divided under Eleven Chapters, in the following Manner. I. Of
the general Ends of erecting Public Schools; under which, he tells us; "If the
Academies had kept within their own Sphere, and only taught Human Science, and
had not, in Pride and Vainglory, mounted into the Chariot of the Sun like
Phaeton; they had then, neither disordered, nor injured Theology, that is above
them, nor the Things of Nature, which they account below them." II. Of the
Division of Academic Learning, and first of School Theology. Hence, having
spoken of Perplexities wherein the presumptuous Imaginations of Mankind have
ensnared and entangled themselves, he proceeds to, III. The Division of Human
Learning; and first of Tongues, or Languages. Herein the greatest Objection is,
the making some Sciences merely speculative; as Philosophy, according to that
of Seneca; Nostraque erat Philosophia, facta Philologia est, ex qua, disputare
dicemus, non vivere; and the like of Mathematics. Then he proceeds to divide
the Sciences in a manner most commodious for his Purpose; beginning with those
subservient or conducive to others, as Grammar; under which he commends Dr.
Webb's Enterprise of teaching the Latin Tongue, by an easy Clausulary Method;
and the elaborate Pains of Mr. Brinsley. So descends to the recommendation of
Hieroglyphical, Emblematical, Symbolical and Cryptographical Learning, all
relative to Grammar; inferrable from the Labors of Oughtred, Harrington,
Spanheim, Porta, Trithemius, Agrippa, Claramuel, Silenus, and Friar Bacon, with
the like Praises of a Universal Character, Dactylogy, the Real Character of the
Chinese, and Jacob Behmen's Language of Nature. After his Observations upon
these Relatives to Grammar, he goes on to discourse in the IV. Chapter, Of
Logic. And here shows what a Civil War of Words it is made; the Imperfections
of Aristotle's System, and of Logic itself; with the Consequence of Tully's
Alphabetical way of Syllogizing, and concludes with Lord Bacon's Opinion of
Logic, as it is abused. So we come to V. The Mathematical Sciences. And here he
complains how shamefully the Foundation-Stone to this great Building,
Arithmetic, has been neglected or thrown aside by our Academic Masters, and but
for some private Spirits, such as Napier, Briggs, Oughtred and a few others, it
had lain as a Garden unweeded. The like is observed of Geometry; also, how
lately, by how few, and those Foreigners, any Optical Improvements appeared.
That Music has indeed had some Pains and Honor showed to that Part of it,
which is the concomitant of, or Spur to Voluptuousness; which is the Companion
of Melancholics, Fantastics, Courtiers, Ladies, Taverns, and Taphouses. But any
higher Advancements of it, for discovering natural Knowledge, and the Harmony
of the Universe remains unattempted. The Absurdities of our Scholastic Systems
of Astronomy, are next largely laid open; as that the Earth is the Center of
the Universe, and the heavenly Orbs immutable; that they are solid Bodies, the
Velocity of the Tenth Sphere, and of the Eighth, or Starry Sphere. In
Cosmography the Deficiences are next mentioned, especially in the mutual
Correspondence and Application of the Heavens and Earth; nor are the Theorems
of Hydrography brought into Practice, whereby Men might be made able for
Navigation. Astrology, notwithstanding all the Derogation of the Schools, and
Discredit brought upon it, by the Ignorance and Knavery of pretended Sciolists,
our Author recommends as a laudable and profitable Study; and arraigns the
negligence of Universities for having so little regarded the Improvement of
Statics, Architecture, Pneumatithmy, Stratarithmetry, and the rest enumerated
by the learned Dr. Dee in his Preface to Euclid. Hence we pass VI. To
Scholastic Philosophy. Herein Aristotle is pulled to pieces, from the beginning
to the end, and Reasons drawn for denying the Palm to the Peripatetic
Philosophy, from the uncertainty we are in, both as to his Books and Doctrine,
as also the defectiveness of those which we least doubt to be his; whence we
are led to observe, in what Parts of Physical Knowledge the Schools are most
deficient, and these are Natural Magic, Chemistry, Medicine, Anatomy, Surgery,
and Physiognomy, Celestial and Subcoelestial, Oneirocratics; besides the
Magnetical Philosophy, for which Dr. Gilbert, Ridley, Carpenter, Barlow and
Cabaeus, are so much commended; and the Atomical Learning, revived by
Descartes, and improved by Magnenus, Regius, White, Digby, Phocyllides,
Holwarda, and others. Then we proceed, VII. To Metaphysics, Ethics, Politics,
Oeconomics, Poesy and Oratory. Where having shown what airy, insufficient,
delusive, and mere Ornamental Assistances they are made, and thus run over some
defects of Academic Learning, though not all, intimating that a great Part
deserves to be eradicated, some reformed, and all meliorated in our said
Schools, he moves on to VIII. Their Customs and Method, leaving their Manners
and Maintenance to others. Here the first Objection is, that though there are
diverse Houses in one University; yet all Students must follow one another like
Carriers Horses in one accustomed Path. The second, is the slothful Performance
of their Scholastic Exercises, their Public Acts being kept but four Times in a
Year. 3. The Injury of tying all Men to one set Course of Years, before they
can receive their Degrees. 4. The ridiculous Levity of their historical
Personations in the performance of their Exercises. 5. Their empty and windy
Disputations therein, without any Foundation from Industry, or practical
Experience. 6. Their Confinement in all Exercises to the Latin Tongue. 7. Too
much admiring Antiquity. 8. Being bound in with multiplicity of Voices. 9.
Adhering to Authority, especially of Aristotle. 10. The Immethodical Course of
instructing Youth in Logic and Natural Philosophy, before they have tasted the
Rudiments of Mathematical Knowledge: But as before an old Building is
demolished, a Platform is usually devised for a better. So our Author in Cap.
IX. Offers some Expedients or Remedies in Theology, Grammar, Logic and
Mathematics; wherein, though he thinks what he has before produced for
demonstrating the ill Composure of the Scholastic Fabric of Learning, not far
from the Truth, and though he here acknowledges his own Insufficiency to make a
more serviceable Substitution: yet, In magnis, voluisse, sat est. He will do
his Endeavor, and hopes that abler Hands will supply his Defects. Having
offered his said Means for regulating the Study of these Sciences, he continues
after the like manner, to treat in Cap. X. Of some Helps in Natural Philosophy;
in which he highly celebrates the Writings of Dr. Flud. So gives us lastly, in
Cap. XI. Some Expedients concerning their Custom and Method: And hopes they
will be acceptable till better be found out.

XXI. PLUS ULTRA: or, The Progress and Advancement of KNOWLEDGE since the Days
of Aristotle: In an Account of some of the most remarkable late Improvements of
practical, useful Learning, to encourage Philosophical Endeavors: Occasioned
by a Conference with one of the notional Way. By JOS. GLANVILL, 8vo. 1668.
Pages 149. Besides Dedication and Preface.
THE Intention of this Treatise is, by assembling such a Variety as it
contains, of new Improvements in all Sciences, to raise able and pregnant Heads
from a drousy Acquiescence in the Discoveries of former Times, and tempt them
from those Modern Advancements, with Encouragements to proceed. And though the
Author intends not a full History of the said Improvements, and their Authors;
yet the most remarkable of them are instanced, at least so far as may serve his
aim of confuting his Antagonist, and exciting Philosophical Endeavors: In
which he has has a principal regard to the Royal Society, by giving a succinct
Account of the Purposes and Productions of that Illustrious Assembly, for the
Information of such as have not met with their excellent History.

After his Dedication to William Bishop of Bath and Wells, and his Preface to
the Clergy of that Diocese, we come to the Work itself; which, in the running
Title, is called, Modern Improvements of useful Knowledge; and is divided into
Eighteen Chapters, though the whole is written by way of Letter to a Friend. The
first Chapter containing his Introduction, shows the Occasion of writing this
Treatise, to have proceeded from a Dispute the Author had with an old Clergyman
in his Neighborhood His Name was as we find elsewhere, Dr. Robert Cross,
Rector of Chue in Somersetshire, in which Country, our Author Glanvill was
Rector of Bath, afterward Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles II. and
Prebendary of Worcester. A. Wood says of him, "That he was a Person of more
than ordinary Parts, of a quick, warm, spruce and gay Fancy, and was more
lucky, at least in his own Judgment, in his first Hints and Thoughts of Things,
than in his after Notions. He had a very tenacious Memory, and was a great
Master of the English Language, expressing himself therein with easy Fluency,
and in a manly, yet withal a smooth Style." Though the said Dr. Cross wrote a
Book against this Plus Ultra, he could not get it printed; and though Dr. Stubbes
also wrote another against it, the same was not much regarded. See a further
Account of this Plus Ultra in the Philos. Transactions. No. 36.
, who was so wedded to the Peripatetic Philosophy, and extolled Aristotle so
far above all Comparison, as to contend, "That he had more Advantages for
Knowledge, than either the Royal Society, or all the present Age." But, says
our Author, in the Conclusion of this Chapter, "As my Lord Bacon observes well,
Philosophy as well as Faith must be shown by its Works: And if the Moderns
cannot show more of the Works of their Philosophy in six Years, than the
Aristotelians can produce of theirs in more than thrice so many hundred, let
them be loaded with all that Contempt, which is usually the reward of vain and
unprofitable Projectors." Chap. 2. Is upon the Ways of improving useful
Knowledge, First, by enlarging the History of Things, and next by improving
Intercourse and Communications: Also upon the Advantages of this Age, from the
great Advancements of Chemistry and Anatomy. Here we have a brief recital of
the many Discoveries made in the Body of Man, and the Names of the Physicians
who made them; more particularly, of the Circulation and Transfusion of the
Blood. Chap. 3. On the Advantage of late Times from the Improvements of
Mathematics, particularly in Arithmetic, by Logarithms, Napier's Bones, and
Decimals; also in Algebra and Geometry, and by whom they have been improved.
Chap. 4. Is upon the Improvements, more particularly in Geometry, by Des
Carts, Vieta, Dr. Wallis, Harriot and Oughtred. Chap. 5. The late Improvements
of Astronomy; in the Performances of John de Sacro Bosco, Regiomontanus, who
published the first Ephemerides, Clavius, Tycho Brahe, Copernicus, Galilaeo,
Jacobus Metius, Inventor of the Telescope, Scheiner, Kepler, Bullialdus,
Hevelius, and several others, ending with Dr. Seth Ward, Bishop of Sarum, who
had demonstratively proved the Elliptical Hypothesis. Chap. 16. Recites the
Improvements of Optics and Geography. Here we learn that Roger Bacon so much
commended, by Picus Mirandula and Vossius, wrote accutely of Optics; by what
Hands Dioptrics also were improved, and that in Geography likewise,
Improvements have been great, as may be found, by comparing the Works of some
Moderns here named, with the best Remains of the Ancients. Chap. 7. Is upon the
Aids of useful Knowledge by Instruments, as the Telescope, Microscope and
Thermometer. Chap. 8. Of the Barometer and Air Pump; and what Advantages we
have and may further expect from them. Chap. 9. The Credit of Optic Glasses
vindicated against his Antagonist. Chap. 10. Our Advantages for Knowledge from
Modern Improvements of Natural History; in the Heavens, Air, Earth; Waters, by
several Hands, and the subterraneous World, by Kercher. In Plants also by
several, and Trees, particularly Mr. Evelyn, from whose Elysium Britannicum
greater Things were to be expected, as he has already obliged the World with
many other Things on Sculpture, Picture, Architecture, etc. Also in Animals,
and chiefly Man: That all the Heads of Natural History, have received Aids from
the famous Verulam, who led the way to substantial Wisdom, and has given most
excellent Directions, for the Method of such an History of Nature. Chap. 11.
The Advantages of late Ages for spreading of Knowledge, by Printing the Compass
and the Royal Society. Chap. 12. Of the Royal Society, the Reasons of the
Institution and their Designs, with an Answer to the Question, what have they
done? Chap. 13. An Account of what has been done by the Illustrious Mr. Boil,
for the Promotion of useful Knowledge; giving an Account of the Books he had
published, and what Knowledge he had advanced in them. Chap. 14. Gives a
further Account of the Works, Mr. Boil had by him unpublished, for the
Advantage and Improvement of real Knowledge; and what Reasons there were to
hope for great Things from the Royal Society. Chap. 15. The Absurdity of making
Comparisons, between the Advantages Aristotle had for Knowledge, and those of
later Ages. Chap. 16. The Reason of some Men's superstitious Adherence to the
notional way, and of the Disputer who gave occasion to this Discourse. Chap.
17. Treats more particularly of the Peripatetic Philosophy, and Aristotle, as
he concerns the Universities. Lastly, in Chap. 18. We have some Arguments of
our Author with his Antagonist about the Prophets and Scriptures; particularly,
that God was pleased in his Inspirations, to apply himself much to the
Imagination of the Prophets. Then comes the Conclusion, containing Observations
about the Censure of Atheism, applied to Philosophical Men; with the Author's
Apology to the Royal Society, and other generous Philosophers.

XXII. The Institution, Laws and Ceremonies of the most Noble ORDER of the
GARTER: Collected and digested into one Body, by ELIAS ASHMOLE, of the Middle
Temple, Esquire Windsor Herald at Arms: A Work furnished with Variety of Matter,
relating to Honor and Noblesse. Fol. 1672. Pages 720, besides the Appendix.
THIS elaborate and costly Performance being adorned with fifty Copper Plates,
etch'd by the famous Hollar, might have still been more complete, by that
further Addition to the Lives of the Knights Companions, which our Author
intended, had not some malicious Insinuations withheld the Encouragement, he
was very near attaining, to re-imburse his Expenses therein; as we have learned
from his own Words, both in Print and Manuscript His Words in Print are these.
"We once intended a full and entire History of the Lives of these Noble
Founders, and to that purpose made a large and chargeable Collection out of the
Records in the Tower of London, and elsewhere, of all that we could find worthy
to be remembered in them; in which we spent most part of the Years 1657, 1658,
1659. But this our Design being afterward represented (20 Feb. Anno 14 Car.
II.) to the present Sovereign and Knights Companions, by the late Chancellor of
the Order, through the wrong End of the Perspective; we thereby received so
great Discouragement, as caused us to wave it, and indeed resolved wholly to
lay it aside. Nevertheless, upon other Thoughts, we are content to let in a
glimpse, of what may be improved to a far greater Light; and from that Stock of
Collections have drawn out some few Things relating to the Founder, and first
25 Knights Companions; particularly, their Honors, Martial Employments, famous
Exploits, Matches, Issues and Deaths; therein laying down only Matter of Fact,
and Materials for History, without Deductions or Observations: All which we
shall deliver with the plainness there found, being unwilling to add other
Rhetorical Flourishes, lest we might withal cast some blemish upon the native
Beauty of Truth." Order of the Garter, fol. 643.

But from a MS. of his own Writing, we find Mr. Ashmole first took this Work of
the Garter into Consideration about the Year 1655: That the Charges of his
Collections for it, amounted to 500 l. before the Restoration, and to no
inconsiderable Sum after it: Yet observing how meagre the Memorials were, which
had been preserved of the Ancient Companions; he petitioned the King in August
1660, that his Majesty would add to the other Officers of the Order, a
particular Historiographer and a Remembrancer, with the Salary of only 100 l.
per Ann. as necessary to transmit their Noble Companions for the future more
suitably to Posterity; and modestly hoped to have the same bestowed upon
himself, as what might bring some Authority to his Performance, lighten his
Charges, and raise him above the detriment of Censure. King Charles, having
been informed of his Reasons, Labor, Expenses and Qualifications, signed a
Warrant for the same, directed to Sir Henry de Vic, Chancellor of the Order,
authorizing the Patent to be passed under the Seal thereof. But the said
Chancellor refused to pass it, under pretense of Mr. Ashmole's Irregularity in
procuring it, and not only alleged he ought to have obtained his first Grant
by the Hand of the said Chancellor, and the Chapter, that is, (as Mr. Ashmole
himself words it) have sought it of those who would obstruct it; but in Feb.
1661, laid an Information thereof before the Chapter then held, and Mr. Ashmole
was not admitted either to make a Defense of himself, or show the Advantages of
the Office proposed, so it was laid aside; and he presented a Draught in
Writing of the Objections there made against such an Institution, and his
Answers thereto, which he dedicated in Dec. 1662, to the Lord Chancellor of
England. From which MS. Of his Arguments for an Historiographer and
Remembrancer to the Order of the Garter, we have extracted thus much of this
Paragraph; and shall only observe, that such a discouragement of an Attempt to
write Histories and Lives of such Great Men, in the complete Circuit of their
Stories, seems no ways wonderful. For this is Biography in its strict Sense;
which is of a searching Nature; and, however useful or acceptable to the
generality, as irksome to some Thoughts, as Light to some Eyes; yea, may be as
terrible to some among the Living, as to others, the Expectation of being
anatomized when they are dead. However King Charles rewarded this Author, who
thus ennobled even the most Noble Order like a Prince, who deserved to be, as
he was, the Sovereign thereof, with Places of above a Thousand Pounds a Year;
and not long after the Book was published, and inscribed to his Majesty, Mr.
Ashmole further received, a Privy Seal out of the Custom of Paper, for Four
Hundred Pounds, as we find in the Diary, he left behind him, of his own Life.


.

The Work itself, is, not without some seeming Respect to the Subjects of it,
distinguished into Twenty-six Chapters, and they subdivided into several Heads,
containing many curious Remarks and Instructions of Antiquity; and not only
concerning the Legal and Ceremonial Parts of this Order, but of many other
Institutions, Customs, Habits and Forms of Honorable Distinction among
Mankind: As may be best seen by the Particulars of those Chapters and Heads,
which are here drawn together, with some necessary Enlargements, from the
Bodies also of those Heads; that the Contents of the Book may be the better
known, and our Readers accommodated with the greater Variety of Intelligence.

Chap. I. Treats of Knighthood in general. Which begins with a Section upon
Virtue and Honor; showing that Virtue is encouraged by Reward, and that Honor
is the reward of Military Virtue; that they were deified by the Romans, who
built them various Temples; and we have here the Sculpture of one erected for
Virtue, which stood before that of Honor, mystically implying that Honor was
not to be attained by any other ways than by Virtue. Hence we proceed to the
Antiquity of Knighthood among the Greeks. The Foundation of the Equestrian
Order among the Romans: From thence to the Modern Degrees of Knighthood, as
Bachelor, Bannerets, Bath and Baronets. The Etymology of Eques, Miles,
Chevalier, Ritter and Sir: Lydgate's Verses on them and others. The Ensigns and
Ornaments of this Dignity among other Nations; Qualifications for it; the
various Ceremonies used in conferring it, with a List of the Knights made Anno
34 Edw. I. lastly the Dignity, Honor and Renown thereof.

Chap. II. Of the Religious Orders of Knighthood in Christendom. And first of
the Societies among the Ancients, analogous to the Orders of Knighthood. The
Christian Institution thereof, and Division of them into Religious and
Military. Of Ecclesiastical Foundations depending on Military Orders. A brief
Account of Forty-six Religious Orders of Knighthood in Christendom, with a
Sculpture of their Ensigns or Bagdes.

Chap. III. Of Military Orders. There we have also a brief Account of Forty-six
Orders in Christendom, absolutely Military, beginning with the Knights of the
Round Table, and a Sculpture of their several Ensigns. Hence we pass to the
Knights in the West Indies, and the Feminine Cavaliers of the Torch in Tortosa.

Chap. IV. Of the Castle, Chapel and College of Windsor; with three Prospects
of the Castle, and six of the said Chapel of St. George in Sculpture. Of the
Dean, Canons, Clerks, and Choristers. Of the Alms Knights, and other Officers:
Endowments and Privileges.

Chap. V. The Institution of the most Noble Order of the Garter. Here we have
several Opinions touching the Occasion of the said Order, and a Refutation of
Polydore Virgil's Fiction of its rise from the King's taking up the Queen's, or
his Mistress's Garter. Hence we are led to the True Cause of this Martial
Foundation, which was to emulate King Arthur's Round Table, so we proceed to
the Time when it was instituted; and here it appearing that King Edward's Robes
for the first Feast, not being made till the 22d or beginning of the 23d Year
of his Reign, and the Statutes of the Institution fixing it in his 23d Year;
the first Feast might not be held till the 24th. Agreeable to what we read in
Fabian, and more expressly in Stow, Lilly, Speed, Segar and Seldom in one Place,
so that in Froissart, however the earliest Writer, the Institution seems
antedated six Years. Next of the Patrons of the Order; with the Honor and
Reputation thereof.

Chap. VI. Of the Statutes of the Order, and other Rules since established, to
amend and reform the first; also of the Annals of the Order.

Chap. VII. The Habits and Ensigns of the Order, with Sculptures and Medals
concerning the same, such as the Garter; the Mantle; the Surcoat; the Hood and
Cap: The Robes for the Queen and Ladies. Of Collars in general. That of the
Order. Collars of SS. The lesser George, and concerning the Assumption of this
Symbol, by the Emperor of Russia, as in his Seals here exhibited. Lastly, At
what Times the Habit is to be worn.

Chap. VIII. Of the Officers for the Service of the Order. Such as the Prelate
and Chancellor; with Letters by John Bishop of Sarum, and Sir Thomas Row; also
of Register, Garter, Black Rod, with their Office, Seal, Oath, Habits,
Privileges, Pensions and Execution by Deputies.

Chap. IX. Of their Election. Their Place of Assembly. Chapter, Right of
Nomination. The Number and Qualifications of those to be nominated, with a List
of Strangers nominated. The Scrutiny; Time, Manner and Order thereof.
Presentation thereof. The King's Considerations thereupon. That he is sole
Elector. The Scrutiny to be entered in the Annals; not to be viewed till entered.
Of Scrutinies without Election. Penalties on Knights absent at Elections.

Chap. X. Of the Investiture. The Notice given. The Knight's Reception into the
Chapter House. Ceremonies of investing him with George and Garter. Of sending
those Ensigns to the Knight Elect. The Manner of his Investiture.

Chap. XI. Preparations for the Personal Installation. That Installation gives
the Title of Founder. The Time and Place appointed for his Installment.
Commissions for the same. Letters of Summons. Warrant for the Livery of the
Order. Removal of Achievements and Plates in and over the Stalls.

Chap. XII. The Personal Installation. Beginning with the Cavalcade to Windsor.
Sir Thomas Rowe's Letter to the Knights, upon the intended Installation of King
Charles II. The Offering in the Chapel on the Eve of the Feast. The Supper.
Order of Procession to the Chapter House. Ceremonies performed there.
Proceedure to the Choir. The Ceremonies of Installation. The Order at an
Installation of several Knights. The Offering of Gold and Silver. The Grand
Dinner at Installation. Setting up the Knights Achievement. A Corollary
showing how the Ceremonies of the Order of St. Michael, are but copied from
this of St. George.

Chap. XIII. Of Installation by Proxy. The Cause of Proxies. Letters of
Procuration, Qualifications of a Proxy. Preparations for Installment.
Proceeding to the Chapter House. Transactions in it. Proceeding to the Choir.
Ceremonies there; and the Dinner.

Chap. XIV. The Signification of Election to Strangers. As when and how they
are certified of their Election. The Notice given of an Election, before
sending the Habit. Notice sent with the Habit. Certificate of Acceptance. Of
Elections not accepted.

Chap. XV. The Investiture of Strangers with the Habit and Ensigns of the
Order. The Time for sending them unlimited. Preparations for the Legation.
Ceremonies of Investiture, with the particular Narratives of several Heralds
concerning their investing some Foreign Princes. Certificates of receiving the
Order.

Chap. XVI. The Installation of a Stranger by Proxy. As to the Choice and
Nomination of a Proxy. The Proctor's Qualifications. His Letters of
Procuration. His Reception. Preparations for the Installment. His Cavalcade to
Windsor. Supper. Proceeding to the Chapter House. Ceremonies there. Proceeding
to the Choir. Ceremonies of Installation, and Dinner.

Chap. XVII. The Duties and Fees of the Knights installed. Those due to the
College at Windsor. To the Register, Garter, Black Rod and Officers of Arms. To
others of the Sovereign's Servants. Those to be paid for Strangers.

Chap. XVIII. The Grand Feast of the Order. To be celebrated on St. George's
Day; fixed to the 23d of April: Which Day is Festum Duplex. To be at Windsor
Castle. Translated to other Places. How it was neglected by King Edward VI. and
no Anniversary of St. George kept at Windsor; but a Grand Festival. Removed
from Windsor by Queen Elizabeth. Prorogation of the Grand Feast. Commissions
for the same. That it ought to be celebrated once a Year.

Chap. XIX. Preparations for the Grand Feast of the Order; by Letters of
Notice. Dispensations for not attending. Commissions of Lieutenancy and
Assistance. Warrant for removing Achievements. Scutcheons of Arms and Styles.
Ornament of the Chapel, wherein we have Chancellor Rowe's Letter to some of
the Knights to pay their Arrearages, as to the Obits of the Companions, and for
adorning the Chapel; also an Inventory of the Furniture in the Chapel and
Treasury. Of furnishing St. George's Hall; and of the Officers appointed to
attend at the Feast.

Chap. XX. The Order of the Ceremonies on the Eve of the Feast: Here we have
Observations on the ancient Vigils, and the Hora Tertia, which is our Nine in
the Morning. The Order of their Proceeding, with a curious Sculpture of the
Procession, Anno 20 Eliz. as set forth by T. Dawes, Rougecroix, and designed by
Mark Gerard, the Queen's Painter. Of their Proceeding to the Chapter House. The
opening of the Chapter. Transactions in the Chapter before the first Vespers;
Ceremonies relating to the first Vespers. The Supper on the Eve.

Chap. XXI. The Order of the Ceremonies on the Feast Day. The proceeding to the
Chapel in the Morning. To the second Service. Of the Grand Procession, with
some ancient Forms thereof. The Order of the second Service. Here we have
another Sculpture of the Grand Procession, Anno 23 Car. II. The Offering of
Gold and Silver. Their Return to the Presence Chamber. Of the Dinner on the
Feast Day. Here we have a Sculpture of all the Knights at Table, and their
Attendance in St. George's Hall. And further, five Stanza's of Verses presented
to King Henry VII. at St. George's Feast in the 3d of his Reign, as our Author
supposes by John Skeleton. Then follow the Ceremonies of the second Vespers; and
the Supper on the Evening of the Feast Day.

Chap. XXII. The Ceremonies observed on the last Day of the Feast: As their
proceeding to the Chapter House in the Morning. Proceeding of the Elect Knights
into the Choir. The Ceremonies performed at Divine Service. The Diets at some
of the Grand Feasts, with the particular Courses in several of them, or Bills
of Fare.

Chap. XXIII. The Observation of the Grand Feast by absent Knights. Of their
Injunctions to observe the same, also more particular Directions how to be
observed in Sickness. How it has been observed by absent Knights; with
Dispensations for Absence granted, during Life.

Chap. XXIV. The Degradation of a Knight Companion. First, Of a Knight
Bachelor. Then of a Knight of the Garter. Of Restoration to the Order after
Degradation.

Chap. XXV. Of the Honors paid to deceased Knights Companions; as by Masses
heretofore. The fixing on their Stalls, Plates of their Arms and Styles. The
Offering of Achievements, depositing their Mantles in the Chapter House.

Chap. XXVI. Of the Founder; the First Knights Companions and their Successors.
Here we have the Portraits at full length, in their proper Habits of King
Edward III. and his first 25 Knights Companions in one Copper-Plate. This is
followed with an Historical Account of the said King, his Wars, Issue, etc.
And, after that, the like Accounts of the said first Twenty-five Knights of the
Order, each in a distinct Section. And lastly, A Catalogue of all their
Successors, with an engraved Leaf, between every printed one, of all their
Arms. Then having made a few Remarks upon some of those Scutcheons, and given
us also a Catalogue of the Officers of the Order; the whole is closed with an
Appendix of about 25 Sheets, containing the Statutes of the Order.
Constitutions of the Officers, Bulls, Letters, Oaths, Warrants, Commissions,
Dispensations, Deputations, Receipts, Instructions, Certificates, Degradations,
etc.

The End of Number II.
XXIII. The Book of ENEYDOS, compyled by VYRGYLE; which has be translated
out of Latyne into Frenshe, and out of Frenshe reduced into English, by me
William Caxton, the 22 Day of Juyn, the Year of our Lord 1490. Fol.
THIS Work contains not an entire Version of two or three Books only of
Virgil's Aeneid, as some might imagine from the slender Bulk of the Book; nor
is it here translated into Verse, as they might also expect, in imitation of
the Original, and as nothing appears to the contrary in the Title above,
printed at the End: but it is rather a Reduction of that Epic Poem to an
historical Narrative in Prose; which, though a commendable Undertaking at that
time, to familiarize the Contents; yet, as it is but a Translation of a
Translation; as the Original itself is familiar enough now, and we have also
many better Translations, even in Verse, directly from it; the very Table of
Heads, no less than sixty-five, cannot be in this Place desirable Therefore, we
shall only refer to a Note at Bottom And first, of the French Author; who as he
begins his Work so high as the Building of Troy by Priamus, so he continues it
beyond the Slaughter of Turnus by Aeneas, to the Succession of his Son
Ascanius, and two or three Sucessions beyond. Moreover, toward the beginning
of his Work, that is, in Chapter 6, he has a Digression upon Bocace, for
relating the Story of Dido in his Fall of Princes, differently from Virgil, and
recites his Account as well as that of his Author. And in Cap. 33. he passes
over Aeneas his Descent into Hell, because it is feigned, and not to be
believed; as if several other Parts of this Story, which he has repeated, were
not as incredible as that. But to pass to the Translator and Printer, we
observe his Style to be more ornate (as he calls it) or dressed up in superfine
Words, especially of the French Extract, than we believe it would have been,
had he not submitted it to the Correction. It is more regularly printed than
that former of his, described in our last Number; as not running out, but
having the Lines all even at the Ends; and large Initials at the beginning of
every Chapter: It has also Signatures at the Bottom of the Pages, and besides
Commas and Periods, Colons and Semicolons, or what might be designed as such,
though not always placed perhaps to answer the Purpose of them.
, for a few Remarks upon the Work itself; and here recite the Translator's
Preface; which contains such observable Proofs of the fleeting Fashions in our
English Tongue, as may moderate the Conceits of those who depend upon a Style,
or Manner of Expression, more than the Matter expressed, that will not, like
most other things, become obsolete, but maintain its Perspicuity, and engage
the Taste of all Ages.

This Preface, containing near two Leaves, is as follows: "After dyverse Works
made, translated and achieved, having no Work in hand; I, sittyng in my
Study, whereas lay many dyverse Paunflettis and Bookys, happened that to my
Hand came a lytyl Book in Frenshe, which late was translated out of Latin by
some Noble Clerk of France; which Book is named Eneydos, made in Latin by
that noble Poet and great Clerk Vyrgyle. Which Book I saw over and read
therein; how after the general Destruccyon of the great Troy, Eneas departed,
beryng his old Fader Anchises upon his Sholdres, his lityl Son Yolus on his
Hand; his Wife with much other People followynge; and how he shypped and
departed, with all th Hystorye of his Adventures, that he had 'er he came to
the Achievement of his Conquest of Ytalye, as all a long shall be showed in
this present Book. In which Book I had great Playsyr, by cause of the fair and
honest Terms and Words in Frenshe; which I never saw to fore like, ne none so
playsaunt, ne so well ordered. Which Book, as me seemed, should be much
requysite to Noble Men to see, as well for the Eloquence, as the Hystoryes, how
well that many honderd Yerys passed was the said Book of Eneydos with other
Works made and learned daily in Scolis, specially in Ytalye and other Places.
Which Historye the said Vyrgyle made in Meter. And when I had advised me in
this said Book, I delybered and concluded to translate it into English, and
forthwyth took a Pen and Ynke and wrote a Leef or tweyne, which I oversawe
again to corecte it: and when I saw the fair and strange Terms therein, I
doubted that it should not please some Gentylmen, which late blamed me,
saying, that in my Translacyons I had over curyous Terms which could not be
understande of common People, and desired me to use old and homely Terms in my
Translacyons, and fayn would I satysfye every Man. And so to do took an old
Book and read therein, and certainly the English was so rude and brood, that
I could not well understande it. And also my Lord Abbot of Westmynster ded do
show to me of late certain Evydences wryton in old Englisshe, for to reduce it
into our English now usid; and certainly it was wreton in such wise, that it
was more like to Dutche than English; I could not reduce ne bring it to be
understonden. And certainly our Langage now used varyeth far from that which
was used and spoken when I was born; for we Englyssh Men ben borne under the
Domynacyon of the Moon, which is never steadfast, but ever waverynge, wexyng
one Season, and waneth and dyscreaseth another Season; and that comyne
English that is spoken in one Shyre varyeth from another. In so much, that
in my days happened that certain Merchauntes were in a Shipp in Tamyse, for to
have sailed over the Sea into Zelande; and for lack of Wind they tarried at
Forlond, and went to land for to refreshe them; and one of them named
Sheffelde, a Mercer, came into an Hows, and axed for Mete, and specially he
axed for Eggs, and the good Wife answerde, that she could speak no Frenshe; and
the Merchant was angry, for he also could speak no Frenshe, but would have
had Eggs, and she understode him not. And then at last another said, That
he would have Eyren; then the good Wife said, that she understod him well. Loo
what should a Man in these Days write, Eggs or Eyren? Certainly it is hard to
playse every Man, by cause of Dyversite and Change of Langage. For in these
Days every Man, that is in any Reputacyon in his Country, will utter his
Communicacyon and Matters in such Manners and Terms, that few Men shall
understonde them; and some honest and great Clerks have been with me, and
desired me to write the most curyous Terms that I could find. And thus
bytween plain, rude, and curious, I stand abashed. But in my Judgment, the
common Terms that be dayli used ben lyghter to be understonde than the old
ancient English. And for as much as this present Book is not for a rude
uplondyssh Man to labor therein, ne read it, but only a Clerk and a noble
Gentleman, that feleth and understondeth in Fayles of Arms, in Love, and in
noble Chyvalry; therefore in mean between both, I have reduced and translated
this said Book into our Englisshe, not over rude, ne curyous; but in such
Terms as shall be understanden by Goddys Grace according to my Copye. And if
any Man will entermete in redyng of hit, and fyndeth such Terms that he
cannot understande, late him goo read and learn Vyrgyll, or the Pystles of
Ovyde, and there he shall see and understande lightly all, if he have a good
Redar and Enformer; for this Book is not for every rude and unconnynge Man to
see, but Clerkys and very Gentylmen that understands Gentylnes and Science.
Then I pray all them that shall read in this lytyl Treatys to hold me for
excused for the translatynge of hit: For I knowleche myself ignorant of
conning to enpryse on me so hie and noble a Work. But I pray Master John
Skeleton, late created Poet Laureate in the Unyversite of Oxenforde, to oversee
and correct this said Book; and taddresse and expowne where as shall be
found fault to them that shall require it: For him I know for suffycyent to
expowne and English every Dyfficulte that is therein: For he has late
translated the Epystles of Tulle, and the Book of Dyodorus Syculus, and
diverse other Works out of Latin into Englisshe, not in rude and old
Langage, but in polysshed and ornate Terms craftily; as he that has read
Vyrgyle, Ovyde, Tullye, and all the other noble Poets and Orators, to me
unknowen: And also he has read the IX Muses, and understands their musicalle
Scyences, and to whom of them each Science is appropred: I suppose he has
dronken of Elycon's Well. Then I pray him, and such other, to correct, add,
or mynysshe, whereas he, or they, shall find fault; for I have but followed my
Copye in Frensshe, as nygh as me is possible. And if any Word be said therein
well, I am glad; and if otherwise, I submytte my said Book to their Correctyon:
which Book I present unto the hye born my tocomynge Naturell and Soverayne
Lord Arthur, by the Grace of God Prince of Walys Duc of Cornewayll and Earl of
Chester, first begoten Sone and Heyer unto our Most Dradde Natural and
Soverayn Lord and most Christian King Henry the VII. by the Grace of God Lord
King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland; byseching his noble
Grace to receyve it in Thank of me his most humble Subget and Servaunt. And I
shall pray unto Almighty God for his prosperous encreasyng in Virtue, Wysdom,
and Humanyte, that he may be egal with the most renouned of all his noble
Progenytours; and so to lyve in this present Life; that after this transitorye
Life, he, and we all, may come to everlastynge Life in Heven; Amen."

XXIV. The HISTORY of Cambria, now called WALES; a Part of the most famous
Yland of BRYTAINE; written in the British Language above Two Hundred Years
past: Translated into English by H. LHOYD, Gent. Corrected, augmented, and
continued out of Records and best approved Authors, by DAVID POWEL, Doctor in
Divinity. Quarto. 1584.
THOUGH there is no Date in the Title Page of this History, we have ventured to
add the same that appears at the End of the Dedication, which is made thereof
to the Right Worshipful Sir Philip Sidney, by the said Dr. Powel. Herein, this
Editor, instead of extolling the noble Gifts and Virtues in his said Patron,
which were conspicuous to all Men, exhorts him to the diligent Exercise of
them; and particularly, from those domestic Examples, his noble Father,
constantly inclined more to benefit even Wales and Ireland, besides his own
Country, than himself; and his honorable Father-in-Law, Sir Francis
Walsingham, the Queen's Chief Secretary; whose Zeal for God's Glory, and Love
of those who feared him unfeignedly, was well known to the World. "Follow, says
he, their Footsteps, with the Remembrance of that noble House out of which you
are descended by your honorable Mother; and then you cannot do amiss. Labor,
by the Example of your Father, to discover, and bring to light, the Acts of the
famous Men of elder Times, who, with Conference of the State and Government of
all Ages, will bring you to the perfect Experience of those things that you
have learned out of Aristotle, Plato, and Cicero, by your Travel in Philosophy.
Your Father, with his great Expenses and Labor, having procured and gotten to
his hands the Histories of Wales and Ireland (which Countries for many Years
with great Love and Commendation he governed) committed unto me this of Wales,
to be set forth in Print, with Direction to proceed therein, and necessary
Books for the doing thereof. And although I was unsufficient for doing of it, yet
I have done mine Endeavor; and now do present the same unto your Worship, as
by good Reason due to the Son and Heir of Him that was the Procurer and Bringer
of it to light," etc.

From the Editor's Epistle to the Reader, his Notes on the History, and the
Beginning thereof itself, we learn, That this Succession of the British Princes
was the Work of Carodoc of Lancarvan, from the Reign of Cadwalader, the last
British Monarch, over the whole Island, (who fled into Armorica, or Bretagne,
Anno 680, and died at Rome eight Years after, with whose Departure to that Part
of France, and a List of the British Kings ruling there, this History begins)
down to some Years of Owen Gwyneth's Reign over that Part of the Island, now
called Wales; that is to the Year 1157, or the 3d of Henry II. King of England,
as may be seen, p. 206. The Continuation which follows for 113 Years, from that
time, was yearly registered in the Abbeys of Conway and Stratflur, down to the
Year 1270; or the 54th of our Henry III. which was a little before the Death of
the last Lhewelyn; and here ends this British Chronicle; as appears p. 327.
Many Copies remained of it, at this time, in Wales; most of them 200 Years old;
and one of them coming to the hands of Mr. Humphrey Lhoyd, a learned and
skillful Antiquary, he translated it into clear smooth English, and continued
it chiefly out of Matt. Paris, and Nicholas Trivet, to the Slaughter of the
said Prince Lhewelyn, the last of British Blood who had the Dominion of Wales,
in 1282; or the tenth of our Edward I. that is, to page 375 of this Volume. But
before this Translation and Continuation were thoroughly polished by the said
H. Lhoyd, he was taken away by Death, in the Flower of his Time. Yet the Copy
of his Labor being procured, and preserved by Sir Henry Sidney, Lord President
of Wales, he preferred our Editor, Dr. Powel, to the Care of its Publication;
who, procuring all the printed Histories which treated of Wales, and the Use of
all John Stow's MS. Histories, and many Books of British Pedegrees from the
Lord Burghley, with his Authority for searching all the Records; did not only
correct the said Translation, but put marginal References in it to those
Historians who treated of the particular Facts, and additional Notes, likewise
throughout of Matters relating to Wales in those Historians, unmentioned in his
Copy; also interspersed the same with many authentic Instruments, Records and
Pedigrees; and lastly made a further Continuation Of the Princes of Wales of
the Blood Royal of England, and the Lords President, down to his own Time; the
whole ending with the aforesaid Sir Henry Sidney at page 401. So that Authors
have been too indistinct, when they have quoted every Part of this Book under
one Name. Thus much for the general View; now to be a little more particular.

After the Editor's Epistle before mentioned, follows a Description of Cambria,
now called Wales: Drawn first by Sir John Prise, and afterward augmented by H.
Lhoyd; and here prefixed for the better understanding of this History. Herein,
upon the Name of Wallia, there is Occasion taken by the said Lhoyd, it seems,
to make a liberal Censure of Polydore Virgil, being a Stranger, as well to many
of our Histories, as the Tongues they are written in, and a Reference made to
the Apology of Sir John Prise, and the British History he purposely writ
against the envious Reports and slanderous Taunts of the said Polydore; whose
Errors in great number are there confuted. And it is further shown, that Wales
is a new and strange Name, which the Britains do not understand; that they know
no other than Cambry, nor of their Language than Cambraec, or the Cambers
Tongue; That they know not what England or English means, but call the Country
Lhoyger (from Locrine) the Englishmen, Sayson; and their Tongue Saysonaec;
which is a Token this is the old British Language: For the Works of Merdhyn and
of Taliessin, who wrote above 1000 Years past, are almost the same Words as
they use at this Day, or at least understood by all who know the Welsh Tongue.
Then he discourses of the Three Remnants of the Britains, in Wales, Cornwall,
and little Britain, or Bretagne in France. The Bounds of Wales, and the
Division thereof, into Three Territories, that is, North Wales, South Wales,
and Powys-Land; subdivided into their several Candreds, and Comots; and all
expressed in their old British Names.

Thus we come to the History, which has a little wooden Print at the Head of
every Chapter or Prince's Reign, more for Ornament, we presume, than real
Resemblance; because they are discontinued at the English Princes of Wales, of
whom some true Representation was more likely to be recovered. The History is
too short to be made shorter, by any thing that looks like an Epitomy; besides,
it cannot prudently be desired, we should be so long confined from the
Description of other Books, as to give an Abstract of every Prince's Reign in
this. It may be therefore sufficient, that we here draw out a Table of their
Names, with a Chronology of their Deaths, and the Names of those Princes, who
were their Contemporaries in England, which will be of general Use in Reading
any other Piece of Welsh History.

In Wales. Died. In England. Cadwalader 688 Saxons, Angles, Jutes, etc. Juor
720 Kentwin, etc. Roderik-Molwynoc 750 Ethelard, etc. Conan Tindaethy 817 Offa,
etc. Mervyn Urych 843 Ethelwulph. Roderike the Great 877 Alfred. Anarawd 913
Edward. Edwal Voel 940 Edmund. Howel Dha 948 Eldred. Jevaf and Jago deposed 973
Edgar. Howel ap Jevaf 984 Ethelred. Cadwalhon ap Jevaf 985 Ibid. Meredyth ap
Owen, deposed 992 Ibid. Edwal ap Meyric about 998 Ibid. Aedan ap Blegored 1015
Edm. Ironside. Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht 1021 Cnute. Jago ap Edwal 1037 Harold.
Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn about 1065 Edward Confess. Blethyn 1073 William Conq.
Trahaern 1079 Ibid. Gruffyth ap Conan 1137 Stephen. Owen Gwyneth 1169 Henry II.
David ap Owen deposed 1194 Richard I. Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth 1240 Henry III.
David ap Lhewelyn 1246 Ibid. Lhewelyn ap Gruffyth 1282 Edward I.

This was the last of the British Princes: Then follows the History of the
Princes of Wales of the Blood Royal of England, by our Editor, down to his own
Time; who are so well or easily known, that they need not be here drawn out in
like manner. All therefore we shall further mention, will be of the Editor's
Notes, with the most observable Instruments, Records, and Pedigrees, which he
first published, to illustrate this History, in several Parts thereof. Such are
his Account of the two Merlins, from Girald Cambrensis; his Transcripts from
John Castoreus his Chronicle, concerning K. Ina, etc. Enlargements upon the
Story of Alfred, and upon that of Elfled, Duchess of Mercia; upon Howel Dha,
his Laws and Form of his Court of Judicature. The Foundation of the Family of
the Stewarts, from Walter the Bastard. The History of the Winning of Glamorgan,
Anno 1091; with the Pedigrees of those who won it; viz. Sir Rob. Fitzhamon, Sir
W. Londres, Sir Richard Greenfield, Sir Pain Turbervile, Sir Robert St.
Quintin, Sir Richard de Syward, Sir Gilbert de Humfrevill, Sir Roger
Berkerolles, Sir Reginald de Sully, Sir Peter le Soore, Sir John le Fleming,
Sir Oliver St. John, Sir W. Esterling, or Stradling. This History was drawn up
by Sir Edward Stradling, and communicated to our Editor, by Mrs. Blanch Parry,
one of the Maids of Honor. And as Robert Sitsylt came also to the said
Conquest of Glamorgan; our said Editor here subjoins the Pedigree of the
Cecylls, as he had it from the Lord Burghley. Several other of their Families,
who made Expeditions into Wales, are also here enlarged upon. Further
Particulars of the Lordship of Powys, the Castle of Chirke and Glyn^dowrdwy,
with the several Lords of Powys. Of the Discovery of some Part of the Spanish
West Indies, by Madoc ap Owen Gwyneth, before Columbus. A Catalogue of the
Descents of the Earls of Chester, from the Conquest to John Scot, 1237.
Articles of Agreement between King Henry III. and the Wise of Gruffyth, Son of
Prince Lhewelyn. Articles of Submission by David, Son of the said Prince. The
Pedigree of the Mortimers; evidencing the frivolous Pretenses of Owen Glyndoure
to the Principality of Wales. Prince Lhewelyn's Letter to Robert Kilwarby,
Archbishop of Canterbury, 1275, from the Collections of Dr. Tho. Yale. Articles
sent by John Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, to Prince Lhewelyn, as copied
from the Records at Canterbury, by the said Dr. Yale, Chancellor to Archbishop
Parker, who is here celebrated, for his chargeable Publication of the
Antiquitys of this Land: With the Princes Answers and Complaints. And in the
Editor's Part, of the English Princes of Wales, we have also several useful
Lights to History, as the Donation of Welsh Lordships to the English Nobility.
The Homage of the Welsh Nobility to Prince Edward, Son of King Edward I. the
29th of his Reign. The Story of Owen Glyndoure, and his Rebellion. The clearing
of Owen Tudor's Parentage from foreign Aspersions; and Accounts of several
Lords President of Wales, as was before observed.

XXV. The principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques, and Discoveries of the
ENGLISH NATION, made by Sea or over Land, to the remote and farthest distant
Quarters of the Earth, within the Compass of these 1500 Years: Divided into
Three several Volumes, according to the Positions of the Regions whereunto they
were directed. The First Volume contains the worthy Discoveries, etc. of the
English toward the North and North-East by Sea, etc. with many Testimonies of
the ancient foreign Trades, the warlike and other Shipping of this Realm; with
a Commentary of the true State of Iceland, the Defeat of the Spanish Armada,
and the Victory at Cadiz. By RICHARD HAKLUYT, M. A. sometime Student of
Christ-Church in Oxford. Fol. 1598. To this is joined, The Second Volume,
comprehending the principal Navigations, etc. of the ENGLISH NATION to the
South and South-East Parts of the World, as well within as without the Straight
of Gibraltar; within the Compass of 1600 Years: Divided into two several Parts.
By R. HAKLUYT, etc. Folio 1599. Both Volumes are bound together; the former
consisting of 620 Pages; the latter of 312 the first Part, and 204 the last;
besides Dedications, Preface and Tables of Contents: And both printed by Geo.
Bishop, Ralph Newberie, and Rob. Barker.
The Third and Last Volume of the Voyages, etc. of the ENGLISH NATION, etc.
within and before these 100 Years, to all Parts of the Newfound World of
America, or the West Indies, from 73 Degrees of Northerly to 57 of Southerly
Latitude, etc. Collected by RICHARD HAKLUYT, etc. Imprinted (as before) Folio
1600. Pages 868 This elaborate and excellent Collection, which redounds as much
to the Glory of the English Nation, as any Book that ever was published in it;
having already had sufficient Complaints made in its behalf, against our
suffering it to become so scarce and obscure, by neglecting to translate it
into the Universal Language, or at least to republish it in a fair Impression,
with proper Illustrations, and especially an Index, wherewith the Author
himself supplied the first Edition, printed in one Volume, Folio, 1589; we
shall not here repeat those Complaints; because we must necessarily wait for
the Return of that Spirit, which animated the gallant Adventurers recorded
therein to so many heroic Exploits, before we can expect such a true Taste of
Delight will prevail to do them so much Justice; or that Envy of transcendent
Worth, will permit a noble Emulation of it so far to perpetuate the Renown of
our said Ancestors, as to render, by this means, their Memory no less durable
and extensive, than their Merits have demanded. For it may, perhaps, be thought
impolitic, thus to display the most hazardous and the most generous Enterprises
which appear in this Book, for the Honor and Advantage of our Country, till
the Virtues of our Predecessors will not reflect disadvantageous Comparisons
upon the Posterity who shall revive them. But there may be still room left for
a more favorable Construction of such Neglect, and to hope that nothing but
the casual Scarcity or Obscurity of a Work, so long since out of Print, may
have prevented its falling into those able and happy Hands, as might, by such
an Edition, reward the eminent Examples preserved therein, the Collector
thereof, and Themselves, according to all their Deserts.
.
THE First Volume, after the Dedication to the Lord Admiral Howard, Epistle to
the Reader, Verses to the Author, by Hugh Broughton, Richard Mulcaster, William
Camden, and Marc. Ant. Pigafeta, begins with the Voyage of King Arthur to
Norway, and the Conquests he made there, Anno 517. and with King Malgo's
Conquest of the Northern Islands, in 580, from Geffrey of Monmouth. The
Conquest of the Isles of Anglesey and Man by King Edwin in 624, from Bid. The
Voyages of Bertus into Ireland 684; of Octher to the Northern Sea, in 890; and
of Wolstan to Denmark. The Voyage of King Edgar, with 4000 Ships round his
Kingdom, Anno 973, from Florence of Worcester, Hoveden, Dr. Dee, etc. The
Voyage of K. Edmund's Sons into Hungary. A Chronicle of the Kings of Man from
Camden. The Marriage of K. Harold's Daughter with the Duke of Russia. The
Antiquities of the Cinque Ports, and State of the Shipping there, from Edward
the Confessor, to King Edward the First after the Conquest; gathered by W.
Lambert in his Peramb of Kent. An English Voyage to Tartary, etc. from Mat.
Paris. The Voyage of Friar John de Plano Carpini to Tartary, 1246. The Journal
of Friar William de Rubruquis to the Eastern Parts, 1253, in Latin and English.
Part of the Charter granted by King Edward I. to the Barons of the Cinque
Ports. A List of King Edward III. his great Fleet before Calice. Friar Nicholas
of Lynn, the Mathematician of Oxford, his Voyage to the Regions under the North
Pole, Anno 1360, from Mercator, Dr. Dee, etc. Henry, Earl of Derby's Voyage,
1390, into Prussia, etc. against the Infidels: And of Thoma; Duke of
Gloucester, thither in 1391. Testimony from Chaucer, who was living in 1402, as
appears in his Epistle of Cupid (though by all, who have written Accounts of him,
laid in his Grave two Years before) that the English Knights after the Loss of
Acon, were wont to travel into Prussia and Lettow. Of the ancient Traffic of
Britain, from Nero to this Time, from the most authentic Histories,
particularly the flourishing State of London, and its Trade, from Bid and
Malmsbury; also of Bristol; Leagues and Privileges of Commerce, by the Saxons
and Danes, the Merchants of the Empire, and those of England, with Charters for
Merchandising, by several of our Kings, and Ordinance of the Staple. A brief
Account of the Great Masters of the Knights Hespitalers of Jerusalem, and their
Exploits in Prussia, or against the Infidels The Ambassador's Oration from the
Master General of Prussia to King Richard II. ^e Agreement of Traffic made
thereupon; the Revocation and Renewal thereof by King Henry IV. The Grievances
of the Merchants of the Hans-Towns in England. Letters to Sir William Sturmy;
also between King Henry IV. and the Master of Prussia, about Agreement with the
said Merchants The said King's Charter to the English Merchants in Prussia. A
Note of King Henry V. his mighty Ships, from a Chronicle in Trinity Church
Winchester. Branches of Statutes in Henry VI. for the Northern Trade. The Libel
of English Policy, an old Poem, written in Henry VI's Time, exhorting the
English to keep the Sea, and especially the Narrow Sea, with the Profits
thereof: Treating more particularly of the Commodities of several Countries,
with the Praise of Sir Richard Whittington; the Policy of keeping Ireland,
Wales, and Calais; the Trade of Bristol and Scarborough; with many Arguments
and Examples for our keeping the surrounding Seas: The whole being 21 Pages,
concluding with the Lord Hungerford's Judgment of this Tract. This is followed
with King Edward the Fourth's Charter to the English Merchants in the
Netherlands, for choosing a Governor. Robert Thorne's Declaration of discovered
Lands in the Indies, and Exhortation of King Henry VIII. to undertake the
Discovery of other Parts thereof, Anno 1527. A Treatise of the Duke of
Muscovy's Genealogy. Sebastian Cabota's Ordinances and Instructions for the
Voyage to Cathay, 1553. The Names of the Counselors appointed in this Voyage,
being 12, beginning with Sir Hugh Willoughby. The Letters of King Edward VI. to
the Northern Princes upon this Expedition to Cathay. The Copy of the Names of
Sir Hugh Willoughby's Company, who wintered in Lapland, where he and they were
all frozen to death in the River Arzina, 1553. Richard Chancellor, Pilot Major,
his Voyage and first Discovery by Sea, of Muscovy, with his Account thereof.
Another Account of this new Navigation to Muscovy, by the North-East,
undertaken by Sir H. Willoughby, and performed by R. Chancellor; translated
from the Latin Copy written by Clement Adams, Schoolmaster to the Queen's
Henshmen; with the Testimony of Richard Eden in his Decades concerning the said
Treatise. The Emperor of Muscovy's Letter to King Edward VI. Of the Coins,
Weights, and Measures in Russia, by John Hasse, 1554. The Letters of K. Philip
and Q. Mary to the said Emperor John Vasilivich. Articles for the Merchants of
this first Russian Company. A Letter from the Company's first Agent in Mosco,
Mr. George Killingworth. The Emperor's Grant of the first Privileges to the
English Merchants, 1555. Queen Mary's Charter to them. Instructions for the
third Voyage to Russia, serviceable in other like Adventures. The Voyage of
Stephen Burough toward the River Ob, for Discovery of the North-East Passage,
1556. Richard Johnson's Account of the Waigats, Nova Zembla, and the strange
religious Rites of the Samoeds. The Reception of the first Russian Ambassador
in England; registered by John ^ncent. Presents from the King and Queen of
England to the Emperor of Russia; from him to them, and from them to the
Ambassador. Ste. Burough's Voyage from Russia to Wardhouse in search of some
English Ships; with a Catalogue of some Russian Words, and their Construction.
Instructions to the Muscovy Company in 1577. Letters of the Muscovy Merchants
to their Agent G. Killingworth, and between T. Hawtrey, H. Lane, Ric. Gray, T.
Alcock, Ant. Jenkinson, Chr. Hudson, and T. Glover, other Agents. The Manner of
Justice in Russia, by Combat or by Lots. Ant. Jenklnson's first Voyage to
Russia, and from thence to Bactria. Richard Johnson's Notes of the Way to
Cathay. A Letter from Sigismond, King of Poland, to Queen Elizabeth 1559. Her
Letter to the Emperor of Russia, for Ant. Jenkinson's safe Conduct, and to the
Sophy of Persia, for the same purpose. A Remembrance of the Russian Company to
the said Jenkinson upon his Departure. A Declaration of his said Journey to
Persia, 1561, to discover Lands, etc. for the said Society of Merchant
Adventurers. The Privileges he obtained from the King of Hircania for the said
Company. The second Voyage to Persia, by T. Alcock, etc. Written by Ric.
Cheiny, 1563. The third Voyage thither by Ric. Johnson, Alex. Kitchen, and
Arth. Edwards, with the said Edwards his Letters into England, concerning the
same; with a Note of the Commodities to be carried thither and brought from
thence. Distance of Places in Russia. Tho. Southam and John Spark's Discovery
of Ways in Russia, 1566. An Act of the Corporation for Discovery of new Trades.
Jenkinson's third Voyage to Russia; the Privileges he obtained for the English
Merchants of the Emperor, 1567. Hen. Lane's Account of the first Russian
Embassy to Queen Elizabeth, to Mr. Ric. Hakluit. The Queen's Letter to the
Emperor of Russia, 1668. The Embassy of Thomas Randolph, Esquire to the said
Emperor, written by himself. Further Privileges granted by the Emperor, 1569.
Randolph's Commission for Discoveries, from the River Pechora to the Eastward.
Three Letters in Verse, by his Secretary George Turbervile, to his Friends
Edward Dancie, Spencer, and Parker in London. Of the State of Russia, and
Manners of the People. The fourth Voyage into Persia, by Arth. Edwards, etc.
written by Laurence Chapman, 1569. Richard Willis his Notes upon that Voyage;
more particularly of the Silk Trade; how the Christians become Apostates; of
the Cotton Tree and Writing of the Persians. The fifth Voyage into Persia, by
Banister and Ducket, to the Year 1574, with the Customs of the Persians. The
Letter of Christ. Hodsdon and W. Borough to the Emperor of Muscovy, 1570. And
from Richard Uscomb to H. Lane of the burning that City. The Proceedings of A.
Jenkinson in his Embassy to Russia, till his Departure in 1572. The Names of
all the Countries he had traveled to for 26 Years past. James Alday's Letter
to Mich. Lock of a Trade to Lappia. Enquiries about the Manner and Charge of
Whale-killing, with an Answer thereto. W. Burough's Deposition concerning the
Narve, Kegor, etc. An Epistle Dedicatory to the Queen, by the said W. Burough
(late Comptroller of her Navy) annexed to his exact Map of Russia, containing
his great Travels, Experience, etc. in those North-eastern Parts. The Queen's
Letters to Shaugh Thamas, the Great Sophy of Persia, by the Agents sent on the
sixth Voyage thither, 1579. Advertisements and Reports of this sixth Voyage, to
the Year 1581, out of Christopher Burough's Letters; concluding with
Observations of the Latitudes and meridian Altitudes in Russia. Directions
given by Mr. Ric. Hakluyt of the Middle Temple, to Morgan Hubblethorn, Dyer,
sent into Persia. The Commission of Sir Rowland Hayward, and Geo. Barn
Alderman, to Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman, for the Discovery of Cathay, with
the Instructions of W. Burough, Master Dee, and the foresaid Richard Hakluit,
of Eiton, in the County of Hereford, Esquire to them, 1580. Gerard Mercator's
Letter to Mr. Richard Hakluit of Oxford, touching this intended Discovery of
the North-east Passage. The Discovery made by the said Pet and Jackman thereof,
written by Hugh Smith. The Opinion of W. Burough about the Departure of our
Ships toward Russia. The Commission for Sir Jerome Bows his Embassy to Russia,
1583, with the Queen's Letter to the Emperor. A Discourse of Sir Jerome Bows
his Voyage to Russia. Henry Lane's Letter to Mr. W. Sanderson, recounting the
Occurrences in the North-east Discovery for 33 Years. The Coronation of
Theodore Emperor of Russia, observed by Mr. Jerome Horsey; with the Course of
his Journey by Land, from Mosco to Emden. Dr. Giles Fletcher's Embassy to the
said Emperor, 1588; with a notable Description of Russia. John Baptista
Ramusio's Note of the North-east Passage. Letters from the Emperor of Russia,
and his Brother-in-Law, to the Lord Treasurer Burghley, and to the Queen, 1591,
with their Answers. The Emperor's last Letters of Privilege to Sir John Heart
and Company. Edw. Garland's Commission to F. Simkinson, for bringing Mr. John
Dee, the famous Mathematician, to the Emperor of Russia. Edw. Garland's Letter
to the said Worshipful John Dee Esquire 1586, to the same purpose, proffering him
2000 l. per Ann. besides 1000 Rubbles, etc. for his Council in maritime
Discoveries, etc. all which he refused. John Merick's Account of the Death of
the Emperor of Russia, 1597. John Balak's Epistle to Gerard Mercator, about the
Discovery of the North-east Passage. A Testimony of the North eastern
Discoveries, by the English, from the Second Volume of Ramusio's Voyages,
written in Italian 1557; and from Mercator's large Map of Europe, and J.
Metellus Sequanus's Preface to Osorius de Reb. Gest. Emanuelis R. Portugalliae.
Here follows a brief Commentary of the true State of Iceland, written in Latin,
1592, by Arngrim Jonas of Iceland, to confute the Errors of several Writers:
With a Translation of the same into English. And after this, we have the
Victory of the English Fleet under the Lord Charles Howard, etc. over the huge
Spanish Armada sent in 1588, to invade England; translated from Emanuel Van
Meteran's History of the Low Countries: And lastly, A brief Report of the
honorable Voyage to Cadiz, in 1596, describing the Overthrow of the Spanish
Fleet there, with the Sacking and Burning of the City, under the Conduct of the
Earl of Essex, Lord Admiral Howard, Lord Thomas Howard, and Sir Walter Ralegh;
which last, is here described to be "a Man of mavelous great Worth and
Regard, for many his exceeding singular great Virtues, right Fortitude, and
great Resoluteness, in all Matters of Importance." With these two Discourses
our Author, through the Importunity of his Friends, and Unwillingness to delay
their Publication, closes this First Volume, though they rather belong to the
Southern Voyages of our Nation.

The Second Volume is dedicated to Sir Robert Cecil, Secretary of State, and,
respecting the Voyages made to the South and South-east Quarters within the
Straight of Gibralter, begins with a Quotation from Camden, to prove that the
Britains were in Italy and Greece with the Cimbrians and Gauls, before the
Incarnation of Christ; so proceeds to the Voyage of Helena the Empress to
Jerusalem, Anno 337. That of Constantine the Great to Greece, Egypt, etc. Of
Pelagius Cambrensis into Egypt and Syria, Anno 390. Of certain Englishmen,
sent to Justinian, Anno 500, out of Procopius. Of Sighelmus, Bishop of
Shirbourne, to St. Thomas of India, from W. of Malmsbury, Anno 883. Of John
Erigena, under King Alfred, to Athens. Of Andrew Whiteman, under Canute, to
Palestine. Of Swanus, Earl Godwin's Son, to Jerusalem. Of three Ambassadors in
Edward the Confessor's time, to Constantinople. Of Alured, Bishop of Worcester,
to Jerusalem, 1058, from Hoveden. Of Ingulphus, Abbot of Croyland, to Jerusalem
(in 1064, according to Florentius Wigorniensis) from the Conclusion of his own
History. Of the Beauchamps, with Robert Curtoys, to Jerusalem. Of the Lady
Gutuere, or Godwera, to Jerusalem. Of Edgar, Grandson of Edm. Ironside, to
Jerusalem, 1102. Of Godericus to the Holy Land. Of Hardine to Joppa, and other
Englishmen thither. Of Athelard to Egypt, etc. Of William, Archbishop of Tire,
and Robert Ketenensis to Dalmatia, etc. Of other Englishmen to the Holy Land,
1147. Of the Lord John Lacy, and William Mandevile, Earl of Essex, to
Jerusalem. Of the English Guard at Constantinople. Of King Henry II. his
Supplies to the Holy Land; and Manuel Emperor of Constantinople his Letter to
him concerning the English in Battle with him against the Sultan. The Voyage of
King Richard I. for the Recovery of Jerusalem from the Saracins, 1190. The
Travels of Archbishop Baldwin after the said King. Memorial of Sir Frederick
Tilney, knighted at Acon in the Holy Land, for his Valor; and the Travels of
Richard Canonicus with King Richard. King John's Contribution to the War in the
Holy Land. The Travels of Hubert Walter, Bishop of Salisbury, and Robert
Curson, made Cardinal at Rome. Voyage of Ranulph Glanvile, Earl of Chester, and
other Nobles to the Holy Land; also of Petrus de Rupibus, Bishop of Winchester;
of Richard, Earl of Cornwall, and William Longespee, Earl of Salisbury. Of
Prince Edward, Son of King Henry III. into Asia, 1270. The Travels of Friar
Turnham, Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham, and the Journal of Friar Beatus
Odoricus concerning the strange Things he saw among the Eastern Tartars,
written 1330. The Expedition of Sir Mat. Gourney against the Moors of Algiers.
The Arrival of Lion, King of Armenia, in England, from Froissart. The Voyage of
Henry, Earl of Derby, afterward King of England, to Tunis, from Pol. Virgil,
Froissart, and Hollinshed. The Victories, in Italy, of Sir John Hawkwood, as
mentioned by Camden, William Thomas, etc. Voyages of John Lord Holland, Earl of
Huntington, and Thomas Lord Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, to Jerusalem, 1399. The
Arrival of the Emperor of Constantinople in England, 1400. Voyage of the Bishop
of Winchester to Jerusalem, from T. Walsingham. King Henry the Fourth's
Preparations to the Holy Land, in 1413. A Relation of the Siege and Conquest of
Rhodes, by Sultan Solomon, 1522: translated from French into English, at the
Motion of the Lord Thomas Dockwray, Grand Prior of the Order of Jerusalem in
England. Here may be seen how many Thousands of the Turks were slain; how
gallantly the English distinguished themselves, particularly Sir John Bourgh,
Turcoplier of England, who was slain; and Sir Wm. Weston, Captain of the
English Postern, wounded there. Next follows the Embassy of Don Ferdinando,
from his Brother Charles the Emperor, to King Henry VIII. for Aid against
Solomon. The Antiquity of Trading with English Ships into the Levant. The said
King Henry's Letter to John King of Portugal, 1531, to restore some Merchandise
belonging to John Gresham and William Lock, which had been treacherously
carried into Portugal. Of two Voyages to Candia and Chio, in 1534, and the Year
after. The Epitaph of Sir Peter Read in Norwich, who was knighted by Charles V.
at Tunis, 1538. The Voyage of Sir Tho. Chaloner to Algier, with the said
Emperor, 1541, taken from his Book De Republica Anglorum instauranda. Roger
Bodenham's Voyage to Candia and Chio. That of John Lock to Jerusalem, 1553.
Anthony Jenkinson's Account of Solyman's entering Aleppo, in his March against
the Sophy of Persia. Solyman's Privilege of Safe Conduct to A. Jenkinson.
Jasper Campion's Discourse of the Trade to Chio, directed to Mich. Lock and W.
Winter. A Report of the Turks taking from the Venetians, the City of Famagusta,
in Cyprus, 1571: translated from the Italian, by W. Malim, and dedicated to the
Earl of Leicester. The notable Delivery of 266 Christians from Turkish Slavery
at Alexandria, by John Fox of Woodbridge, in Suffolk, Gunner, Anno 1577; with
the King of Spain's Letter, allowing him eight Ducats a Month, in the Quality
of a Gunner, till he could otherwise provide for him. The Renewing of Trade in
the Levant. The Letters of Zuldan Murad Can, the Great Turk, to Queen
Elizabeth, granting the first Privileges of Trade, 1579. Her Majesty's Answer.
The Charter of the Privileges granted to the English; and the League of the
Great Turk with the Queen for Traffic, 1580. Her Majesty's Letter to the said
Grand Signior, 1581, promising Redress of the Disorders of Peter Baker in the
Levant. Her Letters Patent to Sir Edward Osborne, Ric. Staper, etc. for Trading
in Turkey, 1581. The first Voyage of Laurence Aldersey, Merchant, to Jerusalem
and Tripoly. The great Master of Malta's Passport to the Englishmen. The
Queen's Commission to W. Hareborne to be her Ambassador in Turkey. Her Letter
in Commendation of him to the Great Turk, 1582. Her Letter to Alli Bassa, the
Turkish Admiral. A brief Remembrance of Things to be endeavored at
Constantinople, and other Places in Turkey, touching our Clothing, Dying, Vent
of our natural Commodities, Labor of our Poor, and the general enriching of
this Realm; drawn up by R. Hakluyt of the Middle Temple, and given to a Friend
sent into Turkey, 1582. His Remembrances for Master S. to inform himself of
some things in England, and of others in Turkey, to the great Profit of this
Commonwealth. The Voyage of W. Harborne, the first Ambassador to Turkey, where
he continued almost six Years. Letters from Mustapha Chaus to the Queen; from
the Ambassador to Harvey Millers, appointing him Consul in some Parts of
Egypt; and his Commission to Richard Forster, constituting him the first
English Consul at Tripoly. Complaints to the Ambassador, and his Letter to
Mustapha, challenging him for his dishonest Dealing. The King of Algier's
Passport to T. Shingleton. Sir Edw. Osborne's Letter in Spanish to the King of
Algier, in behalf of some English Captives. Notes on the Trade of Algier and
Alexandria. The Ambassador's Letter to Edw. Barton, with the Commandments of
the Grand Signior for the quiet Passage of the Queen's Subjects. His Letter to
Mr. Tipton, appointing him Consul. A Register of English Ships and Captives,
taken by the Galleys of Algier. The Ambassador's Letter to Assan Aga thereupon.
A Petition to the Viceroy of Turkey, for Reformation of Injuries offered our
Nation in Morea, with the Turkish Mandates thereupon. Tho. Sanders his Report
of the Voyage to, and Captivity in Tripoly, Anno 1583. The Queen's Letters to
the Turk for Restitution. The Turk's Letter to the King of Tripoly thereupon;
and the English Ambassador's. Captain Henry Austell's Voyage to Constantinople.
The Turk's Passport to him. The Earl of Leicester's Passport for T. Forster,
traveling to Constantinople. A Description of the Yearly Pilgrimage of the
Mahumitans, etc. to Mecca. The Travels of Caesar Frederick in and beyond the
East Indies, for eighteen Years; describing the Customs and Commodities of the
Countries he passed through; translated from the Italian by Thomas Hickocke.
Letters, concerning the Voyage of Mr. John Newbery and Ralph Fitch, to the East
Indies; by the Queen to the Kings of Cambaia and China; by Mr. Newbery to our
Author Hakluyt, etc. and from Mr. Fitch to Leonard Poor. The said Mr. Fitch's
particular Narrative of his Voyage to the East Indies, for the space of eight
Years; with Linschoten's Report (in his Travels) of the Imprisonment and Escape
of the said Newbery and Fitch. Mr. John Eldred's Account of his Voyage to
Tripoly. Of the Weight, Measure, and Money current in Babylon, Ormus, Goa,
Cochin, Malacca; Bill of Charges from Aleppo to Goa, and a Catalogue of Goods,
Druggs, etc. with the Places whence they come; also of the Monson Winds; by
Will. Barret. Mr. John Evesham's Voyage by Sea to Egypt, 1586. Mr. Laur.
Aldersey's second Voyage to Alexandria and Cairo. Philip Jones his Report of
the brave Fight between five London Ships and eleven Spanish Galleys at
Pantalarea. The Return of Mr. Harborne from Constantinople over Land, 1588.
Peter, Prince of Moldavia's Privilege to the English Merchants. The Grand
Signior's daily Payments, out of his Treasury, to the Officers of his Seraglio
or Court, and Annuities; Lists of his Officers and Soldiers; his Yearly
Revenues, and Ambassadors Allowances. Letters from Sinan Bassa, the Grand
Signior's Chief Counselor, to Queen Elizabeth, showing how, for her sake, the
Peace was made with Poland. The Queen's second Letters Patent to the Company of
English Merchants for the Levant, 1592. Edward Barton's Embassy, with the
second Present to the Sultan, 1593, described by Rich. Wrag. A Letter from the
Grand Sultana to Queen Elizabeth, 1594: and here ends the First Part. The
Second Part of this Second Volume begins with the Voyage of Macham, an
Englishman, who first discovered the Island of Madera, 1344, from Antonio
Galuano's Portugal History. A Note of the taking of Ceuta by the Portugueze,
with the Assistance of the English, 1415; which was the first Occasion of all
the Portugueze Discoveries, from T. Walsingham. John King of Portugal's Embassy
to King Edward IV. of England, wherein he prevailed upon the Restraint of John
Tintam and W. Fabian, from an intended Voyage to Guinea, 1481. A Note of the
English Trade to the Canaries, in 1526. A Description of the Canary or
Fortunate Islands, by Tho. Nicols; beginning with a Censure of Andrew Thevet's
Account of them. Of the first Voyage, for Traffic, into Barbary, 1551, under
Capt. Tho. Windham; as observed by J m. Aldaie, the Inventor of that Trade. The
2d Voyage thither, set forth by Sir James York, and others, under Capt.
Windham, related from the Account of James Thomas. The first Voyage to Guinea
and Benin, at the Charge of the Merchant Adventurers of London, under Capt.
Windham, 1553, beginning with a Description of Africa, by Richard Eden. The
second Voyage to Guinea, set out by Sir Geo. Barn, Sir John York, etc. 1554,
under Capt. John Lok. W. Towrson's first Voyage to Guinea, 1555. His second
Voyage thither, 1556. His last Voyage, in 1577; with a List of Wares desired in
Guinea. A Remembrance for Capt. Lok on his Arrival at Guinea, by Sir W. Gerard,
etc. touching a Fortification, 1561. His Letter to the said Merchants
Adventurers on his not proceeding in the Voyage. W. Rutter's Relation of a
Voyage set out to Guinea, 1562, by Sir W. Gerard, Sir W. Chester, Mr. Tho.
Lodge, etc. which Voyage was also written in Verse, by Rob. Baker. The Meeting
at Sir W. Gerard's House, for a seventh Voyage to Guinea, 1564, and the Success
thereof, extracted from the second Voyage to the West Indies, by Sir John
Hawkins. Mr. Geo. Fenner's Voyage to Guinea and the Islands of Cape Verde,
1566; written by Walter Wren. Mr. Edmund Hogan's Relation of his Embassy from
the Queen to Mully Abdelmelech Emperor of Morocco, etc. 1577. The Voyage of
Thomas Stukeley, wrongfully called Marquese of Ireland, into Barbary, 1578,
written by Jo. Tho. Freigius, in Historia de caede Sebastiani Regis Lusitaniae.
Reports of China, from the Italian, by Ric. Willis; and of Japan, with other
Isles in the East Ocean, by the said Willis. A Dialogue of the Kingdom of
China, State and Government thereof, from the Latin, printed at Macao, 1590.
Tho. Stephens's Letter from Goa, 1579. Frey Peter of Lisbon, his Relation of
Pegu, and the rich Traffic there. A Voyage to the East Indies, begun by Mr.
Geo. Raymond, in 1591, performed by Capt. James Lancaster, and written from the
Mouth of his Lieutenant Edm. Barker, by Mr. Richard Hakluyt. Remembrances of an
intended Voyage to Brasil, and the River of Plate, by Edw. Cotton, 1583. The
Escape of the Primrose from the Spaniards at Bilboa, with her bringing the
Corrigidor Prisoner into England; and the King of Spain's Commission to arrest
all English, Dutch, and Easterling Ships, 1585. The Queen's Patent for Trade to
Barbary. The Embassy of Mr. Henry Roberts to Mully Hamet, Emperor of Morocco,
written by himself. That Emperor's Edict, obtained by the said Ambassador, That
no Englishmen should be molested or made Slaves in any Part of his Dominions,
1587. His Letter to the Earl of Leicester. The Queen's Letter to the said
Emperor. A Voyage to the Azores, by Sir Walter Ralegh's Pinnaces, which took
the Governor of St. Michael's Island, and Pedro Sarmiento, Governor of the
Straights of Magellan, besides other Prizes, 1586, written by Mr. John Evesham.
Sir Francis Drake's notable Services upon the Spanish Fleet in the Road of
Cadiz; and of his destroying 100 Barks, taking some Forts, and surprising a
great Carack called Sant Philip, 1587. Patent to Merchants of Exeter and
London, for Trade to Guinea, 1588. James Walsh's Narrative of a Voyage to Benin
beyond Guinea, set forth by Merchants Bird and Newton. Anthony Ingram's Account
thereof, in a Letter to those Merchants. Their second Voyage to Benin, 1590, by
James Walsh. Advertisement to King Philip of Spain, concerning the State of
Angola. Colonel Anthony Winkfield's Discourse of the Portugal Voyage, 1589. The
Voyage of George, E. of Cumberland, to the Azores, etc. written by that eminent
Mathematician and Engineer Mr. Edward Wright. The valiant Fight performed by
ten Merchant Ships of London, against twelve Spanish Galleys, in the Straights
of Gibraltar, 1590. The valiant Fight in the said Straights by the Centurion of
London, against five Spanish Galleys, 1591. A Report of the desperate Fight
near the Azores, between the Revenge, commanded by Sir Richard Grenvile, and a
Spanish Fleet, in August 1591; penned by the Honorable Sir Walter Ralegh. A
Note of the Spanish Indian Ships expected in Spain that Year, with the Number
thereof which perished. Mr. Rob. Flick's Report of the Success of the London
Supplies, sent to the Lord Tho. Howard at the Azores. Linschoten's Testimony of
the worthy Exploits achieved by the Earl of Cumberland, Sir Martin Frobisher,
Sir Richard Grenvile, and diverse other English Captains, about the Azores and
the Coasts of Spain and Portugal, in 1589, 1590, 1591, etc. recorded in his
excellent Voyages to the East and West Indies. A Relation of the State and
flourishing Trade of Arguin, near Cape Blanco. The Voyage of Ric. Rainold, and
T. Dassel, to the Rivers of Senagra and Gambra, near Guinea; with the Treasons
of some of Don Antonio's Followers. Relation of the States of Tombuto and Gago,
written 1594, from Morocco to Mr. Ant. Dassel in London, A further Relation of
the late Conquest and Riches of those Provinces. Extract of a Patent to Tho.
Gregory, etc. for Traffic between the River of Nounia, and others on the Coast
of Guinea, 1592. The taking of two Spanish Ships laden with Quicksilver and
Popes Bulls; by Mr. Tho. White. Report of the Service of Sir John Borough,
Lieutenant General of the Fleet prepared by the Honorable Sir Walter Ralegh,
Lord Warden of the Stannaries; wherein the Santa Clara, of 600 Tun, was taken,
the Santa Cruz burnt, and the huge rich Madre de Dios brought into England,
Sept. 7, 1592. Of the Firing and Sinking that stout Spanish Carack, called the
Five Wounds, by the Earl of Cumberland's Ships: written by Capt. Nich. Downton.
The Loss of the Ship Toby on the Coast of Barbary, 1593. The Queen's Letters by
Laur. Aldersey to the Emperor of Aethiopia, 1597: which concludes this Second
Volume.

The Third and Last Volume, containing the Voyages and Adventures of our Nation
in the Western Parts, begins with the most ancient Discovery of the West
Indies, by Madoc, Son of Owen Guyeth, Prince of North Wales, in the Year 1170,
from the History of Wales, published by Dr. Powel. This is followed by
Christopher Columbus his Offer of the Discovery of the West Indies to King
Henry VII. in 1488, by his Brother Bartholomew Columbus, who presented the said
King with a new Map of the World; in which was represented the Burning Zone,
lately discovered by the Portugueze; but returning with the said King's
Acceptance of the Offer, his Brother was in the mean time engaged to make that
Discovery by and for the King of Castile, as we here have it from the Life of
the said Christopher, written by his Son Don Ferdinand Columbus. After another
Testimony, from the said Life, of that Engagement, we have the Letters Patents
of King Henry VII. to John Cabot, and his three Sons, Lewis, Sebastian, and
Sancius, for the Discovery of new and unknown Lands, 1495; with a Record from
the Rolls of the Voyage of the said John and his Son Sebastian; also an Extract
from Sebastian Cabot's Map, cut by Clement Adams, concerning the said Cabot's
Discovery of the West Indies, 1497; which Map was to be seen in the Privy
Gallery at Westminster, and in many Merchants Houses. Next we have the said
Sebastian's Discourse of that Discovery with the Pope's Legate in Spain, from
the second Volume of Baptista Ramusius his Voyages; also further Testimonies of
this Cabot from the Preface of Ramusio's Third Volume, from the third Decade of
Peter Martyr of Angleria, from Fra. Lopez de Gomera's General History of the
West Indies, and from Robert Fabian's MS. Continuation of his Chronicle, in the
Custody of John Stow; with an Account of the three Savages presented by Cabot
to the said King in the 14th of his Reign. After this, we have a Note of the
Discovery of Newfoundland from Robert Thorn's Book to Dr. Leigh, and the Grant
made by King Edward VI. of a Pension of 166 l. 13 s. 4 d. yearly, with the
Office of Grand Pilot of England, to Sebastian Cabot, 1549. And this is
followed by Sir Humphrey Gilbert's learned and curious Discourse, to prove a
Passage by the North-west to Cathaia and the East Indies; with other Reasons
proving the same, by Mr. Richard Willis. The first Voyage of M. Martin
Frobisher to the North-west, in search of the Passage to China, 1576, written
by Christ. Hall. The second Voyage of Frobisher for the said Discoveries, 1577,
by Dionise Settle. Frobisher's third and last Voyage to Meta Incognita, 1578,
by Tho. Ellis; with Tho. Wiar's Report of a great Island in their way home. The
Notes of Richard Hakluyt, of the Middle Temple, Esquire for the Direction of
certain Gentlemen who went with Mr. Frobisher. Mr. Geo. Best's Discourse of
these three Voyages, with a Preface, proving all Parts of the World to be
habitable. The Queen's Letters Patents to Adrian Gylbert, and others, for the
Discovery of the Northwest Passage to China. The first Voyage of Mr. John
Davis, in 1585, for the Discovery of the North-west Passage, written by John
Janes. Davis's second Voyage for that Discovery, 1586. His Letter to Mr. W.
Sanderson concerning his Voyage. A Relation of the Course held by two of his
Pinnaces, in discovering the Passage between Greenland and Iceland. Mr. Davis's
third Voyage for discovery of the Isles of the Moluccas, or the Coast of China,
1587, written by Mr. John Janes. Another Letter from Mr. Davis to Mr.
Sanderson. A Traverse-Book made by Mr. John Davis, in his said third Voyage.
His Report of these three Voyages, taken from his Treatise, entitled, The
World's Hydrographical Description. Nicholas and Anthony Zani's Discovery of
Friesland, Iceland, etc. 1380, from Marcolino's Letters. Several Voyages
toward and to Newfoundland; as by two Ships, in 1527, mentioned by our
Chroniclers Hall and Grafton. Another Voyage thither by Mr. Hoar and others,
1536. An Act against exacting any Money for License to traffic to Iceland and
Newfoundland, 2 Edw. VI. Ant. Parkhurst's Letter to R. Hakluyt of the Middle
Temple, concerning the true State, etc. of Newfoundland, 1578. The Queen's
Letters Patent to Sir Humphry Gilbert. A Latin Poem, by Steph. Parmenius
Budeius, upon Sir Humphry's Voyage to Newfoundland, for the planting a Colony
there; celebrating also several others of our Sea-Adventurers. A Report of Sir
Humphry's said Voyage, and the Success thereof, 1583, by Mr. Edward Haies;
concluding with an Account, how the Admiral was lost, and a Letter from the
said Parmenius to our Author R. Hakluyt of Oxford. Richard Clark's Relation of
the said Voyage, excusing himself from casting away the Ship. Sir G. Peckham's
Report of the late Discoveries and Possession taken in Newfoundland, by Sir H.
Gilbert. Sir Fra. Walsingham's Letter to our Author Hakluyt, encouraging him to
the Study of Cosmography, etc. 1582. Another Letter from Sir Francis to Tho.
Aldworth, Mayor of Bristol, concerning the Western Discovery. Aldworth's Letter
to Sir Francis, concerning an intended Western Voyage for Discovery to the
South-west of Cape Briton. Capt. Christ. Carlile's Discourse upon the intended
Voyage to the hindermost Part of America, 1583. Articles by the Committee
appointed in behalf of the Muscovy Merchants, to confer with Capt. Carlisle upon
his intended Discovery. Relation of the first Voyage, and Discovery of the Isle
of Ramea, to make Train Oil of the Morses, performed 1591. Tho. James's Letter
to the Lord Burghly, about the Discovery of the Isle of Ramea. A brief Note of
the Morses, and their Use. Richard Fisher's Relation of a Voyage to Cape
Briton, 1593. The Voyage of Mr. Geo. Drake, of Apsham, to the Isle of Ramea.
Sylvester Wyet's Voyage to the Isle of Assumption for Whale Fins and Train Oil,
1594. Charles Leigh's Voyage to Cape Briton, and the Isle of Ramea. The three
Voyages of Jaques Cartier, discovering New France, between the Years 1534 and
1540, with John Alphonse's Course from Belle Isle, up the River Canada; and the
Lord of Roberval's Voyage thither, in 1542. The several Voyages to Virginia,
and Discoverys thereof, chiefly at the Charges of Sir Walter Ralegh; from 33 to
40 Degrees Latitude: As first, the Queen's Letters Patents to him, for new
Discoveries, 1584. Whereupon ensued the first Voyage to Virginia, by Capt.
Phil. Amadas, and Capt. Arth. Barlow, at Sir Walter's Charge and Direction. Sir
Richard Grenvile's Voyage for Sir Walter thither, in 1585. The Names of the
English Colony left there under Governor Lane. Extract of the said Mr. Ralph
Lane's Letter to Richard Hakluyt Esquire etc. Account of the Employments of the
English left in Virginia, by Sir Richard Grenvile, under Governor Lane, from
August 1585 to June 1586, directed to Sir W. Ralegh. The third Voyage in 1586,
for Relief of the Virginian Colony at the sole Charges of Sir W. Ralegh. A true
Report of the Newfound Land of Virginia, with the Commodities to be there
found, or raised, by Mr. Tho. Hariot, Servant to Sir W. Ralegh. The fourth
Voyage to Virginia, with three Ships, transporting the second Colony, 1587;
with a List of their Names. The fifth Voyage to Virginia, under Mr. John White,
1590. Certain Voyages to Florida, with the more perfect Discoveries thereof;
beginning with the Relation of John de Verrazzano to the French King, 1524. A
notable History of four Voyages, made by certain French Captains into Florida,
1561, etc. mostly written by Mons. Laudonniere; translated from the French by
our Author Richard Hakluyt, and by him dedicated to the Right Honorable Sir W.
Ralegh, Knt. Captain of her Majesty's Guard, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, and
Lieutenant General of the County of Cornwall, 1587. The Relations of P. Morales
and Nic. Burgoignon, brought by Sir Fra. Drake from St. Augustines in Florida,
touching the State of those Parts. Sundry Voyages from Nueva Galicia and Nueva
Biscaia, in New Spain, to the 15 Provinces of New Mexico, and to Quivira and
Cibola, as far as 37 Degrees Northerly Latitude, beginning with Ramusio's
Account of the three Voyages of Friar Marco de Nica, Fran. Vasquez de Coronado,
and Ferdinand Alorchon. Letters of the said Vasquez to Don Antonio de Mendoca.
The said Don Antonio's Letter to the Emperor Charles V. Then more particularly
of Friar Marco's Discovery of Cevola or Cibola, 1539. And the said Vasquez his
Voyage thither, 1540. With the Continuation of this Voyage and Discovery, from
Fra. Lopez de Gomara's General History of the West Indies, and the said Lopez
his Description of the strange crook'd-back'd Oxen, great Sheep and Dogs in
Quivira. The Voyages of Friar Augustine Ruis, and Antonio de Espeio, to the 15
Provinces of Mexico, in 1581, 1582. Bartholomew Cano's Letter about the
building of two strong Forts in St. John de Ullua, and in Vera Cruz; also
touching the Discovery of Cibola or New Mexico, 400 Leagues North-west of
Mexico. Francisco de Ulloa's Voyage, at the Charges of Ferdinando Cortez, into
the Gulf of Calefornia, 1539, from Ramusio's third Volume of Voyages.
Ferdinando Alarchon's Discovery to the Bottom of the said Gulf, 1540. Sir
Francis Drake's Course from the Haven of Guatulco, in the South Sea, to the
North-west of Calefornia as far as 43 Degrees; where he landed, made many
Discoveries, had Possession given him, and named the Country Nova Albion. The
Voyage of Francisco de Gualle from Acapulco, in New Spain, to the Philippinas,
the Haven of Manilla, and Macao in China, and back again, in 1584. The English
Voyage to Mexico, and to most other principal Parts throughout the Kingdom of
New Spain, to Nicaragua, Panama, and Peru; as the Voyage of Robert Tomson into
Nova Hispania, 1555. Roger Bodenham's Voyage to St. John de Ullua, in the Bay
of Mexico, 1564. John Chilton's notable Observations of the People, Cities,
Riches, Mines, Forces, etc. of New Spain, and other West Indian Provinces, in
the space of 17 Years, returning into England 1586. Henry Hawks his Relation of
the Commodities of Nova Hispania, and the Manners of the Inhabitants, at the
Request of R. Hakluyt, Esquire of Eiton, 1572. A Discourse by Miles Philips, who
was set ashore by Sir John Hawkins near Panuco, 1568, of the Spanish Government
and their Cruelties in the West Indies; his several Imprisonments by them, his
Escapes and Return to England, after 14 Years. The Travels of Job Hortop, set
on land in the Bay of Mexico, by Sir John Hawkins, after his Departure from St.
John de Ullua, the same Year. A Relation of the Haven of Tecuanapa, situate on
the South Sea, describing the Rivers falling into that Haven, with the Towns,
etc. adjoining, fit for building and victualling of Ships. The English Voyages
to all the Isles called Las Antillas, and the greater Islands of Puerto Rico,
Hispaniola, Jamaica, Cuba, etc. with the taking, sacking, etc. most of the
principal Spanish Towns there; since their traitorous burning of the Jesus of
Lubec, murdering the English, and arresting their Ships and Goods, in 1585.
Beginning with the Voyage of Sir Thomas Pert, Vice Admiral of England, and
Sebastian Cabota, in 1516, to Brasil, Santo Domingo, and Sant Juan de Puerto
Rico, from a Work of that learned and painful Writer Richard Eden, called, A
Treatise of New India, and the Account of Gonsalvo de Oviedo. The Voyage of
Tho. Tison to the West Indies, before 1526, from an old Ligier Book of M. Nic.
Thorn of Bristol. The first Voyage of the Right Worshipful and Valiant Mr. John
Hawkins, since knighted, and sometime Treasurer of her Majesty's Navy Royal,
made to the West Indies, 1562. The second Voyage of the said Sir John Hawkins,
in the Jesus of Lubec, to the Coast of Guinea and Nova Hispania, 1564. His
third perilous Voyage in the said Jesus of Lubec, with five other Ships, to the
Parts aforesaid, in 1567, 1568. The first Voyage of that expert and valiant
Captain M. Francis Drake, in the Dragon, with two other Ships, to Nombre de
Dios and Dariene, about the Year 1572, written by Lopez Vaz; which Discourse
with the Author were taken at the River of Plate, by the Earl of Cumberland's
Ships in 1586. The Voyage of John Oxnam, of Plymouth, to the West Indies, and
into the South Sea, 1575, by the said Lopez Vaz. The Voyage of Andrew Barker to
Terra Firma, and the Bay of Honduras, 1576, collected by our Author Ric.
Hakluyt. The Opinion of Don Alvaro Bacan, High Admiral of Spain, touching the
Army of Sir Fra. Drake, at the Isles of Bayon in Galicia, written in Lisbon
1585. A summary and true Discourse of Sir Francis Drake's West Indian Voyage,
began in 1585, wherein were taken several Cities and Towns, published by Tho.
Cates. Baptista Antonio's Survey of the Ports, Harbors, Forts, and Cities in
the West Indies, which have been edified, repaired, etc. by the King of Spain's
Direction. The Voyage of Capt. William Michelson, and Master W. Mace, to the
Bay of Mexico, 1589. Spanish Letters intercepted by Mr. John Wattes his Ships,
containing many Secrets of the State of several West Indian Countries in 1590.
The memorable Fight in June 1591, against the Spanish Ships in the West Indies,
by three Ships of Sir Geo. Carey's, then Marshal of the Queen's Household, and
Captain of the Isle of Wight, since Lord Hunsdon, etc. John Twitt's Report of
Christ. Newport's Enterprise with three Ships and a Pinnace, set out in Jan.
1591, wherein were taken and burnt upon the Coast of Hispaniola, etc. 3 Towns,
and 19 Cities, etc. The Voyage to Mexico, by Capt. Will. King, etc. 1592. Henry
May's Note of a Voyage to the East Indies, begun in April 1591, with three tall
Ships and a Pinnace, ending with a large Description of Bermudas. The
Honorable Mr. Rob. Duddeley's Voyage to the Isle of Trinidad, and the Coast of
Paria, in which he took and sunk 9 Spanish Ships, written at the Request of Mr.
R. Hakluyt, concluding with some Words of the Trinidad Language. The victorious
Voyage of Capt. Amias Preston and Capt. Geo. Summers, to the West Indies, begun
in March 1595, written by Robert Davie. The Voyage of Sir Francis Drake and Sir
John Hawkins, with six of the Queen's Ships, and 21 others, to the West Indies,
Anno 1595; in which Voyage both those brave Knights died by Sickness. This is
followed with a Detection of the Spanish General's Slanders, which he published
in a Letter relating to this Voyage, and the Generals therein, particularly
that Sir F. Drake died of Grief, because he had lost so many Barks and Men; and
that the English Fleet fled from the said Spaniard, which, with other
Assertions, are contradicted by Capt. H. Savile, who was in the Expedition, and
Sir Thomas Baskervile, who returned General thereof. A true Relation of Sir
Anthony Shirley's Voyage to St. Jago, Dominica, Margarita, etc. and homeward by
Newfoundland, with the memorable Exploits achieved therein, 1596. The Voyage
of Capt. William Parker to Margarita, etc. the same Year, in which he joined
Sir A. Shirley, and they took Puerto de Cavallos, Campeche, etc. An excellent
Ruttier for the Islands of the West Indies, and for Terra Firma and Nueva
Espanna. Another principal Ruttier, containing most particular Directions for
sailing to all the Western Islands, with the Marks of all the Capes, etc. and a
Declaration of Longitudes and Latitudes. The Discovery of the large, rich and
beautiful Empire of Guiana, and many Provinces therein, Anno 1595, by Sir
Walter Ralegh, Captain of the Queen's Guard, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, and
Lieutenant General of Cornwall: Dedicated to his Kinsman the Lord Charles
Howard, Knight of the Garter, and Admiral of England; and to Sir Robert Cecyll,
of the Queen's Privy Council. To which is annexed, An Abstract of certain
Spanish Letters taken at Sea by Capt. Geo. Popham, concerning Guiana and the
Countries upon the great River Orenoque. A Relation of the second Voyage to
Guiana, performed and written in 1596, by Capt. Laurence Keymis; dedicated to
the approved right valorous, and worthy Knight Sir Walter Ralegh; at whose
Expense and Direction it was undertaken. After the Preface, we have an Heroic
Poem in English Verse, by G.C. upon this famous Enterprise. And some Latin
Verses, by Captain Keymis, to Mr. T. Hariot the Mathematician, in praise of
Guiana, and the Discoverer thereof; and at the end, a Table of the Rivers,
Nations, Towns, and Casiques discovered in this Voyage; with a List of all the
famous Spaniards, who have attempted this Discovery and Conquest. The third
Voyage set forth by Sir W. Ralegh to Guiana, in 1596, written by Mr. Tho.
Masham. Testimonies concerning the River of Amazons, and the wonderful Cataract
at the Head thereof, and of the stately Empire of Dorado or Guiana, etc. from
Joseph Acosta, and Martin Fernandez de Encica. Several Voyages, ancient and
modern, upon the Coast of Brazil, etc. beginning with the two Voyages of Mr. W.
Hawkins (Father to Sir John) in the Years 1530 and 1532. The Voyages of Rob.
Reniger and Tho. Borey to Brazil 1540, and of one Pudsey thither, in 1542. John
Whithal's Letter from thence to Ric. Staper, 1578. A Letter of the Adventurers,
sent to the said Whitehal there, 1580. Tho. Grig's Notes of Capt. Stephen
Hare's Voyage to Brazil the same Year. Account of the rich Trade begun there,
in a Letter from Fra. Suares to his Brother, 1596. The prosperous Voyage of Mr.
James Lancaster with three Ships and a Galley, in 1594, in which he took 29
Ships, etc. surprised Fernambuc, and brought home 15 Ships full of Goods.
Feliciano Cieca, Governor in Brazil, his Letter to the King of Spain,
mentioning, among other important Communications, a rich Silver Mine at
Copaoba. A special Note of the Currents of the Sea between the Cape of Buena
Esperanca and the Coast of Brazil, given by an experienced French Pilot to Sir
John York before Sebastian Cabot. A Ruttier or Course for those who would sail
from Cabo Verde to Brazil, and along the Coast to the River Plate, and from
hence to the Streights of Magellan. The Voyage of two Englishmen with Sebastian
Cabota to the River Plate, in 1527, from Rob. Thorne's Information to Dr. Ley,
Ambassador to the Emperor Charles, touching the Discovery of the Molucca's by
the North. An Extract from Lopez Vaz, concerning the Fight of Capt. Fenton,
with the Spanish Ships, with Capt. John Drake's Proceeding to the River of
Plate. A Ruttier of the Coast of Brasil from Santa Catelina to the Mouth of the
River of Plate, etc. The famous Voyage of Sir Fra. Drake, in the Pelican, to
the South Sea, and thence about the whole Globe of the Earth, begun from
Plymouth, 15 November, but driven back by Distress, and begun again 13 December
1577, with five Ships and Barks, and finished 3d of November, 1580, when he
arrived safe in England; concluding with the Names of the Kings and Prince of
Java then living, and certain Words of their Language. The Voyage of Nuno de
Silva, a Portugal Pilot, taken by Sir F. Drake at Cabo Verde, with his
Confession to the Viceroy of Mexico, of the Course and Actions which passed in
the Voyage of Sir Francis, during the time he was his Prisoner, concluding with
a Letter of Sir Fra. Drake to Mr. J. Winter. The said Mr. Winter's Voyage into
the South Sea, by the Straight of Magellan, with Sir Fra. Drake in 1577, the
first Englishman who ever repassed the said Straight: Written by Edward Cliffe.
Instructions by the Lords of the Council to Edward Fenton Esquire for his Voyage to
the East Indies and Cathay, 1582. The intended Voyage toward China, wherein
the said Edward Fenton was appointed General; written by Capt. Luke Ward his
Vice Admiral, 1582. The Voyage set out by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Cumberland, in 1586, for the South Sea, performed to 44 Degrees South of the
Equinox, written by Mr. John Saracoll, Merchant. A Discourse of the West Indies
and South Sea, written by Lopez Vaz, to the Year 1517; wherein, amongst some
uncommon Things, is a true Report of certain English Voyages; which Discourse
with its Author were taken at the River of Plate, by Capt. Witherington and
Capt. Christ. Lister, in the Fleet set forth by the Earl of Cumberland. The
admirable and prosperous Voyage of the Worshipful Thomas Candish of Trimley in
Suffolk, Esquire into the South Sea, and thence round the whole Earth, begun with
three Sail of Ships, 21 July 1586, and finished 9 Sept. 1588; written by Mr.
Francis Pretty. Certain rare and special Notes, which properly belong to the
said Voyage, concerning the Heights, Soundings, Lyings of Land, Distances of
Places, Variation of the Compass, Time in Sailing between Places; also
Harbors, Anchorings and Depths, with the Winds of several Coasts; written by
Mr. Thomas Fuller of Ipswich, Master in the Desire, of Mr. Candish, in his
foresaid Voyage. A Letter from the said Mr. Candish to the Lord Hunsdon,
touching the Success of his Voyage, dated the Day he returned to Plymouth.
Notes or References taken out of the large Map of China, brought home by Mr.
Candish. W. Magoth's Relation of a Voyage to the Straights of Magellan, under
John Chidley Esquire and Capt. Paul Wheel, 1589. A Petition by some of the Company
in the said Voyage, to the Master of their Ship. The last Voyage of the
Worshipful Tho. Candish Esquire intended for the South Sea, etc. and the Coast of
China, with three Ships and two Barks: he set forth the 26th of August 1591,
and on the 21st of May 1592, was lost near Port Desire. The Queen's Letters to
the Emperor of China, by and in behalf of Ric. Allot and Tho. Bromefield,
Merchants of London, whose Voyage thither was set forth at the Charge of Sir
Robert Duddeley. Testimonies concerning the mighty Kingdom of Coray, tributary
to the Emperor of China. A Note of an extreme Northern Province in Japan,
called Zuegara, and of a Nation of Tartars, called Jezi, never heard of in
these Parts before; as written from Japan in 1596, by Friar Luis Frois.
Advertisements of the Ships that go from Sevil to the Spanish Indies; with some
Notes of the Contractation-House in Seville. The Order of the Carena given to
Ships that go from Spain to the Indies. The Examination of Masters and Pilots
in the Spanish Fleets to the West Indies, by P. Dias, a Spanish Pilot; which,
with his Account of the Table of Rates in the Contractation-House aforesaid,
concludes this whole Work. And this Summary of it, may sufficiently intimate
what a Treasury of maritime Knowledge it is; wherefore we shall here take our
leave of it, with referring only to a needful Observation or two at the Bottom
And first, As it has been so useful to many of our Authors, not only in
Cosmography and Navigation, but in History, especially that of the glorious
Reign in which so many brave Exploits were achieved: As it has been such a
leading Star to the Naval Histories since compiled; and saved from the Wreck of
Oblivion many exemplary Incidents in the Lives of our most renowned Navigators;
it has therefore been unworthily omitted in the English Historical Library. And
lastly, Though the first Volume of this Collection does frequently appear, by the
Date, in the Title Page, to be printed in 1599. the Reader is not thence to
conclude the said Volume was then reprinted, but only the Title Page, as upon
collating the Books we have observed; and further, that in the said last
printed Title Page, there is no mention made of the Cadiz Voyage; to omit
which, might be one Reason of reprinting that Page: For it being one of the
most prosperous and honorable Enterprises that ever the Earl of Essex was
engaged in, and he falling into the Queen's unpardonable Displeasure at this
time, our Author, Mr. Hakluyt, might probably receive Command or Direction,
even from one of the Patrons to whom these Voyages are dedicated, who was of
the contrary Faction, not only to suppress all Memorial of that Action in the
Front of this Book, but even cancel the whole Narrative thereof at the End of
it, in all the Copies (far the greatest Part of the Impression) which remained
unpublished. And in that castrated Manner the Volume has descended to
Posterity; not but if the Castration was intended to have been concealed from
us, the last Leaf of the Preface would have been reprinted also, with the like
Omission of what is there mentioned concerning the Insertion of this Voyage.
But at last, about the middle of the late King's Reign, an uncastrated Copy did
arise, and the said Voyage was reprinted from it; whereby many imperfect Books
have been made complete.
.

XXVI. Enquiries touching the DIVERSITY of LANGUAGES and RELIGIONS, through the
chief Parts of the World. Written by EDW. BREREWOOD, lately Professor of
Astronomy in GRESHAM COLLEGE in LONDON. Printed by John Bill, 4to. 1622. Pages
203, besides Dedication, Preface, etc.
THIS learned Treatise, being published after the Author's Death, is dedicated
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, by Robert Brerewood, who, as it is thought,
did also compose the Preface to the Reader, showing the Occasions the Author
had to write the ensuing Discourse; and briefly describing the general State of
Protestants in Europe, for a Supply to the said Work.

It is divided into Twenty-seven Chapters; and treats, first, Of the ancient
Largeness or Extent of the Greek Tongue, and the Causes thereof, with its
Declension, upon the Inundation of the Saracens, about 640 Years after our
Savior, in the Time of Heraclius the Emperor. 2. More particularly of the
Decay of the ancient pure Greek, and of the present vulgar Greek; nevertheless
that the present Language does not so much decline from the ancient Greek, as
the Italian departs from the Latin, according to Bellonius: for that there were
Corruptions, even in the ancient Greek; however, it is concluded, that the
Skilful in the learned Greek cannot understand the vulgar. 3. Of the Extent of
the Roman Tongue in the time of the Roman Empire, with the Causes of its
spreading, and in what Parts of the Empire it was most spoken: That it was
little respected in the Eastern Parts thereof, and why. 4. That the Roman
Tongue abolished not the vulgar Languages in the foreign Provinces of the Roman
Empire, but that near fourteen Tongues here mentioned (in which Number the
English, Italian, Spanish, and French, are not reckoned, our Author instancing
only Original or Mother Languages) were in Europe in the Time of the Roman
Empire, and six or seven of them within the Limits of it. From hence it is
observed, how hard it is to supplant vulgar Languages in populous Countries:
That neither the Punic, nor the Gallic, the Spanish, or Pannonian Tongue was
abolished by the Romans; and that the Latin was neither generally nor perfectly
spoken in the Provinces. 5. Of the beginning of the Italian, French, and
Spanish Languages; with the Ruin of the Roman Empire, when, and by whom; and
that Barbarous Nations were not the first Authors of those degenerate
Languages, but rather Promoters of their Corruptions. 6. Objections touching
the Extent of the Latin Tongue answered; That it was never purely spoken in the
foreign Provinces; that there were great Changes in it; whereof, he concludes
with a pregnant Example from the Inscription upon that naval Column (they call
it Columnam Rostratam, being decked with the Beaks of Ships) in the Capitol at
Rome; which Inscription, though composed not above 150 Years before the Tongue
shone in its full Luster under Cicero, has not one Word in it spelled like the
later Latin that is subjoined: An Example which may give the English Tongue
some Countenance, though our Author does mention an Instance or two also of its
Mutability, since it is in a far larger Compass of Years. 7. Of the Ancient
Languages of Italy, Spain, France, and Africa: That the Punics of Africa were
originally Canaanites or Phoenicians, and that the Punic Language was the old
Hebrew Tongue; and though that Punic Speech in Plautus, which is the only
Specimen of it extant, has no great Affinity with the Hebrew, yet it is imputed
to the Corruptions of Transcription. 8. Of the great Extent of the Slavonic,
Turkish, and Arabic Tongues. 9. Of the Syriac and Hebrew Tongues; the Beginning
and Change of the Syriac; the Difference of Hebrew from Chaldee and Syriac; the
Greek and Chaldee Translations read in the Synagogues. 10. Of the sundry Parts
of the World inhabited by Christians; that Christians were mingled with
Mahometans in Europe; the weak State of Christianity in Africa; the Dimensions
of the Kingdom of Abessia; the State of Christianity in Asia, its Regions and
Islands; and its Declension in the East Parts thereof; with the Condition of
Christianity in America. 11. Of the Parts of the World possessed by Mahumetans;
the large Extent of Mahumetism in Africa and in Asia; and why so mightily
increased. 12. Of the sundry Regions in the World inhabited by Idolaters; what
Part of Africa possessed by them, and what Parts of Asia; their vast Extent in
America. 13. Of the Jews dispersed in several Parts of the World; the State of
them in Europe, Asia, and Africa. Tartars suspected to be of the Israelites
Race: That Americans are the Progeny of the Tartars: That many Nations are
circumcised besides the Israelites, and therefore that Circumcision is no sure
Token of Descent from them: That the Tartarians are not the Offspring of the
Israelites: That the second Book of Esdras contradicts the Scripture: That the
Israelites departed not out of the Dominion of Assyria: that Arsareth was a
feigned Mansion of the Israelites; and that their Voyage and remote Retirement
favors of the same Talmudisal Spirit with that other Tale of the reason why
God appointed the Sea for the Whale, and the Land for the Elephant, because
they were too big to be Inhabitants together in either of those Elements;
whereupon we have a Digression upon the Dimensions of those two Animals; the
Deepness of the Sea, and Height of Mountains; that the Sea is not higher than
the Land, and the Depth of the Sea more than the Height of the Mountains; the
great Declivity of the Face of the Land, and great Deepness of the Sea. 14. Of
the Quantity and Proportion of the Parts of the Earth possessed by the several
Sorts of the abovementioned Religions; as, the Proportion of Christians to
Mahometans and Idolaters; the vast greatness of the South Continent, and of the
Antartic Continent. 15. Of the diverse Sorts or Sects of Christians in the
World, and of their several Regions: And first of the Grecians: The large
Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople, and by what Means increased;
the Properties of the Grecian Religion. 16. Of the Assyrians or Melchites;
their Religion differs not from the Grecians; the Patriarch of Antioch's
Jurisdiction distracted. 17. Of the Georgians, Circassians and Mengrellians,
with their Religion. 18. Of the Muscovites, and the Properties or Principles of
their Religion. 19. Of the Nestorians, and how far spread in the Orient; their
Patriarch seated in Musal; the Properties or Principles of their Religion. 20.
Of the Indians or Christians of St. Thomas, and their Habitation; that they
were Nestorians, and became of the Roman Religion; Properties of the ancient
Indian Religion; and that the New Testament in Syriac is no ancient
Translation. 21. Of the Jacobites; the Antiquity and Seat of their Patriarch;
Properties of their Religion. 22. Of the Cophti, or Christians of Egypt;
infected by the Heresies of Eutyches, and how much ^ooted there: The great
Jurisdiction of the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Jerusalem. 23. Of the
Abassines; and the Dependence of their Church on Alexandria: Properties of
their Religion, and that Circumcision is a national Property among them. 24. Of
the Armenians; and that their Church is governed by two Patriarchs; their
Jurisdiction, and the Properties of their Religion. 25. Of the Maronites, and
their Habitation in Libanus; the Residence and Jurisdiction of their Patriarch;
the Articles of their present and ancient Religion; the beginning and spreading
of Eutychianism; the pestilent Train of Eutyches his Heresy, the Oriental Sects
reclaimed from their Errors touching Christ. 26. Of the several Languages
wherein the Liturgies of Christians, in several Parts of the World, are
celebrated: The Jews Prayers in Hebrew; Mahumetans in Arabic; the Christian
Liturgy anciently in Syriac; Armenian Liturgy in the Armenian Tongue; the
Abassines and Muscovites Liturgy in their own Language; the Slavonian Liturgies
in the Slavonic; that the Scriptures were translated into vulgar Tongues by the
Fathers; the original Liturgies in the Syriac; also those of the Nestorians,
the Indians, Jacobites, Egyptians, and Maronites; the Grecian and Syrian
Liturgies in Greek; also those of the Georgians and Circassians. Lastly, Of the
Languages of the People of Europe; collected out of Jos. Scaliger: And with
this ends the whole Work.

XXVII. FINETTI PHILOXENIS: Some choice Observations of Sir JOHN FINETT Knight,
and Master of the Ceremonies to the two last Kings, touching the Reception and
Precedence, the Treatment and Audience, the Puntillios and Contests of Foreign
AMBASSADORS in ENGLAND. With this Motto, Legati ligant Mundum. 8vo. London
1656. Pages 250, besides the Dedication and Table.
THIS curious Book, containing the Author's Observations on the Treatment and
Contests of foreign Ambassadors in England, from the Year 1612, to the Year
1627, inclusive, was published after the Author's Death, from the Manuscript by
his intimate Acquaintance, Mr. James Howell.

The Editor, in his Dedication to Philip Lord Viscount Lisle, gives this
Account of the Author: "Among other Parts of Industry, which were known to be
in that worthy Knight, one was, to couch in Writing and keep an exact Diary of
what things had passed in his Province, as Master of the Ceremonies." And he
observes, that "Nothing is taken here upon Trust, but all upon the Author's own
Knowledge, being still upon the Place himself, and an Actor in everything We
may further add, The Author was, by King James I. about the Middle of his
Reign, made Assistant to Sir Lewis Lewkner, Master of the Ceremonies, in which
Service he acquitted himself with great Honor and Fidelity: whereupon King
Charles, after his Father's Death, not only continued him in hi^ Place, but
gave him a reversionary Grant of the Office of Master of the Ceremonies; which
came to his Possession by the Death of Sir Lewis, 10th of March 1626. During
his whole Service, he applied himself with great Assiduity; retiring only when
Occasion would serve, to his Country House at Twittenham. It was his constant
Maxim to give the least Occasion to, and avoid as much as possible, the too
nice Punctillios of Procedence between Ambassadors; which seldom fail to breed
Animosities in their Sovereigns: And, by this means, he was not only much
esteemed by the Ambassadors, which turned greatly to his Advantage, with regard
to their usual Presents; but he likewise prevented the Trouble that would have
ensued to his Majesty, of hearing their frivolous Complaints. As to this Work,
it was the Author's Method, as appears by the Editor's Dedication, to couch in
Writing, what things passed in his Province, not only for his own, but for the
Information of others; and his Notes were more than once, as appears by his own
Words, produced to the Lord Chamberlain to regulate by Precedents the
Differences which happened between Ambassadors: And in one of his Observations,
page 129. he says he does it, " for future Occasions and Use to the Master of
the Ceremonies;" which plainly shows his Intention, that these Observations
should be made public; and to every one in that Province, they may, no doubt,
be of great Use and Instruction. And they may be of further and still greater
Use, as well in illustrating some Parts of Mons. Wiquefort, as the English
History in that Period, well known to have so much abounded in Embassies, and
in the Particulars whereof our Historians of those Times are very deficient,
not having had the Light of these Observations. Anthony Wood, who informs us,
that he lived to the Age of 70 Years, and died in 1641, yet gives us no Account
how long he remained in his Office, nor why he so abruptly discontinued his
Observations. But we have heard there now is an original or authentic MS. of
them in being, which might give further Intelligence in this Particular.
."

The Work itself consists of two Parts, and is continued in a chronological
Method.

Part I. Containing the Author's Services under K. James, begins with the
Arrival of the Count Palatine of the Rhine to marry the Princess Elizabeth on
the 16th of October. 1612, attended by Count Henry of Nassau, and eight other
Counts. Then shows the Discontent of Mons. Boiscot, the Arch-Duke's Ambassador,
on Precedence given to the Venetian Ambassador at the Marriage; with the King's
Apology in Writing, sent by the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain. The
Viscountess Effingham's Dispute with the French Ambassador's Wife for
Precedence. Afterward we have an Account of the Marriage in Feb. following, of
which he extols the Bravery and Riches; adding, that the King's, Queen's, and
Prince's Jewels only, were valued by his Majesty at 900000 l. Sterling. He then
shows the Occurrences at the Invitation of Ambassadors to the Marriage of the
Earl of Somerset in December 1613. Next follows a Clash between the Agents of
Savoy and Florence. Mons. de Buisseaux, the French Ambassador, has the Honor
of sitting in a Chair with the Prince, at the Marriage of Lady Jane Drummond,
on the 20th of Feb. following. The Spanish Ambassador Don Diego Sarmiento
(afterward Count Gondomar) excepts against Sir Noel Caron, the Ambassador of
the States, (whom he calls his Master's Vassals and Rebels) sitting with him in
the King's Presence, and refuses to be at a Mask in January 1614; with the
King's Reasonings thereupon. An Ambassador from Russia 26 of October. following.
The Arrival in July, 1615, of Zomoiski, a young Nobleman of Poland, Son of the
famous Chancellor of that Kingdom, and his Audience of the King. The Reception
of Monsieur de Mareth, the French Ambassador; a Question thereupon between
Secretary Winwood and the Master of the Ceremonies. Foscarini, the Venetian
Ambassador, dissatisfied with his Present; with the King's Answer for
satisfying him. Segnior Barbarigo succeeds in his stead. Sir Dudley Carleton
returns from his Embassy thither. Sir H. Wotton nominated in his room. Mons. de
Mareth, Segnior Barbarigo, and the Savoyard Ambassador at a Mask at Twelf-tide.
Those three Ambassadors, and Sir Noel Caron, at a Reader's Feast in the Temple.
A Messenger from Russia received. Mons. de Mareth at St. George's Feast, in
1617, without Notice. The King and he invited by the Earl of Exeter to hunt at
Wimbleton. Don Diego Sarmiento invited to hunt with the King at Theobalds. The
Creation of the Prince of Wales the 1st of November. The Arrival of two
Ambassadors from Russia; one whereof being the Chancellor of that Kingdom,
brought a Present of Furs, etc. to the King, esteemed worth 4000 l. The
Ambassador of Sweden's Arrival, and Audience; dines with the King at Newmarket,
sees the Earl of Suffolk's rare Building at Newport, and is knighted. A Clash
between Don Diego Sarmiento and Mons. de Mareth, about going to a Mask at
Twelf-tide; the latter makes Remonstrances to his Court, and departs. The
King's Recommendation of Capt. Manwaring to Seignior Contareni, the Venetian
Ambassador, come for the King's Leave to raise certain Companies here for their
War. Several ceremonious Audiences of the Russian Ambassadors, and their
Departure in May 1618, having obtained only Part of a Loan of 100000 Marks,
with Sir Dudley Digges Ambassador to Russia. The Lords Examination in Sept.
following of Mons. le Clerc, the French Agent, touching the employing Mons. de
la Chenay, one of his Domestics, for conveying Sir Walter Ralegh to France. A
Messenger from Turkey, whose Son is touched for the King's Evil. Seignior
Donati succeeds Contareni, who is recalled to Venice. The Sitting of
Ambassadors at a Mask with the King reformed. The Arrival and Audience, in
1619, of Count de Tillieurs, the French Ambassador; also of a young Duke of
Holstein; of Count Guido, Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy, to condole the
Death of Queen Anne; of Baron Denow, from Prince Palatine, to notify his
Master's Accession to the Crown of Bohemia; of Monsieur Beninch Hauson from the
Princes of the Union in Germany; and of Count de Gondomar, Ambassador from
Spain. A Difference between the Counts de Gondomar and de Tillieurs, for
Precedence at a Mask the 24th of March, and between other Ambassadors. The
Venetian Axiom; That the first Place of inferior Degree is worse than the last
of a superior. The pompous Arrival, in December 1620, of the Marquess de
Cadenet, Extraordinary from France, attended by above 50 Persons of Title, and
their Treatment: He is allowed 200 l. per Diem. Six Commissioners from the
States are knighted, but pay no Fees. Osalinskie, Count Palatine of
Sindomerskie, Ambassador Extraordinary from Poland, arrives in March, and
departs with a Loan of 10,000 l. Sterling, obtained by the cunning Assistance
of Count de Gondomar. Three Ambassadors from the States the 23d of December
1621. The Russian Ambassador Thomas Simonwitz, with his Puntillio for
Precedence. The Reception of the Emperor's Ambassador Suartzenberg, in April
1622. His Question with the Venetian and French Ambassadors concerning Titles
and Visits. The Reception of the young Landgrave of Hesse; and his Departure in
three Months. Don Carlos de Colonna, Ambassador from Spain. The States
Ambassador's Distaste. The Russian Ambassador's Dissatisfaction at his Present.
Audience of Duke of Soubize, Refugee from France. Seignior Valeresso,
Ambassador from Venice. The States Ambassadors Exceptions on their not being
invited to a Mask. Mons. de Boiscot, Ambassador Extraordinary from the
Archduke. The Marquess de la Inoiosa, Extraordinary from Spain. The Prince's
Return from Spain, in May 1623, attended by Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza,
Ambassador Extraordinary from Spain. The French Ambassador gets ground of the
Spanish. Differences about Precedence between the Spanish Ambassadors. Don
Diego de Mexia, from the Arch-Dutchess. Reasons why the Master of the
Ceremonies should sit in the same Coach with the Ambassadors, whom he is sent
to receive. The Duke of Buckingham entertains the King and several Ambassadors
at a Supper and Mask. A Clash between the French and Spanish Ambassadors. Sir
Robert Sherley, Ambassador from Persia. Two Ambassadors from the States. The
Spanish Ambassadors depart in June 1624, without Success in their Treaty of
Marriage between the Prince and Infanta. Marquis de Fiat, Ambassador
Extraordinary from France to treat of Marriage: Monsieur de Villiaveler from
France, about the same Business. Then the Author concludes Part I. in this
manner. "Here end the Services of my Place of Assistant Master of the
Ceremonies under King James, who died the 27th of March following."

Part II. Containing the Author's Services under King Char. I. begins with the
first Audience of the Persian Ambassador Sir Robert Sherley, and an Account of
the Solemnization of King James's Funeral, 7 May 1625. The Complaint of the
Venetian Ambassador against Sir Lewis Lewkner, for neglecting to invite him to
the Funeral: His Reason for claiming Parity with Ambassadors of crowned Heads.
The King goes to Canterbury to meet Maria Henrietta of France, affianced to
him: News brought from Dover to Canterbury of her Arrival, in half an Hour, by
R. Tirwhit: Their first Interview: Ratification of the King's Marriage. Three
Ambassadors from the States. A Messenger from Turkey. The Marquess de
Bleinvill, the French Ambassador's Remonstrances with regard to his Lodging and
Diet at Court: His Reason for not assisting at the Coronation: His Discontent
and Departure. The remarkable Outrage of the new Persian Ambassador against Sir
Robert Sherley. The Reception of Seignior Coraro, and Seignior Contareni,
Venetian Ambassadors, in 1626. Two Commissioners from Hamborough. Paul
Rozencrantz, Ambassador from Denmark. The French removed from the Person of the
Queen. Monsieur Quadt, Ambassador from Bethlem Gabor, Prince of Transylvania,
his Reasons why he covered at his first, but not at his last Audience of the
Queen. The Reception of Monsieur de Bassompierre, Ambassador from France, about
the Removal of the French from the Queen's Person: He is present at several
Masks. A Difference between the Master of the Ceremonies, and Sir H. Mildmay,
Master of the Jewel-house, about carrying Presents to Ambassadors. The
Reformation of Ambassadors sitting next the King, under the State, and eating
with him. A Deputy from the States, who at his Departure was knighted. The
Danish Ambassador returns from his Negotiation in France, 29 Mar. 1627: His
Complaint against Philip Weisman, a German, whose Trade was to defray
Ambassadors. The Venetian Ambassador declines being at St. George's Feast, on a
Punctillio of Precedence to the Danish. A Particular of the Gratuities given by
the Danish Ambassador to all the Kings Servants. The insolent Treatment of the
Duke of Soubize (the French Refugee) his Followers, by some drunken Mariners.
Two Commissioners from Saliy in Barbary. Count Emden (Brother to the Chief of
that Title) his Arrival. A new Ordinance touching the Diet, Lodging, and
Presents of Ambassadors. The Reception of the Marquess Pompeio Strozzi,
Ambassador from the Duke of Mantua: his Expostulations upon the New Ordinance.
Two Ambassadors from Denmark. The Order established that no Ambassador should
be defrayed but at Conclusion of Peace, Marriages, and Baptisms. Distinctions
in the Reception of Regal and Ducal Ambassadors. The Abbot de la Seaglia,
Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy: The too nice Punctillios of the Danish and
Venetian Ambassadors about visiting him. The Lord Mayor of London's Refusal to
give place to the King of Denmark's Ambassador, within the City. The Duke of
Buckingham's Displeasure at the Ambassador of Savoy, for procuring the Lady
Purbeck's Escape. The Venetian Ambassador's Complaint, on account of
intercepting his Letters. Two Ambassadors from the States: Their Exceptions and
Punctillios satisfied. The Author then steps backward to the Year 1624, and
gives an Account of a Remonstrance made by Sir Walter Aston the King's
Ambassador in Spain to that Court, on the notable Plot traced by the Spanish
Ambassadors (the Marquess de Inonosa, and Don Carlos Colonia) in that Year, to
destroy the Duke of Buckingham. And with this ends the Work.

XXVIII. ORIGINES JURIDICIALES: or Historical Memorials of the English Laws,
Courts of Justice, Forms of Trial, Punishment in Cases Criminal, Law-Writers,
Law Books, Grants and Settlements of Estates, Degree of Sergeant, Inns of Court
and Chancery. Also a CHRONOLOGY of the Lord Chancellors and Keepers of the
Great Seal, Lord Treasurers, Justices Itinerant, Justices of the King's Bench
and Common Pleas, Barons of the Exchequer, Masters of the Rolls, King's
Attorneys and Sollicitors, and Sergeants at Law. By Sir WILLIAM DUGDALE, now
Garter, Principal King of Arms. The Third Edition with Additions, and
Sculptures. Folio. Pages 336, the Historical Part, and the Chronological, 122.
Printed, 1680.
THE historical Part of this Work, which that elaborate and accomplished
Antiquary, its Author, designed as an Introduction to the chronological Tables,
is divided into seventy-eight Chapters, beginning with the Original of
Government, which our Author thinks he cannot better express, or account for,
than in the Words of Sir Walter Ralegh, which are here quoted at length, from
his History of the World. Then he proceeds to treat, all in distinct Chapters;
Of the beginning of Laws; The Antiquity of ours in England; our ancient Laws
and Lawmakers; Parliaments, Judges; Chief Justices of England; Lawyers; Courts
of Justice; Court Baron; the Hundred Court; the Trihing, or Lathe; the
Shireeves Turn, the Country Court, Court Leet; the Chancery, and Antiquity of
the Lord Chancellor's Jurisdiction for hearing of Civil Causes; the King's
Bench Court; the Common Pleas, with a Table of the Justices of the Common
Pleas, before whom Fines are levied, from the 7th of King Richard I. to the
16th of King Charles II. Of the Exchequer, Justices Itinerant, Justices of
Assize and Gaol Delivery, a Table of our ancient Laws, British, Saxon, West
Saxon, and, since the Normans, down to K. Henry III. By whom they were
composed, and in what MSS. or Histories, the Collections are extant. A
Catalogue of our Law-Writers and Law Books, beginning with the Mirror of
Justices, wherein is seen how the Kingdom was governed eleven hundred Years
since, and ending with T. Blount's Law-Dictionary; with the Times when printed,
or Places where they remain in MS. taking up above nine Pages, and ending with
Law Books and Treatises of uncertain Times. Of Trial by twelve Men. Trial by
Combat in Cases civil. Trial by great Assize. Trial by Combat in Cases
criminal. Trial by Fire and Water Ordale. Wager of Law, or personal Oath.
Punishment in Cases criminal. Of the four Terms, Hilary, Easter, Trinity and
Michaelmas, from a MS. of Sir H. Spelman's. Fines, how ancient; in what manner,
before whom, and where levied. Pleadings in the French Tongue. Limitation of
Time for pleading in some special Cases. Outlaries, how ancient. Justices of
the King's Courts in Westminster Hall, how created: Their Vestments. Here we
have a Sculpture of some Judges in their Habits, from Sir Robert Grimbald's
Seal, and some monumental Effigies, with the Judges Decree in 1635. and a
Remark at the End about the Collar of SS. That Justices of the King's Courts at
Westminster, were anciently dignified with Knighthood. Their ancient yearly
Fees, or Salaries. Of Sergeants at Law: The ancient Form and Order used in
making them, from Sir John Fortescue's Book De Laud. Legum Angliae. The Manner
of making three Sergeants at Law, of the Middle Temple, 19th Henry VII. Others
13 Henry VIII. Others 1 Edw. VI. And others 19 and 20 Eliz. Of the Sergeants
Feasts. The Order of a Serjeant's Feast the 2 and 3 of Phil. and Mar. Their
Writs of Summons; and their Robes. When they were first knighted: The Form of
Creating them at this day. A Memorial of the said Ceremony by the Judges, Anno
1635. A Discharge of the said State and Degree, to Ralph Rokeby; another
Discharge to Tho. Fleming, made Sollicitor-General. Of settled Places for
Students, called Inns of Court and Chancery. Of the Inns of Chancery. Of the
Inner Temple, the Buildings, Orders for Government and Learning there; several
Accounts of their Feasts at Christmas; Orders and Exercises: The Officers of
this House: A Catalogue of the Readers of the Inner Temple, another of the
Treasurers, and a third of the Governors. Of the Temple Church; with the
monumental Inscriptions, and at that of Mr. Seldom, here is (in this last
Edition) a Copper Print of him inserted, graved by Rob. White. Next, we have
three Pages of Sculpture, representing all the Arms painted in the Windows of
the said Temple Hall. After this, an Account of three Inns of Chancery,
belonging to the Inner Temple; which are Clifford's Inn, Clement's Inn, and
Lion's Inn. So we come to the Middle Temple, and its Buildings; Orders for
Government and Learning, with the Legacy of Mr. Robert Ashley's Books toward a
Library. Other Orders for Government, Charge of Diet, Stipend of Officers, etc.
as in the Time of King Henry VIII. from a MS. in the Cottonian Library. The
State of the House at present, containing the Offices of Servants, the
Admission and Degrees, Exercises, and Fines or Penalties of Students; with the
annual Wages of all Masters or Members of the Society, and Underofficers. A
Catalogue of the Readers in the Middle Temple, from 17 Henry VII. and of the
Treasurers there. Then follow the Representations in Sculpture, for 6 Pages and
a half, of all the Arms in the great Hall of this House, and a short Account of
the two Inns of Chancery belonging thereto, which were New-Inn and Strand-Inn.
Then we come to Lincoln's End, and its Buildings; namely, the Square, Library
and Gatehouse; the Gardens, and the Terras raised there, in 1663. An Account of
the Portraits of the Prophets and Apostles, in the Window of the Chapel, and
the Coats of Arms under them; with a Representation also in Sculpture of those
Arms, in 4 Pages and a half. Next, of their Orders for Government in this
House; Expenses at their Solemnities, Revels, Grand Christmas; and of their
Readers; with a Catalogue of them from 4 Edw. IV. and another of their
Governors, from 3 of Henry VI. ending with an Account of four famous Persons of
this House, not mentioned in those Catalogues, who were Sir John Fortescue, Sir
Arthur Plantagenet, William Lambard, and Sir Henry Spelman. This is followed
with a Letter, by the Privy Council, to restrain building in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. So after some Account of the Orders of the Society, their
Rules of Exercise, and the two Inns of Chancery belonging to this Inn, which
were Furnival's Inn, and Thavye's Inn; we pass to Gray's Inn, and the Account
of its Buildings, with the planting of its Walks, Orders for Government,
Exercise for Learning, Readers, and double Readers, Commons, Barresters and
Apparel: Of the Chapel: Their Sports and Pastimes; Copy of the ancient
standing Orders of this Society, as to their Commons, Chapel, Exercises,
Degrees, and Chambers. After which, we have a Catalogue of the Readers of this
House, from the 5th of Henry VIII. and of the Treasurers, from the 22d of the
same Reign, and ten Pages of the Arms in Sculpture, which are in the Windows of
the Hall and Chapel of the said Inn, ending with the proper Arms of the twelve
several Inns of Court and Chancery, also in Sculpture. Then we have an Account
of the Inns of Chancery belonging to Gray's-Inn, which are Staple Inn, and
Barnard's Inn; and this is followed with the Judges Orders to be observed in
all the four Houses or Inns of Court, made the 3d and 4th of Phil. and Mar.
others made 1 Eliz. and others the 16th. Others for better regulating the
Readings in all the Inns of Court; others by the general Consent of the Judges
and Bench of Gray's-Inn; others to be observed by the Inns of Court and
Chancery, 36 Eliz. An Answer to the former Orders by the Society of
Lincoln's End. Other Orders at Serjeants-Inn, 38 Eliz. others, 1 Jac. others
agreed on by the Readers and Benchers of the four Houses of Court, 12 Jac.
Orders for establishing the Company of the Inns of Court and Chancery in their
Exercises and military Discipline, tempore Regis Jacobi. Orders to be observed
in the Houses of Court, subscribed by all the Judges 1627. Orders by the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, all the Judges of both Benches, and Barons of the
Exchequer, by Command of the Privy Council, for the Government of the Inns of
Court and Chancery, 6 Caroli primi. Orders at the Council Table, 19 Mar. 1636.
And further, in the last Editions, one Copy more of Orders, by the Lord
Chancellor, and all the Judges and Barons of the Exchequer, by Command of the
King, for the Government of the Inns of Court and Chancery, 16 of Charles II.
Next, as in the former Editions, a Table of the mootable Days, in the Reading
times, for the Inns of Chancery. Of the two Sergeants Inns; first of that in
Fleet Street, with three Pages in Sculpture of the Arms in the Hall, as they
were observed there, in 1599, by Mr. W. Burton; and another Page of the Arms
there, as they were, before the Fire of London, in 1664. And lastly, in the
next Page, the Arms (and Names also, as all the other Coats have over them) of
those Heads of this House, who were Contributors to the new Building. This is
followed with an Account of Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane; at the Conclusion
of which, it appears, how a Lease thereof was granted to Sir Anthony Ashley,
for three Lives; that of Philippa his Wife, afterward married to Carew Ralegh,
Esquire and two of his Servants; under whom the Judges and Sergeants then held it.
Next, after a short Account of Scroop's Inn, which was an Inn for Sergeants, we
have a Print, in one Page, of the Arms in the Hall Windows of Sergeants Inn, in
Chancery Lane, as they were in 1664. The next Chapter gives us the Inscriptions
on three Monuments in the Chapel of the Rolls. And the last Chapter is a Copy
of a Letter from the Lords of the Privy Council, Anno 1573, to the Shireeves of
the several Counties in England, for easing them in their Entertainment of the
Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery, with Diet, in their respective Circuits.
Thus, after a short Index to this first Part of the Book, we arrive at the
last, by our Author, entitled,

CHRONICA SERIES Cancellariorum, etc. In which useful Tables of the said Lord
Chancellors, Lord Treasurers, Judges, Barons of the Exchequer, Masters of the
Rolls, King's Attorneys and Sollicitors, and Sergeants at Law, from the
beginning of William the Conqueror, Anno 1067, in distinct Columns, parallel
with each other, down (in this last Edition) to the Year 1680, may be seen, in
one View, as our Author observes, "how the famous Men for Knowledge in our Laws
stood Contemporary through all Ages since the Conquest; also, what great and
noble Families have sprung from those Roots: and lastly, rectify the common
Mistakes among young Students, in reading the ancient Year-Books, where they
are apt to mistake the Judge for the Pleader, and the Abbreviations of Judges
Names for their proper and perfect Appellations." Our Author was at the Expense
of Engraving the Heads or Effigies of some of the Chancellors and Judges,
mentioned in these Tables; but they are differently bound up, sometimes before,
sometimes after them, and sometimes interspersed in the Chronology, against the
Pages where their Creations are mentioned. These Heads are those of Sir John
Clench, etch'd by Hollar; Sir Edward Coke, graved by D. Loggan; Sir Randolph
Crew, and Sir Robert Heath, by Hollar; the Earl of Clarendon, by Loggan; to
which Chancellor, the first Edition of this Book being inscribed, his Print is
often bound therein, at the beginning thereof; and further, which are not in
the first Edition, Sir Orlando Bridgman, graved by Faithorne, which is in the
second and last Editions; and Sir John Vaughan, by White, which is only in this
last. So that the last Edition has, with Mr. Selden's Head before mentioned,
three Cuts more than the first: But those in that, are, as must be expected, of
more lively and perfect Impression. At the End of these Tables, we have, in one
Page, a Continuation of the Catalogues of the Readers and Treasurers of the
Inner Temple, Middle Temple, Lincoln's End, and Gray's-Inn; which should have
followed at the end of those Catalogues, in their respective Places, had what
passes for this last Edition been entirely reprinted, but except the Title Page
at the beginning of the Book, and three Leaves at the end, continuing the
Chronology, and Catalogues aforesaid, it is the same with the second Impression,
and they are so much worse than the first, by how much the Errata of the Press
in them are more numerous; however, this last Edition sells in the Shops,
sometimes, for as much again as the first. And this is all we have here to
remark of this Book, from our present Review of it, and the Opportunity we have
had of collating the several Editions: What others have observed, we refer to
below Of these Editions we shall only add, That the first was published in
1666, that the historical Part consists of 332 Pages, and the Chronology of
117, when the Figures of the Pages are rightly corrected, ending at the Year
1665. The second Edition was printed 1671, has in the historical Part, like
this last, 336 Pages; and in the chronological, 117, ending at the Year 1671.
Ant. Wood says, "That of the first Impression, many Copies were burnt by the
Fire of London:" And that, "in the Chronica Series are many Faults;" which will
not so much be wondered at, by those who have read how much of it was now first
calculated, and in a manner guessed at, through the Defect of Registers, as that,
for such a Space of Time, the Author should be able to settle so many Persons
in their respective Places. Bishop Nicholson is of Opinion, "That our first
Enquiries after the History of the Laws of this Kingdom, ought to begin with
the careful reading of this Book; which we shall find so accurately penned, and
with so good a Mixture of Learning and Judgment, that it will almost do the
Work alone: That he cannot give a better View of this most elaborate Treatise,
than by telling the Reader, it fully answers its Title Page; giving as complete
a History, as it was possible for one Man to furnish us with, of the
Particulars therein mentioned: That under all these Heads, the Collections are
many, and the Method exact; so that we have abundance without Superfluity; and
all we can wish for, without the hazard of being cloyed: That in the
Chronology, if any thing has escaped the Search of so diligent and curious a
Writer, the Tables are so ordered, that every Reader's additional Discoveries
are quickly marshalled and tribed under their proper Columns: And lastly, That
out of these, and Rastal's Table of Years, were stolen the Chronica
Juridicialia;" which is printed in 8o. 1685.
.

XXIX. The NATURAL HISTORY of STAFFORDSHIRE: By ROB. PLOT, LL. D. Keeper of the
Ashmolean Musaeum, and Professor of Chemistry in the University of Oxford. Fol.
Oxford 1686. Pages 450.
THIS Work, by the Title, seemingly confined to the remarkable Productions of
Nature, only in one County; therefore, under that Consideration alone,
particularly engaging to all ingenious Natives thereof, is nevertheless such an
extensive Field of curious and instructive Matter, so various in its kinds, yet
connected by such easy Transitions, and supported by such pertinent Parallels,
as have rendered it of a more general or comprehensive Nature; so as to become
a Pattern, though scarcely equaled, to several Writers, who have attempted the
Illustration of other Counties in the like manner, and may indeed be coveted by
all Readers, who delight in natural Knowledge.

It is dedicated by the Author to King James, because of the Approbation his
Majesty had shown to his History of Oxford; and after his short Preface, we
have the Verses of T. Lane to the said King James II. upon occasion of the
Author's presenting him this Work: Also others to the Author himself, by Mr. J.
Norris, in English, and S. Welsted, in Latin. After this, the Work is faced
with a most accurate Map of the County; inscribed by the Author to the Lord
Lieutenant thereof, Charles Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. It is graved on a large
Sheet, folding in, by Joseph Brown, having the Arms of all the Gentry in the
County displayed about the Margins, and such mutual References, that any
Stranger, seeing a Seat in the Map, may most readily find the Arms and Name
that belong to it; or knowing only the Name, shall as quickly find his Arms and
Seat. Yet we have the further Convenience, for the less apprehensive Reader, of
an Explanation prefixed, and an alphabetical List of all the Parishes,
Villages, and Houses delineated therein.

As to his Method; that which he formerly prescribed himself in his Natural
History of Oxfordshire, being approved of, he follows the same here; whereby
the whole Work is divided into Ten Chapters; which are interspersed with
thirty-seven Copper Prints of the chief Seats and Views, Curiosities of Nature,
and Antiquities found in the County; each Print inscribed to the Owners of
those Seats, or other eminent Natives of the said Shire. Chapter I. treats of
what has been observable among them in the Heavens and Air; as, particularly,
the Remark of the Moorland Inhabitants upon the Sunset, in the Summer
Solstice; also the Mock-Suns frequent in this County. Remarkable Rainbows, as,
of the Moon, and Halo's of the Sun. Strange Effects of Thunder and Lightning;
with an elaborate Digression upon Fairy Circles; which though he indulges so far
the Accounts of Remigius and others, who impute the same to Wizards and
Witches, as to recite them; yet, at last, more probably imputes them to
Lightning. Then we come to his Remarks on Animals, especially on the mortal
Effects of Thunder upon Crevices and Lobsters. Several strange Meteors. Noises
in the Air. Extraordinary Hail Storms, and prodigious Showers, particularly of
Frogs, Maggots, etc. Prognostics of Showers and Winds; of the Tornado Wind;
and uncommon Echoes; which, with an Experiment upon Sounds, and some short
Observations on the Comet in 1681, ends this Chapter.

Chap. II. Of the Waters. This is introduced with a Discourse of nine Pages
upon the Effects of Air on human Bodies. And, among many other Observations,
some on Unction and Painting of the Body, to prevent the Depredations thereof,
from Roger Bacon. The Choice of healthy Situations, with many Examples; which
brings him to the Consideration of Waters, by which the Air is so much
affected. Several Remarks on the pure Streams and Waters of common Use in this
County, and particularly the refreshing Pool of Madely, mentioned by Gervase of
Tilbury. Instances of Health in the Moorlands, from the Age of twelve Tenants
who made up 1000 Years, and four, who made 360 Years. Then speaks of the more
unusual Waters; their Discolourations, Prognostications of Rain and Dearth,
Noisiness, Inconstancy of Flowing, and Intermissions; in Examples from Hobbes
and Cotton, Alex. Neckham, Will. of Newberry, Sylvester the Poet, etc. Here we
have a Digression upon the Question, Whether Springs are supplied from the
Rains, etc. or from the Sea. Observations on the Quantity of Water thrown out
by perennial Springs. Sir Chr. Wren's Invention of the Rain-Bucket, to measure
the Quantity that falls. Computations of what the greatest Rivers throw forth
in an Hour, Day, Year. The many Examples favoring the Origin or Supply of
Springs from subtertaneous Communications. Then proceeds to the Rivers and
Fountains of this County, which have yielded any unusual Remarks; some running
under ground, and rising again; some throwing up little Bones; some never
freezing; some warmest in the coldest Weather; some salt, as the Brine-Pits,
with the manner of Salt-work; some again are Vitrioline; some Petrifying, and
some Sulphurous. Here we are led to the Medicinal Waters; among these, such as
are of a milky Nature, and others aluminous. Some of Repute for curing the
King's Evil; some good for the Eyes; and some of noxious Quality, as the
Coal-pit Waters which kill the Fish of those Rivers into which they fall.

Chap. III. Of the Earths. This begins with the Situation of the County,
Nature, and Fertility of the Soil. K. James his saying of it for the Firmness
of the Highways. A Remark upon some Pastures, which tinged the Teeth of Cattle,
of a Golden Color; and upon others, which changed the Color of their Hides. A
Pit that never held any Water when it filled all others. Deductions from
Remarks upon some Buildings, tending to prove the Earth will be quite level. Of
Earths that vegetate or grow up, and Floating Islands. Of turfing their moorish
Grounds, and the rotten Shining Earth. Here we have many curious Instances of
luciferous Bodies, animate, and inanimate. Their different Kinds of Earths and
Clays; and how the Potters work the same. Of their Earths used by Painters in
Colors, Sulphurs, Bitumen, and Pit-Coal, with the Extent of its Mines. Remarks
on their Damps, and firing of Mines: Of Earthquakes there, thought to be caused
thereby. Signs for finding of Coal: Of working it, and keeping it dry.

Chap. IV. Of Stones. The Causes of their Production; Observations on Salt in
Stones, and such as best endure the Fire. Of Limestone, and the Pyrites; and
the Bishops Stones near Weeford, why so called. Then we come to the Iron Ore,
with the melting and working it; also the Copper Ores, and their Works; then to
the Lead Ores, where we have an Account of a Leaden Coffin that swam in nine
Inches Water, with the hydrostatical Reason for it. Hence we come to the
Quarries and their Stones for Building, Grinding, and the Mills; with an
Experiment giving reason to believe the Loadstone is to be found at Rowley
Regis. Next of the Rocks, Cliffs, and Caves, which have any thing remarkable;
their Alabaster, and the kind of Marble, whereof their Chimney-pieces,
Tombstones, Emery, etc. are made. Also of their Crowstones, and transparent
Pebbles.

Chap. V. Of Formed Stones. And first of those resembling heavenly Bodies, as
the Selenites or Moon-stones, more rationally called Lapis Specularis, found in
this County; and the Asteriae, or Star-Stones, of different kind from any yet
described, whose unaccountable Quality of moving toward one another in Vinegar
is here observed to have been known 400 Years since, by the learned Roger
Bacon. He speaks next of the Thunder Stones, as they are commonly called, found
in those Parts, and others representing the Parts of Birds; Crystalline Stones;
a kind of Honeycomb Stones, full of sweetish Liquor; many Stones resembling Sea
Fishes, especially of the testaceous Kind. Of Gold and Silver growing like
Trees, and other Ores also, into odd Figures. Stones also formed like
particular Vegetables, as the Fungites, likewise Mineral Corals, like Stumps of
Trees, and the Vertebrae of Fishes; like Fruits and the Stones of them; Animals
and their several Parts; Buttons, Barrels, Saddles, and some Plants found with
Rings of Stone, Iron, and Copper naturally growing about them.

Chap. VI. Of Plants. Among which, none so remarkable for resembling certain
Parts of the human Body, as the Fungus Phalloides, or Phallus Hollandicus of
Hadr. Junius. After several uncommon Observations among the herbaccous Kind, he
advances to some undescribed Shrubs; as the White-Berried Elder, Standard
Honey-Suckles, and Ivy. A Vine changing its Fruit from Red to White, St.
Bertram's Ash, with a narrower Leaf than usual, a yellow-leav'd Yew Tree, a
blood-spotted Birch, yellow-leav'd Thorn; and among the Trees unnoted to be of
English Growth, the Sorbus Pyriformis, and one kind of Firr: And among the
Accidents of Trees, some of extraordinary speedy Growth. Oaks of vast Bulk and
extensive Shade; more particularly Sir Harvey Bagot's Witch-Elm, growing at
Field, within Memory; which was 120 Foot long, 17 Yards round at the Bottom,
had 14 Load of Firewood broke off in the Fall, 47 Load more of Firewood cut
from the Top, 8000 Foot of Plank, 80 Pair of Naves, etc. in short computed to
contain 96 Tons of Timber, after their Country way of reckoning; but, according
to our Author, at least 100 Ton of neat Timber. With this is mentioned, as what
might equal it in Height, the Oak which yielded a Plank above 25 Yards long,
and near one Yard broad, of which was made the Table at Dudley Castle. From
this we are led to the tall Firrs at Norbury; one of which was 47 Yards high;
and thence, to what is observable in the Roots of Trees, as their embracing and
lifting up great Stones; Trees of different Species uniting at the Roots, or in
the Trunks, and some Trees growing out of the Bodies and Heads of others; but
above all, those found buried under Ground in all Countries, are reckoned most
unaccountable. Here we have an elaborate Dissertation upon those subterraneous
Trees, by some called Moss-wood, with the Cause of Mosses, sinking of Hills,
and raising of Valleys. Hence we pass to the internal Notice of what was most
uncommon in Trees; as the Cylindraceous Cavities in an old Crab Tree here
described, with the Cause; leading us to the strange Discovery of Animals in
the Bodies of Trees, as Field Mice, which are superstitiously pegg'd up by the
Country People here, to make Nursrow Trees, as they call them, to cure
Swellings in their Cattle; and other Instances of their Superstition, in the
Wood of the Quicken Tree, for walking Staves. Here ending his Remarks on Whole
Trees, and their Trunks, with an Observation, that the Timber of this County is
generally large and good, particularly the Woods in the Park of John Offley,
Esquire whereof 1000 Trees might be chosen worth 8000 Pounds, and of these 100
worth 1500 Pounds; he proceeds to unusual Accidents in the Branches, Fruits,
and Leaves of Trees; upon which last he accounts for the Excrescences by
Insects, and the Variegations or Stripings in Hollys, Maples, Ashes, and Oaks
he met with. From thence passes to Fruit Trees, as the large spreading Apple
Tree at Leigh, having borne 50 Strike of Apples in a Year; Pear Trees
blossoming at Christmas; another that blossomed and bore twice a Year. The
Orange and Lemon growing on one Tree, and in one Fruit; the Quantity of Cider
that might be made in one Parish; large Cherry Gardens, and great Variety of
Fruits in the Gardens of Rowland Okeover, Esquire as 60 Sorts of Apples, 35 Sorts
of Apricots, and other Plums, etc. with which Enumeration this Chapter ends.

Chap. VII. Of Brutes. Under which is comprehended Birds, Insects, Fishes,
Reptiles and Quadrupeds, and of these only such as are undescribed by others,
unnoted by Willughby and Ray to be indaginae of this County, or have had
extraordinary Accidents attending them. And first he begins with Birds; among
these he reckons a kind of Gooselegg'd Swans, and the black-bill'd Goose, with
a Voice like a Bittern; an undescribed Loon or Ducker, crested, horned, and
bearded; the Eagle, the Shriek, Heathcock, or Black Game, Gorcock, or Red Game,
the Martlet, Ground Martin, Brambling, Gross-beak, Heron, and great Loon: but
most remarkable is his History of the Pewits, and their breeding only upon the
Estate of Sir Charles Skrymsher, at the old Pewit-Pool in the Parish of
Norbury, and Shebben-Pool in the Parish of High-Offley; where they increased in
such abundance, that 50 Dozen has been taken at a Driving; which, at five
Shillings a Dozen, the ancient Price, comes to twelve Pounds ten Shillings; but
some Years the Profit of them has amounted to fifty or threescore Pounds: and
we have here a Representation, in Sculpture, of Shebben-Pool, with the manner
of driving and taking these Birds. Next he observes what has been extraordinary
in the Colors, Limbs, Eggs, and Time of Production among Birds; as Popinjays,
Crows, and Sparrows that were white; Cross-bill'd Ravens; a four-legg'd Pewit,
and three-legg'd Goose; with the Opinions of Fabricius and Dr. Harvey, that
such Deformities arise from double yolked Eggs, etc. Next we have Observations
upon white yolked Eggs, and Eggs all Yolk. Of Hens and Ducks, that laid at the
rate of three Eggs a Day, and of Birds hatching in the Winter. Then we come to
flying Insects, as the winged Glowworm, or Lanthorn-Fly; the white Ear-wigg.
Of viviparous Insects, Spiders, and their Webs, with some aquatic Insects,
undescribed; which leads to Fishes, and his Account of the Burbot or Bird-bolt,
not before, or not well described. Of Fishes found in unusual Places. Of the
uncommon Nature of Eels, that they are viviparous, travel from one Water to
another, and the Account of their equivocal Generation. How various the Food or
Prey of Fishes; how voracious some of them, and others restored to their
Element after they had been swallowed up. The unusual Magnitude of Fishes,
particularly a Carp weighing 15 Pounds, with Scales as broad as a Half-Crown:
Jacks a Yard and half long. Thus passing from the Water to the Land Animals, he
begins with the Toad, and how strangely some have been found excluded from both
Elements in the midst of solid Blocks of Stone, and in the Bodies of sound
Trees. Then we have an Account of an undescribed Land Lizard, a strange toothed
Rabbit, uncommon Accidents in a Hare, and other Animals breeding their Young;
and an odd Mixture in the Breed of Dogs. Of large Boars; the Reason discussed
why Castration prevents Horns in some Animals, and enlarges them in others. Of
uncommon Accidents in Sheep, Deer, Cows, Oxen, Horses, as to Heading, Breeding,
Superfoetation, etc. Of Hair Balls found in the Stomachs of such Animals; and
Shining Tallow: Concluding with a Description of the true Hippomanes, or
Forehead Flesh of a new foaled Colt, so famous among the Ancients in Philtres
or Love-Potions; and an Account of the Jawbone of an Elephant, found in this
County.

Chap. VIII. Of Men and Women. Beginning with an Account of one who was
neither. Of Men getting Children at 104 Years of Age. Of Longing in Women, and
dismemdering the Foetus like the Object which gave the Fright. Some who had all
the Signs of Pregnancy, without being with Child; others having a Child without
the Signs. Of Children born with Teeth. Monstrous and imperfect Births. Of the
Persons born in this County, who were eminent Churchmen, Lawyers, and Authors,
or for their Valor by Land and Sea, and for numerous Offsprings. Remarkable
Customs relating to Births, as Borow-English, or Descent of Lands to the
Youngest before the Eldest born, with the Reason presumed to be, that where
this Custom remains, the Places were anciently liable to the Privilege granted
also in Scotland, by King Evenus or Eugenius, to the Lords of Manors, that
they should have the first Night's Lodging with their Tenants Brides; so that
eldest Sons being supposed all Bastards, and of the Lord's begetting, they
settled their Lands on the Youngest, as more likely to be their own: But how
common this Custom was all over England, may be seen by the Tax afterward
gathered instead thereof, called Marcheta Mulierum, in Bracton. Nor was the
Privilege of Lotherwits or Lierwit, expounded in Fleta, to import the same as
Mulcta Adulteriorum, and remaining here to this day, much less lewd or immoral,
being a Liberty of taking a Compensation for Bastards, got or born in the
Lordship, nay also out of the Lordship for 1 l. 19. s. 11 d. paid to the Lords;
and further, here was an Oak in Knoll-Wood, which had such a superior Privilege
of Fornication, that if a Bastard was sworn to be begot under its Shade,
neither the Bishop nor Lords of the Manor themselves could take any Cognizance
of it. After these Births, we have some Remarks upon Christnings, or Christian
Names, how they ran much upon Ralph and Walter, from two famous Earls who lived
in the County; and how some Families christened their eldest Sons of the same
Name for many Generations. Having done with the Births of Infants, he proceeds
to remarkable Passages in Childhood and Youth, as the Impostures of William
Perry, the Boy of Bilson, who counterfeited himself bewitched or possessed;
whereof there is a Pamphlet printed in 1622. And this Story brings in other
Instances of imitating Sounds and Motions, whereof the involuntary Imitations
of Donald Monro, are most strange. Next we advance to uncommon Accidents and
Qualities in adult Persons, and first of Women. Some who yielded great
Quantities of Milk, and the medicinal Virtues of Women's Milk. One who slept 14
Days and Nights; and another 7 Days. A Man who fasted 14 Days; and another in
Scotland 30 or 40 Days together. And here is a Copy from a Record in the Tower,
of a Pardon granted 31 Edward III. to Cicely de Rygeway (who was condemned at
Nottingham, for killing her Husband) because she had fasted forty Days without
Meat or Drink, etc. Of deaf Persons understanding People by the Motion of their
Lips. Of a Lady who had a Pin squeezed out of her Arm, which she never could
account for, yet paralleled with like Instances. Of strange Deliverances from
Murder and Hanging; particularly of Judith de Balsham, who having been hanged
from nine a-Clock on Monday Morning, till Sunrising on Tuesday, according to
the Sentence passed, yet lived after it, and had a Pardon thereupon granted,
48th Hen. III. which is here recited. And of a Swiss, who was hanged 13 times,
yet could not by that kind of Execution be put to death. Next we come to Men
eminent for their extraordinary Strength, excessive Stature, and Pious Works;
others who had their want of Sight wonderfully supplied by the Perfection of
their other Senses; strange Instances of Longing in Men, as well as Women; and
other uncommon Distempers. Of Men that never spit. The strange Force of Custom
in some Fools, especially one, who being removed from a Place where he had
heard a Clock constantly strike, would repeat the Strokes punctually every Hour
when he heard it not; and of the Artificial, learned to become a Natural Clock,
as Dr. Willis has related. Here is another Instance of a Fool, whose strange
Sagacity exceeded the other telling not only the Changes of the Moon, Times of
Eclipses, and when Easter and Whitsuntide fell, or any other moveable Feast,
but at what time they had, or should fall, at any distance of Years, which
could receive no Help from the Force of Custom: From the Imperfections of Men,
we have a Transition to their Vices, which brings in the dreadful Judgment upon
John Duncalf, who having stole a Bible, had his Hands rotted off, according to
his Wish, if that Theft were true; from the Narrative of this Judgment
published by Mr. Ja. Illingworth and Mr. Newey. This is followed with some
wonderful Escapes from Death in this County, particularly that of King Charles
II. after the Battle of Worcester, who found an Asylum at Bentley, and
afterward conferred several Honors on Col. John Lane, as the Letters Patent
here exemplified, concerning the same, do testify. Here is likewise an Account
of the Preservation of his Followers; and by whose means his Majesty's George
came safe again to his Hands. From Men solitarily considered, we proceed to
some Remarks upon them jointly, in Examples of Men extremely alike, or
resembling each other, particularly Dr. Hen. Fairfax and his Brother. Of
Bishops twice married. Remarks on many Families of one Name, and marrying among
themselves. Of some odd Customs; as at Guosall; where the Civil Law Judge
determines according to a Jury; Moseley's Dole-penny at Walshall. The Society
of Free-Masons in the Moorlands of this County; with some curious Remarks
thereon; particularly on a fabulous MS. History of the said Craft; their Lodges
and Rules, with the Notice of an Act 3 Henry VI. abolishing this Society, and
adjudging the holding of their Congregations to be Felony. The Custom at
Brewood, etc. of adorning their Walls with Boughs and Flowers. Many Examples of
extreme old Age; many aged Persons living together, five and six Generations at
a time. Examples of several unaccountable Warnings of Death in some Families,
by diverse kinds of Noise. Remarks on the frontal Sutures in some Skulls, and of
some large human Bones: which, with an Omission or two in the Articles of
valiant Men, and those famous in the Law, finishes this Chapter.

Chap. IX. Of Arts. These are treated of after his former Method; first, of
such as relate to the Heavens and Air; next, of Fire and Waterworks; thirdly,
tending to the Improvement of Earths, Stones, or Plants, and lastly, respecting
Men or Women. To this purpose he begins with an Account of a new Sort of Dyals,
and a Dyal Quadrant; with an Experiment proving the Force of the Rarefaction of
Air. The Arts relating to Fire are, those of burning Turf, Earth, etc. for the
fertilizing of Lands, and for certain Iron-works, at the Anvil and Forge;
particularly of the Difficulty and Ingenuity of making Frying-pans and that
there were but two Masters of this Craft in the Kingdom. An improved Way of
burning Tiles. Prince Rupert's Dexterity in shooting with Firearms,
exemplified in the two famous Shots he made successively, through the
Weathercock of St. Mary's Church-Steeple, at Stafford, with a screwed
Horseman's Pistol, at threescore Yards distance, before King Charles I. Among
the Waterworks, we have some Account of remarkable Mills, and Mill-dams; of
Brewing and Fining of Ale; and in the Pleasure-Gardens, of Fountains, Canals,
etc. Of Arts relating to the Earth, we have here those of the Agriculture used
in this County: and of those concerning Stones, what is most observable in
Architecture, both public and private; with some copious Remarks upon the
Building of Churches, especially East and West. Next of the Bridge at Burton
upon Trent; and after that, of the Hardening and Softning of Iron, for the
making of several kinds of the said Hard Ware, with many Instances of curious
Improvements therein, and the ways used to keep them from Rust. Then follow
some Arts relating to Plants, as the improving of Ropes, made with Hemp and
Rushes; preserving of Beer with Heath instead of Hops; and making Malt of Oats.
After these, the Arts relating to Shrubs and Trees; as to the sowing of Acorns,
making Furze Hedges, planting of Vines, forming of Topiary Works, Arbors, and
other like Curiosities in Gardens, Parks and Groves; with the managing of their
Woods, as to Brushing, Fencing, Barking, Felling, etc. and the Excellency of
some Joyners and Turners Work thereon: also their Management of Fruit Trees.
Thus we come to their Arts concerning Animals; beginning with Bees and
Bee-hives An Instrument to match Game Cocks: Device to prevent Hogs from
rooting; and to cure some Distempers in Cattle; a new invented Bridle, or Gag
for scolding Women; and a Sledge for Smiths. Improved Barrels for Drink; in
Cookery potted Otters tasting like Venison; and to punish Misdemeanors, a Pair
of Finger-Stocks. Lastly, some odd kind of Pictures upon an indented Board,
which beheld directly, appear confused, but obliquely, the Pictures of a King
and Queen: also some curious Cut-work, in Paper, with Scissars, of Col. J.
Lane's Tomb, Trophies, Inscription, etc. And Part of a Greek Chapter which,
laid on a black Ground, was as legible as the same in a printed Testament.

Chap. X. Of Antiquities. And these, not so much of Persons or Actions, as of
Things; such as are remote from the present Age, whether found under Ground, or
whereof there yet remain any Footsteps above it; as ancient Medals, Ways, Lows,
Pavements, Urns, Monuments of Stone, Fortifications, etc. whether of the
ancient Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes, or Normans. Beginning with the
Author's Reasons, why the original Inhabitants of this County might be Iceni,
and the notable Remains of some ancient British City near Wrottesley, of great
Extant, being about three or four Miles round; with some Ruins of
Fortifications presumed also to be theirs. Of their Arrow Heads made of Flints,
found here. Other Antiquities also of British Origin; and particularly the
Place where Litchfield now is, so called from the dead Bodies of St.
Amphabale's Companions, who were martyred there. Of Roman Antiquities, the most
considerable in these Parts are, their public Ways; which here, with some
other of their Antiquities also, are copiously treated of. The Saxon and Danish
Antiquities are still more largely discussed, in relation to the building or
destroying of several Towns, Fortifications, etc. in the County. Here speaking
of the Customs and Utensils of the Danes, which obtained among these People, we
have a large Account and Sculpture of the Staffordshire Cloggs, or little
square Logs of Wood, which by the Notches and Incisions upon them, supplied the
Use of Almanacks; with many Remarks upon the Symbols thereon, and the
Computations relating thereto; ending, as to this Danish Part, with the Account
of the famous Lady Godiva, who rode through Coventry naked, to obtain many
Privileges, for the Inhabitants, of her Husband Leofric, Earl of Mercia; she
dying at his Village of Bromleyg in this County, according to Knyghton, though
buried at Coventry. To these are added, some old Customs, whose Originals being
obscure, might commence as high as those Times: such as the Service of the Lord
of Essington to the Lord of Hilton, round whose Hall-Fire, he was to drive a
Goose every New-Year's-Day three times, etc. while Jack of Hilton, a whimsical
kind of Aeolipile, being a little brazen Image, in an impudent Posture, filled
with Water, is blowing the Coals. Their merry Custom of the Hobbey-Horse Dance,
etc. at Abbots Bromley had a good useful End in it; but the Custom at Tutbury
for the King of the Minstrells to arrest all the Musicians in the said
Franchise, who refused to do the yearly Services, according to the Charter of
John of Gaunt, for which they had a Bull, given by the Prior of Tutbury, amidst
all the Harmony thereof, seems to have been attended with much Discord, which
produced an Alteration according to the modern Ceremonies used in these their
musical Meetings, which yet are not void of Tumult and Mischief. That other
Custom at Tutbury, of finding a Flitch of Bacon for every married Man, who took
the Oath a Year and a Day after his Marriage, That he had never wished to
change his Wife, but would have taken her before all other Women had she been
single; whereby Sir Philip de Somervile held Whichnovre, and other Manors; had
a good Encouragement in it to the making of mature Elections, and being
contented with those they made; and was paralleled by that Custom also
instituted at the Priory of Dunmow in Essex, by the Lord Robert Fitzwalter,
temp. Hen III. which Ceremony is also here recited, from the History of that
Baron, printed 1616 Then follows an Account of some other Antiquities, as the
Donation of Heyley Castle to Hen. de Aldithleg, and the Advowson of Penckridge
Church to the Archbishops of Dublin, by King John; which, with the founding of
some other old Structures, also the Account of an Entrenchment, anciently the
Seat of the Cockains, a monumental Stone in Memory of the Death of James Lord
Audley, and the mention of a few more eminent Persons, omitted in their proper
Place, concludes this elaborate and curious History of Staffordshire; and how
grateful soever our Au^hor's Acknowledgments throughout the same appear, for
his Encouragement therein, he yet ends with informing us, he is "pretty fully
resolved never to publish any more of these Histories, though I think, says he, I
was never so fit as now, unless commanded by a Power that I must not resist."
To the Work he has joined a useful Index, also his Proposals for Subscription;
which are very reasonable, no more than a Penny per Sheet, a Penny each Plate,
and the Map Sixpence; which for each Copy, he guesses will amount to about ten
or twelve Shillings: and the whole ends with a List of the said Subscribers.

XXX. A Collection of ROYAL GRANTS from the beginning of King HENRY VIII. to
the latter end of King WILLIAM III. Extracted from the Patent Rolls, and other
authentic Instruments in the Offices of Record. MS. Large Folio. Pages 260.
THIS Collection, made about the Beginning of the Reign of our late Queen Anne,
by a Gentleman lately dead, as we have some Reason to believe, who was well
acquainted with the Records of this Kingdom, and the Pedigrees of the most
eminent Families in it, begins with Abstracts from the Patent Rolls of Grants,
which were made by King Henry VIII. from the first to the thirtieth Year of his
Reign, extending to Page 32: which is followed with a long Recital in Latin, of
many other Grants, in the same Period, of Abbey Lands, etc. to whom, and where
also demised, as far as Page 68; concluding with the said King's Grants to the
Lord Chancellor Audley, of Duke's Place, etc. copied from the Exchequer, to
Page 76. So we come to the Grants of the Reversions of Mildenhall, Marlborough,
etc. made by King Edward VI. in the first Year of his Reign, to his Uncle,
Edward, Duke of Somerset; whereof we have here two large Copies in Latin, to
Page 135. Next we come to an Abstract from some Patents of several Grants, made
by Queen Elizabeth in the 38th Year of her Reign, as far as Page 152. Hence we
descend to a Copy from the Hanaper Books, of the Entries of all Perpetuities,
Charters, Licenses, Grants, and Confirmations which passed the Great Seal, from
the Restoration of King Charles II. Anno 1660, down to Michaelmas 1696, to Page
224. Whereunto is joined the like Copy or Abstract of all the Leases, which
passed the Great Seal, during the same space of Time: The whole ending at Page
260, with one to Thomas Lord Raby of the Post Fines for 48 Years; and another
to Thomas Harley, Esquire of certain Mines, Lands, etc. in the County of Radnor for
42 Years The whole, though two or three Leaves may be wanting at the end of some
of the Reigns, is a very useful Collection; giving great Intelligence in a
little Compass; as it respects the Properties and Privileges of so many hundred
Persons, to whom the said Grants of Lands, Tenements, Leases, etc. were made,
with the particular Times when, and the Places where they lay; to what Abbeys,
Priories, etc. they belonged; for what Consideration, and by what Rents, or
Rights they were held; and into what Court those Rents were payable. All which
Particulars, must render the Collection most readily instructive, as in diverse
other Enquiries, so in the Pedigrees of many Families of Distinction, and the
Era of many Tenures: the Authority of Titles, Right of Conveyances, Valuation
of Estates; and to all Writers of particular History in the said Periods, as
well Personal as Topographical, or the Antiquities of the several Counties of
England. It is preserved in the same Hands with that MS. which we described in
our last Number.
.

XXXI. A Collection of curious Discourses, written by Eminent ANTIQUARIES, upon
several Heads in our ENGLISH ANTIQUITIES, and now first published by THOMAS
HEARNE, M. A. Oxford. 1720. 8 vo. Pages 327; besides a long Preface.
THE Publisher of these Discourses shows us in his Preface, that Experience and
Practice are better helps in the Study of Antiquities than General Rules; yet
that these are to be regarded, and better Accounts of our Antiquities to be
given. Next he commends the Baroccian Collection of Greek MSS. and Dr.
Langbain's noble Design of publishing diverse Volumes of Fragments, which
required Assistance; and that the Clergy ought to have better Provision to
enable them for such Public Services. That the Polyglott Bible is a noble
Instance of what should be expected from Joint Labors; requisite also in our
own History and Antiquities. That such Societies ought to have stated Meetings,
and write upon intricate Subjects, as these Antiquaries did. Further of the
said Society, and this Collection; and how they were summoned to give their
Opinions; with a List of the Members at one of their Meetings, 41 Eliz. Remarks
upon some Roman Coins and Antiquities. The Neglect of our Historians herein,
and Praises of Dr. And. Pern. Some Obscurities in these Discourses observed,
and why our Ancestors hid their MSS. under Ground, and in old Walls; with an
Example from Sir Thomas Elliot's Dictionary, in the Word Britannia, and the
Etymology thereof. That the Ancients were more exact than the Moderns in noting
the Bounds of Places. That the Saxons imitated the Romans herein. Whence the
Division of Shires is ascribed to Alfred; and why he is called the Founder of
Oxford University. Of King Edward the Confessor's Chapel at Islip; with a
Sculpture thereof. Also concerning the Minister of Ashdon in Essex. Of other
Ancient Structures in Oxfordshire. Of King Offa's Buildings there. Remarks upon
Castles in Coats of Arms; upon other Military Buildings, and upon the Efficacy
of Bells, with the Names of those of Osney. The difficulty of procuring a
perfect List of the Society of Antiquaries, and their Dissertations. An Account
of some MS. Collections made by Francis Tate the Antiquary, in the Hands of
John Anstis, Esquire the Heads of which are here recited. Praises of the said Mr.
Tate, by Mr. Seldom; how well he was versed in Domesday Book. His Explanation
of the abbreviated Words therein, with a Copy thereof here represented, from a
Copper Plate in one Page. A complete Edition of Domesday Book much desired.
Remarks upon our ancient Tournaments. Further Praises of Mr. Tate's Skill in
the British as well as English Antiquities, and of his Acquaintance with the
learned Mr. Jones. The Publisher's Acknowledgment to John Bridges, Esquire for his
Communications. And his Addition of two Discourses in this Work, from his own
Collections; which, with his Observation to us how careful he has been, not to
vary from his MSS, finishes this Preface of 134 Pages.

After the Table of Subscribers, the first Discourse in this Collection is
entitled, The Antiquity of the Laws of this Island, written by W. Hakewill (of
Lincoln's End, Esquire) which is followed by another anonymous Discourse on the
same Subject. Next we have four Discourses upon Sterling Money, by Sir Tho.
Lake, 1590, Francis Thynne, ( Lancaster Herald) Mr. James Ley, (afterward Earl
of Marlborough) and Anonymous. Five Discourses upon the Antiquity of Shires in
England, and the Reason of such Division; written by the Deputy-Chamberlain of
the Exchequer, Mr. Arthur Agard, 1591, Mr. Thynne, Mr. Tho. Talbot, (Clerk of
the Records in the Tower) Mr. Richard Broughton, and Mr, James Ley. Two
Discourses of the Antiquity of Terms, for the Administration of Justice in
England, by Mr. Joseph Holland, and Fra. Thynne. Of the Antiquity of Cities in
England, by Jos. Holland. Three Discourses on the Dimensions of the Land of
England, by the said Mr. J. Holland, Sir John Dodderidge, and Mr. Agard, 1599.
Six Discourses on the Antiquity, Office, and Privilege of Heralds in England,
by Mr. Leigh, Mr. Camden, Mr. Whitlock, 1601, Mr. Jos. Holland, Mr. Agard, and
Anonymous. Four Discourses on the Antiquity and Privileges of the Houses or
Inns of Court and Chancery, by Mr. Agard, Mr. Thynne, Mr. Holland, and Mr.
Whitlock. Two Discourses upon the Knights who were made by Abbots, by Sir
Francis Leigh, (Knight of the Bath) and Mr. Francis Tate (afterward one of the
Welsh Judges.) Four Discourses of the Diversity of the Names of this Island, by
Mr. Camden, Mr. Holland, Mr. Agard, and Mr. Oldsworth, 1604. The Etymology,
Antiquity and Privileges of Castles, by Sir Rob. Cotton; and of Towns, by the
same Hand, (42 Eliz.) Of Dimension of Land, by the same. The Antiquity of Motts
and Words, with the Arms of Noblemen and Gentlemen of England, by the same. Of
the Antiquity of Arms in England, by Mr. James Ley. Foresta, by the same. The
Antiquity of the Chancellor of England, by Mr. Ley. Of Epitaphs, by the same.
Of Motts, by the same. The Etymology and Original of Barons, by Mr. Camden. Mr.
Tate's Questions about the ancient Britons. Mr. Jones's Answers. Two Discourses
of the Office and Duty of an Herald of Arms in England, by Francis Thynne,
1605, and Sir John Dodderidge, 1600. After which follows an Appendix by the
Publisher, of eleven Papers, which are Sir James Whitlock's Epitaph; Mr.
Camden's Will; A Letter of Degory Whear to Mic. Oldsworth; A Greek Fragment
about the Places assigned for the Souls of the Just and Unjust; Dr. T. Smith's
last Letter to the Publisher; Archbishop Laud's Letter to Mr. J. Greaves
concerning the Gift of his Grace's Coins to Oxford; Mr. Tim. Nourse's Donation
to Oxford; A Note of the Divinity-School and Ancient Library in Oxford; Dr.
Langbain's Collections thereupon; A Letter about the Forfeiture of Bristol
Bells; Lastly, A Note about the Bells of Osney, and their Names. Then follows
the Index; and the whole Book is concluded with a Catalogue of the Publisher's
Works hitherto printed, in which is inserted an Account of John Morwen, with a
Recital of his long Latin Epitaph on Steph. Gardener, Bishop of Winton; which
was first printed in 1555.

The End of Number III.
XXXII. The Book of the ORDER of CHYVALRY or KNYGHTHODE, translated out of the
Frensshe and imprinted by William Caxton. Quarto, without Date.
THIS thin Volume, of about one hundred Pages, is perhaps one of the scarcest
Books now remaining of that our first Printer; seeing it has so little occurred
to those who have attempted to give us any Catalogues of his Publications. Though
no Date when it was printed is expressed, yet may it be guessed at within a
Year over or under, by supposing it in 1484; from the short Reign of that
Prince to whom it is inscribed at the End, as will presently appear. It is
printed with large initial Letters at the Beginning of the Chapters; with only
one Sort of Points, which are oblique or leaning Dashes; some double or united
Types, as in his other Books, which we have hitherto observed; also with
Signatures, but no Catch-words at the Bottom of the Leaves, nor any Numbers on
them at Top. And is divided into eight Chapters.

The first, shows how a Knight, who was a Hermit, bestowed this Rule or Order
of Chivalry upon a Squire. The second, treats of the Beginning of Chivalry or
Knighthood. The third, of the Office of Chivalry. Fourth, Of the Examination
that ought to be made to the Esquyer, when he will enter into the Order of
Chivalry. Fifth, In what manner the Squire ought to receive Chivalry. Sixth, Of
the Sygnefyaunce of the Arms belonging to a Knight. Seventh, Of the Customs
that appertain to a Knight. And eight, Of the Honors that ought to be done to
a Knight. By all which it will appear how different the Honor, the Profession,
the Qualifications, required in Knights anciently, were from those for which
they have been created in latter Times.

At the End we have the Printer's Rehearsal in these Words: "Here ends the
Book of the Order of Chyvalry; which Book is translated out of Frensshe in to
English, at a Request of a gentyl and noble Esquyer, by me William Caxton,
dwelling in Westmynstre, beside London, in the most best wise that God has
suffered me, and according to the Copye that the said Squire delyvered to me;
which Book is not requysyte to every common Man to have, but to noble
Gentylmen, that by their Virtue entende to come and enter in to the Noble Order
of Chyvalry; the which, in these late Days, has been used according to this
Book here to fore wreton on, but forge en, and thexcersytees of Chyvalry, not
used, honored ne excercysed, as hit has been in ancient Time; at which time
the noble Acts of the Knyghts of England, that used Chyvalry, were renomed
through the unyversal World. As for to speak to fore thyncarnation of Jesu
Christ; where were there ever any like to Brenius and Belynus, that from the
Great Brytayne, now called England, unto Rome, and far beyond, conquered
many Royammes and Lands; whose noble Acts remain in thold Hystoryes of the
Romans. And sith the Incarnation of our Lord, behold that noble King of
Brytayne, King Arthur, with all the noble Knytes of the Round Table, whose noble
Acts, and noble Chyvalry of his Knights, occupye so many large Volumes, that
is a World, or as thing incredyble to byleve. O ye Knyghts of England! where is
the Custom and Usage of noble Chyvalry that was used in tho Days? What do ye
now, but go to the Baynes and play at Dyse? And some, not well advysed, use not
honest and good Rule, ageyn all Order of Knyghthode. Leve this, leve it, and
read the noble Volumes of Saint Graal, of Lancelot, of Galaad, of Trystram, of
Perseforest, of Percyval, of Gawayn, and many mo: There shall ye see Manhood,
Curtoyse, and Gentylness. And look in latter Days, of the noble Acts sith the
Conquest; as in King Richard's Days, Cuer du Lion; Edward the First, and the
Third, and his noble Sons; Sire Robert Knolles; Sir Johan Hawkwode; Sir Johan
Chaundos, and Sire Gaultier Manuy; read Froissart. And also behold that
vyctoryous and noble King Harry the Fyfthe, and the Captayns under him; his
noble Brethren; the Earl of Salysbury, Montagu; and many other, whoos Names
shine gloryously by their virtuous Noblesse and Acts that they did in thonour
of thordre of Chyvalry. Allas, what do ye, but sleep and take ease? And ar al
disordred fro Chyvalry. I would demand a Question if I should not displease.
How many Knights ben there now in England, that have th Use and thExcercyse of
a Knight? that is, to wete, that he knows his Horse, and his Horse him; that
is to say, he being ready at a Point, to have al thing that longs to a
Knight, an Horse that is according, and broken after his hand; his Armures and
Harnoys mete and fyttyng, and so forth, et cetera. I suppose, and a due Search
should be made, there should be many founden that lack; the more Pity is. I would
it pleasyd our Soverayne Lord, that twyes or thryes in a Year, or at the lest
ones, he would do cry Justes of Pees, to the end that every Knight should have
Horse and Harneys, and also the Use and Craft of a Knight, and also to tornoye
one ageynste one, or 2 against 2, and the best to have a Prys, a Dyamond or
Jewel, such as should please the Prince. This should cause Gentylmen to resort
to thauncyent Customs of Chyvalry, to great Fame and Renoumee; and also to be
alwey ready to serve their Prince, when he shall call them, or have need.
Then late every Man that is come of noble Blood, and entendeth to come to the
noble Order of Chyvalry, read this lytyl Book, and do thereafter, in keeping
the Lore and Commandments therein comprysed: And then I doubt not he shall
atteyn to thordre of Chyvalry, et cetera. And thus this lytyl Book I present
to my redoubted, naturel, and most dradde Soverayne Lord, King Rychard, King of
England and of France; to the end, that he command this Book to be had, and
read unto other young Lords, Knights, and Gentylmen within this Royame; that
the noble Order of Chyvalrye be hereafter better used and honored, than hit
has been in late Days passed. And herein, he shall do a noble and virtuous
Deed; and I shall pray Almighty God for his long Lif and prosperous Welfare,
and that he may have Victory of all his Enemies, and after this short and
transitory Life, to have everlastyng Life in Heven, where as is Joye and Bliss,
World without end. Amen."

XXXIII. The Works of Sir THOMAS MORE, Knight, sometime Lord Chancellor of
England; written by him in the English Tongue. Printed at London at the Costs
of John Cawod, John Waly, and Richard Tottell, Anno 1557. Fol. Pages 1458,
besides Tables, etc.
THOUGH Sir Thomas More suffered Death for maintaining the Supremacy of the Pope
over that of his Sovereign, as may be read in these Works, and in the many
Accounts of his Life, set forth by the Roman Catholics, who have much magnified
him for his said Writings and Sufferings; yet are there many things in this
Collection of his English Works observable to all Readers, who are even not
attached to his own Persuasion, as it is one of the most copious Exemplars we
have in Print of the best English Style in those Days, and contains some
curious Pieces or Parcels of Civil, and many of Ecclesiastical History,
relating to the Times of our Reformation: and, overlooking the superstitious
Adherence to his Cause, with some sophistical Arguments necessary to support
it, is fraught with many Testimonies of virtuous Learning, fine Genius, and
good Morals for the universal Conduct of Life.

The Book was collected together and published from the Author's printed Copies
and Manuscripts, by his Nephew William Rastell, Sergeant at Law, and dedicated
to Queen Mary; that it might forward her Majesty's most Godly Puspose, in
purging this her Realm of all wicked Heresies.

After the Table of Contents, and a tolerable good Index, the Collection
commences with some Pieces of our Author's Poetry, which he wrote for his
Diversion, in his younger Days. As, the Merry Jest, how a Sergeant would learn
to play the Friar; containing some good Reproofs of those who act out of their
Sphere. Then follow his Verses to explain the Images in some Pageants, which he
devised in his Father's House; describing the several Stages and Consequents of
Life. After this, we have his rueful Lamentation of the Death of Queen
Elizabeth, Wife of King Henry VII. in Feb. 1503. Next come his Prefatory Verses
before the Book of Fortune: These Verses make about four Sheets. Hence we pass
to his Works in Prose; beginning with the Life of John Picus, Earl of
Mirandula, an Italian Nobleman, of great Virtue and Learning, who died in 1494,
aged 32; with several of his Letters, and his Verses, translated from the
Latin, and dedicated to his beloved Sister Joyeuce Leigh. After this, we have
the History of King Richard III. written by our Author when he was one of the
Under Sheriffs of London, about the Year 1513, but unfinished, and published
before, in the Chronicles of Harding and Hall; though very corruptly, and much
varying from his own Copy whence this is printed. The next is a long Treatise
on the four last Things, Death, Dome, Pain, and Joy; with several Chapters on
Pride, Envy, Wrath, Covetousness, Gluttony, and Sloth; composed after he was
knighted, of the Privy Council to King Henry VIII. and Under-Treasurer of
England, about the Year 1522, but unfinished, and we presume never before
printed; but that which succeeds, it was as we are informed, the Year after it
was written; entitled, A Dialogue of Sir T. More, then Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster, wherein is treated of the Veneration and Worship of Images and
Relics; praying to Saints, and going on Pilgrimage, with many things touching
the Sects of Luther and Tyndale, begun by the one in Saxony, and labored to be
brought by the other into England; made in the Year 1528. This is a large
Treatise, in four Books, divided into many Chapters, and illustrated with many
pleasant Examples, Tales, etc. with which he had a Memory plentifully
furnished, and a Talent happily constituted to apply them. To some, who made
Objection thereat, we find his Answer was, "That for a Layman to tell his Mind
merrily, might sometimes better become him, than seriously and solemnly to
preach." His next Treatise is, The Supplication of Souls, written 1529, against
a famous little Tract, called, The Supplication of Beggars; (written by Simon
Fish of Gray's-Inn, which was very Instrumental to the Reformation, and is
reprinted in Fox.) To that follows, The Confutation of Tyndale's Answer, (to
the Dialogue aforesaid) made 1532, by our Author. In the Preface hereof, we
have a large Account of many late Books, and their Authors, whom Sir Thomas
calls Heretics. Then we come to Tyndale's Preface, divided, with our Author's
Answers to the several Particulars alternately; which ends the first Book: but
the first Part of the Work contains 3 Books. The second Part, written 1533,
after he had given over his Chancellor's Office, begins at the fourth Book: It
contains Tyndale's Defense for his Translation of the Testament; with our
Author's Answers to the several Parts interfering, as before; and herein,
having considered Tyndale's Church, to the End of the seventh Book, we come in
the eight, to our Author's Confutation of Barnes his Church in the same manner:
The ninth Book is a Summary of the rest, was not printed before, and appears at
the End to have been left unfinished. This Work is succeeded by a Letter of our
Author, written at Chelchith (or Chelsea) in 1533, against the little Book of
John Frith upon the Sacrament; and both concluded with a long Apology, written
and published also the same Year, in Answer to the Objections which were made,
more especially to these his last Writings, against his said three Antagonists.
These Pieces of his, producing a large Treatise against him, called, Salem and
Bizance, he writ the same Year his Debellacion of Salem and Bizance. The same
Year he wrote his Answer to the first Part of the Poisoned Book, which a
nameless Heretic named the Supper of the Lord. His Postscript to this Treatise
ends with this Allusion; "Of all my Adversaries, could I never hitherto find
any one, but when he catches once a Fall, as each of them has caught full
many, there lies he, still tumbling and toltring in Mire, and neither Spur,
nor Bridle can one Inch prevail, but, as though they were not fallen in a Puddle
of Dirt, but rubbed and laid in Litter under the Manger, at their Ease, they
whine, and they bite, and they kick, and they spurn at him that would help them
up." His next Performance is entitled, A Dialogue of Comfort against
Tribulation, made by an Hungarian in Latin, and translated out of Latin into
French, and out of French into English, in 1534, when he was Prisoner in the
Tower of London. And this is followed with a Treatise to receive the Blessed
Body of our Lord sacramentally and vertually both, written in the same Year and
Place. The next is, a Treatise Historical, containing the bitter Passion of our
Savior Christ, after the Course and Order of the four Evangelists; with an
Exposition upon their Words, taken mostly out of the Sayings of sundry good old
holy Doctors, etc. This copious Treatise was also written in the same Year and
Place aforesaid; it is mostly taken from John Gerson's Monatesseron; but is
unfinished, the Author now being denied the Use of Books, Pens, Ink, and Paper.
Yet here follows, His Godly Instructions, Meditations, and Prayers, in Latin
and English, written with a Coal, both before and after his Condemnation, which
was on Thursday the first of July, 1535, Anno 27 Hen. VIII. and he was beheaded
on Tower Hill the Tuesday following. The rest of the Volume consists of his
Letters, etc. written at sundry times on diverse Occasions, beginning with his
Letter from the Court at Woodstock, to his Wife the Lady Alice at Chelsea, in
1528, the Year before he was Lord Chancellor, containing Consolations to her
for the Loss she had there by Fire. Next we have his Epitaph, written by
himself in Latin, in 1532, soon after he had laid down his Chancellor's Office;
which he caused to be inscribed upon his Tomb, which he had erected in Chelsea
Church, while he was Lord Chancellor; with a Translation of it. Then follow
four Letters which he wrote after he had given over the Office of Chancellor,
and before he was imprisoned, viz. Three to Mr Tho. Cromwell of the King's
Privy Council, and one to King Henry VIII. all in the Year 1533. Next we have
his Letters, etc. wrote while he was Prisoner in the Tower, beginning with his
Letter to his eldest Daughter Mrs. Margaret Roper, upon his refusing the Oath.
Another to his said Daughter, written with a Coal. His Answer to a Letter of
hers, which seemingly persuaded him to take the Oath, that she might get the
Liberty she did obtain of Access to him. Her Answer thereunto. His Letter to
all his Friends, written with a Coal; with two Stanza's upon Fortune. Lady
Alice Alington's Letter to Mrs. Margaret Roper. A long Answer by her or her
Father to the same. His two Letters to Doctor Nicholas Wilson, also Prisoner in
the Tower, 1534. His Daughter Roper's Answer to a Letter of his, when he was
shut up close Prisoner, 1534; with his Answers both to the same and another she
had sent him. His Letter to Mr. Leder, a virtuous Priest, the same Year. Two
more of his Letters to his Daughter in 1535. His Latin Epistle to Mr. Anthony
Bonuyse, Merchant of Luca, in London, his old Friend, written with a Coal the
same Year: with the Translation. His last Letter was to his Daughter Roper, the
Day before his Death, containing his Blessing to, and desires to be recommended
to the Prayers of her, and his other Friends and Relations.

XXXIV. The BREVIARY OF BRYTAYNE, etc. containing a learned Discourse of the
Variable State, etc. thereof, under diverse, as well natural, as foreign
Princes: With the Geographical Description of the same; such as neither by
elder nor later Writers, the like has been set forth before. Written in Latin
by HUMFREY LHUYD, of Denbigh, a Cambre Britayne, and lately englished by THOMAS
TWYNE, Gent. Octavo. 1573. 94 Leaves.
THIS much-commended Book is dedicated to Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxenford,
Lord Great Chamberlayne of England, by the Translator, who tells his Lordship,
at this time but in the Flower of his Age, "that hereon when your Honor shall
be at leisure to look, bestowing such Regard as you are accustomed to do on
Books of Geography, Histories, and other good Learning, wherein I am privy your
Honor takes singular Delight, I doubt not, but you shall have cause to judge
your Time very well applied. And so much the rather, for that in the Study of
Geography, it is expedient, first to know exactly the Situation of our own home
where we abide, before that we shall be able to judge how other Countries do
lie unto us, which are far distant from us; besides, that it were a foul Shame
to be inquisitive of the State of Foreign Lands, and to be ignorant of our own."

Then follows the Translator's Preface; in which he acknowleges the Assistance
of Dr. Yale, for the Translation of some Names, especially in the British
Tongue; and the Faultiness of the Latin Copy which was printed at Cologne. He
also apologizes for his Translation of the Title, as above, it being called by
the Author, Commentarioli Britannicae Descriptionis Fragmentum, that is
literally, A Fragment of a little Treatise of the Description of Britain, which
he thinks not much beside the Meaning of the Title he has given it. Next we
have other Commendations in Verse, namely by T. Brown, Prebend of Westminster,
Ed. Grant, Schoolmaster of Westminster, Lodowick Lhuyd, etc. Lastly concludes
his Preface with a Commendation of the Author, which for Brevity we refer to,
having a Character more Modern, here to subjoin In the Copy of this Book now
before us, which had been the late Mr. Hearne's of Oxford, he has written as
follows: "This is a very rare Book and the Translation is done admirably well;
and therefore the Encomiastick Verses are deservedly put before it. I have seen
a very imperfect and miserably shattered one, go at a considerable Price in an
Auction."
. Nor is the Translator unattended with Verses by his Brothers Laurence and
John Twyn.

After an Alphabetical Table, we have the Author's Epistle to Abraham Ortelius
of Antwerp, wherein we observe, he was now suffering under a dangerous Fever.
Yet that he had here sent him his Description of Wales and of England, with the
ancient Names, and another England; besides certain Fragments written with his
own Hand, probably for his great Book of Geography. This Epistle is dated from
Denbigh, Aug. 30, 1568, and subscribed yours, both living and dying, H. Lhuyd.

After a Table of near seventy Authors used in this little Work, our learned
Antiquary begins it, with his Notice of the Promise he had made to his
Correspondent aforesaid, of sending him the Geographical Description of
Britain, with the most ancient Names, as well Latin as British; wherein,
because he finds he must disagree from the Opinions of others, he has thought
it expedient, first, in a few Words, to disclose the Effect of his Purpose, and
by what Arguments and Authorities he is moved to change or ascribe to others,
the Names of some Countries, Towns, Rivers, and other Places. But before he
takes this in hand, enters upon some Explanation of the British Tongue,
touching the signification of the Letters, and manner of pronouncing the same:
The Ignorance of which Tongue having driven many notable Men to such shifts,
that endeavoring to wind themselves out of one, they have fallen into many.
After this he begins with the Etymologies of Britain; shows their Errors who
have darkened all the Names of Places and Men with those of Latin Derivation;
whereof Robert Coenalis is particularly arraigned; so proceeds to confirm Sir
Thomas Eliot's Observation out of an old Manuscript that Britain was anciently
written Prytannia, as if it were derived from Pride signifying Comeliness or
Beauty, and Cain, or White, with the first Letter sunk for smoothness in
Conjunction. After this he takes occasion to chastise Polydore Virgil the
Italian, and Hector Boethius the Scot; whereof the first, in his History of
Britain, mainly sought not only to obscure the Glory of the British Name, but
also to defame the Britains themselves with scandalous Lies; and the other, in
attempting to raise the Scots out of Darkness, attributes whatever he finds the
Romans or Britains have done worthy of Commendation in this Island, all to his
Countrymen. Yet does he also believe that Brutus came into Britain with his
Trojans, and took upon him the Government thereof; whence they might also be
called Britains. Then he proceeds to the Divisionof Britain into Lhoegria,
Albania, and Cambria; so to the Entrance of the Saxons, and by whom the Country
was called England, and the People Saison. But now returning to treat more
particularly of Lhoegr or England, he begins first with Kent, and having given
an Account of the ancient Names of Places in this and other Counties, to fol.
35, where, having also reproved Sleydan's partial Abridgment of Froissart, and
ended with the Descent of the Stuarts, he begins, as in a Second Part, with
these Words: "Now that we have wandered over all England called Lhoegr, let us
next in Order proceed to the second Region of Britain, which, of our
Countrymen, is called Albania, of the Inhabitants, Scotland." Here he observes,
That there was never any Writer of Name, that made mention either of Scots or
Redshanks before Vespasian's Time, about the Year of our Lord's Incarnation 72,
when Merrigus or Arviragus reigned in Britain. And that they could not be
called by the Romans, Phichtiani, for painting their Bodies, since they were
called by that Name before they were ever known to the Latins, and were the
Britains whom Caesar and others report to have painted themselves blue with the
Herb Woad, that they might appear more terrible to their Enemies. Then having
given us the Original of the Scots and Redshanks, and sharply corrected
Boethius for his many Falsities, he proceeds, in the like Manner as he had done
of England, briefly to describe or explain the Names of several principal
Places in Albania or Scotland, and the circumjacent Islands; so passes to the
third Part concerning Wales, upon which our Author is most copious, as well in
describing the Manners of the People, and the Characters of some of their most
ancient Worthies, as the ancient Names of the Places: Interspersed with many
learned Authorities, curious Observations, and critical Remarks. Of which, we
shall mention only his Reproof of the Golden Number, his Description of
Wenefride's Well; with other Censures again of P. Virgil and William Petit the
Monk, and lastly of Gildas, for his hard Character of the Britains; as if he
was to be regarded merely as a Preacher "whose Custom is, very sharply to
inveigh against the Faults of their Hearers: Wherefore, if we seek Authorities
out of Sermons as Polydore has done; what Parish, what Town, what Nation, or
Kingdom may escape Infamy? What has Bernard written of the Romans? Thus
surely, terming them impious, unfaithful, seditious, dishonest, traitorous,
great Speakers, but little Doers. These Things are by Divines spoken in the
Pulpit, according unto their Manner, that the like Faults may be amended, and
the Life reformed; not that the Romans or Britains were such indeed. Neither is
there any Man, unless he be a shameless Sycophant, that lies in wait for all
Occasions to dispraise and accuse, which will go about, by wresting of
Sentences forth of the Sermons of Preachers, slanderously to tax, and
infamously to note any whole Covent, Shire, City, or People. Wherefore, let
such idle and ill-disposed Slanderers leave off, and suffer the true Renown of
Britain to appear to the World. Neither judge me good Reader, of too sharp a
Tongue; seeing (so God help me) neither Envy of any Foreign Name, neither
Thirst of Vainglory, neither Hatred of any Nation, but alone the Love of my
Country, which is evil spoken of undeservedly, and desire to set forth the
Truth, have provoked me to write thus much." Then follows a short and modest
Conclusion, after which, the whole is ended with certain Welsh, or rather true
British Words converted into Latin by the Author, and now translated into
English.

XXXV. A Treatise of the CORRUPTION of SCRIPTURE, COUNCILS and FATHERS, by the
Prelates, Pastors and Pillars of the CHURCH of ROME, for maintenance of Popery
and Irreligion. By THOMAS JAMES, Student in Divinity, and Chief Keeper of the
Public Library in OXFORD, etc. With a sufficient Answer unto JAMES GRETSER and
ANTONIE POSSEVINE Jesuits, and the unknown Author of The Grounds of the Old
Religion and the New. Divided into V. Parts. Land. Quarto. 1612.
THE Learned Author of this Work, in his Dedication to George Abbot, Archbishop
of Canterbury, tells him, "he has written this Book in English for the Benefit
of his poor seduced Countrymen, who are persuaded by the Priests and Jesuits
that there is no such Matter, and that their Books are freest from Corruption,
and Minds from Falsehood; that Protestants are guilty of this Crime, and sundry
others. But as St. Austen observed of Heretics, that they were shameless and
impudent, without Foreheads, not caring what they said: So it is with the
Papists; they do not only impudently deny, but wickedly translate the Crime
from themselves unto others. For if forging false Treatises, or Corruption of
the True; changing of Scriptures, or altering of Men's Words, contrary to their
Meaning, be certain Notes of Heresy, how heretical then must the Church of Rome
be, wherein this Doctrine of Corruption is both openly taught and professed? As
their Indices Expurgatorii; the Printing of the Fathers Works at Rome, and the
Evidence of the Fact does plainly declare. All which is plainly showed in this
small Treatise, and whatsoever else does tend thereunto." Then he observes how
his said Patron, the Archbishop, had long since in his Book against Hill, begun
to discover this devilish Policy of the common Adversary, and his Grace's
Example has encouraged him to proceed therein, and emboldened him to consecrate
his Labors with himself, wholly at his Grace's Disposition.

After this Address, which gives, in this Part we have here extracted, a
Glimpse of the Contents of the Work before us, we have an ample Advertisement
to the Christian Reader, wherein he tells him, that "having fully traveled
this vast Wilderness of Sin, I have thought it my Duty to leave certain
Landmarks behind me, for their Direction which shall come hereafter." The
whole Book is resolved into five Parts: The First shows, The Bastardy of the
False Fathers, and in this Part these few Things are to be noted, That there
are 187 several Treatises, here distinctly produced, which are shrewdly
suspected, if not plainly convicted of Forgery by the Papists themselves. That
our Author follows herein the Judgment of their most esteemed Writers, such as
Bellarmine and Baronius, Possevin and Gretser, Sextus Senensis, Angelus Roccha,
Pamelius, and sundry others; sometimes, though seldom, citing Erasmus, or
following his Censure, because the Papists say he was an Apostate; though he
defended the Religion, then openly maintained, against Oecolampadius,
Melancthon, Martin Luther and others; was accounted in the bosom of the Church,
and saluted by the Name of Son, by Adrian VI. and Leo X. And however he was
accused for a Lutheran, seeing his Apology satisfied the Pope in his Lifetime,
why should the Papists traduce him being dead? Though he were in Heart and
Profession a Papist, God made him write against the Abuses of Popery, rather
than against the Religion itself, as himself says. But leaving him, let them
consider the rest who were inflexible Papists, and see here how the best of
them are driven to censure these Treatises, yet enforced to make use of them,
abusing the simple Reader, by the frequent Citation of Clement, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, and the rest, when no one Scrip of their Writings
is alleged; yet Cocceius their Master has been bold to set down the Age when
every one of these Fathers lived, to those bastard Treatises, which themselves
never saw. Our Author begins his said Catalogue, in this first Part with
Abdias, who lived in the Time of St. Paul, and ends it with Isodore, who
flourished not long after St. Gregory; yet, in this Part, he comprises not all
the Treatises of the Fathers who lived within the Six Hundred Years, condemned
by Papists, nor many more detected by the Protestants, but only those he finds
cited by the Papists in their Books of Controversy; especially when they are
alleged to gain Credit with the simple People; which they well might do, since
some Learned Men here named have been deceived, to cite thief Forgeries, as the
Works of the Fathers, who lived before Luther's Time, so they could not be
forged by Protestants, who according to the Opinion of the Papists derive their
Origin from him. And as to their being cited sometimes by learned Protestants
also, it is but reasonable, as one side has used them for their Convenience,
that they should be as free for the other. After this Catalogue, which
comprehends 71 Pages, we have a List of the Names of the Author's whose Books
are cited; and a brief Table wherein is declared, the Use that Papists make of
these Bastard Treatises: With another Table, showing who they were written by,
or ascribed to, and the Characters of them. Thus we come to

Part II. Of the Corruption of the True Fathers, wherein is the greater Danger,
because it may spread farther before espied. And here our Author takes the Word
Fathers in a large Sense, extending it as far as Gregory de Valentia does, unto
the best learned of all Ages. His Observations are taken from the most learned
Protestants, and particularly his chief Encourager the learned Dr. Bilson,
Bishop of Winchester. Further, this Part contains, 50 Proofs of corrupted
Places in these Ecclesiastical Writers. In the 26th Proof, there is a Story
rehearsed by our Author of Bishop Jewel, who citing St. Gregory's Epistles in a
Visitation Sermon, at Abingdon in Berkshire, was defamed for corrupting his
Author's Sense; which caused all the MS. of that Father to be searched, whereby
it was found, that the Popish Editions only were corrupted, that the Bishop had
quoted the genuine Sense, and that those who charged such Corruptions upon him
were themselves most guilty of them. Our Author concludes this Part, with his
Wishes for a Protestant Edition of the Councils; and observes, that Dr. Ward,
Master of Sidney-Sussex College, in Cambridge, had bestowed many Years Pains in
this way, and that his Endeavors would tend to excellent Purposes, if he might
be prevailed on to publish them; but if any Thing keep him back, it is an
humble Conceit he has ever had, to think himself so much the less able, the
more sufficient others esteem him. This Part is comprised in 103 Pages, and has
in another Page, The Names added, of the Authors and Pages corrupted.

Part III. The Variety and Contrariety of the Popish Bibles, commonly called
the Vulgar Bibles in Latin. Our Author's Motives for publishing this Part were,
first, because it is a Matter of Faith to appoint what is Scripture, and what
not, to show that the Pope may err in Matters of Faith. Secondly, Because
Papists object to us our different Translations of the Bible, to show their own
gross Errors and Absurdities, in setting forth their two Hierome Bibles,
authorized by two Popes within two Years. Thirdly, To vindicate his Bellum
Papale, wrote against those two discording Editions, from some Objections to
the same, lately published by James Gretser. In this Part it further appears,
These Bibles were set forth by Pope Sixtus in 1590, and Pope Clement 1592. And
what Sentences or Words were added by Pope Clement, which were not in the
Edition of Sixtus: Also the Sentences or Words left out by Clement, which were
in the Bibles of Sixtus; with the Contradictions of one against the other:
Errors in Numerical Computations; Transposition of Names, and other Alterations
of the Sense: To which follows, An Apology or Defense of the Bellum Papale,
published by our Author against those Bibles, 4to, 1600. In which he tells us,
how he came to engage himself against those Editions; recites the pompous
Inscription set up in the Vatican in Honor of Sixtus, upon his said
Publication, with the Apologies of some Jesuits for the Errors therein; as
Baldwin, Dr. Norrice, and Dr. Bishop; also some Answers to Gretser's
Allegations against our Author: With an Account of Arias Montanus's Apology,
for his Integrity in setting forth the King's Bibles, containing the whole
History of his Troubles in the Progress of that costly Work; the Copy of which
was found at the Sack of Cadiz, and by Dr. Rives reposited in the Library at
Oxford; this with a rehearsal of some Sentences that are yet found uncorrected,
or rather added unwarrantably to the Vulgar Bible; also some further Answers to
his Antagonist, and a Character of him, concludes this Part in 59 Pages.

Part IV. Of their condemning the Fathers. For though the Papists do much boast
of their Fathers, and vulgarly seem to value their Writings, yet it is found
that none are more injurious to their Works or their Worth, "using them as
Merchants do their casting Counters; sometimes they stand for Pounds, sometimes
for Shillings, sometimes for Pence, sometimes for nothing, according as they be
next and readiest at Hand to make up their Accounts." In this Part, our Author
acknowledges himself much indebted to the Second Part of the Dean of
Winchester's Apology, and to Sam. Huberus in his Anti-Bellarminus. And having
proved these Assertions, he proceeds, to lay open the Mystery and Abuses of the
Indices Expurgatorii; shows you the Original, Nature, Use and Corruption of
this Inquisition; the Officers, Inquisitors, Commissaries, and Public Notaries,
concerned in these Indices of Books to be forbidden, or purged from whatever
impugned the Church of Rome. And here he commends the Treatise, written by
Gabriel Putherbeus, De tollendis Libris malis, 1549, as what has discovered the
Wickedness of their Bishops, Priests and Monks, better than any Work our Author
knows. In the latter end of this Part, we have a Table of the Divinity Books,
first set forth and approved, then censured by Papists. This Catalogue contains
323 of their said forbidden Books, which are often noted in what Parts they
have been purged: Among them there are some of our own Authors; as Alcuinus,
whose Book de Trinitate, ad Carolum Regem, printed in Bibl. Patrum, is falsely
by Sextus Senensis and others, attributed to Calvin; though indeed their Names
are one, by a Metathesis and Change of the Letters. Whereas Copies of it,
written above 500 Years ago, were to be seen in the Prince's Library at St.
James's and elsewhere. St. Adhelm Bishop of Sherburne has also incurred the
Roman Censure; and the Sums of Richard Fitz-Rauf, Archbishop of Armagh,
against the Armenians, with his other Treatises, are cautioned against, as
printed Anno 1511, by Possevine; and in Bishop Fisher's Book de Fiducia Dei,
the Papists, finding some Points against them, have pretended it was printed by
some Heretic in his Name, and even by Calvin according to Gregory Capuchine. A
silly shift; for the Book was printed at Cologn in 8 vo 1556, shortly after his
Death; and since then no such Matter was ever heard, till of late Years. "A
very likely Matter (says our Author) that the Papists would suffer such a piece
of Knavery to lie buried so long. Again, what reason have Protestants to
counterfeit such a Book in a Papist's Name? Seeing their Indices of Books
forbidden, and to be purged, do furnish us with a sufficient Number in this
kind; without any Labor of ours. So much the more are we kindly beholden unto
them, first for sending us unto the best Books, by their Catalogue of Books
prohibited, and secondly, for directing us unto the best Places to be read in
those Books, by their Indices Expurgatorii." Nay, Gildas Sapiens was not so
wise, as to see that his Works should come to be censured at Rome, for
otherwise he would to be sure have prevented them, and retracted his Opinion.
Much less could William of Occham's Dialogues, his Works of 90 Days, and his
Writings against Pope John XXII. escape the Catalogue of Books forbidden:
Besides some others o^ our Countrymen in this Table also mentioned. At the End
of which we have a little Summary of the Uses thereof, under the Consideration
of what Popes, Patriarchs, Bishops, Cardinals, Fathers, Saints, Martyrs, etc.
Councils, Liturgies, Prayer-books, Bibles, etc. are censured therein; also by
what degrees Books have been corrupted; with what Opposition; the Inquisitors
being still at odds with us and themselves; what Popish Authors, through all
Ages, have maintained the Truth of our Religion; what Books and Editions are to
be read by Protestants: lastly, what is constantly denied by the Papists, That
the Text of the Fathers Works is commanded to be purged in their several
Indices Expurgatorii, and plainly proved in this Table, by the Mark of a Hand
in the Margin. In this Table, our Author doubts not but many Writers have
slipped his Pen, Wherein he desired not Exactness, but to give you a Taste only
of that sour Fruit, which they have grafted upon other Men's Stocks. He has
cited nothing without a sufficient Author or Authority. And as for the Books of
Law, Physic, and the Arts, which the Papists have thus mangled and disfigured,
they are reserved for some other time, this Part ending at p. 102.

Part V. A Remedy against all Popish Corruptions. Herein the Author shows how
vain it is to find out the Diseases in Books, without we endeavor to find out
the Remedies also. This last Part, containing 27 Pages, begins with an Account
of the sundry Ways how Books are depraved and corrupted, and three Ways
proposed for reforming the same. That the Discovery of false Treatises, in the
Name of the Fathers, has in part been made by the Bishop of Winchester, Dr.
Reynolds, Abraham Scultetus, and especially Master Robert Cook of Leedes. How
the Corruption of the true Fathers is to be known; and that those Places purged
by the Inquisitors are to be restored as fast by the Protestants. Of a
Catechism to be framed for us out of their Writings: and how Papists are to be
answered by Papists. The Collations of this kind by Mr. W. Crashaw, of the
Temple, commended. How the Romish Falsifications might be shortly discovered,
by dividing the Examination among many Divines. The Profit of Collating printed
Books, with the Indices Expurgatorii. Their late corrected Editions to be
considered and suspected. Of their pretended Discovery of lost Writers in
Caves, Mountains, etc. The Popish Editions of the Fathers to be compared with
ancient MSS. How the Fathers Works were corrupted before, and since Printing;
the Ways of correcting them. Our Universities and private Libraries well stored
with MSS. notwithstanding the great Consumption of them in England. An
Exhortation to private Men not to monopolize, but communicate their MSS. seeing
that how commendably soever they preserve them, little Use can be made of them,
nor their Authorities safely vouched, since they are not always to be seen,
while such Owners are living; and, when they die, may easily miscarry, by
falling into the Hands of such as regard them not; by whom, as one merrily
said, Monyscripts are more pored upon than Manuscripts. That the Neglect of the
Fathers has proceeded from the false Editions of them; and that there would be
an End of Controversy, if their Works were truly printed. An Objection from the
diverse Readings of ancient MSS. Another against the Antiquity and Integrity of
Copies; with Answers. The Satisfaction of small Differences in Copies. Our
English MSS. highly esteemed beyond Seas. Our Founders of Colleges careful to
furnish their Libraries with rare MSS. maintaining diverse Scholars abroad, to
compare, transcribe, or procure Originals. That Richard Dunelmensis, Founder of
Duresme College, now called Trinity College, bestowed many thousand Pounds per
Annum in Books, and most of his Books upon the Library he erected in that
College, who, for his exceeding great Love of Learning, did well deserve the
Name of Philo-biblos: See his Book, De Amore Librorum, printed at Oxford 1598.
De eo dictumerat, quod haberet plures Libros quam omnes Pontifices in Anglia.
Which Title and Character, since his Time, is most justly to be given to Sir T.
Bodley, whose great Munificence has far surpassed the Bishop, having stored his
Magazine, as our Author observes, with eleven or twelve thousand Volumes;
whereof the greatest part are in Folio, in all Sciences and Languages, and
frequented by Scholars of all Nations. Here follows the Confession of his
Adversaries, Possivine and Costerus, of the Goodness and Plenty of our Books;
the Way of discerning corrected Copies, and to know if they be ancient or not.
That those which are written in a set Hand, with great Letters, or in the
Lombard or Saxon Characters, are of great Antiquity; how far later MSS. to be
esteemed of. The Objection, that it is a tedious and needless Work to collate
the Fathers Works, with MSS. answered. The Benefit likely to arise of a general
Collation. Commendations of Erasmus, and wherein defective, in his
Animadversions upon the Fathers Works. That he gave the first Alarm of their
barbarous corrupting the Fathers, for which his very Name is in Maledictione.
Exhortation to our wealthy Stationers to print the Fathers Works; such as Mr.
Geo. Bishop, Mr. Bonham Norton, and Mr. John Norton, who have been chosen
Aldermen of London. That the Charge of Printers and Stationers ought to be well
recompensed. They are compared to our Merchants-Adventurers. Why, the Hazard
being alike in most Books, they should seek rather to deserve well of the
ancient Fathers. The Bible compared, revised, and printed this Year, 1611. St.
Chrysostom's Works, with several other of the Greek Fathers, likely to be
printed at the unspeakable Charge of the learned and judicious Provost of Eton
College, and Warden of Merton College in Oxford, Sir Henry Savile, well seen in
the best Languages, and most of the Liberal Arts. The Latin Fathers, more urged
in all Controversies, should be the sooner correctly printed. The Collation and
Revision of the Fathers Works, a good Inducement to the printing of them. The
Use that is made of the MSS. indifferently, both by Protestants and Papists;
whereof, though much remains to be spoken, our Author, like a weary Traveller,
here takes up his rest; which indeed he might well need, having gone through
such a Variety of Books, as this Work does manifest; and really held it, as
Baronius pretended to do, a Religion, to say nothing which he could not prove,
and to prove nothing but out of certain, known, and sufficient Authors. At the
End of his Advertisement mentioned at the beginning, there is an Appendix,
showing first, how there are Scribes diligently employed in the Vatican
Library, to transcribe Acts of the Councils, or Works of the Fathers; that they
can imitate their Copies exactly; that it is feared they alter and change at
the Pope's pleasure; and that these Transcripts in time may be vouched for
ancient MSS. And this is more to be feared, if there is an Index Expurgatorius
for purging of MSS. as well as printed Books. Secondly, That the unknown Author
of the Grounds of the Old Religion, and the New, so often mentioned in this
Work, is now known to be one May, a Priest, a Man neither immodest nor
unlearned, yet foully mistaken in sundry Points of his Answer to Mr. Crashaw's
first Tome of, Romish Forgeries and Falsifications. What we have lastly to
observe, is, That at the End of the whole Book, there is a Table of the Authors
mentioned in this Treatise, with the particular Editions made use of throughout
the same.

XXXVI. The YOUNGER BROTHER'S APOLOGY, or, a Father's Free Power disputed, for
the Disposition of his Lands, or other his Fortunes, to his Son, Sons, or any
one of them: As right Reason, the Laws of God and Nature, the Civil, Canon and
Municipal Laws, of this Kingdom, do command. Quarto. Oxford, 1634. Pages 56.
THIS scarce Tract is dedicated by the Author to all Fathers, and Sons of
worthy Families, whom Virtue, Birth, and Learning, have justly styled
Gentlemen. And in the said Address has these Asseverations; "Not upon the least
Presumption of a Self-sufficiency to confront thereby any received Custom (if
any such be) nor to diminish the natural Reverence due by younger Brothers to
their Elder, nor to enkindle Emulation in Families, nor to innovate any thing
to the Prejudice of public or private Quiet (which none I hope will be so
ill-affected as to suppose) neither mine inoffensive Zeal for younger Brothers,
among who I am ranked one; nor the absolute Consent of Imperial and
Ecclesiastical Laws, which I, having a little studied, not a little respect;
nor the particular Honor I bear to the Usages in this Point of our ancient
Britains, from whom I am descended; nor desire to maintain and justify an Act
in this kind, done by a Friend, whom I must ever reverence; nor yet the hope of
bettering my private Fortunes, which moves Men much in these our Times, has
drawn me to this Undertaking: But principally the singular Respect, which, as a
Patriot, I bear to the Glory and Good of Gentlemen's Houses, whose best
Original, surest Means of Maintenance, and principal Ornament, is Virtue, or
Force of Mind; the want whereof is a common Cause of Ruin. The free Power
therefore of you, who are Fathers, is here in some special Cases argued and
defended, to give you occasion thereby to consider, with the clearer Eyesight,
for the Establishment and Continuance of Families. Here also the natural Rights
of us that are Children, be so discoursed and discussed, as that we younger
Brothers may have Cause and Courage to endeavor, by virtuous Means, to make
ourselves, without the least wrong to any, capable, if need shall be, of the
chiefest Uses. And both and all, are so handled, as that no Offense can
reasonably arise in any respect, much less for that the whole is conceived and
written in Nature only of an Essay or Problem; to which I bind no Man to
afford more Belief than himself has liking of, being free to refute the whole,
or any part, at his pleasure, as he feels himself able or disposed." In the
Conclusion of this Epistle, the Author observes, that nothing in this Apology
is defended but by Authority, Reason, and Example, nor any Person taxed, or
particular personal Vices; nevertheless, if he has not performed as well as he
desires, or the Cause deserves, he hopes, that for his good Intention he shall
be conceived well of: and subscribes the two Letters of his Name, J. A.

The Work is divided into ten Chapters, whereof the first shows the Occasion of
writing this Apology, to prove that a Father may, in some Cases, make any of
his Children his Heir, or freely dispose his worldly Estate to which of his
Sons he pleases, leaving to the rest a Competency; and do an Act which may be
just, according to the Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations. The 2d Chapter
maintains, That the Grounds of all good Constitutions being in Nature, yet she
neither before nor after the Law of Propriety established, did command that all
should be left to any one more than another: herein is also shown the happy
Community of all things in the primitive Ages; and that hereditary Succession
or Title to Parents Lands or Goods, was not in use till Nature came to be
depraved. 3. That the Breach of some written Laws of God, upon Warrant of the
primary. Law of Nature, is without Sin; and that therefore there can be no such
Right in Primogeniture, which is not in the Father's Power to avoid, though there
were a Precept to the contrary, as there is not. 4. That Nations beginning to
devise sundry Forms of settling Inheritances, the Romans especially therein
respected the free Power of Fathers; the Right of Children to their Fathers
Estates, beginning only at their Father's Death. 5. That the present Custom of
our Country, of giving all, or almost all, to the Eldest, was never so begun
that it meant to exclude just Remedies for such Evils, as should grow out of
the Abuse of that Custom, when it may make Fathers guilty of their Sons Faults,
and of their Families Ruin. 6. That it is no Offense before God, for a Father,
being Tenant in Fee-simple, to disinherit the Eldest, or to parcel his Estate
upon Cause; and that extreme Vices of Heirs apparent, together with the fewer
Means, which younger Brothers have now to live on than heretofore, cries out
against the contrary Opinion. 7. That Fathers, being Tenants in Fee-tail, may
likewise without Scruple of Conscience, discontinue the State-tail upon Cause,
and devise the same at their reasonable Pleasure. 8. That Unthriftiness is one
known Name of many hidden Sins, and is alone a sufficient Cause of
Disinherison, proved by the Law of God and Man, 9. The main Points of the
Premises exemplified in diverse particular Facts, as well of Princes as of
private Persons. 10. That the Law of natural Equity and Reason, confirm just
Disinherison; and that the riotous Lives of eldest Brothers deserve that
vehement Increpation, with which the Author closes up this Treatise Before we
part with this Subject, we shall here take the Opportunity we have, of
referring to a couple of scarce Tracts, more ancient than this above
recapitulated, which have some Parts or Chapters in them relating thereunto.
The first is called Newnam's Nightcrow, a Bird that breeds Braules in many
Families and Households: Wherein is remembered that kindly and provident Regard
which Fathers ought to have toward their Sons; together with a Disciphering of
the injurious Dealings of some younger sort of Stepdames. Quarto. 1590. Pages
50. This Pamphlet is dedicated to Thomas Owen. Esquire Sergeant at Law, by the
Author John Newnam: Is divided into Two Parts, and each into five Chapters, The
first Part is concerning Fathers; showing chiefly how the Virtues or Vices of
their Children proceed mostly from their Examples. And the second Part, upon
Step-mothers, ends with two Chapters under these Titles, That disinheriting of
the eldest Son, without very great lawful Cause, is an Act very wrongful and
ungodly. That Procurers and Counselors of Disinherison, and all wrong doing,
ought to make or procure Restitution. But as strong Arguments as there are
herein, against the disinheriting of Heirs, though several Crimes are produced,
which they being convicted of, it is allowed; yet they seem matched in that
other Pamphlet we mentioned, which is a Dialogue, entitled, A Work worth the
Reading: containing five Questions very expedient, as well for Parents to
perceive how to bestow their Children in Marriage, and to dispose their Goods
at their Death, as for all other Persons to receive great Profit by the rest of
the Matters herein expressed: Newly published by Charles Gibbon, and dedicated
to the Right Worshipful Sir Nicholas Bacon. Qo. 1591. Pages 60. The second
Chapter of this Tract is upon the Question, Whether the Father may lawfully
disinherit his Firstborn; where, though there are Arguments produced on both
sides of the Question, yet we are induced to discard a lewd lavish Reprobate of
an eldest Son, a riotous Spend-thrift, which is a Character less criminal than
those produced by the former Author, for a younger that is dutiful, virtuous,
and prudent. For that "a wise Man will alter Custom after Discretion, and
dispose his Wealth according to Wisdom." And a little further, "Goods are the
Gift of God; and he has appointed us not to do as we list with them, like
Lords, but to dispose them well as his Stewards: Therefore we ought to bestow
them on such, where he that gave them may be glorified;" according to the
Apostle's Command, which is here cited. Thus much may suffice in this Place, if
not to satisfy the Reader, yet to inform him where he may meet with further
Satisfaction upon a Subject of this important and universal Concern.
.

XXXVII. SCOT's Discovery of WITCHCRAFT: Proving the common Opinions of Witches
contracting with Devils, Spirits, Familiars, and their Power to kill, torment,
and consume the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children, or other Creatures, by
Diseases or otherwise; their flying in the Air, etc. to be but imaginary,
erroneous Conceptions, and Novelties. Wherein also the Practices of
Witchmongers, Conjurers, Inchanters, Soothsayers; also the Delusions of
Astrology, Alchemy, Legerdemain, and many other things are opened, that have
long lain hidden, though very necessary to be known, for the undeceiving of
Judges, Justices and Juries; and for the Preservation of poor People, etc. With
a Treatise also upon the Nature, etc. of Spirits and Devils, etc. Quarto, 1651.
Pages 401. besides Tables, etc.
THIS curious Book so elaborately written upon these uncommon Subjects, and
first published by Reginald Scot, Esquire in 1584, as appears also in the
Title Page of this Edition, had for a while a very good EfFect upon the
Kingdom, in purging those Dregs of Superstition, to which it seems naturally
subject, by the Paroxysms into which it has so frequently relapsed. James Ady,
M. A. in his Perfect Discovery of Witches, published in 4to. ten Years after
this Edition of Mr. Scot's Book now before us, tells us, "It did for some time
take great Impression in the Magistracy, and also in the Clergy; but since that
time, England has shamefully fallen from the Truth, which they begun to
receive." Further, it appears in the third Book of this Mr. Ady's Discovery,
which detects the Vanity of some English Writers concerning Witches, and
principally that Dialogue of King James's, called Demonologie, first printed at
Edinburgh, 4to. 1597. that the said King has, in the Preface thereof, chiefly
objected to this Work of Scot's; wherefore, the Reader might expect in the Body
of his Majesty's Pamphlet, to find our Author notably confuted; but in reading
that Dialogue, he shall not find one thing or other answered, but only a bare
Affirmation of such Tenets, without Ground, or Warrant of Scripture, which were
confuted by Scot; as the Tenets of Bodin, Hyperius, Hemingius, and other Popish
Writers; which might yet bring a Discredit upon Scot's Book, in those
Understandings which are to be dazzled by Names that glare with great Titles or
Dignities; but with discerning and unbiased Judges, an Antagonist of such
Character and such Conduct, will but raise the Credit of the Works he opposes.
All we have further to premise of our Author, is from A. Wood, who informs us,
That he was the younger Son of Sir John Scot of Scots-Hall, near Smeeth in
Kent; that he was bred at Oxford, and "gave himself up solely to solid Reading;
to the Perusal of obscure Authors, that had, by the generality of Scholars,
been neglected." And at Times of leisure, to Husbandry and Gardening, as may
appear from his Perfect Platform of a Hop-Garden, which was the first Treatise
that had been written upon this Subject, and from this Discovery of Witchcraft,
which also he seems to have first detected, publicly at least, in our Nation.
In both "our Author plainly appears to have been well versed in many choice
Books, and that his search into them was so profound, that nothing slipped his
Pen which might make for his Purpose."

As to this Work, now under our Inspection, there are Three ingenious Epistles,
published by our Author before it. Two of them, to Sir Roger Manwood, Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and to Sir Thomas Scot; and the third, to Dr.
Coldwell, Dean of Rochester, and Dr. Readman, Archdeacon of Canterbury. Then
follows his Epistle to the Reader; in which he solemnly professes, his Drift in
this Undertaking was, That the Power and Glory of God should not be abridg'd or
abased; that Religion might stand without the Trumpery of such Impostures; and
that Compassion might be used toward those poor ignorant Souls, who are
commonly accused, and sometimes credulously confess themselves guilty of
Witchcraft. At the End of this Epistle, there is a Table of between two and
three Hundred Authors used in the ensuing Work, which is divided into Sixteen
Books, and they into many Chapters; beginning with an Impeachment of the Power
of Witches in Meteors, and Elementary bodies, tending to the Rebuke of such as
attribute too much unto them. So proceeds in the next Chapter, to the
Inconvenience growing by Men's Credulity herein, and a Reproof of some
Churchmen inclined to the common Opinion of Witches Omnipotency, with a
familiar Example thereof, in the Story of Margaret Simons of Brenchley in Kent,
who being accused of Witchcraft, by John Ferral Vicar of that Parish, was
arraigned in 1581 at Rochester; but one of the Jury being wiser than the rest,
she was acquitted. Next we have a Description of those who are called Witches,
the Motives to their being thought and thinking themselves Witches. What
miraculous Acts are imputed to them, by Witchmongers, Papists and Poets.
Confutations of the Opinion of Witchcraft, and the Sin of repairing to Witches
for help; how their Name became so famous, and how variously People think of
them. Causes why Witches themselves, as well as others, believe they can work
Impossibilities, with Answers to certain Objections, where also their
Punishment by Law is touched, and some late credulous Publications reflected
on. This Book concludes with an Arraignment of the Cruelties practis^d upon old
Women in all Ages, since the Commencement of Popery, by Witchmongers and
Inquisitors.

The Second Book shows what infamous Witnesses are allowed to give Evidence
against reputed Witches, and upon what hard Conditions to be challenged; as
James Sprenger, and Henry Institor, from whom Bodin, and other Champions of
Witchmongers receive their Light, allow. Next follows, the Order of their
Examination, with an Account of the Scottish Customs of accusing Witches, and
King Childebert's cruel Device. Matters of Evidence against them. Their
Confessions. Presumptions whereby they are condemned. Interrogatories by the
Inquisitors. Their superstitious Trial of Tears; their Cautions and Tortures to
procure Confession. The fifteen Crimes laid to their charge; refuted. Cornelius
Agrippa's Pleadings for an old Woman condemned of Witchcraft. That it is no
wonder Witches condemn themselves, through the Barbarities used in extorting
their Confessions.

The Third Book lays open the Bargains charged upon these reputed Witches with
the Devil, by several Popish Witchmongers here mentioned; with the Order of
their Homage to the Devil: Their Songs, Dances, Excourses, etc. Their Summons
to appear before the Devil; riding in the Air, Conferences, Supplies,
Sacrifices, etc. That there can be no real League made with the Devil, with the
weak Proofs of the Adversaries for the same. Of the private League with the
Devil. Bodin's fabulous Miracle of the French Lady, transported from Lions to
Lorrain by an Ointment. A Disproof of their Assemblies and their Bargains. A
Confutation of the Objection concerning Witches Confessions. What folly it were
for Witches to undergo such desperate Peril and intolerable Tortures for the
little Gain and great Disappointments they meet with; and how it comes to pass
they are overthrown by their Confessions. How Melancholy abuses old Women, and
the Effects thereof in sundry Examples. That voluntary Confessions may be
untruly made, though to the undoing of the Confessors, and of the strange
Operation of Melancholy, proved by a late Instance, in the story, of Ade Davie
of Sellenge in Kent. Other strange Effects of Melancholy; that it frequently
abounds in old Women, and that their Confessions are not to be credited.
Confutations of their Confessions, concerning their League, and causing of
Tempests. What would be the Consequence if their Confessions were true.
Examples of credulous People, who used Witches in the Wars. Of the Eye-biting
Witches in Ireland; of those pretended to ryme Man or Beast to death; and of
enchanted Archers, particularly a poor Fellow at Malling in Kent, who by one of
Queen Mary's Justices was punished, for shooting with Flies, or Familiars, or
enchanted Arrows, because he could win two or three Shillings a day at the
Butts. Authorities condemning the Confessions of Witchcraft, with the Attempts
of a Popish Doctor to disprove the same. The Reasons also of Witchmongers, to
prove the Wonder-Workings of these old Women: Bodin's Tale of the Frieseland
Priest transported; and the further Illusions of melancholy Imaginations. Of
the Sufficiency of Witches Confessions in Law to take away Life, with the
Decrees of Divines and Councils in the Case. Answers to the four Capital Crimes
objected against Witches. The Author's Request that his chaste Readers would
overlook Eight Chapters in the following Book, reciting some lewd Feats
ascribed to Witches by Doctors of Popish Divinity; with his Apology for the
same, as necessary to be detected.

The Fourth Book exposes the presumptuous Opinions of Witchmongers, in
ascribing the superior Power to evil Spirits, of framing themselves in more
excellent sort than God has made us; with their absurd Assertions of the
incongruous Conjunctions of Witches with Incubus; that since the Year 1400,
they have consented willingly to the Carnal Embraces of this Diabolical
Phantom, and that many Witches burned at Ravenspurge, confessed such Carnal
Knowledge for many Years together; with many other Tenets of the said
unaccountable Intercourse, most grossly unphilosophical, and improbable to have
met with the Reception they have done among the most Ignorant; such as the
Devil's visible Dealings with Women in this kind, the Power of Witches to
obstruct Generation, and their supernaturally depriving Men of the Paris
thereof. The Legend of St. Sylvanus personated by Incubus, and of St.
Christina, who charitably supplying the Place of a Female oppressed with one,
was shrewdly accloy'd: Also another ridiculous Legend of St. Bernard, with the
Tradition of yellow-hair'd Maids being most encumbered with Incubus; and the
bewitchery of married Men, to use other Men's Wives instead of their own: how to
procure the dissolving of bewitched Love, and enforce Men to love old Hags;
with the relation of a lewd Trick of a Priest in Gelderland. Instances of
diverse Saints, very letcherously disposed and miraculously rendered chaste. A
recital of certain Popish and Magical Cures for those who are bewitched in
their Privities, among which we have the wise distinction of Hostiensis,
between Frigidity and Witchcraft; also Sir Thomas More's Receipt to procure
Generation mentioned, but not recited even in Latin, as the former is; being
too gross in our Author's mind for Repetition. This Chapter concludes with the
pious Offering made by Katharine Lo, of a waxen Resemblance of the Parts
affected in her impotent Husband, at the Altar of St. Anthony for his Recovery.
After these, and the Narrative of another Cure performed on a Hag-ridden
Mass-Priest, from the Account of Jason Pratensis; This Book concludes with a
Confutation of these Follies touching Incubus and Succubus, showing them to be
nothing but Popish Imposture and Knavery, to cover the shameful Debaucheries of
the Ecclesiastics and their Concubines: That Robin Goodfellow was nothing but
a lusty cosening Friar; and that there can be no Carnal Copulation with
Spirits, much less any Offspring therefrom, whatever Hyperius, and other such
Deceivers write of our Merlin: That Incubus is a natural Disease, and of the
Remedies prescribed for the same; with the Derision which Chaucer, who had seen
through these Popish Abominations, long since made of the Priests, under that
Name, quoted from his own Verses in the Wife of Bath's Tale.

The Fifth Book lays open and confutes with many Arguments and Authorities, the
absurd Accounts of Transformations by Sorcery, into Wolves, Asses, Cats, etc.
Answers the Witchmongers Objections concerning Nebuchadnezzar, with their Error
relating to Lycanthropia; and answers also their Arguments for Transportation,
and from the Calamities of Job; concluding with the several sorts of Witches
mentioned in the Scriptures, and how the word Witch is there applied.

The Sixth Book begins with an Exposition of the Hebrew Word Chasaph, wherein
is answered that Objection in Exodus, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live;
also of Simon Magus in Acts 8. An Explanation also of that Place in
Deuteronomy, wherein are recited all kind of Witches, with a Confutation of
their Opinions, who hold they can work such Miracles, as are imputed to them.
Observations upon the Use of Poison, by Women in all Ages more than Men. Of
diverse Practitioners with Poison in many Countries, called Veneficia. A great
Objection answered concerning this kind of Witchcraft called Veneficium. What
Confections used therein. Of Philtres, or Love-Potions, and the same confuted
by Poets. Proofs that such Potions rather promote Death tbro' their Venom, than
Love by Art; with a recital of many simple Ingredients, on which this Power is
imposed. And this Chapter concludes, with Bodin's Charge of false Greek, and
false Interpretation thereof, against John Wier, retorted upon himself.

The Seventh Book begins with explaining the Hebrew Word Ob in the Old
Testament, translated Pytho or Phyonicus Spiritus; which Hebrew Word signifying
most properly a Bottle, is there used because the Pythonists spoke hollow, as
in the bottom of their Bellies, whereby they are aptly in Latin called
Ventriloqui; of which sort was Elizabeth Barton the Holy Maid of Kent, etc. by
which Faculty they many times overthrow the good Fame of honest Persons. But
our Author passing over a hundred Cosenages he could recite of this kind; does
here give us a large and true Story of a Wench named Mildred Norrington,
practicing her diabolical Witchcraft by this Ventriloquy, Anno 1574, at
Westwell in Kent, six Miles from his own House; with the Account of her
detection before two discreet Justices, named Thomas Wotton of Bocton Malherb,
and George Darrel, Esqs; Here, says our Author, compare this Wench with the
Witch of Endor, and you shall see that both the Cosenages may be done by one
Art. The Discovery also of other such Deceivers, as Agnes Brigs, and Rachel
Pinder of London, who disgorged Pins, Clouts, etc. and the Dutchman at
Maidstone, named John Stiklebow, who was dispossessed of Ten Devils in 1572,
according to the Pamphlet then printed. The Abuses of Apollo's Oracle; the
Apostle's mistake of Spirits, with Arguments that they can assume no Shapes.
Further of Apollo's Witches called Pythonists, and of Gregory's Letter to the
Devil, with a Comparison between the Idol of Apollo, and our Rood of Grace,
through the help of little St. Rumbal at Boxly in Kent. How many learned Men have
been deluded in their Writings upon this Subject of Spirits. More of the Witch
of Endor, and that Samuel was not raised indeed; the Dotage of Bodin and other
Papists herein, and that Souls cannot be raised by Witchcraft. That neither the
Devil nor Samuel were raised; but that it was a mere Trick according to the
Guise of our Pythonists. Answers to the Objections of our Witchmongers in this
Case. Expositions of the Places in Scripture, showing how Saul was abused, and
how it might all be wrought by Ventriloquy. With other Opinions produced and
answered, tending to prove that our Miracles are commonly Knaveries, and
especially of the Priests; that since Luther's Time these Spirits, Hags,
Fairies, Imps, Incubi, Robin Goodfellows, Men in the Oak, Puckles, Fire-drakes,
Hobgoblins, Tom-thumbs, and all the rest of this Black Brood of Bull-beggars,
have much vanished and very little appeared; and lastly, that those who will
credit the Stories of Witches, must allow as much to their Power of working
Miracles, as to that of Christ.

The Eighth Book shows us how Miracles, the Gift of Prophecy, and Oracles are
ceased; with a recital of Plutarch's Tale, believed by many learned Men, of the
Devil's Death; and another out of the Golden Legend of a godly Devil. The
Judgment of the Fathers upon Oracles, and their Abolishment, with their
Transplantation from Delphos to Rome; also where, when, and how the priestly
Sorcerers wrought their Feats of old; and when they ceased in England.

The Ninth Book expounds the word Kasam or Divination; proves from Scripture
the Lawfulness of making Observations on the Weather; that of other
Observations, some are Indifferent, some Ridiculous, and some Impious. Further
of the Idol of Apollo, and the ancient Aruspices. Of the Predictions of
Soothsayers, and Lewd Priests, Astronomers, Physicians; and of Divine Prophecy.
The diversity of True Prophets; of Urim, and the Prophetical Use of the twelve
Precious Stones therein; and of the Divine Voice called Echo. Of Prophecies
Conditional: Whereof the Prophecies in the Old Testament do treat, and by whom
they were published, with some Answers against Witches supernatural Actions. Of
the Mircales in the Old and New Testament, and that we are not now to expect
any more such.

The Tenth Book interprets the word Onen, and thereupon discourses of divine,
natural and casual Dreams, with their Causes and Effects. The variance of old
Writers touching Dreams. Against the Interpreters of Dreams, and that the
Interpretation of them is ceased. Of Hemingius his diabolical Dreams, and that
Witches nor any other can impose upon sleeping Men what Cogitations they list.
The Cause of Magical or rather frightful Dreams. How Men have been deluded by
Dreams to dig for Money, with the Order and Ceremony used therein; also an
Account of Receipts for procuring pleasant Dreams, and the difference between
Morning and Midnight Dreams. Receipts of Unctions used for the Transportation
of Witches; with a Confutation of these Follies, and of the Witches Assemblies
and Banquets. That the Prophecies in the Old Testament were mostly revealed in
Dreams, and that such Revelations are not now to be looked for. Of some Dreams
coming to pass, others proving contrary, and Nebuchadnezzar's Rule to know a
true Expositor of them.

The Eleventh Book begins with the Exposition of Nahas, or the flying of Birds
called Augury, so passes to the Jewish Sacrifice to Moloch, with an Argument
against Purgatory. The Cannibal Custom of the Popish Sacrifice in the Mass. The
Superstition of the Heathens about Fire. Of the Roman Sacrifices, and their
Esteem of Augury. That the Practisers of that Art were Coseners. Of the
Ceremonies thereunto belonging: Upon what Signs and Tokens they did
prognosticate. Observations on the Parts of Beasts. A Confutation of Augury,
Plato's Opinion thereof. Of contrary Events and false Predictions. The Cosenage
of Sortilege, or Lotteries. Of the Cabalistical Art. Of the first Ordaining and
Profanation of Sacrifices, and of the Pope's Corruption of Sacrifices. Of the
Objects upon which the Augures exercised their Prognostications. Of the
Divisions in the Art, Persons admittable, and other Superstitions, especially
by the common People. The variance of old Writers upon this Art; wherefore it
is ridiculous; derided by Cato, Aristotle, etc. Of the silly Distinctions made
thereof. Of Figure-flingers, and the Uncertainty of their Art. The Sentence of
Cornelius Agrippa against judicial Astrology. The Subtilties and Impieties
thereof, with further Instances of the Deceits of these Genethliacs or
Nativity-Casters.

The Twelfth Book treats of Enchantments from the Hebrew Word Habar. In what
Sense Words may be allowed as Charms. What is forbidden in Scripture concerning
Witchcraft. The Superstition of the Cabilists and Papists. The Offense of
Charms, and what would follow, if the Effects ascribed to them were true. Why
God forbade the practice of Witchcraft. The Absurdity of the Law of the Twelve
Tables, whereon their Estimation in miraculous Actions is grounded. An Instance
of one arraigned upon the Law of those Tables; where the said Law is proved
ridiculous. Laws for the Punishment of Witches that work Miracles, and of
Popish Laws against them. A Recital of the Poetical Authorities alleged by
Witchmongers for the Proof of Witches. A Collection of Popish Tablets, Amulets,
Charms, Agnus Dei, etc. against Diseases, Casualties, etc. How to make Holy
Water, with several other Receipts, and the Opinion of Ferrarius touching them:
Of Homerical Medicines, and several other Popish Charms for Man and Beast,
especially for the Duke of Alva's Horse, which was consecrated or canonized in
the Low Countries, at the solemn Mass; wherein the Pope's Bull and his Charm
was published, the Duke sitting as Viceroy with his consecrated Standard in his
Hand, till the Solemnity was over. Several Accounts of the charming of
Serpents, Snakes, etc. Mahomet's Pidgeon, the tractable Ass at Memphis, with
many other Instances of Charms, particularly with waxen Images; whereby the
Impostures of Mother Baker, a famous Kentish Witch, were discovered. Several
Receipts used of old, to make Charms, as St. Adelbert's against Thieves, the
Pope's Incantation in 1568, to the Spaniards for Success in the Low Country
Wars, etc. ending with a Confutation of the Virtues falsely ascribed to such
Charms and Amulets, by ancient Writers.

The Thirteenth Book opens with explaining the Hebrew Word Hartumim or Natural
Magic, and shows how the Ancients traveled for the Knowledge thereof. Of
Solomon's Knowledge therein, the distinction thereof, and why it is condemned
for Witchcraft. That this Study teaches only the Works of Nature: What
wonderful Effects are discovered by it in Waters, Precious Stones, with the Use
thereof by Magicians; the Sympathy and Antipathy of Natural and Elementary
Bodies, particularly of two notorious Wonders not marvell'd at. The one a Piece
of Earth which would fly the hot Steel with great swiftness, and pursue Gold as
fast, with other Properties more incredible; the other a strange Stone which
would shine bright in the Dark, always labored to ascend, etc. But the former
of these being found to signify a Man, the latter a Fire; our Author applies
the manner of Expression to that often used in Magic, which sometimes consists
as well in the deceit of Words as slight of Hand; and this introduces the
Illusions and Confederacies here displayed in the Art of Legerdemain. Here he
observes the Admiration there was at Brandon the Juggler, who by the Wounds and
Words he used upon the Picture of a Dove painted on the Wall, promised the King
before whom he performed, perhaps Edward VI. it being still in remembrance,
that a live Dove then on the Housetop should fall down dead; which it did
accordingly: The Juggler was forbidden the Practice of this Feat, as if he
could murder any body so in Effigy, though the Mystery being here revealed, he
appeared not to have more dangerous Power than any other body. We have here
also many other of the Juggler's Tricks recited and revealed. Observations on
Pharaoh's Magicians, a Comparison between them and our Witches. Many strange
Experiments by Glasses, and the perspective Art. Remarks on the Feats of Jannes
and Jambres; also on Balaam's Ass. But the Trick which was called the
Decollation of John Baptist, performed by one Kingsfield, at London, in 1582,
was long practiced with great Surprise to the Spectators; as the League of
Stephen Tailor and one Pope, the one to steal Horses, and the other to discover
them, seems to have been with Profit to the Confederates. But the most
dexterous Fellow for Legerdemain, in our Author's Time, was John Cautares of
St. Martin's; not that himself was a mean Artist: for says he, "If Time, Place,
and Occasion serve, I can show so much herein, that, I am sure, Bodin,
Spinaeus, and Vairus would swear I were a Witch, and had a familiar Devil at
Commandment: But truly my Study and Travel herein, has only been employed to
the end I might prove them Fools, and find out the Fraud of them that make them
Fools, as whereby they may become wiser, and God may have that which to him
belongs." With this, and the Patters or Prints, of some juggling Instruments
beforementioned, our Author ends this Chapter.

The Fourteenth Book treats of the Craft of Alchemy, recites Chaucer's
Character and Opinion of Alchemists, and their Terms of Art. Their Pretensions
by the Philosophers Stone and Waters, with other Characters, and Detections of
them, by Chaucer in his Chanon's Yeoman's Tale. Several Stories of Persons
cousened by Alchemists, among the rest, that of Erasmus in his Colloquies. The
Opinion of some learned Men touching the Folly of Alchemy, as Avicenna,
Petrarch, etc. That vain and deceitful Hope is the Cause of Delusion hereby,
ending with the Story of the Courtier, who gave King Lewis XI. a fine Horse,
because his Majesty had given a Peasant (who had often entertained him in his
Hunting Diversions) a thousand Crowns for a Turnip; in hopes of a
proportionable Reward, but received the Countryman's Present for his own.

The fifteenth Book having shown the Significations of the Word Jidoni, a sort
of Conjurers, whom our Author calls No small Fools, as not going to work with a
Toad or a Cat, as Witches do, but with a kind of Majesty call up by Name, and
have at Command, no less than seventy-nine principal and princely Devils, who
have under them, as their Ministers, many Legions of petty Devils: and we have
here a List of all their Names, with an Account of their Shapes, Powers,
Government, their several Segniories, and Degrees: The Work of one T. R. in
1570. Whereunto is joined, the Hours wherein it is pretended, that the
principal Devils may be bound or raised, and restrained from doing hurt. After
which follows a Confutation of the manifold Vanities in these Accounts, and of
the Predictions derived from the planetary Aspects and Motions; whereof we have
here several Tables, with their Characters. The Forms used in the pretended
Conjurations of the Spirits of dead Persons, and for finding hidden Treasures.
The Conjuration of the three Fairy Sisters for the Ring of Invisibility, and
for the enclosing of Spirits in a Crystal Stone; with Types or Figures
explaining the same. The Receipt for making of Holy Water; Compacts with
departing Persons to appear, and be bound, etc. Then follows a Confutation of
this kind of Conjuration of raising, binding, and dismissing of the Devil,
going invisible, etc. into which the Assassine was deluded, who murdered the
Prince of Orange, 1582. Also an Observation, that the chief Authors among us of
those Conjurations were T. R. beforementioned, and John Cokers. A Comparison
between Popish Exorcists and Conjurers. The Detection of a late cousening
Conjuration practiced at Orleans by the Franciscans. Who may be Conjurers in
the Romish Church, besides Priests; a ridiculous Definition of Superstition.
Why there were no Conjurers in the Primitive Church; and that it is more
difficult to conjure the Devil out of one bewitched, than one possessed; with
many other absurd Distinctions. Some Conjurations taken out of the Pontifical
and out of the Missal. The Rules of Popish Exorcists, and other Conjurers, all
one; and how St. Martin conjured the Devil. That it is a shame for Papists to
believe other Conjurers Doings, their own being of so little force; with
Hippocrates's Opinion of the Art. How Conjurers have beguiled Witches. What
Books they carry about to procure Credit-Wicked Assertions by the Ancients
against Moses and Joseph. All magical Arts confuted, by an Argument concerning
Nero. What Cornelius Agrippa and Carolus Gallus have left written thereof, and
proved by Experience. Of Solomon's Conjurations from Josephus, P. Lombard,
Gratian, Durandus, and the Lessons of the Romish Church upon St. Margaret's
Day. Those Lessons translated, and a ridiculous Story of that St. Margaret
cited. Some other Popish Miracles. Of Visions, Noises, Apparitions and imagined
Sounds; wandering Souls, and other Illusions, with a Confutation thereof.
Cardan's Opinion of strange Noises; how counterfeit Visions grow into Credit.
Of Boniface his Knavery in counterfeiting a Voice from Heaven, by which he got
the Popedom of his silly Predecessor Coelestinus. Of Echos, and Cardan's odd
Story or a Man who was near being drowned by one; and of the strange Noise at
Winchester, which was so much wondered at about 1569, though indeed a mere
natural Noise engendered by the Wind and other concurring Causes. Of Theurgy,
or working by good Angels, with the appendent Arts, and the Rejection thereof,
as altogether papistical and superstitious; more particularly exposed in a
Letter here recited, which was sent to our Author by T. E. Master of Arts,
Practiser both of Physic, and also, in times past, of certain vain Sciences,
for which he was now, 1582, in Prison, and condemned to die. In this Letter, it
is confessed by the Writer of it, that in twenty-six Years practice of these
secret Arts, and converse with those most familiar in them, he could meet with
nothing true as pretended, or supernatural Performance, but that it was all
Imposture and Delusion; and recommends a Book written in the old Saxon Tongue,
by one Sir John Malborne, a Divine of Oxenford, three hundred Years past,
detecting the Devices of Conjuration, or opening all the Illusions and
Inventions of these Arts and Sciences; which Book this Letter-writer had left
with the Parson of Slangham in Sussex; where, he tells our Author, if he would
send for it in his Name, he might have it: But though he did send, and used the
Interest of Men of Worship and Credit, particularly of the Knight of the Shire,
who would have passed his word for the Restitution, yet such was the Folly and
Superstition of this Parson, that he would not lend it for our Author's
Perusal. But, in truth, he had so industriously stored himself with other
Authorities and Intelligences, that he appears to have little needed those
which this Book might have afforded; insomuch, that whatever lay clouded or
shadowed in the Face of Truth, by this frightful Grey-Beard of Superstition,
seems here discovered by the Light of those Authorities, and that of Reason,
according to this ryming old Verse; Quicquid Nix celat, Solis calor omne
revelat.


The sixteenth Book contains a Conclusion, in manner of an Epilogue, repeating
many of the former Absurdities of Witchmongers, with Confutations thereof, and
the Authorities of James Sprenger and Henry Institor, Inquisitors and Compilers
of Malleus Maleficarum; more particularly by what means the Vulgar have been
brought to believe in Witches; with a Definition and Description of Witchcraft.
Reasons to prove that their Charms, Characters, etc. are all Fables, and that
those who use, them are all Cheats; and from the Confessions of the most
notorious among them, more especially Mother Bungie, who, in diverse Books, set
out with Authority, is registered and chronicled, by the Name of the Great
Witch of Rochester; who, on her Deathbed, confessed, That her Cunning
consisted only in deluding and deceiving the People with some little Skill in
Physic, and the Assistance of a Friend, named Heron, which was all the Spirit
or Devil she had, whatever the World had been imposed on to believe. Further
Detections of these Knaveries in one so bewitched, that he could read no
Scripture but canonical, and a Devil that could speak no Latin. Of the
Divination by the Sieve and Sheers, and by the Book and Key: Hemingius his
Opinion thereof confuted, and many other juggling Delusions. The Consequences
of believing in the Devil's Transformation, or assuming of different Shapes,
exemplified in the Instances of Christ's Argument to Thomas; the Inhabitant of
Tigurie, appearing to be in wicked Dealings with a Mare, as Lavater records;
and the Story of Queen Cunegunda from Crantzius, with her Purgation by the
Fiery Ordeal, or Candentis Ferri. After another idle Story exposed, of the
Devil preaching holy Doctrine, in the shape of a Priest, and Arguments to show
what a shame it is, after Confutation of the greater Witchcratfs, for any Man
to give credit to the lesser Points thereof, we have a general Conclusion
against those whom this Book concerns; which, with two or three Chapters upon
natural Witchcraft, or Fascination, bewitching Eyes for Hatred and for Love,
concludes the whole sixteen Book.

Then follows a Discourse upon Devils or Spirits; and first of Philosophers
Opinions; also the Manner of their reasoning hereupon, and the same confuted.
Herein the Author proceeds to show how unsatisfactorily all Authors have
written upon this Subject; particularly Psellus, whose absurd Assertions are
here exposed; as also Cardan's about his Father's Familiar Devil. Plato's
Opinion of Spirits, and of Socrates's familiar Devil. The nine Orders of
Spirits and Angels, according to Plato and Dionysius. The meaning of Archangel,
according to Mr. Deering, our Author's Kinsman, in his Lecture upon the
Hebrews. The Commencement of Devils fondly gathered out of the 14th of Isaiah.
Of Lucifer and his Fall; the Opinion of the Cabalists, Talmudists and
Schoolmen, of the Creation of Angels. The Contention between the Greek and
Latin Church about the Fall; and among the Papists. Enquiries where the Battle
was fought between Michael and Lucifer, how long it continued, and what their
Forces. Other fond Opinions about the fallen Angels, particularly among the
Rabbis, Reasons against the Devil's Ugliness. That the Devil's Assaults are
spiritual, and how grossly some understand the Scriptures herein. The
Equivocation of the word Spirit, and how diversely taken in the Scriptures. Of
Christ's healing the Blind, and of those possessed with Devils in the Gospel,
or Lunacy, and other Diseases. How the word Devil is to be understood, both in
the singular and plural Number. The Variation of Authors about Spirits and
Souls. Popish Opinions of Spirits; of Day-devils, and Night-devils. That the
Devils mentioned in Scripture, have their Nature and Qualities in their Names,
here mentioned and interpreted. The Idols or Gods of the Gentiles
distinguished. Their Lares, Larvae, Manes, Daemones, and Virunculi Terrei, etc.
such as was Robin Godfellow in England, who would supply the Office of
Servants, specially of Maids; and Hudgin, a very familiar and sociable
Hobgoblin in Germany, so called because he always wore a Cap or Hood; therefore
our Author thinks him a kind of Robin Hood; and that our Friar Rush was
altogether such another Fellow, brought up in the same School, the Kitchen,
insomuch as the self-same Tale is written of one as the other, about the
Scullion said to have been slain, etc for the reading whereof, we are referred
to Friar Rush's Story, or else to John Wierus, De praestigiis Daemonum. Further
of the Romans chief Gods, called Dii selecti; the various Gods in other
Countries; of Popish provincial Gods, as St. George, St. Andrew, etc. A
Comparison between them and Heathen Gods, where it appears we have had as great
Traitors, as great Whores, as great Quacks and Impostors, among our sanctified
and canonized Tribe, as the best of them. And whereas our ancient Saints were
Patrons only over some one Province of Health, or had Power to cure only one
Disease, nothing comes amiss to our Moderns through the Omnipotency of
Witchcraft, yea greater Matters ascribed to their Powers, than to all other
Saints; witness S. Mother Bongie, S. Mother Pain, S. Feats, S. Mother Still,
S. Mother Dutton, S. Kytrell, S. Ursula Kemp, S. Mother Newman, S. Doctor
Heron, S. Rosimund, with diverse more, who deserve to be registered in the
Pope's Calendar, or the Devil's Rubric. Then follows a Comparison between the
Heathens and the Papists, touching their Excuses for Idolatry. The Idolatry of
the Council of Trent. A notable Story of a Hangman arraigned, after he was dead
and buried, taken from our Lady's Rosary; with a Confutation thereof, and
several other Tales. Of Moses and Elias appearing in Mount Tabor. A Confutation
of assuming Bodies, and of the Serpent tempting Eve. Exposition of the Curse
rehearsed, Genesis 3. John Calvin's Opinion of the Devil. Our Author's Opinion of
the Nature of Spirits, and of the Devil, with his Properties. Against
Witchmongers, and their idle Opinions of Corporal Devils, and particularly
against Brian Darcie's Distinction of Spirits, and the Books published by W. W.
and Richard Gallis of Windsor. Then comes the Conclusion, wherein the Spirit of
Spirits is treated of, by the Illumination whereof, all Spirits are to be
tried; with a Confutation of the Pneumatomachi, denying the Divinity thereof;
which, with a Summary of the Chapters, concludes the whole Book.

XXXVIII. The VALE-ROYAL of ENGLAND: or, The County Palatine of CHESTER
Illustrated; wherein is contained a Geographical and Historical Description of
that famous County, with all its Hundreds, Seats, Rivers, Towns, Castles, etc.
Adorned with Maps and Prospects, with the Coats of Arms belonging to every
Family. Performed by W. SMITH and W. WEBB, Gentlemen: Published by Mr. DANIEL
KING. To which is annexed, a Chronology of all its Rulers and Governors, in
Church and State. Also an excellent Diyscourse of the Isle of MAN. Fol. 1656
Thus the common printed Title; but there is also a Title Page printed from a
Copper Plate bound before it, which entitles the Book more briefly, A
Description Historical and Geographical of the County Palatine of Chester,
illustrated with diverse Figures cut in Copper, and published by Daniel King of
Chester, 1656. It Is environed with Branches forming an Oval, containing the
Arms of all the Earls of Chester, from Hugh Lupus to Henry, eldest Son of King
James I. and on the Sides thereof, are two Standards supported by Wolves, and
bearing the Arms of the County; which are in one of them, 3 Wheat-Sheaves; and
in the other, a Wolf's Head eraz'd. As for this Publisher, Daniel King, though
Ant. Wood might receive a private Character of him from a noted Author, in a
Letter, intimating he was an ignorant and knavish Fellow, we see not, with what
Justice the same is published, in relation to this Book. It is plain, that he
commendably procured these Accounts of Chester, which might never have seen the
Light but for him; and has faithfully published them, justly ascribing every
Part to its due Owner; that he has industriously adorned them with many
Sculptures; has assumed no part to himself but what was visibly his own, and
was in so much Credit with the Gentry of the County, that many of them were
evidently his Patrons, and Encouragers: wherefore we cannot but think rather
with Dr. Fuller, That seeing this Daniel King had, in his Travels, got the
Mystery both of Surveying and Engraving, and used the same to enliven the
Descriptions above, which he set forth, with so many Cuts of Heraldry and
Topography, "That Cheshire is chiefly beholden to his Pains." Nay, he further
acknowledges himself so much beholden to the particular Courtesy of the Man,
through his many Communications, as to have verefied his Anagram, and been even
a kind Angel to him.
.
THIS Collection is dedicated by the said Daniel King to the Worshipful Sir
Orlando Bridgman. Then follows a Letter to the Editor, by his Cousin John King,
encouraging the Publication in hand through the Merits of his Labors therein.
After which, we have Verses in Latin and English, upon the same, and another
Letter to him, by his Friend Thomas Brown. In his Preface to the Reader, we
learn, that the first Part of this Volume was the Work of William Smith, long
since Rouge-dragon, Pursuivant at Arms, and communicated to him by Mr. Ranulph
Crew, Grandson to the Lord Chief Justice Crew, in whose hands the Copy was
left. The second, was the Work of Mr. William Webb, heretofore a Clerk in the
Mayor's Court at Chester; and this was imparted by that great Lover of
Antiquities, Sir Simon Archer of Tanworth in Warwickshire. Both these Pieces
relate purely to the County Palatine of Chester. The third, touching the Isle
of Man, was written by Mr. James Chaloner, whose Abilities in historical
Matters, the Work itself will speak. To all which are added by this Publisher,
several Prospects and other Pieces of Sculpture, for the better Ornament of the
whole; as also, through the help of some that were Well-wishers thereto, A
Translation of diverse Foundation-Charters, with other things of good Note. Then
follows this Remark, "That there is no County in England more famous for a
long-continued Succession of ancient Gentry than this of Chester, will not be
denied, nor any that can afford Materials with so little Trouble and Charge,
for the setting forth their Descents and memorable Employments, insomuch as the
Substance of all public Records merely relating thereto, for almost 400 Years,
are carefully preserved in the Castle at Chester; and that the private
Evidences concerning the particular Families of that County, are, by reason of
their long Duration, less dispersed than those of many others be through the
great and frequent Changes that have befallen them in most Places." But our
Publisher, apprehensive, belike, that his Authors, however they may have
preserved many worthy Memorials, had not made all the Advantage they might have
done of those Records, "hopes therefore, that these Essays of the Persons
abovementioned, now coming to the View of the World, will for the Reasons
before expressed, considering the Worthiness of the Subject, stir up such whose
greater Abilities may, by a more exact Survey and Search into the Antiquities
of this Shire, contribute further to its Honor, by restoring to Light its
ancient Glory, for the more ample Content of all Persons concerned therein, and
their own lasting Memory."

After this Preface, we have the Publisher's Map of the County Palatine of
Chester, which Mr. Randolph Crew had drawn with a Pen. Then begins the Work
under the Title of, The Vale Royal of England, with a Catalogue of the Kings of
Mercia, or March; which Kingdom in the Saxon Heptarchy reached from London to
the River of Marsey, which parts Cheshire from Lancashire, containing seventeen
Counties, and Part of two more. This Catalogue contains 22 Kings, beginning
Anno 5^5 with Crida, descended from Woden, and ending in 886, with Ceolwolph.
Next we have an Account, gathered, as the former seems to have been, from Fox,
Holinshed, Llhuyd, Camden, etc. of the Dukes and Earls of March, before the
Conquest, who were also Palatines of Chester; for that it was a County Palatine
before the Conquest, appears in the Supplication here exhibited to King Henry
VI. by the Inhabitants thereof; and also that they were, among other
Privileges, exempted from the granting of Subsidies, appears by that King's
Answer thereunto. Then we have a Confirmation of the Liberties of the County
Palatine by Queen Elizabeth, 1568, with the Opinions of the Judges, Dier,
Weston, Harper, and Carns, concerning the Jurisdiction and Liberties of the
said County. Here we enter upon a particular Description of the County; its
Length about 44 Miles; Breadth about 25, and Compass 112 Miles; Number of
Market Towns 11; Parish Churches 87; Longitude 17 Degrees. 30 Min. and Latitude 53
Degrees. 30 Min. with the reason, from its low Situation, of its being named the
Vale-Royal, by King Edward I. when he founded an Abbey in the midst of the
Shire. So we proceed to the Temperament of the Air, the Fertility and Products
of the Soil, among which the Salt-Wells are not forgot; lastly of their
Buildings, the Disposition of their People, and their Manner of Housekeeping.
Hence we pass to the Waters and their Courses, beginning with the River Dee; so
of the Marsey, the Weaver, the Dane, Bollin, Peever, Wheelock, Taume, and the
Goit; with others mentioned by John Leland, and W. Harrison. Thus we come to
the Particularities of Cheshire, that is, the Divisions or Hundreds, into which
the County is distinguished, and they are seven. Of Weral, the first here
mentioned, we have a Description from Leland, and of Helbrie Island: Then
follow the Names of all the Villages and Townships in this Hundred. So we go on
to Broxton, with a List of all the Townships therein; the like of Nantwich,
Edsbury, Northwich, Bulkley, and Maxfield. Here we have a brief Account of the
Antiquity of the City of Chester, from Henry Bradshaw and Ranulph Higden, two
Monks of that City, and from Holinshed and Harrison; and then a Map giving a
Prospect of Chester, the Ground Plot, and Arms of the Earls since the Conquest.
Then we advance more particularly to the Longitude and Latitude of the City,
Descriptions of the Walls, the Gates, the Bridge, the Castle, Custom-House,
Shire-Hall, Exchequer, and the Parish Churches in Chester. Next of the Mayor,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common Hall, the Pendice, the Rows, the Mercer's Row and
Conduits. Then of the Bishopric of Chester. The Division of Mercia into five
Bishoprics. The Names of the Bishops of Chester, since the Beginning of King
Henry VIII. Market Towns in Cheshire. The Manner of making Salt at Nantwich,
and at Northwich. After that short Account of the Market Towns, and some others
of principal Note, and a Reference to the Map for the rest, not named here, we
have the Genealogy of the Earls of Chester, since the Conquest; wherein is
briefly showed some Part of their Deeds, beginning with Hugh Lupu^, and ending
with Edward the Black Prince, who was the eleventh Earl. After these follows a
Note of the chief Places of Gentlemen in Cheshire, from John Leland; and next,
the Names of all the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and Freeholders in the
County Palatine of Chester, and in what Hundred they dwell, taking up about
three Leaves and a half. Then comes a List of all the Mayors and Sheriffs of
Chester, beginning 1320, ending 1586, about fourteen Leaves. After this, we
have another List of the Benefices, or Rectories, and Vicaridges in the County,
with their Valuations, from a MS. in the Library of St. John's College,
Cambridge. Then comes the Descent of the Barons of Haulton, Constables of
Chester, and a Sculpture representing Beeston Castle, with the Castle and Town
of Haulton; also some Latin Verses upon Beeston Castle, built by Ranulph, third
Earl of Chester, from Leland, with Translations of the last Distich, from Speed
and Camden; and a Note of the Battle on Blore Heath, Anno 1459; which, with
another Note touching the Arms of the Gentry in this County, introducing eleven
Pages of them, represented in Sculpture, alphabetically, and a Table of the
remarkable Passages, in the foregoing Discourse, finishes this Part of the
Vale-Royal, ascribed to William Smith, by our Editor as aforesaid; which,
besides the Sculptures, takes up 99 Pages.

The other Part, or Description of this Vale-Royal, by William Webb, M. A. and
sometimes Undersheriff to Sir Richard Lee, begins with his Wishes, that the
Labors of Mr. John Norden had been continued to the finishing of that
Historical and Chronographical Description of the rest of the Shires of this
famous Isle, which he had begun in that of Middlesex: also his Commendations of
our Worthy Countryman, Mr. John Speed's Labors of the same nature. At the End
of this Introduction, he gives us a summary Account, for his more methodical
Proceeding, of what Matter he has chosen to treat, and in what manner; so
enters upon a Description of the City and County Palatine of Chester; and
because Broxton, in some sort, contains or borders upon, and almost encompasses
the said City, he first makes a short Survey of that Hundred, then more
particularly describes the City itself, recites its Names, remarks upon the
ancient Foundations and Buildings thereof, more as a Topographer than
Antiquary, though not wholly avoiding historical Observation, where it will
illustrate his Account, as himself professes. The Authors used in this
Description, are Giraldus Cambrensis, Peter Langtoft, Ranulph Higden, Harding,
Caxton, Fabian, Holinshed, Stow, Camden, and a manuscript Life of St. Werburg,
in English Verse, by Henry Bradshaw, Monk of Chester; out of whom he makes
several Quotations, and calls him their best Antiquary. Then follows a
Discourse of the Foundation and Endowment of the Abbey of St. Werburg in
Chester, written by N. N. with two Sculptures representing the Ground-Plot of
her Church, and the Southern Prospect of it. This holy Virgin appears to have
been the Daughter of Wulpher, King of Mercia, who died A. Dom. 675. She had the
Command over the Monasteries of Weedon, Trentham, Repton, and Hambury. In her
tender Years was professed under her Aunt Andry at Ely, lived much at Weedon,
deceased at Trentham, and was buried at Hambury, but twice translated, first
from Trentham to Hambury about the Year 708, afterward to Chester, about 875,
as the 2 B. and 2 Chap. of her Life aforesaid testify. After which follow
several monumental Inscriptions in the Quire of the said Abbey, and in St.
Nicholas Chapel, for William Downham, Bishop of Chester, who died 1577; Dr.
Geo. Lloyd, Bishop of Sodor, 1615; Dr. John Lloyd, a famous Civilian, 1607; Sir
Geo. Beverley; the famous Abbot Simon Ripley, who died about 1492; Sir W.
Gerrard, 1581; and in St. Mary's Chapel, Sir Henry Troutbeck, round the
Effigies of whose Body, in complete Armor, is neatly wrought a Wreath of
Trouts. Here also was buried the late famous Citizen Robert Brerewood,
Alderman, and thrice Mayor of Chester, who was, says our Author, "The happy
Father of the learned Edw. Brerewood, of Oxford; whose surpassing Progress in
the Studies of all manner of Learning, the University does yet, and for ever
will ring loud of; and Gresham College in London, where he was Mathematical
Reader, will, to the World's end, bewail the want of; being deprived of him by
an untimely Death, before he had finished, or taken Order for Preservation of
such learned Labors, as, if they were published, would make the World beholden
to Chester, the Nurse of such a Father, which begat such a Son." Here are also
recited several Inscriptions of several other Mayors, Aldermen, etc. of the
said City. Then, after some Observations upon the River Dee, and the renewing
of the Haven, our Author gives us the Remainder of his Remarks upon Broxton
Hundred, taking notice all the way he travels along, by the Towns and
Lordships, of the principal Seats, or Mannor-Houses, and by whom possessed or
inhabited. This is also his Course through the Hundred of Nantwich, where we have
a Recital of the Foundation-Charter of Cumbermere Abbey in Chester, founded
Anno 1133, by Hugh Malbanc, from the Annals of Crocksdon, in the Cotton
Library. In this Hundred, we have some Remarks upon the Excellency of their
Cheese, on their Salt Pits or Wiches, and a Sculpture of Crew-Hall. In the
Hundred of Northwich, our Author thinks the Ale of Sandach as worthy of Praise,
as Mr. Camden does that of Derby; and if that Ale got its Name from the old
Danish word Oel, as he says, our Author knows not why this may not, almost with
as little Variation, come from Oil, being almost as substantial in handling. He
also remarks upon the common Report of the Trees, which are seen floating in
Bagmere Pool above Water, just before any Heir of the House of Brereton the
Owner thereof dies; but looks upon it as merely accidental. In Eadsbury
Hundred, we have the Foundation-Charter of the Abbey of Dernhall, in the County
of Chester, translated afterward to the Vale-Royal, given by Edward, eldest
Son of King Henry III. in the 54th Year of his Reign; also the said King
Henry's Letters of Recommendation to all Abbots, etc. in England, for Books to
be bestowed on the said Abbey; also the Charter for Translation of the said
Abbey to the Vale-Royal. This Hundred he concludes with an Apology for passing
over some old Prophecies, some conceited Names of Trees, Moss-Pits, Pools, long
Shoots of old Archers, a Horse Race or two, and the latter Newfound-Well,
because he supposes his long Journey in this little Hundred, has well nigh
tired his Reader already. In Werall Hundred, when he comes to Birket Wood, we
have a Prospect, in Sculpture, of the Ruins of Berkenhead Abbey. A Reference to
the Monasticon, fol. 404; with the Charter of Hamon Massie's Donation of the
Church of Bowdon, and another Charter of Power to the Monks of Berkenhead. Thus
he passes on, as through the rest of the Hundreds, giving Descriptions of the
chief Seats all the way, and Characters of the Gentry who possessed them, till
he arrives again at the famous City of Chester; and here takes the Government
with its Governors under Consideration, so begins with a Narrative of the
Earls of Chester; and first of those four or five before the Conquest, who were
named Edolf, from the Testimony of Ranulph Cestrensis and Fabian. 2. Curson,
according to John Harding. 3. The famous Leofric, whose Power, Grandeur, and
charitable Works are celebrated by many Historians; but the Story of his Wife
Godwina, or Godiva, riding through the City of Coventry naked, to obtain the
Franchisement of the City, is suspected by our Author. 4. His Son Algarus. But
these two (and much less Jonas, mentioned in the Chronicle of St. Albans, or
Othonel) are, though allowed to have been Earls of March, by Sir John Fern, in
his Second Part of Lacie's Nobility, not reckoned to have been Earls of
Chester, but he thinks they are so mistaken to have been, by their Residence or
Abode in that City, or thereabouts. Here we enter upon the History of the Earls
of Chester from the Conquest, of whom there is more certain Record; beginning
with Hugh Lupus, who was the Son of William the Conqueror's Sister, and we have
a Sculpture representing the said Earl in Parliament with the Barons and Abbots
of the County Palatine; which Hugh having governed the Earldom 40 Years, died
about 1107. In the like manner, we have a Chapter a-piece upon the six ensuing
Earls, ending with John Scot, who died in 1237, without Issue. King Henry III.
took the Earldom of Chester into his hands, and it was thenceforward held by
Princes of the Blood Royal; of whom, after a little Account of the Barons under
the ancient Earls, we have also a Catalogue down to Prince Charles. This is
followed with a Discourse of the Ecclesiastical State and Government in this
County; the Successions of the Bishops, and, with more certainty, from the 33d
of Henry VIII. ending with Dr. John Bridgman. The next Chapter treats of the
Government of the County and City, by the Officers, or Princes, who ruled here
after the Earls, down to King James I. Then we have a Table of the Mayors and
Sheriffs of Chester, from 1242 to 1655, interspersed with little historical
Memoirs of some noted Occurrences, happening under several Years within that
Time and Place. After this, we have the Names of the Justices of Chester, with
another List of the Sheriffs of the County: and the whole closes with a Copy
from Domesday Book, sub Titulo, Cestersheire; showing in whose Possession the
Lands of this County were at the Conquest. So ends this second and more copious
Narrative of the said County Palatine, containing 239 Pages; and has an Index,
like the former, at the End of it.

But here follows another Tract, not before spoken of in either of the
Title-Pages before the Book, or in the Editor's Preface, not being communicated
perhaps till they were printed; and it is called Chronicon Cestrense, written
by Samuel Lee, as appears at the End of his Epistle to the said Editor his
ingenious Friend Mr. D. King, dated May 8, 1656. In this Epistle, perceiving
the exact Times of the former Rulers of that Province, not so much attended as
might illustrate that Vale-Royal, he desired to communicate to Paper, what he
has observed in his Reading, which might conduce to the fixing of the Times and
Seasons, wherein the noble Atchivements of its Rulers and Inhabitants have been
performed. And indeed he has showed himself more critically acquainted with all
our ancient Historians, as to Time and Place, the two Eyes of History, than
both the foregoing Authors put together. His Work begins with a Chapter upon
the Romans in Cheshire, in which we have the various Opinions of several
Authors concerning its Longitude and Latitude; but he prefers Shakerley in his
British Tables, before all the rest. Then we have, in Chapter 2, the Kings,
Dukes, and Earls of Mercia, with the particular Earls of Chester from the
Conquest, and those of the Royal Blood, disposed in their exact Times, in five
several Sections. The third Chapter treats of the Bishops of Mercia, who had
their Seats sometimes at Coventry, sometimes at Chester, most commonly at
Litchfield, and therefore are usually so styled; but had Cheshire under their
Episcopal Government. Also of the Bishops of Chester since the Conquest; and of
the peculiar Bishops of Chester, from the Time of King Henry VIII. in four
Sections. The fourth and last Chapter discourses of the Parliamentary Barons of
the Earls of Chester: And first of the Barons Temporal, in which we have the
Stem of the Barons of Haulton; lastly, of the Barons Spiritual, being an
Account of the Earls, Bishops, and Abbots. But before we leave this Work
wherein the Author has proved himself so expert in calculating and fixing of
ancient Times, as to make us wish that Saxon History he promises in two or
three Places, had seen the light; we shall only remark out of his second
Chapter, upon the Mercian Monarchy, how he accounts for many Defects in our old
historical Computations; where he says, "Considering that all our Monkish
Writers more skillful in numbering of Beads than Years, did uno tramite follow
the Dionysian Account, a thing diligently to be attended in the reading of our
monastical Writers, I hope to extricate myself out of these Difficulties, by
treating a little of it before I begin with the Reigns of the Kings of Mercia."
Then having given an Example to show wherein that Account is deficient, and
Direction to several Authorities for Confirmation thereof, he further "refers
this to be proved more at large in its proper Place, when he treats about the
Saxons Arrival into our Land, demonstrating their Entrance to have been in the
Vulgar Year of Christ 428, and not in 449 or 450, as our old Authors usually
fixed it; whereby great and knotty Difficulties have tied up the History of the
Saxon Dominion in this Island." Thus much of this Chronological Treatise,
containing 55 Pages. We come now, lastly, to

A short Treatise of the Isle of Man, etc. illustrated with several Prospects
of the Island by D. King, 1556. It Is dedicated to Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord of
Man, and of the Isles, by the Author James Chaloner, one of the Commissioners
for settling Affairs in that Island, who dates his said Epistle from
Middle-Park, Dec. 1, 1653; wherein it appears, he was the rather induced to
present the same to his Lordship, because of his Respect to Antiquities, so
signally manifested in patronizing our notable English Antiquary Mr. Roger
Dodsworth, in his Collections, composing and publishing of that singular Piece
his Monasticon, etc. The Work is divided into six Chapters, which, after a Map
of the Island environed with little Prospects of some notable Parts or Places
in it, begins, 1. with the Situation of the Isle of Man. 2. Concerning the
Inhabitants, whence derived, their Language the Manks Tongue, and of the
Translation of the Bible therein, and of the Conditions of the People. 3. Of
the State Ecclesiastical; of the Bishops, Monasteries, and Free-Schools, with
three Prospects in Sculpture, of Balisaly Abbey, the Nunnery; and the Bishop's
Court. 4. Of the Civil Government, and the supreme Governors, particularly King
Edward II. his Grant of the Island to Henry Lord Beaumont; and here we have a
Sculpture of the Arms of the Beaumonts. Then the Author descends to the
inferior Officers, and the Judicatories of the said Isle. The fifth Chapter is
concerning the Trade of the Isle. And the last Chapter is of the Strength of
the Island, where we have three Prospects in Sculpture, of the Castle Rushen,
Peel Castle, and Douglas Fort; upon which Fortifications and others, that might
be wanting, our Author concludes, That the Poverty of the Island is its
greatest Security. The whole is no more than 32 Pages, followed with a Leaf of
Addenda, Errata, and a Table of the true Longitude and Latitude of certain
Cities in England, which ends the whole Book.

XXXIX. RELIQUIAE BODLEIANAE: Or some Genuine Remains of Sir THOMAS BODLEY;
containing his LIFE, the first Draught of the STATUTES of the PUBLIC LIBRARY at
OXFORD, (in English) and a Collection of LETTERS to Dr. JAMES, etc. Published
from the Originals in the said Library. Octavo, 1703. Pages 383.
THESE Remains of that famous Founder of the Public Library at Oxford, are
pretty well known to have been published, though their Editors Name appears not
to them, by the late Mr. Hearne. In his Preface, after having touched upon the
Antiquity of Letters and Libraries, and shown how ancient they were in Egypt;
what a magnificent Collection was made there by Ptolemy, and what Ambition the
Greeks and Romans had of this kind; he descends to observe how early Learning
flourished in Britain; and that in King Alfred's Time, there were diverse
Libraries for the Preservation of Learning; but is more particular of Richard
de Bury, Bishop of Durham, his noble Gift of Books to this University in 1295,
as may be further gathered from his own Account in his Philobiblos, sive de
Amore Librorum, first printed at Paris, afterward at Oxford, 4to, 1599, and
since in 8vo. Also of Thomas Cobham, Bishop of Worcester's Building for a
Library in the said University in 1320. That after this, another Library was
built there by Duke Humphrey, and famous in 1439, which falling to Ruin toward
the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Sir Thomas Bodley, a second Ptolemy, began
to restore it in 1597, finished it in two Years, and in a few more so nobly
endowed it with Books, Revenues, and other Buildings, that it is accounted one
of the most famous Libraries in the World; excelling, according to the Accounts
of Travelers, the Vatican at Rome; that being so full of Corruptions and
Forgeries. The History of the Bodleian Library is given us by the Oxford
Antiquary ( Anthony Wood) at large: But the Catalogue of the Printed Books, by
Dr. Hyde: We have had one since also of the MSS; but both being imperfect, we
are here told, an Appendix to the former, as big as the Doctors Catalogue, was
now ready for the Press; and that an Appendix also to the latter, was in some
time to be published; yet are we still in expectation of them. The Editor
likewise says, 'Twas for the sake of this noble Library, that lately, in his
searches therein, finding the Life of Sir Thomas Bodley; the first Draught of
its Statutes, and a Collection of his Letters to Dr. James, the first Keeper of
it, all written by Sir Thomas his own Hand, he took a Transcript of them, and
sent them to the Press; that others, imitating Sir Thomas his Zeal and Industry
for the good of Learning, might become Benefactors themselves to such a noble
Repository; which they could not do at a better time, since the Act of
Parliament for sending certain Copies thither, of Books printed at London, was
expired. The Life, he says, has been printed some Years before, and two Letters
to Sir Francis Bacon, lately, at the end of Archbishop Usher's Letters; but the
Copies of the former, being dispersed, and the latter, containing Matter of
Moment, it was thought fit to reprint them.

In the LIFE of Sir THO. BODLEY written by himself, consisting of 15 Pages, he
tells us he was born at Exeter in Devonshire, the 2d of March 1544, of
Worshipful Parents. That his Father, a known Enemy to Popery, fled in Queen
Mary's Reign into Germany, sent for his Family and settling at Geneva, when our
Author was twelve Years of Age, had him instructed in Hebrew and Greek, by
Chevalerius and Beroaldus; and in Divinity by Calvin and Beza, besides Domestic
Teachers. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, they returned to London,
and he was sent to complete his Studies at Oxford, where he took his Bachelor
of Arts Degree, and was chose Probationer of Merton College in 1563, and the
Year after admitted Fellow. In 1565 read the Greek Lecture. Proceeded Master of
Arts 1566, and read for that Year, Natural Philosophy; was elected one of the
Proctors in 1569. Supplied for a long time, the Place of University Orator.
Traveled into Italy, France, and Germany, to acquire the Modern Tongues in
1576. In 1585, was sent by the Queen to several German Princes, to procure
their Aid for the King of Navarre. Also to Henry III. of France, both for this
King's Advantage and that of the Protestant Cause. In 1588 was sent to the
Hague, and there admitted one of their Council of State, and acquitted himself
in his Charge, so much to the Queen's Satisfaction, that thenceforward he
rarely received any Instructions in these Proceedings of State. After his
return from near five Years Foreign Employment, he was sent to the Hague again
but returned in less than a Year: Yet was no sooner come home, but the Queen
pleased with his Discoveries, sent him again to the States, with Charge to
pursue, what he had secretly proposed; whereby all was brought to the Issue
desired. In all which Employments, he had no one more to his Friend among the
Lords of the Council, than the Treasurer Burghly, who was of Opinion there was
no Man so sit for the Office of Secretary of State, and whose Intention was,
when he advanced his own Son thereto, to make Sir Thomas his Colleague. But
before he returned from the United Provinces in 1597, the Earl of Essex in
Opposition to the Cecils, had so prodigally recommended his Sufficiency to the
Queen for the Post aforesaid, that she (who hated the Earl's Ambition) was not
the readier to prefer him, though they were to be jealous of him. Thus finding
his Preferment on this Quarter obstructed, and considering what a slender
holdfast the Earl had with the Queen; withal his declining Years, and the easy
Circumstances of his own Fortune, he resolved to retire; and though he had
afterward, both in the Queen's Reign, and King James's, many honorable
Invitations, as well to Foreign as Domestic Employments, he concluded at last
to set up his Staff at the Library Door in Oxon, and accommodate that ruined
Place for the Public Use of Students; finding himself competently furnished
with the fourfold Aid necessary thereto, which was a Knowledge in the Learned
and Modern Tongues, as well as sundry kinds of Scholastic Literature; a
Purse-Ability; Store of Honorable Friends, and Leisure to follow the Work: But
how well he has sped; he thinks that which is already performed in sight, that
which besides he has given for the Maintenance of it, and which he afterward
purposes to add, will so abundantly testify, that he needs not be the Publisher
of the Worth of his own Institution. Written, etc. 1609. Signed T. B. Then
follows:

Sir THOMAS BODLEY's first Draught of the STATUTES of the PUBLIC LIBRARY at
OXON, transcribed from the Original Copy, written by his own Hand and reposited
in the Archives of the said Library. Herein, upon the Consideration that no
Institution can have the good Effects intended, unless there be Statutes to
encounter and restrain the Disorders of ill-affected Persons, it is ordained,
by the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Doctors, Proctors, Masters, Regents, etc of
the great Convocation of the University upon their frequent Consultation with
Sir Thomas, That some one be deputed to the keeping of this Library, who is a
diligent Student, Trusty, Active and Discreet; a Graduate, a Linguist,
unmarried and unbeneficed. That the manner of electing such a Keeper, should be
like that yearly practiced in the choice of their Proctors; and first the
Electors to be tendered one Oath, then the Elected another, which are here
specified. That the said Keeper is not to be displaced but by his own Assent,
unless for some heinous Offense or apparent Insufficiency. That his Business
shall be to keep and continue the great Register-Book, chained to the Desk at
the upper Window of the Library, in which are to be enrolled the Names of
Benefactors thereto, whether mean Persons or great: Which Book to be fairly
written, and laid to open sight, as a Token of thankful Acceptance and
Inducement of Imitation to Posterity. He is further also to range all his Books
according to their Faculties, to assign to every Family its Catalogues and
Tables, dispose of the Authors therein named Alphabetically, and besides their
Names and Title of their Works, express in what sized Volume printed, the Place
where, and the Year when. Upon Gifts of Books to the Library, what Order to be
taken, that they be put up in good plight, and the Charge to be supplied by the
Vice Chancellor, (Receiver of the Library Rents) and upon Gifts in Money; how
it is to be disposed of to the Donors satisfaction. That for the Accommodation
of Students, the Keeper is not to be exempted one whole Day in the Year upon
Penalty of 20 Shillings, except Sunday, Christmas Day, and some others here
named: But to come constantly to the opening of the Library Doors, and give
access to others from Eight to Eleven in the Morning, and Two till Five in
Afternoon, from Easter to Michaelmas; but the rest of the Year, from One to
Four in the Afternoon; a Warning-Bell to be rung at his Ingress and Egress.
None to enter by Night, with Candle, Lamp, etc. Next, of the care to be taken
by Students in reading the Books, fastening the Clasps and Strings, untangling
the Chains, and leaving the Volumes in the Places they found them. And for the
smaller Volumes within the Grates, and under the Custody of the Keeper alone,
he is to deliver them out by Hand and Tale, and with Condition, that they be
perused in sight, and presently restored to him or his Assistant, who is to
look out and deliver Books so asked for, and but six at a time of one sort or
other, unless he be won to gratify some Persons to exceed that Number. No Books
to be lent out of the Library upon any Security whatever; and in Case of Books
to be sold as unprofitable, or changed for better Editions, or carried out to
be new bound, the Keeper to consult the Overseers to be appointed. The Keeper's
Absence to be dispensed with in case of Business, seven Days every Quarter; but
his Office to be supplied by some able Graduate, who is of known Fidelity, or
shall take the Oath. And if the Case is such, that longer Absence is allowed by
common Suffrage in Convocation, to be accorded with. For this continual
Attendance and Engagement, the Keeper though he has greater Advantages to advance
his Knowledge and Credit than other Students, is to have, besides the Annual
Stipend of 20 Nobles, which was the Donation of King Henry IV. issuable from
the University Treasure, 33 Pounds, 6 Shillings and 8 Pence, and to be paid
half-yearly out of the Library Revenue, and his Assistant Ten Pounds; and Four
Pounds more to a poor Scholar or Servant, for sweeping, wiping, etc. The choice
of these to be at the Keeper's Discretion, their Payment at the
Vice-Chancellor's care, and displacing of them in the power of the Overseers.
That for the safer Custody of the Revenue aforesaid, it should be locked up
where the University Rents are kept, in an Iron Chest, under three different
Locks, with double Keys, to remain with the Vice Chancellor and two Proctors;
which last two are to be Witnesses of the Sums brought in or taken out and
registered by the third. The Persons to be admitted as Students are next
distinguished; besides all Graduates, Benefactors, etc. Strangers, or such as
have no University Education, or been Contributors, may for the furtherance of
their Study obtain the Freedom of Recourse; the same being craved as a Grace in
the Convocation House, and the Oath of Fidelity to the Library, here exhibited,
first by them, as by all other Persons, before the constant Liberty of
Entrance, taken; and a Penalty imposed upon those who intrude without
Permission before they are sworn; unless accompanied with one who is sworn; as
also upon any who shall be convicted of dismembering, purloining, or corrupting
the Sense of any Books. Lest the Keeper should be tardy in his Duty, eight
principal Graduates are appointed perpetual Overseers and Visitors of the
Library, every 8th Day of November, (the Day of first opening or free Access,)
who are not only to examine how well the Keeper has perfom'd his Charge, but
direct him in doubtful Matters, and reform him in erroneous ones; also to
appoint the Exchange, or disposal of superfluous, and Purchase of new Books;
and to have forty Shillings for a Dinner or Supper that Day, also Gloves of Ten
Shillings a Pair, to the five Professors of the King's Lectures, and the two
Proctors, which two are also to have forty Shillings each, for the Custody of
the Keys; one Pair of Gloves at five Shillings to the Beadle then attending;
one Pair of 20 Shillings to the Vice Chancellor, with 20 Nobles in regard of
his Trouble, he only being to deal with the Employment of the Annual Rents of
the Library: Yet at the end of the Year to let the Visitors and Keeper see the
Money remaining in the Iron Chest, with the Account of Receipts and
Disbursements, which they are to audit, so deliver up his Keys and Accounts to
the New Vice Chancellor, relating the State thereof, at the next Convocation;
who are to take notice of the last Vice-Chancellor's Discharge of his Trust,
according to his Merit; and in all former Acts and Decrees, expound, alter,
abrogate, or innovate, and provide in all Events for the Indemnity of the
Library, as for a Treasure, to Students, of incomparable Worth. So we come to

The LETTERS; which are 234 in Number; and mostly written by Sir Thomas Bodley
himself, from London, Fulham and Burnham, to Dr. Thomas James, the first Keeper
of his Library. Few of them have the Date of the Year when written, but the
earliest Date we meet with, is in 1602; to Dr. Rives, Vice Chancellor of Oxon,
about opening the Library and constituting the Statutes thereof, therefore,
perhaps, should have stood the first in this Collection; and the latest is
dated in 1611. Though one, toward the end, without any Date, was written much
sooner than the former, being to his Cousin Francis Bacon when he was a Youth
in France, containing Advice to him in his Travels; and the last Letter in the
Book is written to Dr. James, by Laurence Bodley after the Death of his Brother
Sir Thomas, (which was in 1612.) Except another Letter from Sir Thomas Bodley
to the said Sir Francis Bacon, which is also somewhat Foreign to these
Collections, as containing both a Censure and Commendation of some Maxims of
Modern Philosophy in his Novum Organum; that which the Reader is to look for in
these Letters, might be sorted and comprehended under these five Topics. The
Founder; the Benefactors; the Books; the Library, and the Librarian: But we,
for the Reader's Facility of finding the Particulars here extracted, shall give
a transient View of the most observable among them, in the same Order as they
occur; which, though in the Collection itself, short, dissever'd, often repeated,
and unconcluded in many Points, as the Nature is of Occasional Letters, in such
familiar Intercourse; yet may yield many Historical Hints, relating to the
Encouragers of this Foundation, or the manner of collecting and preserving the
Writings of Learned and Ingenious Men.

Such therefore are the Founder's Expostulations with his Librarian, upon his
sudden thoughts of a married Life; the same being utterly denied; also
concerning the Advantages he had of improving his Knowledge, and the
Opportunities there might be of augmenting his Salary; his Notice of several
Benefactors, as Mr. Hariot the Mathematician, Mr. Haidock, Mr. Ridley, Mr.
Urrey, and Mr. Farmer; his Judgment of a Transcriber, and of Duplicate Copies;
Advice about making the Catalogues, and advertising each other of such Books as
were given or new bought, and not to let the knowledge of defective Copies be
divulged. Of the Course to be taken with such as had been Promisers of
Contributions, but no Performers. Further Advice about the Catalogue, as when
diverse Authors are bound in one Volume, not to bury them all under the Name of
the first Author, but to name every Author distinctly in his proper Letter of
the Alphabet, and to place the Name before, not after the Title of the Book.
Notice of the Arrival of many Books from John Bill at Venice, and more
expected. The Founder's Approbation of a Table to enlist the Names of
Benefactors and their Gifts, till the Register be finished. The Lord
Treasurer's Donation of an Hundred Pounds unto the Library. The Founders
Consent that any Gentleman Stranger, after request to the Congregation, and
taking the Oath, may have free Access to the Library. That John Bill had bought
Four Hundred Pounds worth of Books abroad. That such as give only a little Book
or two, may not expect to be recorded on the Register. That the Lord Cobham had
given Fifty Pounds to the Library, and promised diverse MSS. out of St.
Augustine's Library in Canterbury. The Founder's Supposal that there are not to
be had Twenty Pounds worth of the Books of Protestant Writers, which he has not
already, and that of those in Folio, thinks they have all that can begotten.
His Opinion about sorting and fastening the Books, also of figuring them with
great Letters. Some Defects specified in the Librarian's Catalogue. Further
Intimations of Benefactors, as the Earl of Cumberland, Mr. Helmeston, Mr.
Ledsham, Dr. Bond, Mr. Burhil, Mr. Canning. The Founder's Care for every thing
to be in Order at the opening of the Library. His Advice how the Librarian
should receive Sir John Fortescue, suitable to his Dignity and Desert.
Concerning the Frankfort Catalogues of Books, containing all from 1564 to 1592,
and another from thence to 1600, also in 4 to. The Bishop of Durham's Promise
of Fifty Pounds. The Founder's Opinion what Officer only should be under the
Keeper of the Library. The Lord Mountjoy's Gift of an Hundred Pounds. Further
Advice about the Duplicates. The Librarian's Labor in copying of Catalogues
acknowledged, but withal their Imperfections, as being taken in haste, with
Advice about a new Catalogue. The Founder's Intention of entreating the
Vice Chancellor, to move the University for their Letters of Public Thanks, to
the Lord of Northumberland, who gave an Hundred Pounds; to Sir Walter Raleigh,
who gave Fifty Pounds; and to Sir Edmund Udal, who gave as much to the Library;
with Intimations in the same Letter of the King's being expected at Oxford. The
Books of Worcester Library to be selected for this at Oxford. Mr. Comptroller's
Promise of Fifty Pounds. Of placing the Manuscripts, figuring the Books with
Letters, and fixing of Catalogues for a Trial to the Tables; with the Founder's
Caution to avoid Censure. His Considerations about the Register-Book. Some
mention of the Earl of Essex's Gift, and Sir Robert Sidney's, and Mr.
Barkham's. The Founder's Opinion that there should be no Vacation at all in the
Library; but that the Keeper being absent upon urgent Occasions, another might
supply his room till he return, in regard of the Time good Students would lose.
A reason for binding sundry Authors together, that the multiplicity of Chains
might not take away the sight and show of the Books. The Earl of Southampton's
Gift of an Hundred Pounds to the Library. The Founder's Character of himself,
as to matters of Literature, in these Words: "As touching your Title Page and
your Epistle, I am no Judge for you to build on: For in my own Writings, I am
altogether negligent, and in censuring other Men's, somewhat too curious." Some
notice of Dr. Reynolds his Gift, and of some Books from Windsor; but if not to
be had without his Majesty's leave, to let them alone, he not thinking it
proper to be a Suitor for them, unless the Gift were greater, his Majesty
having given him larger Expectations. Lady Vere's Request, that in the
Inscription to her Gifts, there should after Vidua, be set down and Filia Jo.
Tracy de Tuddington Militis. The Founder's Recommendation of his Librarian's
Suit to the Archbishop of Canterbury. A singular Courtesy of lending out the
Manuscript Epistles of Nazianzen, to Sir Henry Savile, his Affection to the
storing and preserving of the Library being singular. The Lord Cranborn's Gift
of Fifty Pounds to the Library. The Founder's Gladness at the Assurance of his
Librarian's Information, that in England there are more Books to be found, than
are worth Five Hundred Pounds, which are not in the Library. "For, says he, you
shall never see, that any good Books shall be lost for want of buying, though I
find no Contributors: Albeit you need not doubt, but I shall always find
sufficient." Further Expostulation with his Librarian about leaving his Charge,
and betaking to a private Course, and about his engaging Sir Thomas Lake to
obtain him two Prebends, with Sir Thomas his Offer of Twenty Pounds a year to
be Chaplain in his House, to the dislike of the Founder, who could not promote
such Motions, and thought that all Promises of Livings, when they fall, and
Letters of Recommendation, are to very small purpose unless they be followed
and effected; and though Sir Thomas could procure many of those, none of them all
would relieve him. The Inscription upon Sir Francis Vere's Gift of Books this
Year (when the King of Denmark was in England) to be, Donavit jam tertio 10
Libras. Mr. Worseley's Present of some MSS. of Roger Bacon, and Notice of the
King's Grant of some Books. An Observation that the Libraries at Cambridge were
meanly stored, and Trinity College worst of all. Of the Duke of Brunswick's
Entertainment at Oxford, and of his Promise made to the Library. The Founder's
Opinion about the choice of a Librarian or his Deputy; that he should be one
whose Person, as well as Learning were to be liked, in regard of the great
Access of great Persons oftentimes of both Sexes; therefore that he who attends
upon them, should be a personable Scholar, and qualified with a Gentleman-like
Speech and Carriage. A Computation of the room to be allowed for Books of Law
and Physic, and that the former Faculty will require five times more than the
latter. Notice of the King's Warrant for the choice of any Books in any of his
Libraries. The Errors of the Librarian's Hebrew Words (in his Catalogue)
observed by the Founder, and concerning the Dedication, he says, "I do not mean
the King, as you supposed, but the Prince; for that to the King, there are
daily Books dedicated, and, for aught I can hear, few Rewards bestowed; whereof
I do think you may have more hope at the Prince's hands, by the means of good
Friends." Of the Founder's Speech, for the Librarian to receive his Majesty
with; and of his firm denial to lend any Books out of the Library. The Lord
Paget a Donor of some Books, and Dean Wood of an Hundred Marks. Preparations
appointed against the King's coming. Concerning Buchanan's Book (against the
Queen of Scots) the Founder says, "it is in your Catalogue, and it will not
avail to conceal him in his Desk, neither do I think, that it will be thought
on; or if it be, as yet we have no reason to take any Notice of the King's
dislike." The Founder's Conjecture, that when those Books he has laid out for
are brought in, there will not be above Two Hundred New Books to be added
yearly. His Reasons against an Assistant Librarian or Deputy. Dr. Abbot, Bishop
of Litchfield, solicites the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of
London, to bestow a Prebend upon the Librarian. Mr. Thomas Allen's Gift of
Greek MSS. and other Books. The Founders Opinion about buying new Editions of
Books they already had. His Preference of Sir Henry Savil's Judgment of his
Building. Several Observations further about the printed Catalogue, and about
the Precedence of Faculties, as Law before Physic, etc. The Librarian's
intended Undertaking to compare the Fathers approved, if it will not require a
Dispensation of his Personal Attendance. The Bishop of London's Gift of Fifty
Pounds. And the Founder's Brother Laurence Bodley, Canon of Exeter, his
Addition of Twenty Pounds to his former Gifts. Further Escapes noted in the
Librarian's Catalogue of the Hebrew Books. The Founder's Opinion for excluding
Almanacks, Plays, and Numbers more daily printed, hardly one in forty being
worth keeping. That in other Nations, Plays may be more esteemed for learning
the Languages, and being compiled by Men of Wisdom and Learning, seldom the
Case among us; and though some little Profit might be reaped from some
Play-Books, it will not countervail the Scandal they will bring on the Libary,
when it shall be given out, it is stuffed with Baggage Books; and that a few
would be multiplied by such as purpose to disgrace it. Sir H. Savil, by what he
has given and purposes to give, likely to prove the greatest Benefactor. That
Sir Thomas Knevet, and Sir Peter Young, dealt very much underhand to stop the
King's Grant of Books. The Founder's free Opinions of the Librarian's Work to
prove the Corruptions of the Fathers. His Censure of Dr. Howson's last Sermon,
utterly void of all Honesty and Wit. An Account of young Drusius coming to
Oxford. One Hundred Pounds gotten by the means of Sir Edwyn Sandys to the
Library. Advice against the Repetition of Authors in the Catalogue. The
Founder's dislike of his Librarian's Proposal of a Library for the younger
Sort. Mrs. Owen's Gift of an Hundred Pound to the Library. The Founder
congratulates his Librarian for the Opportunity he had of showing himself in
the Speech, he was to make to the King. His further Opinion about their
collating of the Fathers, and about the Speech aforesaid, that it should not be
above half a quarter of an Hour long, etc. His mention of other Benefactors,
Mr. Barneston, Mr. Evan Jones, Mr. Dorel, and Mr. Edward Jones. His Opinion
that Wickliffe is not inferior to Scotus in Subtilty; his Caution to the
Librarian, to be well advised in what he shall publish from that Author, which
in regard of his Office, may be thought the Act of the University. No Notice to
be taken of some Books the King prohibited in Scotland. Of Josippus Barbatus
the Egyptian coming to Oxford. Further of the Founder's Undertaking to collate
the Fathers. His further Advice about the Librarian's Speech to the King. That
it must be short and sweet and full of Stuff. His Orders to put Sir Henry
Wotton's Name before a little Alcoran with Points, as the Donor. His Resolution
to be determined by the Delegates about the Statutes, and mention of Sir Tho.
Smith's Gift to the Library, and for Dr. Budden to be admitted one of the
Delegates. Other Donors, as Sir William Roper (who gave the Works of Sir Thomas
More) Mr. Hakewell, etc. mentioned by the Founder. His further Enquiries after
Dr. Howson, and Opinion that he should be severely censured, and made to recant
his malicious Taxation of those he terms Glossers, or not suffered to hatch his
new-fangledness in the University. His Orders for placing the Book, which Mr.
Coryat, the famous Traveller, writ and bestowed on the Library, in some such
Place during the Act, at which the Author was to be present, as might seem to
magnify both him and his Work. The rest of this Collection consists only of the
three Letters, written by the Founder, to Dr. Rives, and Sir Francis Bacon; and
one by his Brother Laurence Bodley, to Dr. James, as was observed, with their
Purport, in the beginning of this Extract thereof.

XL. The DIFFERENCE between an Absolute and Limited MONARCHY; as it more
particularly regards the ENGLISH CONSTITUTION. Being a Treatise written by Sir
JOHN FORTESCUE, Knight. Lord Chief Justice, and Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND,
under King HENRY VI. faithfully transcribed from the MS. Copy in the Bodleian
Library, and collated with three other MSS. Published with some Remarks, by
JOHN FORTESCUE-ALAND of the Inner Temple, Esquire F. R. S. 8 vo. 1714. Pages 148.
Besides the Editor's Dedication; and his Preface, which contains 82 Pages, and
a Table of Contents The MS. from which this Book was published, and which is
the fairest and most perfect, remains among the MSS. of Mr. Seldom in the
Bodleian Library, and appears to have been transcribed by Sir Adrian Fortescue,
who was a Descendant from the Author, and lived in the Reign of King Henry
VIII. for at the End, it is thus written: Explicit Liber compilatus and factus
per JOHANNEM FORTESCUE, Militem, quondam Capitalem Justiciarum ANGLIAE, and hic
Scriptus manu propria mei ADRIANI FORTESCUE Militis, 1532. Of the MSS. with
which the Editor collated this Work, two are among the MSS. of Archbishop Laud,
and Sir Kenelm Digby in the same Library; and the third in the Cotton Library:
But all the material Variances are noted in the Margin of the Book.
.
THIS most excellent Treatise was written by the Author in the Language of
those Times in which he lived; participating much of the Nature of the Saxon:
And therein are used many Words, Terminations, and Phrases, no where to be met
with in the Modern English, which may therefore seem uncouth and obsolete; but
by the Etymological Remarks of the Learned Editor, these seeming Improprieties
vanish; and the Author appears with great Advantage in his Native Dress.

The Editor in his Dedication to Sir Thomas Parker, Knt. Lord Chief Justice of
England, having shown the Office of a Judge over the People of England; that he
is Guardian of their Laws and Liberties, and Mediator between Prince and
Subject, extols the great Abilities and Integrity of the Author and of his
Patron too; and compliments Sir Thomas with this beautiful Simile; "That your
Lordship now appears with such a Luster, is, in some measure, owing to your
high Station; though the latent Cause existed long before: So the Sun itself when
rising, shines only to the East; but is the same with that, which, when
elevated to the Meridian, enlightens the whole Hemisphere."

He then opens his Preface, to Sir John Holland, Bart. with the Grand Division
of Law, into Divine and Natural; and shows that the Law of England comes
nearest to the Law of Nature, and the Divine Pattern. Next he treats of its
Certainty; proving that legal Beings in general, are capable of the best
Certainty, even Demonstration, and Mr. Lock's Notions of Morality applicable to
them; and after shows the special Care of the Law of England, in defining
Terms, raising Axioms, drawing Deductions therefrom, searching the Truth of
Facts by Juries of 12 Men, and giving Judgment upon mature Consideration: Then
of its Antiquity; and here he cites our Author de Laud. Leg. Angl. that neither
the Roman nor Venetian Laws can claim so great Antiquity; and lays down, that
all Laws have their Origin from Nature, and those that are founded on her are
equally ancient; that the Law of England consists of the Laws of Nature,
positive Institutions, and Customs. That Ethelbert the first Christian King, in
561, with the Advice of his Wisemen, made the first Saxon Laws, after the
coming of Austin the Monk; and many Saxon Kings after him in like manner, made
and confirmed Laws; that Alfred, first sole Monarch after the Heptarchy, with
the Advice of his Wisemen, collected the Laws of former Saxon Kings into one
entire Codex (supposed to be the same with the Dome-Book) ut in Jus Commune
totius Gentis transiret; that his Successors Edward the Elder, Aethelstan,
Edgar, Ethelred, and Canutus confirmed these Laws, and commanded their Judges
to give right Judgment according to the Dome-Book, and that the Folc-Right
should be preserved to all their Subjects: And from hence the Editor concludes,
that the Common Law of England under the Name of Folc-Right, existed under
Alfred; and that Edward the Confessor only collected, as Alfred had done, the
Laws then extant, which had not been observed during the Usurpations of Harold
I. and Hardicanute, and may well be called the Restorer of the English Laws;
and this he backs with the Oath of William I. to keep inviolable the Laws of
the pious Kings of England, and especially King Edward, which, says he, were
not only those enacted in his time, but of all his Ancestors, and the with
Confirmation of King Edward's Laws by Henry I. Stephen, Henry II. Richard I.
John, and Henry III. and Magna Charta, which as Lord Coke observes, is only a
Confirmation of the Common Law of England: He then speaks of the Salic Laws
among the German Franks, and briefly of the English Constitution. Afterward he
passes to the Author's Life and Character, his Pedigree and Works. Then
follows, the Reason of his Remarks on the Author's Language; and here he
observes, that "though an Etymology, strictly speaking, is no more than a
Derivation of the Word or Name; yet Etymologies from a Saxon Original, will
often present you with a Definition of the thing, in the Reason of the Name."
And this he illustrates with many remarkable Instances: he likewise gives the
Etymology of several Law-Terms, particularly By this word Witkernam, Sir Thomas
More once gained no small Honor; for being at Bruges in Flanders, an arrogant
Fellow set up a Thesis, that he would answer any Question that should be
propounded to him in what Art soever: Sir Thomas made this Question to be put
to him, whether Averia capta in Withernamia sunt irreplegibilia? adding, that
there was one of the English Ambassador's Retinue that would dispute it with
him. The Thraso not so much as understanding those Terms of our Common Law,
knew not what Answer to make, and so became ridiculous to the whole City. Life
of Sir Thomas More, 8 vo. 1652.
Withernam, Heriot, Husting, Murder, Homicide, etc. and of the Words King and
Queen, and several others, which come from Saxon Originals. He then shows the
Use, nay necessity, of the knowledge of the Saxon Tongue in almost all
Sciences. And gives an account of Books proper for attaining it; and to that
end is the rest of the Preface.

We come now to the Work itself, consisting of XX Chapters. Chap. I. Contains
the difference between Dominium Regale, and Dominium Politicum and Regale. II.
The Reason of this Difference. III. The Fruits of these different Governments;
wherein is instanced the extreme Poverty and Misery of the Commons of France,
and the Wealth of the English. IV. Treats of the Revenues of France and
England. V. Of the Harms that come of a Kyng's Poverty. VI. Of the Kyng's
Ordinary Charges. VII. Of the Kyng's Extraordinary Charges. VIII. That, if the
Kyng's Lyvelyhood suffyce not, his Realm is bounden by Right to susteyn him,
in every thing necessary to his Estate. IX. Of the Perils that may come to the
King by over-mighty Subjects. X. How the Crown may be belt endowed. XI. What of
the Kyng's Lyvelyhood gevyn away may best be takyn ageyn. XII. What Harm would
come to England, of the Poverty of the Commons. XIII. That lack of Heart, and
Cowardice keep the French from rising. XIV. That there ought to be a Resumption
by Act of Parliament of the Kyng's Revenue, and a Subsidy granted to him, for
making Gifts and Rewards, with Advyse of his Counceile. XV. How the Kyng's
Counceile may be chosyn and established. XVI. How the Romans prospered whiles
they had a great Counceile. XVII. Advertisement for the gevying of the Kyng's
Offices. XVIII. For gevyng Corodies and Pensions. XIX. Of the great Good that
will grow of the firm endowyng of the Crown. XX. Advertisement for making of
Patents of Gyfts.

Of several ancient Words, Customs, etc. in these Chapters, the Editor has from
learned Authorities, given many curious Explanations; as in showing whence
Talys signify Taxes. The Etymology and Definition of King, and of Fellowship;
the Use of Negatives in our Language; the Etymology of Scute a Coin; of
Esquire, and Escutcheon; of Guild, Dome, and Domesday-Book; of Right, and
Worshipful, of Knight, Fee, Marches, Rover, and Caryk or Ship, of Ambassador,
Procurator, and Messenger; of Surples, Bawderick or Belt, of Law, and Man; with
the reason of Writing our Genitive Cafe, as Man's Son, with an Apostrophus;
next he gives the Etymology of Christen, Earl, Ealdorman, Thane and other
Titles of Honor, City and Burgh, of Demesne, Queen, Gabel, Gavelkind, and
Kyrk, of Sowdan or Sultan. The Penny and other Saxon Coins, Lordshypp, Taylys
or Entailes; of Jakke, a Coat of Mail; Pall Mall, Harness, Quinsime and Disme;
Taxes of England, These, True Man, Scotland, Larcenye, Brochage, Kynne or
Kindred; Frank, a French Coin; Sheriff, Bullion, Month or Month, Escheker,
Clerk or Master of the Rolls, Bailiff and Bayliwick, Array, Arraignment,
Steward, Constable; Mark, a Denomination of Money; Firm and Farm, Mortmain, and
Bishopric. After these Etymologies we have an Account of the Saxon manner of
singing and praying, and of their Piety; next an Etymology of the word Year. He
then gives a Catalogue of the Authors quoted in his Remarks; and lastly
concludes the whole Work with the Saxon Alphabet.

XLI. The Antiquities and Practice of the COURT of EXCHEQUER. MS. Quarto. Pages
71.
THUS, the better to understand the Contents of this Work, is its Title here
enlarged; which otherwise is no more than barely Exchequer; as if it were a
Part of some larger Performance, which had a more comprehensive and explanatory
Title at the beginning. And this we are the rather inclined to believe was the
Case, in that we have been informed, the late Lord Chief Baron Gilbert wrote
Two Discourses upon the Courts of the King's Bench and the Common Pleas, and a
Third upon the Exchequer; of which last, this, before us, is presumed to be a
Copy. It was certainly wrote by an Author who was familiarly acquainted with
the Laws of this Court, or Course of Practice therein, both Ancient and Modern;
and that it was written since Mr. Maddox published the History of the
Exchequer, appears by our Author's frequent Quotations from it; besides, there
is the Form of a Writ of Scire Facias issued under the Test of the said Chief
Baron Gilbert, in the fourth Year of his late Majesty's Reign, recited in the
56th Page of the said MS; which was imparted to us out of the Collections
mentioned in our Account of the MS, we described in our last Number.

It is divided into Ten Chapters, which for want of room we shall only repeat,
as follows: 1. Showing that the Exchequer was the ancient and sovereign Court
in Normandy. 2. How to understand the Revenue and Business of the ancient
Exchequer. 3. How, when Baronies, toward the latter end of the Norman Period
escheated, they were wont to be broken into small Tenures. 4. That, in the
Saxon Times, the Lords Spiritual held by Frank Almoigne. 5. How the King's
Tenants, who held per Baroniam, did Suit and Service at his own Court. 6. How
all Debts to the King bind from the Time they are contracted. 7. What Acts and
Instruments pass by the King's Chancellor under the Broad-Seal. 8. The usual
Revenue which arose from Fines and Amerciaments. 9. The Receipt of the
Exchequer. 10. The Sheriffs Accounts; and with this, concludes the Treatise, at
least as far as our Copy extends.

The End of Number IV.
XLII. TULLIUS his Book of OLD AGE: Whereunto is added his Book of FRIENDSHIP,
and the Declaracyon, showing wherein HONOR should rest. Translated into
Englyssh, by the Earl of WORCESTER. Enprynted by William Caxton, 1481. Fol.
THIS threefold Work is so sufficiently explained in the Prefaces and
Conclusions of its several Parts, that the Reader cannot have a better Account
thereof than by a Recital of them: We shall therefore begin with his Preface to
the first Part, which is as follows.

"Here begins the Prohemye upon the reducynge, both out of Latin as of
Frensshe, into our Englyssh Tongue, of the Polytyque Book, named Tullius de
Senectute; which that Tullius wrote upon the Disputations and Commynycacions
made to the puissant Duc Cato, Senator of Rome, by Scipion and Lelius, then
being young noble Knights, and also Senators of the said Rome, of the
Worship, Recommendacyon, and Magnyficence that should be gyven to Men of old
Age, for their Deserts and Experyence in Wysedom of polytyque Governaunce, and
blamed them that reproven or lothen old Age; and how Caton exhorts and
counseileth old Men to be joyful and bear pacyently old Age, when it comes
to them: And how Tullius, at reverence of Caton, declares, by ways of Example,
how Ennius, thauncyent Philosophre, purposes and writes in three Verses
compendyously unto his Friend Atticus, also a Senator of Rome, how he took
great Thought and Charge for the Governaunce of the common Prouffyght; for which
he deserved great Lawde and Honor, in preferring the same, named in Latin,
Res Publica, keeping the Romans prosperous, and defendyng them fro their
Adversaryes and Rebels. Which Book was translated and thystoryes openly
declared by the Ordenaunce and Desire of the noble ancient Knight, Sir Johan
Fastolf, of the Countee of Norfolk, Bannerette, lyvyng the Age of fourscore
Year; excercsyng the Warrys in the Royame of France, and other Countrees, for
the Diffence and unyversal Welfare of both Royames of England and France, by
forty Years endurying, the Fayte of Arms hauntyng, and in admynystryng Justice
and polytique Governaunce, under three Kings; that is to were, Henry IV. Henry
V. Henry VI and was Governor of the Duchye of Angeou, and the Countee of
Main, Capytayne of many Townys, Castellys, and Fortressys, in the said Royame
of France; havyng the Charge and Saufgarde of them dyverse Years, ocupyeng and
rewlynge three hundred Speres, and the Bows acustomed then; and yeldyng good
Acompt of the forsaid Towns, Castellys, and Fortresses to the said Kings, and
to their Lyeutenauntes, Princes of noble Recommendacion; as Johan, Regent of
France, Duc of Bedford, Thomas, Duc of Exeter; Thomas, Duc of Clarence and
other Lyeutenauntes; prayeng to take this reducyng pacyently, and submittyng me
to the Amendyng and Correction of the Reder and Understonder, that is disposed
to read, or have any Contemplacion in thistoryes of this Book, which were
drawn and compyled out of the Books of thauncyent Philosophers of Greece, as in
thorygynal Text of Tullius de Senectute in Latin, is specifyced compendyously,
which is in manner hard the Text: But this Book reduced in Englyssh Tongue,
is more ample emnowned, and more swetter to the Reder, keeping the just
Sentence of the Latin.

Thence for as much as this Book thus reduced into our English, is with great
Inst^ce, Labor, and Cost comen into mine hand; which I advysedly have seen
over, read, and considered the noble honest and virtuous Mates, necessarily
requysite unto Men stepte in Age, and to young Men, for to learn how they ought
to come to the same, to which every Man naturelly desires to atteyne. And the
Matter and Commynycacion of this said Book between that wise and noble Man
Cato, on that one part, and Scipio and Lelius, two young Knights, on that
other part, is much behoefful to be known to every Man, virtuous, and well
disposed, of what some ever Eage reasonable that he be. Then by cause I have
not seen any of the same here to fore, I have endeavored me to get it with
great difficulte, and so gotten, have put it in Enprynte, and dilygently, after
my lytil Understandyng, corrected it, to thentente that noble virtuous and well
disposed Men might have it to look on, and to understonde it. And this Book is
not requysite, ne eke convenyent, for every rude and simple Man, which
undestandeth not of Science, ne Connyng, and for such as have not herd of the
noble, wise and great Lords, Gentilmen, and Merchants that have seen, and
daily been ocupyed in Matters towchying the publyque Weal. And in especial unto
them, that been passed their grene Yongthe, and eke their myddle Age, called
Virylyte, and ben approchid unto Senectute, called old and ancient Eage;
wherein they may see how to suffer, and bear the same pacyently; and what Surete
and Virtue ben in the same: And have also cause to be joyous and glad, that
they have escaped and passed, the manyfolde Peryllys and doubteous Adventures,
that been in Juvente and Yongthe, as in this said Book here followyng, ye may
more plainly see. Which Book endyted and wrote in Latin, by the noble
Philosopher and Prince of Eloquence, Tullius Consul Romayn; within the Breast
of whom, Phylosophye Naturel and Moral, had chosen her Domicill: Out of which
it has been translated into Frensh, and after into our Englyssh Tongue, as hier
after al a long ye may see.

Also, when the said Tullius had made his Book, De Senectute, he aftir made
another Book, called De Amicicia, that is to say, of Friendship. In which he
reherceth of two young Knights of Rome, that one named Sevola, and that other
Faunyus, both Sones-in-law unto Lelius, a noble Senator of Rome, and felawe
and alyed in Friendship with Scipio Affrycan; which within few days to fore
was deed. How they desired to know of the Friendship that was between the said
Scipio whiles he lived, and Lelius their said Fader-in-law: And of the
Disputation in Friendship, as also plainly it appiereth in the same; which Book
was translated by the virtuous and noble Earl, therle of Wurcestre, into our
Englyssh Tongue. And by cause it is according and requysite to have Friendship
joined to old Eage, I have enprynted the said Book of Friendship, and annexed
to it the Book of Eage; which Book of Friendship is full necessary and behoefful
unto every Estate and Degree: And aftir, I have set in this said Book,
followyng them both, a Noble Treatys of the Declaracion of two noble Knights
Romans, in making of two Oracions to sore the Senate, to know wherein
Noblesse rests? And thus this Volume is dyvyded into three particular Works;
which ben of grate Wysdom in old Age, very Love in Friendship, and the Question
wherein Noblesse rests? Which lytil Volume I have emprysed tenprynte under the
Umbre and Shadow of the noble Protection of our most dradde Soverayne and
naturel Lyege Lord and most Christian King, King Edward the Fourth, to whom I
most humbly byseche to receyve the said Book of me William Caxton, his most
humble Subget and litil Servaunt, and not to desdeyn to take it of me so pour,
ignorant, and simple a Person: And of his most bountynous Grace to pardonne
me so presumyng; beschyng Almighty God to keep, mayntene, and grant to him
long Life and prosperous, and thaccomplishment of his hye and noble Desires:
And aftir this short and transitorye Life, everlastyng Life and Joye in Heven,
Amen."

After this general Preface, follows a Table of the Heads in the first Part or
Discourse of Old Age; which being almost eight Leaves, is too long to be here
recited, and much more any tolerable Abstract of the Discourse itself; which
extending as far as the Printer's Mark I.2. for this Book has Signatures at the
bottom of it, though no Numbers on the Pages at top, concludes with these
Words: "Thus ends the Book of Tulle of Old Age, translated out of Latin into
Frenshe, by Laurence de Primo Facto, at the Commandment of the noble Prince
Lowys Duc of Burbon, and enprynted by me, simple Person, William Caxton, into
English, at the Playsir, Solace, and Reverence of Men growing into Old Age,
the 12 Day of August, the Year of our Lord 1481." To this is joined the Second
Treatise, beginning with these Words.

"Here follows the said Tullius de Amicicia, translated into our maternall
English Tongue, by the noble famous Earl, the Earl of Wurcestre, Sone and
Heir to the Lord Typtoft, which in his Time flowred in Virtue and Cunnyng, to
whom I knew none like emonge the Lords of the Temporalite, in Science and
Moral Virtue. I byseche Almighty God to have Mercy on his Soul, and pray all
them that shall here or read this lityl Treatys, much virtuous of Friendship, in
like wise of your Charity, to remember his Soul among your Prayers. And by
cause this Work was made by the Prince of Eloquence, Tullius, entitled De
Amycicia, after that he had achevid his Book De Senectute, as hertofore ye may
more plainly see at large, thene me seems it requisite and necessary that I
set in following the said Book, this Book De Amicicia, which, by Gods Grace,
shall plainly follow." This Treatise is marked with Signatures, in the same
manner as the former, that is to say, an alphabetical Letter repeated on every
Leaf, with a numerical Figure as far as four, then four Leaves blank without
any Signature: so that this Treatise beginning at A, 1. and ending at D, 4. has
28 Leaves in it, and concludes in this manner. "Thus ends this Book, named
Tullius de Amicicia, which treats of Friendship, uttered and declared by a
noble Senator of Rome, named Lelyus, unto his two Sones-in-lawe, also Noble
Men of Rome, named Faunyus and Sevola. In which they desired him to inform
them of the Friendship that was between the said Lelius and the noble Prince
Scipio Affrican. Wherein he has answered, and told to them the noble Virtues
that be in Friendship, and without Virtue, very Friendship may not be, as he
prevyth by many Exsamples and notable Conclusions, as heretofore is much
plainly expressyd, and said all alonge. Which Work was translated by the
virtuous and noble Lord and Earl, therle of Worcestre; on whoos Soul I bechese
Almighty God to have Mercy; and all ye that shall read or here this said Work,
of your Charity, I beseech you, to pray for him. And by cause this said Book,
De Amicicia, is full necessary and requysite to be had and known, I have put
it in emprynte, to thentent, that very Amyte and Friendship may be had, as it
ought to be, in every Estate and Degree; and Virtue, without which Friendship
may not be had, may be encreaced, and Vices eschewid. Then when I had
enprynted the Book of Old Age, which the said Tullyus made, me seemed it
acordyng, that this said Book of Friendship should follow, by cause there cannot
be annexed to old Age a bettir thing than good and very Friendship: which two
said Books here to fore wreton ben of great Wisdom and Auctoryte, and full
necessary behoeffull and requysite unto every Age, Estate and Degree. And that
they prouffyte in encrecyng of Virtue, I beseech the blessed Trynyte, to geve
and grant unto all them that shall read and here thise Books, and so to flee
and eschew Vices and Sins, that by the Merytes of vertuose honest and good
Works, we may atteyne, aftir this short transytorye Lif, the eternal blessed
Lif in Heven, where is Joye and Glory without end. Amen."

Lastly, follow the Two Declarations, made by Publius Cornelius Scipio and
Gayus Flamyneus, Competitors for the Love of Lucresse; showing wherein True
Honor and Nobleness consists: The former placing it in Blood, Riches, and the
worshipful Deeds of his Ancestors, without urging any thing of his own Life or
Manners; the latter insisting, that Nobleness cannot be derived from the Glory
or Merits of another Man, or from the flattering Goods of Fortune, but must
rest in a Man's own proper Virtue and Glory. After these Orations, which, with
the Argument or Introduction, take up nineteen Leaves, the whole Book is
concluded by our Editor in these Words. "Here I make an end of this Matter for
this time; prayeng and requyryng all them, that in this said Work shall have
any Playsyre, that ye will remember him that translated it into our Maternal and
Englyssh Tongue. And not only this said Work, but the Book of Tullius de
Amicicia, here to fore enprynted, which treats so well of Friendship and Amyte;
I mean; the right virtuous and noble Earl, therle of Wurcestre, which late
pytously lost his Lif This John Lord Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, thus praised
and lamented by his Editor, was born at Everton in Cambridgeshire, educated in
Baliol-College, Oxon. traveled to the Holy Land, and, after his Pilgrimage,
was three Years in Italy, where Pope Pius II. shed Tears for Joy at his
eloquent Oration. He was twice Lord High Treasurer of England; and in 1467
Deputy to George Duke of Clarence, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. He wrote some
Orations and Epistles, besides these Translations abovementioned: Being
attainted by Parliament, he was beheaded Anno 1470, and buried in the
Dominicans Convent at London, according to Leland. See also Bale, Camden,
Brook, Ware de Script Brit. Fuller and Dugdale. As for Sir John Fastolf,
beforementioned, and the unjustifiable Liberties which have been taken with
his Name and Character, enough has been lately spoken thereof, in the Account
we have elsewhere given of him.
; whose Soul I recommende unto your special Prayers; and also in his Time made
many other virtuous Works, which I have hard of. O good blessed Lord God,
what great Loss was it of that noble virtuous and wel-disposed Lord? when I
remember and advertyze his Lif, his Science, and his Virtue; me thinks God
not displesyd over great Loss of such a Man, consyderyng his Estate and
Conning; and also thexcercise of the same; with the great Labors in gooyng on
Pylgremage unto Jherusalem, visytyng there the holy Places that our blessed
Lord Jhesu Criste hallowed with his blessed Presence, and shedyng there his
precious Blood for our Redemption, and from thens ascended unto his Fader in
Heven. And what Worship had he at Rome, in the Presence of our holy Fader the
Pope? And so in all other Places unto his Death; at which Death, every Man that
was there, might learn to dye, and take his Death patiently; wherein I hope, and
doubt not, but that God receyved his Soul into hes evirlastyng Bliss. For,
as I am informed, he right advysedly ordeyn'd all his things, as well for his
last Will of worldly Goods, as for his Soul Health, and pacyently and holyly
without grudchyng in Charity to fore, that he departed out of this World,
which is gladsom and joyous to here. Then I here recommend his Soul unto
your Prayers; and also, that we, at our departing, may depart in such wise,
that it may please our Lord God to receyve us into his evirlastyng Bliss.
Amen. Explicit per Caxton."

XLIII. The Book named the GOVERNOR; devised by Sir THOMAS ELYOT, Knight.
Imprinted at London, in Flete-strete, in the House of THO. BERTHELET, cum
privilegio ad imprimendum solum. 8o. 1553. 216 Leaves, besides Tables, etc.
THIS Sir Thomas Elyot, for his Learning, and virtuous Accomplishments, was an
Honor to the Gentry and Nobility of England, in his Time; and though his younger
Years were much employed in Court and State Affairs, especially certain
Embassies into Italy, etc. yet did he apply the Knowledge thereby acquired
rather to the Improvement and Communication of his Studies, than to the more
fashionable Seize of worldly Riches, Offices and Dignities. He is said,
by Bale, to have been the Son of Sir Richard Elyot, and born in Suffolk; but
his chief House and Estate was at Carleton in Cambridgeshire; of which County,
we find him in the List of High Sheriffs, in the 24 and 36th of Henry VIII. and
at which Town he was buried in 1546, having a handsome Monument over his Grave.
His Works, partly original Compositions, partly Translations, from Greek and
Latin, are all upon grave and important Subjects. They need not, upon this
occasion, be here enumerated, being at least a Dozen in number; which, perhaps,
in little more than so many Years, he set forth in the English Tongue; whereof
his Dictionary is not the least considerable. But we may here observe, that the
Accounts which have hitherto been given of them, are very imperfect, especially
that of Anthony Wood. As to this Book, named the Governor, we find it to be
the first he published; and it has been so well received, as to have had as
many, if not more Editions than any other of his Writings. This Edition we make
use of, is not mentioned in the Author last quoted; and its having the Date of
1534, in the ornamental Border, from a wooden Print, in the Title Page, gives
room to conjecture the Book was first printed that Year.

It is dedicated by the Author to King Henry VIII. and in his said Proheme, or
Dedication, he has these Words, which verify in part what we have above
observed, and at the same time show you the subject Matter of his Work. "I have
now enterprysed to discribe, in our Vulgar Tongue, the Form of a just public
Weal; which Mattier I have gathered, as well of the Saiyings of most noble
Autors, ( Greeks and Latins) as by mine own Experience; I being continually
trained in some daielye Affairs of the public Weal of this your most noble
Realm, almost from my Childhood; which Attemptate is not of Presumpcion to
teach any Person, I myself having most need of teaching; but only to the
intent that Men, which will be studious about the Weal publyque, may find the
thing thereto expedient, compendiously written. And for as much as this
present Book treats of the Education of them, that hereafter may be deemed
worthy to be Governors of the public Weal under your Highness, which Plato
affirms to be the first and chief Part of a Public Weal; Solomon saiynge
also, where Governors be not, the People shall fall into ruin; I therefore
have named it the Governor, and do now dedicate unto your Hyghenesse, as the
first Fruits of my Study, etc."

After the Table of Contents, our Author enters upon his Work, which is divided
into Three Books, with explaining the Signification of a Public Weal, and why
it is called in Latin Respublica; giving the Reason of Government, and showing
why Man, for his Understanding, and the Honor which is due to it, is best
fitted for the same. Further, that one Sovereign Governor ought to be in a
Public Weal; and what Damage has happened, when a Multitude has had equal
Authority, without any Sovereign? This is illustrated by many Examples,
especially from our own History of the Saxon Invasion and Divisions of this
Kingdom, till it was reduced to its primitive Estate, by the noble King Edgar:
But here not proposing to describe the Office or Duty of a Sovereign Governor,
he distinguishes his Intention to treat of the two Parts of a Public Weal,
named due Administration and necessary Occupation, which shall be divided into
two Volumes. "In the first, says he, shall be comprehended the best Form of
Education or brynging up of noble Children from their Nativitie, in such
manner, as they may be found worthy, and also able to be Governors of a
Publyke Weal. The second Volume, which God grantyng me Quietnese and Libertee
of Mind, I will shortly after send forth: It shall conteyn all the Remenant
which I can, either by Learning or Experience, find apt to the Perfection of a
just Public Weal; in which, I shall so endeavor myself, that all Men, of
what Astate or Condition so ever they be, shall find therein Occasion to be
alwaie virtuously occupied, and not without pleasure, if they be not of the
Schools of Aristippus, or Apitius; of whom, the one supposed Felicitee to be
only in Lecherye; the other, in delicate Feeding and Gluttonye; from whose
sharp Talones, and cruelle Teethe, I beseech all gentle Readers to defend
these Warkes, which for their Commoditee is only compiled." Then he proceeds to
observe in the third Chapter, That in a Public Weal there ought to be inferior
Governors, called Magistrates, which should be appointed, or chosen by the
Sovereign Governor. In the next Chapter, he treats of the Education or Form of
bringing up the Children of Gentlemen, which are to have Authority in the
Public Weal: so proceeds to the Order of Learning, that Noblemen, in their
Minority, should be trained to, and at what Age Tutors should be provided, and
what belongs to their Office. In what wise Music may be necessary to a
Nobleman. The Commendation of Painting and Carving in a Gentleman. The exact
Care required in choosing of Masters. The Order to be used in Learning, and
which Authors to be first read. The Reasons why Gentlemen at this time be not
equal in Doctrine to the ancient Noblemen, which are Pride, Avarice, and
Negligence of Parents, with the want or scarcity of sufficient Masters or
Tutors. Here we have a Character of Henry Beauclerk, King of England, and his
Brothers: Also a Commendation of Eloquence and of Poetry, with Translations of
some Verses from the ancient Poets, showing what good Advice, even the wanton
Writers often contain; and that it were no Reason, for some little matter that
is in their Verses, to abandon therefore all their Works. "No wise Man enters
into a Gardein, (sais our Author) but he soon espieth good Herbs from Nettils,
and treads the Nettils under his fete, whiles he gadreth good Herbs, whereby
he takes no damage; or if he be stungen, he makes light of it, and shortly
forgets it: Semblably if he do read wanton Metter myxte with Wisdom, he
puts the worst under foot, and sorteth out the best; or if his Courage be
stered or provoked, he remembers the litteil Pleasure and great Detriment that
should ensue of it, and withdrawyng his Mind to some other Study or Exercise,
shortly forgets it." From hence, we pass to the Law, and some Observations
upon the Improvements to be made in the Study thereof. The Cause why, at this
day, there be in this Realm so few perfect Schoolmasters. Sundry Forms of
Exercise mentioned, as necessary for every Gentleman; some of which are
referred to in Galen's Book, De Sanitate tuenda; "which is translated into
Latin wonderful eloquently, by Dr. Linacre, late most worthy Physician to
our Most Noble Sovereign Lord King Henry VIII." And those mentioned are
Wrestling, Running, Swimming, Art of Defense, Riding and Vaulting; and here
speaking of Horses he sais, "It is supposed, that the Castle of Arundel in
Sussex, was made by one Beauvize, Erl of Southampton, for a Monument of his
Horse, named Arundell, which in far Countries had saved his Master from many
Perils." Then we come to the ancient Hunting of the Greeks and Romans; also of
Hawking; and next of Dancing; showing, that it is not all in general to be
reproved. The Antiquity of Dancing, and wherefore in the good Order of Dancing,
a Man and Woman dance together. How Dancing may be an Introduction to the first
moral Virtue, called Prudence. Of the Motions in Dancing, and what they are
called; as the Honor, the Braul; with an Explanation of the word Maturity; the
Singles and Reprinse, or Indication of Circumspection, which gives our Author
an Opportunity, under that Consideration, to deliver a laudatory Character of
King Henry VII. Other Branches of Prudence are also further described, from
other Motions or Steps in Dancing. This ends with a Criticism on the words
Modesty and Discretion, not hitherto known in the English Tongue, and of the
word Mansuetude, till this time, also unknown in our Tongue; with Reasons for
naturalizing Words from the Romans, as they did from the Grecians. Hence we
pass to other Pastimes, expedient, if moderately used. Here Dicing is shrewdly
censured, its ill Consequences exposed, and the vicious Motives to it; with
Examples how contemptible it was held by the Ancients. Cards and Tables are
more favorably censured, as depending more on Wit, and trusting less in
Fortune; especially were such Improvements made in these kinds of Gaming, that
Knowledge or Science in higher things might thereby be advanced delightfully,
and so as to tender Study most commodious, whether in military Contentions, or
those between Virtue and Vice, or any other laudable Invention. To this end, is
the Game of Chesse commended, and as most pleasant to those Players at it, who
have read the Moralization of it, and think thereof in their Play; which Book
is in English but very scarce, because few, in their Play, seek for Virtue or
Wisdom. Thus we come to Shooting in the Long-Bow, which he commends as the
principal of all other Exercises, not only for being more moderate, but more
serviceable; having been our best Defense, and made us most victorious, famed,
and feared, as may be seen in the Histories of King Richard I. and King Edward
I. Hence our Author takes occasion to exclaim against the Decay of Archery in
his Time, and the Neglect of putting in Execution those Laws and Provisions
which were made for restoring the same: And here he concludes the first Book,
containing 27 Chapters, and 84 Leaves.

The Second Book begins with laying down such virtuous Admonitions, as should
be premeditated by whomsoever is appointed a Governor of a Public Weal; with
some Examples produced to prove, that as the Governor is, such is the People;
and more referred to in History; the Readers of which, our Author most desires
should be, of all others, Princes and Governors. Those Admonitions our Author
would have delectably written, and set in a Table within the Governor's
Bedchamber, with those Verses of Claudian to the Emperor Honorius added, which
he has here translated, and of which we shall give our Reader only this Taste:
What thou may do, delight not for to know;
But rather what thing will become thee best:
Embrace thou Virtue, keep thy Courage low,
And think that always Measure is a Feast.
And just before: If Lust or Anger do thy Mind assail:
Subdue Occasion, thou shall soon prevail.


Then proceeds he to the Exposition of Majesty, which he calls "The Fountain of
all excellent Manners, the whole Proportion and Figure of noble State; and is
properly a Beauty or Comeliness in Countenance, Language and Gesture, apt to
his Dignity, and accommodate to Time, Place and Company; which like as the Sun
does his Beams, so does it cast on the Beholders and Hearers a pleasant and
terrible Reverence," etc. Next, we have his Judgment and Advice about the
Apparel fit for a Nobleman, who is a Governor or great Counselor; also
concerning the Furniture of his House; the Definition or Description of true
Nobility, and whence it took its Denomination; in which Chapter he has this
Allusion: "We have in this Realm Coins, which be called Nobles; as long as
they be seen to be Gold, they be so called; but if they be counterfeited and
made in Brass, Coper or other vile Metal; who, for the Print only, calls
them Nobles? whereby it appears, that the Estimation is in the Metal, and
not in the Print or Figure." Hence he proceeds to the Praise of Affability, and
the Use thereof in every State, more particularly in the Facility of Address or
being spoken to; with Examples of the dismal Condition of a Prince and his
Realm, where Liberty of Speech is restrained. The notable Virtue of Placability
is also here illustrated; and here he gives us at large, a domestic Example of
this Virtue, comparable with the best that ever was recorded of any other
Princes or People, in the notable Story of King Henry the IV. his Thanksgiving
to God, upon hearing that the Prince of Wales, afterward our renowned King
Henry V. was committed to Prison, and the Reason thereof; in that he was
blessed with such a Judge, as feared not to administer, and such a Son, as
scorned not to obey Justice Sir Thomas Elyot quotes no Authority for this
curious Story; and I recollect not any more ancient than his own, in this Book.
John Speed, in his Chronicle, quotes it from this Place. And Dr. Fuller, though
he misquotes our Author, as if it were from Sir T. Elyot's Chronicle (for no
such Book did he ever publish) yet seems rightly to add, "from whom our modern
Historians have transcribed it." Shakespeare, in the second Part of his Henry
IV. has made a lively Scene of it for the Stage, and enlarged it with
Circumstances, as a Dramatist has a License to do. But Stow's Computation of
the time which the Chief Justice concerned in this Story sat on the Bench, is
observed to have been too much contracted; and John Trussel's Account of King
Henry the V. his Acknowledgment of the said Judge's Justice, as if he were
alive, after the Coronation of that King, is observed not to agree with the
time of the said Chief Justice's Death. For Sir William Gascoigne was this
Judge, who committed Prince Henry to Prison, and he was made Chief Justice of
the King's Bench, in the first of Henry IV. according to Fuller, as he assures
us from our authentic Records, or 15 of November 1401, which was 3 of that
King, according to Dugdale; and died on the 17th of December, in the 14th or
last Year of that King, which was in 1412, according to the Date on his
Monument in Harwood Church in Yorkshire, and the Pedigree of his Family, still
in being. What confirms the Truth of this Story here abovementioned is, That
there is a Medal struck in Commemoration thereof, an Impression of which I have
seen. It is not so broad as a Guinea, has his Name written round it in the old
English Characters, with the Image of himself, I suppose, sitting on a Bench by
another Person, and reading to three Auditors before him. Mr. J. Hopkinson, in
his MS. Volume of the Pedigrees of the Yorkshire Gentry, has given us a
Specimen of this Name's being spelled more variously than any other I ever met
with. It is upon the said Medal Sir Wylliam de Gasquone, as I remember, but has
since been most generally written Gascoigne; though Fuller, who was acquainted
with an accomplished Antiquary in Record-heraldry, of the same Family, and
Surname, writes him Gascoinge.
. From hence we pass to Arguments and Examples, showing that a Governor ought
to be merciful, with the difference between Mercy and vain Pity. Here we have
the choice Example of Mercy showed by the Emperor Augustus to his Enemy Lucius
Cinna, from Seneca. Then he descants upon the other principal Parts of
Humanity; the Excellency of Benevolence, Patience, Charity, adorned with many
ancient Examples. Of Beneficence, Liberality, and Prodigality. The true
Description of Friendship. The wonderful History of Titus and Gisippus, whereby
is fully declared the Figure of perfect Amity, with some Cautions to know a
Friend from a Flatterer. The Division of Ingratitude, and the Dispraise
thereof, with Instances of Kindness in Beasts. Of the Election of Friends, and
the Diversity of Flatterers, illustrated also with ancient Examples and
Observations. That many Friends are necessary for a Governor: and herewith ends
the Second Book, at the 141 Leaf, containing 14 Chapters.

The third and last Book, begins with a Discourse on the noble and most
excellent Virtue named Justice; whereupon it is observed from whence the Name
of King first proceeded; the Distinctions between commutative and corrective
Justice; so proceeds to the first Part of Justice distributive. And here is
first recommended the Love and Honor of God, and the Example of the Gentiles
instanced, who in such Honor placed the chief Part of Justice. This leads us
to observe the Tranquillity that is caused by Devotion, and to consider the
Places consecrated for the same. Here we have the Justice of raising Temples
for that purpose, and offering our Worship therein with convenient Ceremonies.
Next he treats of the three Counselors of Justice, Reason, Society and
Knowledge, and of its two Enemies, Violence and Fraud; with Examples showing,
that Justice ought to be between Enemies. Distinctions of the Word Fides, which
is the Foundation of Justice; as when it may be called Faith; when Credance;
when Trust; also when named Loyalty, according to the French, or Fidelity, from
the Latin; with several historical Illustrations of the same. Then we come to
that Part of Fidelity, which concerns the keeping of Promises or Covenants: and
here ends his Discourse upon Justice. So we enter upon the noble Virtue of
Fortitude, and the two extreme Vices, Audacity and Timerosity: more
particularly in what Acts Fortitude consists; and that Painfulness is the first
Companion of Fortitude, with ancient Examples verifying the same, according to
the Method hitherto pursued. Thus we come to his Recommendations of Patience:
Advice how it may be obtained, and a Remedy against Impatience. Of Patience in
sustaining Wrongs and Rebukes; also in Repulses, or Hinderance of Promotion,
with the Commodities which happen from the Advancement of good Men. Hence we
proceed to the Praise of Magnanimity: And in this Chapter, among other
Examples, we have that of King Edgar's Treatment to the King of Scots, who
wondered, that himself, and other tall able-bodied Princes and Commanders,
should suffer themselves to be subdued by such a little Body as Edgar was:
Proving, that by this Virtue, and not by Chance, he was preferred to the
Sovereignty over so brave a People. Here follow the Vices attending this
Virtue, such as Obstinacy and Ambition. Abstinence and Continence are next
treated of, as the Companions of Fortitude; the former especially with relation
to Rewards; with Examples showing, how backward good Men have been against
being led into the Bondage thereof; and of the latter, we have also Examples in
several eminent Persons. Next of Constancy, Temperance and Moderation. Of
Sapience, and the Definition thereof. The Signification of the Muses; of
Science; the Understanding. Of past Experience, and a Defense of History,
wherefore it is commendable, what it signifies; with an Answer to the
Objections of those who would slight the Advantages thereof, because it has
been sometimes corrupted with fabulous Inventions. Next we are taught the other
Part of Experience or Practice, necessary in the proper Person of a Governor;
and then, as a Vice necessary to be discouraged in Men in Authority, we have a
Essay upon Detraction, with a Description of the Picture which Apelles painted
thereof. Lastly, the three concluding Chapters are upon Counsel and
Consultation, in what form they ought to used in a Public Weal, and what
therein ought to be chiefly considered. As the Choice of good Counselors, and
Regard to be paid them; with the Method of Belinger Baldasine, to discover what
would be the Result of Opinions in Council; and the Matter to be consulted of;
in which Generals are to be considered before Particulars: And with this Head
concludes the third and last Book of this present Work; which Book contains 30
Chapters, and the Volume ends with the Number of Leaves observed at the
Beginning.

XLIV. A COLLECTION, HISTORICAL and POLITICAL, of Letters, Discourses,
Memorials, etc. concerning several Persons and Places of Note, in the Reign of
Queen ELIZABETH: Gathered, chiefly, from the Papers of HENRY Earl of DERBY,
Lord Lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire, and one of her Majesty's most Hon.
Privy Council. MS. Fol. 1589. about 280 Pages.
IT was a Custom, in the Reign when this Collection was made, and indeed one or
two Reigns after, not fuller of Industry than Modesty, and public Spirit, for
Gentlemen, of good Intelligence, thus to copy over and transmit in Volumes to
Posterity, so many little, observable and authentic Memoirs, as otherwise, for
their Incongruity, could never have been preserved; but for their Use have been
much preferred to our best Libraries. In a Collection of this kind, there is all
the Toil of writing, which in a continued History is employed, but none of the
Partiality; all the Use of Histories compiled for the Press, but none of the
Profit: as if only the Information of After ages were intended thereby; and all
Praise, Reward, or Memory of those, who were Instrumental to it, studiously
declined: For from the Generality of these Collections, which we have seen, it
seldom does appear, otherwise than from what may be presumed, as in the present
Case, who was the Collector, or the Scribe; or by whom, and for what end they
were set to work; yet the end may be commonly understood in most of these
Collections; seeing many Particulars may be too well known, or contain too much
Truth, or be Matter of too private a Concern, or need the further Illustration
of corresponding Authorities, to be put in print in their Collectors own Time;
but transmitted thus, in a Miscellany, or Cluster of indifferent Matters, they
are preserved, like Fruits that find a Safeguard in their own Leaves, till they
arrive at that Maturity, in which it is fit they should be, occasionally,
gathered for public Use.

The present Collection, may, perhaps, as to some Parts of it, be looked upon
in this light. Though the Transcriber's Name does not directly appear, several
Parts of the Collection may sufficiently authorize the Title we have drawn out
for it, as above. The Period of Time it relates to, may be comprehended between
the Years 1584 and 1589; they being the earliest and latest Dates we find
therein; and hence have we settled the Date in the said Title we have given it;
as believing nothing in the Book to be written below that Year. It begins with
a Letter from the Privy Council to the Earl of Pembroke, informing him of her
Majesty's Pleasure, that the six hundred Foot, and thirty-two Demilances to be
levied for the Service in the North out of the County of Salop, should be taken
out of the trained Numbers only, in respect of the present Necessity, and the
Importance of the Service wherein they are to be employed; also censuring some
Negligence in his Lordship's Care for her Majesty's Service, touching the
Certificates of his Deputy Lieutenants of Salop and Wigorne; for that the
Provisions and Weapons they had supplied were nothing answerable to
Expectation. And further, desiring his Lordship's Opinion, if the contagious
Sickness now at Ludlow should continue, whether her Majesty's Household should
be removed to some other Place, and his Lordship not repair into Wilts till it
was over, etc. This is the Substance of the said Letter, which is subscribed
with the Names of some Privy Counselors; but the Leaf is so much damaged, and
the Writing blinded by some Wet which has befaln it, that all we can further
read, and this with great Difficulty, is the Name of Comptroller, Chamberlain
and Walsingham; but may guess, from the hazardous Times spoken of in it, that
it was written at the first arming of the Nation against the Spanish Invasion,
about the Year 1586. The next Piece, is a remarkable Letter from the Earl of
Leycester, then Governor of the Low Countries, to Sir Thomas Hennage, dated
the 23d of September 1586, beginning thus: "Since my other Letters of the
20th, yt fell out that yesterday Morninge some Intelligence was brought, that
the Enemy was bringing a Convoye of Victual, guarded with 300 Horse. There was
sent out to ympeache yt, 200 Horse and 300 Footmen, and a Number more both
Horse and Foot to second them: Among other young Men my Nephew Sir Philip
Sydney was, and the rather for that the Coronell Norrice himself went with the
Stand of Footmen, to second the rest; but the Vangard of the Prince was
marched and came with this Convoye, and being a mystie Morninge, our Men fell
into the Ambuscade of Footmen, who were 3000, the most Musketts, the rest
Pykes. Our Horsemen being formoste by their haste indeed, would not turn,
but paste through and charged the Horsemen that flede at the back of their
Footmen so valientlie, as albeyt they were 1100 Horse, and of the very Chieffe
of all his Troops, they brake them, being not 200. Many of our Horses hurt and
killed, among which was my Nephews own. He went and changed to another, and
would needs to the Charge again, and onste paste those Musketters; where he
receyved a sore Wound upon his Thighe, three Fingers above his Knee, the Bone
broken quite in Pieces; but for which Chance, God did send such a Day as I
think was never many Years seen, so few against so many." Here the Earl
proceeds to enumerate the Commanders and other Persons of Distinction in this
Rencounter, whose Names were Colonel Norrice, who had the Charge of the Foot,
my Lord of Essex, Sir Thomas Perrot, "and my unfortunate Phillip, sais he, with
Sir William Russell, and diverse Gentlemen, and not one hurt but only my
Nephew. They killed four of their Enemies chief Leaders, and carried the
valient Count Hannibal Gonzaga away with them upon a Horse; also took Captain
George Cresier, the principal Soldier of the Camp and Captain of all the
Albanez. My Lord Willoughbie overthrew him at the first Encounter, Horse and
Man. The Gentleman did acknowledge it himself. There is not a properer
Gentleman in the World toward than this Lord Willoughbie is; but I can hardly
praise one more than another, they did all so well; yet every one had his Horse
killed or hurt." And it was thought very strange, "that Sir William Stanley,
with 300 of his Men should pass in spite of so many Muskets, such Troops of
Horse, three several Times, making them remove their Ground, and to return with
no more Loss than he did. Albeyt, I must say (continues the Earl) yt was too
much Loss for me, for this young Manne was my greateste Comfort next her
Majesty of all the World, and if I could buy his Lieffe with all I have, to
my Sherte, I would geve yt. How God will dispose of him I know not, but fear
I must needs, greatly, the worste; the Blow is in so dangerous a place, and
so great; yet did I never hear of any Manne that did abide the dressinge and
settinge his Bones better than he did: And he was carried afterward in my
Barge to Arnheim, and I hear this Day he is still of good heart, and
comfort all about him as much as may be. God of his Mercy grant me his
Lieffe, which I cannot but doubt of greatly. I was abroad that time in the
Field, givinge some Order to supply that Business, which did endure almost
twoe Owres in continual Fight; and metinge Phillip coming upon his
Horseback, not a little to my Greafe. But I would you had stood by to hear
his most loyal Speeches to her Majesty; his constant Mind to the Cause, his
lovinge Care over me, and his most resolute Determmation for Death, not one
Jott appalled for his Blow; which is the most greevous that ever I saw with
such a Bullet; ryding so, a long mile and a half, upon his Horse, ere he
came to the Camp; not ceasing to speak still of her Majesty; being glad, if
his Hurt and Death might any way honor her Majesty; for here is he was
whileste he lyved, and God's he was sure to be if he dyed: Prayed all Men to
think that the Cause was as well her Majesty's as the Countrie's; and not to
be discoraged, for you have seen such Success as may encorage us all; and
this my Hurt is the Ordinance of God, by the hap of the War. Well I pray
God, if yt be his Will, save me his Lieffe; even as well for her Majesty's
Service sake, as for mine own Comfort." These are the Earl's Words, concerning
his said worthy Nephew; and we thought it would be excusable to transcribe thus
particularly all he has there said of Sir Philip Sidney, being a Man of such
particular Merit; even though it should oblige us to be the more general and
concise in succeeding Topics. The rest of the Letter, above a Page of small
Writing more in folio, relates to the Account of their Enemies Retreat, the
Prisoners taken, and the chief Spaniards who were at the Charge, with the
Number of their Forces; the hazardous Enterprises of the Lord North, who though
bruised on the Knee with a Musket Shot, yet leaving his Bed, hastened to this
Skirmish, one Boot on and the other off, and went to the Matter very lustily:
Also of two hopeful young Gentlemen in the Camp, Mr. Hatton and Mr. Umpton, who
were as ready in the Service as the meanest Soldiers, and got with their Pikes
into their Fore-ranks, under Rowland York, to second Sir William Stanley's
Company; "and till we see what the Prince will do, these notable young Fellows,
sais the Earl, will not away:" And to this Effect ends the Letter: Signed
Robte: Leycester.

The next Piece may be entitled, Arguments for the sudden Execution of Mary
Queen of Scots. We have not Leisure now to examine whether it has ever been
printed, nor can we certainly say that the Earl aforesaid was the Author of it;
therefore shall only observe, that it here makes four Pages, and begins with
these Words: "It may seem a vain Labor to go about to heap upp Reasons for
the persuadinge of that which is of such Necessity, as yt were against all
Reason any way to think it might be desuaded." It is written in the same
Hand with the former, and followed by another Letter of the said Earl's
writing, giving a further Account to some Nobleman here in England, of their
Success in winning a Town by Battery, and the Enemies yielding before Assault;
in breaking their Horsemen in a most valiant Skirmish; getting from their
Footmen two most strong Forts by Assault, and making them forsake the third by
Night, the Prince himself being at hand with his whole Army; and never
attempting after the first Skirmish to empeach them: Which he only speaks in
general of here, expecting the Earl of Essex, or some other that come over,
will be more particular. And now that the Prince is retired, intends to dismiss
his Army into Garrison, and make a Skip over to see his Friends, etc. Dated at
the Camp, 14 Octo. 1586. After this, we have a Letter, signed Richard Hollande,
to a noble Lord, entreating that his Lordship would be present at the hearing
of a Cause in the Star Chamber, wherein his Brother-in-Law, Mr. Dokenfield was
concerned: It Is dated from Heaton, 3 May, 1586. And then follows, Queen
Elizabeth's Speech in Parliament, also the same Year, concerning the Form of
proceeding against the Queen of Scots; and the Delay of her immediate Answer to
their Petition for the Execution of the said Queen, till she had first, "with
earnest Prayer, beseeched his divine Majesty, so to illuminate her
Understanding, and inspire her with his Grace, as she may do and determine
that, which shall prove to the Establishment of his Church, preservation of
their Estates, and Prosperity of this Commonwealth under her Charge." This
Speech consists of four Pages and a half, and begins with these Words: "The
bottomless Graces and immeasurable Benefits bestowed upon me by Almighty God,
are and have been such, as I must not only acknowledge them, but also admire
them, etc." The next is Queen Elizabeth's Speech, in answer to the French
Ambassador, Monsieur Believre, and the rest of his Company, justifying her
Proceedings against the Queen of Scots. It begins thus: "My Lords Ambassadors,
I trust so much upon the Goodness of the King my good Brother, etc." And
therein her Majesty sais; "I assure you, that all the Sorrows and Afflictions
which ever I did receive, as concerning the Deaths of the King my Father, the
King my Brother, and the Queen my Sister, have not been such a Grief unto my
Heart as the Matter we speak of. I call God to witness if ever I would use her
as she has done me: All this I take upon my Salvation or Damnation. I have
seen many Histories, and read I believe as many, I believe, as any Christian
Prince or Princess, but I never found one Matter like unto this. I remember
well your Discourse, and all that you have alleged unto me, but it cannot
entice me to change my Will, etc." Then follows the most sorrowful and
desperate Letter of Margaret, Queen of Navarre, to Monsieur de Sarlant,
complaining of the Queen her Mother's abandoning her to shameful Ruin; and
protesting, "That as her Heart would not let her fall into the Hands of her
Enemies alive, she would never eat more; and that the first News her Mother
shoud hear of her shoud be her Death." After this we have, The Book of the
whole Navy, containing the Names of all the Queen's Majesty's Ships, with
their Tonnage, and number of Mariners, Gunners and Soldiers the 27 of
December, 1585. From hence we learn the Royal Navy then consisted of 36 Ships;
that the biggest, named the Triumph, was of 1000 Tun Burden, carried 350
Mariners, 50 Gunners, and 200 Soldiers. Of the rest, two were of 900 Ton, one
of 800, one of 650, and seven of 500, so lessening down to 20 Ton some of them.
This List is followed with a Discourse, entitled, An Analogy or Resemblance
between Joan Queen of Naples, and Mary Queen of Scotland. It consists of three
Leaves; and the Facts or Circumstances are drawn for Queen Joan, chiefly from
Ran. Collenutius, Lib. 5. de Regno Neapolitano; Pet. Mexia in vita Vencelai;
Platina; and Leonardus Aretinus, in Historia Florentina; and those for Queen
Mary are gathered from Buchanan, de Nuptiis Mariae, also his History of
Scotland, and her own Letters. This is followed with an Addition to the said
Analogy, of 17 Pages; containing historical Examples or Precedents of Sovereign
Princes being condemned and put to death, in a formal and advised Manner; in
the Stories of Queen Joan aforesaid, who was deliberately executed by Charles,
King of Naples, through the Advice of Lewis King of Hungary; and Conradine King
of Naples, who was in like manner condemned and publicly executed; and the
most Christian Constantine, who put to death the Emperor Licinius, with a
Comparison between this Case and that of the Queen of Scots; and here we have a
Book of this Queen's referred to, called Expetit. Causarum, etc. Then follows a
second Precedent of an Emperor, Tiberius, who put the King of Thrace to death,
as we have it in Livy, Tacitus and Suetonius: Also a third Precedent in the
Emperor Henry VII. who deprived Robert King of Naples, and gave Sentence of
Death against him. Nay, we have several Examples also produced of Popes, who
cannot err, as themselves affirm, giving their Judgment for the putting of
Kings to death; as of Pope Clement IV. against Conradine, King of Sicily; also
Pope Boniface, who put Pope Caelestine to death, lest he should, for his
singular Virtue, be called again to the Sea; and Pope Urban VIII. who not only
put to death eight Cardinals, who are accounted part of his Body, called his
Brethren, and in Offense to whose Persons, the Crime of Treason lies, according
to Gigas and Julius Clarus, but carried three of their Carcasses, dried in an
Oven, about with him in Portmanteaus, and had their purple Hats born up before
him, in terror to others; which Examples, and others, are taken from
Collenutius, Guildefingense, Corn. Agrippa, Platina, Pedro Mexia, Augustine,
besides some from the ancient Romans; and confirming Authorities from Hugoline,
Johan. Delignano, and others; and all to encourage the execution of the unquiet
Queen of Scots.

The next Piece is a Letter of a private Nature, from Sir Edward Standley to my
Lord his Brother, entreating him to move the Archbishop of Canterbury to make
his Friend John Kine a Proctor of the Arches; and contains some Acknowledgments
for the receipt of some Moneys from his Lordship for his Charges in a Lawsuit:
It is dated from Winwycke, 29 December, 1586. And then follows Liber Pacis
1584; or the Names of all the Justices of Assize in the several Counties of
England and Wales. This List, in double Columns, takes up 29 Leaves. After
this, we have another List, which is called also, a Book of the Number, Names,
and Burden of all the Ships, Barques, and Vessels, with the Names of all
Masters and able Mariners belonging thereto, within or appertaining to the
River of Chester. It was written by William Wale, the Mayor, at the Command of
the Earl of Derby; to whom it is addressed in an Epistle, by the said Mayor;
bearing Date 18 February, 1586; and it appears in these Lists, that the Number
of Ships, Barques, etc. from the Burden of twenty, to sixty Tons, were fifteen
in Number; and that the Owners, Masters, and Mariners, with the Places of their
abode are named, and numbered at 152. To this is joined, the like Account of
all the Barques, etc. belonging to the River of Preston, (in Lancashire) called
the Water of Rible; and this is performed by Laurence Wall, Mayor of Preston,
at the Command of the said Earl of Derby, he being Lord Lieutenant also of this
County, as appears by this Mayor's Letter to his Lordship. This List of Vessels
is contained in one Page; and they are eight in Number, from the Burden of four
to ten Ton. The like Book or List of all the Vessels belonging to the River
Wire in Lancashire, as well abroad as at home, with their Burden, Masters, etc.
is addressed to the said Earl of Derby, according to his Command, the same
Year, by Henry Butler, Esquire and William Skillicorne, Gent. The Number of these
Vessels are 28, and the Burden between four and eighteen Ton. This is followed
with such another Account of the Vessels, belonging to the Peele of Foodre and
the Creeks thereof, in Fournes and Cartmeale, within the said County of
Lancashire; directed to the said Earl of Derby, the same Year, according to his
Command, by John Bradley, Esquire and John Richardson, Gent. They are but five
Vessels in Number, from the Burden of two to twenty Ton. And to this is joined
one more such List of all the Vessels in the Port of Liverpoole, in the said
County, taken the same Year; with the Names of the Places they were bound to;
the Owners, Mariners, etc. They appear to be twenty-eight in Number, and from
eight to forty Ton Burden. Then follows a Note concerning the entire Subsidy,
and the two Fifteenths and Tenths granted in Parliament; the first Payment
whereof was to be in November next ( viz. 1587) and the second in November
1588: With the Manner of appointing the Collectors thereof. After this we have
a Letter from Captain A. Cosbye, dated at Utrecht the 16 February, 1586, to Sir
William Stanley; advising him to retain the Town of Deventer for her Majesty's
Use, notwithstanding the Contentions between him, and Taxis for the Government,
or the Expectation of great Forces from the Prince to remove him; as what will
no doubt recover his Credit, Pardon, and her Majesty's Favor: And offers
himself to be employed into England to further this Service. The next Paper is
a List of all the Soldiers and Munition in the Castle of Russhen and Castle
Peele in the Isle of Man, directed to the Earl of Derby, with a Note at the
Bottom of all the Provisions wanting there, which it is hoped his Lordship will
speedily supply: And to this is joined the Number of all sort of serviceable
Men within the said Island. Here it appears, the Number of Horsemen were 41,
Calliver-men 18, Bow-men 286, and Bill-men 357; but all much unprovided with
Weapons and other Furniture, as appears by a Note of their Wants, at bottom;
signed by R. Sherburne, H. Scarisbricke, W. Lucas, T. Burscoghe, and H.
Radclyff. The next, is, A particular Valuation of Guddisden Demain; where it
appears that the Sum total of Acres is 352, and the total Value per Annum 113
l. 14 s. 5 d. To this is joined, a Particular also of St. Leonard's Rents;
being 33 Shillings. Then follows a strange Account of Madam St. Marcian's
Vision, on April 18, 1587, being Shrove-Tuesday, of three Ladies, with Hawks on
their Hands, hawking as it were at Sheep in the Meadow before her; but being
sent to, the Messenger could see nothing. The Lady with other of her Company
still seeing them from her Chamber, sent again, but no body appeared: She,
still seeing them, and fearing some Violence, sent a number of Men with Arms,
charging them to fire at whatever they saw; they found at last a Cow, but that
vanished from them; at which instant Madam St. Marcian and her Company saw the
three Ladies with their Hawks, Sheep, Cow, etc. all throw themselves headlong,
with great noise into the River, out of which a Flock of Swallows mounted into
the Air: At the same instant also, the Mayor of Saints in Xanctoign coming
through a Meadow near the Town, saw three fair Ladies kneeling and eating of
Grass; of whom taking pity, he invited them to better Fare, but they made him
reproachful Answers; yet he invited them again afterward by his Servant, whom
they also answered dtsdainfully, wishing him to be gone, saying, we are Three
whose Names are Death, Famine, and Pestilence.

Then follows the Warrant of Sir Peter Leigh, Provost-Marshal of Lancashire and
Cheshire, and Justice of the Peace, to the Keeper of Chester Goal, to receive
and detain therein the Body of Randulph Northburie, Husbandman, for very
heinous and slanderous Words spoken against Robert Earl of Leicester; dated at
Lyme in Handley, 26 April, 1587. And next we have the Charge that is given to
the Queste of Howsehoulde, as well at the Castle, as at the Peele, (in the Isle
of Man) with particular Instructions to the Officers there; in one Sheet. After
this we have an Address from Cambridge to the Lord Treasurer Burghley,
Chancellor of that University, to rectify some Grievances therein mentioned;
signed by nineteen Persons, among whom are John Bentley, John Weston, Rob.
Russel, Will. Gager, Jo. Holland, Leonard Hutton, John King, Tho. Crane, Rich.
Thorneton, etc. Then follows a Transcript of some Letters: The first of which
is from the Earl of Leycester to a Friend, concerning some Persons who had, as
he intimates, wrongfully treated or represented him in his Absence, of whom he
sais: "Touching my Lord Buckhurst, Norris, and Wilkes, I doubt not but her
Majesty and my Lords do sufficiently understand of their Doings by this: For
dealing with Wilkes, to have his Resolution I desire it not, nor like not to
deal with so ungrateful and unthankful Wretches; let him and they do their
worste; they shall be found as they are, and I as I am, I trust. The Bruits
touching Sluice, if they be ill, and believed against me I have the more Wrong;
I will never write three Lines to satisfy such Persons; I know I have done as
much as any lyving in my Place, and it suffices me that I know it to be so: I
am sorry my Friends should be troubled to excuse me, when in Conscience I have
done all that became me. I have deserved better of my Countrymen's Hands than
lightly to believe of me: But they shall seek another hereafter to deal as I
have dealt for them, if they reward me so, etc. Dated from Dorte, 22 August,
1587." The next is a Letter to the Earl of Derby, signed by the Vicar of Great
Marlow in Buckinghamshire, whose Name was Thomas Brown, and the Churchwardens,
etc. testifying, That, Jane Boulde, (Wife of Richard Boulde Esquire) who was
reported to have absented herself from the Church, and not to use the same
according to the Injunctions thought meet, did frequent his Church, though it was
two Miles distant from her House at Harleford; and she had been out of order:
Dated 12 April 1587. The next is a Letter from Arthur Aty, to the Right
Honorable Mr. John Wooley, of her Majesty's Privy Council; showing what
indifferent Opinion was held of the English Aids in Holland, as if "her Majesty
had already agreed upon the Conditions of Peace with the Duke of Parma, and
that she would endeavor to enforce the States General thereunto, as he had
heard from Monsieur Aversons, Secretary to the said States. And though his Lord
( Leicester we suppose) had traveled much about to the Towns, with great
Diligence, instilled the most honorable Thoughts of her Majesty, and brought
the Matter in good Terms, as well for Satisfaction of those who are misled, as
to encourage their treating with her Majesty in the Peace, yet thinks it will
be very difficult; for most who mislike the Peace, or England, or him, seek
nothing more than to abase his Credit, upon the surmised Grounds before
written, and the earnest Pressing of the said Peace from England; which yet, he
hopes, will do well this Way; but in his Opinion, would have fallen out the
other Way his Lordship first took, to her Majesty's good liking, though not in
haste, etc." It Is dated at the Haghe, 15 October. 1587.

After these Letters, we have the Answer of Christopher Sothworthe, Priest,
(born in Lancashire, Son of Sir John Sothworthe, and aged 31 Years) to several
Articles against, and Examinations of him; which Answer he made before Dr.
White, Dr. Beacon, Rich. Topclyff, and Rich. Young; whereby it appears, that he
being earnestly required to conform himself in Religion according to the Laws
of her Majesty, now established, refused utterly, saying, "He is taught that
Doctrine and Religion at Rome, wherein he will stand and hops to die." These
Answers contain three Pages. Then follows two Letters by the Earl of Leicester
to Mr. Woolley aforesaid; both written from the Low Countries. From the first,
consisting of six Pages, we learn, That Mr. Woolley had conveyed to her Majesty
his Lordship's Replications to the Lord Buckhurst, Sir John Norris, and Wylkes;
and that he had advised his Lordship not to be severe in following Revenge, for
her Majesty has them still in her Displeasure; and they give it out that it is
only for his Lordship's Cause. In this Letter he further declares, they have
Friends to help them to execute their foul Facts; and he, few to help to
deliver him in his just Defense: And asks what he should have been thought of
if he had left their Declaration unanswered. That in what her Majesty has
spared them for herself, they ought the more to acknowledge it, and what she
laid upon them for his Sake, he is upon his Knees, with all Humbleness, to
yield most dutyful Thanks. As to his Successor that is talked of, and whether
he was to be Governor General as his Lordship is, or only have the Government
over her Majesty's People there, he thinks it will soon be resolved; for that
the States have found such a sweet Taste in commanding as well Men as Money,
that they will hardly yield to any more Governors till they must by force;
therefore that it should be seen his Lordship would be the last. We are here
informed also, of the Dispute his Lordship had with the States, about the
Payment of the 5000 Men he carried over with him. Also concerning Sluice Haven,
what he has written about it, and Mr. Beal is to deliver. And that nothing can
be done but by Count Maurice, of whose bad Dealing her Majesty does know. That
the Talk of Peace holds all Things in suspense: That it is greatly pressed by
some, to make it conceived, that it will be better for themselves to deal by
themselves, than to join with her Majesty; and herein does Maurice and Hollock
join and practice for life against her, as they have done ever since his
Lordship came over; and that he shall hazard somewhat to impeach their Doings,
as he intends. And a little further: "What a Time of Faction I have suffered!
and now more than ever; for that the Assurance of Peace does draw many from
me and my Authority, and so falls it out every Day more manifest than
other. I am here without either Nobleman, Officer, or Councellor. Killigrewe I
am feign to leave at Hage, where the Council are; my self, for her Majesty's
Service, to wander upp and down, both in daily Danger of my Lyffe, and yet
without so doing should not be able to stay Men's Minds as they ought to
be. And if her Majesty's Letter had been delivered to the States that Atye
brought, never Man had receyved so undeserved a Shame as I had, and utterlie
dishonored her own Doing withal. Such Comfort I am subject unto! And all this
while not one Person sent over to confirm my Doings, which were meet so to be;
nor to expostulate to these Men as it had been convenience, in so dangerous a
Time as this is, for yt is not the haste of Peace, nor the Shows of yt that
will bring such a Peace as should be, etc." This Letter is signed with the
Earl's Name, and dated 3 of October. 1587. The next Letter by the said Earl to
the same Person, informs us, That this Peace in hand begins to make great War
in those Parts, for that none would hear of it but such as wholly depended on
her Majesty. And here he further expresses his Uneasiness under his Charge,
thus, "I assure you my Lyffe was never wearisome to me till now: I would my
Estate here were either felt, heard, or understood; I know, of so many
professed Friends as I have, I shall find some would seek to releyve yt."
And further, that he was near Horn in North Holland, and means to stay a few
Days thereabouts; desires to be excused to the Lords, for that all his
Secretaries are employed abroad; hopes to hear from him speedily the blessed
Sound of Retreat; that he is dispatching the Soldiers as fast home as he can;
that he trusts the Lords will consider how little Cause he has to stay there
any longer, except, now he has worn out all his Company, they intend he shall
wear out himself. So ends, in haste, the 9 of October. 1587.

Then follow some more private Accounts, relating chiefly to the Estates, etc.
of the Earl of Derby, as we gather by Circumstances; beginning with a Note of
the Particulars of my Lord's Stand at Pilkington: This is an Inventory of the
Goods or Furniture in the Apartments there. The next Paper is an Account of
Wood sold; in this Method. The first Column contains the Names of the
Commissioners; the next, the Names of the Woods; the next, the Year when sold,
and the Valuation; next, the Earnest Money; and lastly, Earnest Money received.
These Woods were named Stretlie, Gorynge, Burciter, Middleton and Arncot;
Whichford, Ardington, Brackley, Gadesden and Wynnington: And the Sales were
made between the 25 and 28th Years of the Queen's Reign. To this is added, a
separate Paper of the Earnest of my Lord's Woods for those Years, the Sum total
whereof is 108 l. 9 s. 4 d. To this is also joined, an Account of the riding
Charges allowed by the Auditors to the Commissioners, for sale of the sad Woods
in those three Years. And this is followed with Orders set down by my Lord, for
Earnest Money due unto his Lordship for the Sale of Woods. These Orders are
agreed to by the Commissioners aforesaid, whose Names are Tho. Heart, Edw.
Clarke, Jam. Kenwicke and Edw. Gunne: And the Agreement is witnessed, amongst
others, by Edward Rigby, Gent. who is expressed in the next Page to be a
Receiver for the Earl of Derby in the southern Parts of England, and whose
Receipts we have here audited in the 28th of the said Queen's Reign; at the End
of which Account is mentioned the Sale of the abovesaid Woods in this last
mentioned Year, for upwards of 1200 l. Then follows a short Bill of some yearly
Payments. The next Paper is called a Note what Liberty Mr. Butler of Bewsey
Esquire had by Virtue of the Conveyance passed between the Earl of Leycester and
him, to lymmit and appointe to his Wieffe or Wyves. The next is entitled,
Rygate in Com. Surrey; and contains the Particulars of three Woods, that is,
Erle's Wood, described to be well set with great Oaks and Beeches, containing
240 Acres, valued at 3000 l. Petrydge Wood, containing 30 Acres, valued at 207
l. 13 s. 4 d. and Raye Wood, containing 16 Acres, valued at 50 l. The next
Memorial seems to be a very curious and particular Account of the whole yearly
Revenue of the Kingdom of Spain: First, beginning with the Revenues of all the
States belonging to that Crown: The Mines; Customs of them, and of the Slaves;
amounting to above ten Millions, four Hundred Thousand Ducats. Next, of the
King's yearly Pension from the five Orders of Knighthood, and his Profits upon
bestowing the Encomendas belonging to three of them; with the particular Names,
Number, and Value thereof; where it appears, the whole Order of St. James
amounts to 385915 Ducats: The whole Order of Calatrava to 254450 Ducats,
including that of Monteza: The whole Order of Alcantara to 171300 Ducats:
Besides the Order of St. John, at this time divided between Don Antonio de
Toledo, and the base Son of the Duke of Alva. Further, that out of the Rents of
the three Orders of Encomendas that King receives, as Great Master, for his
Part yearly, two Hundred and seventy Thousand Ducats. Then follows an Account
of the yearly Charges which that King is at, amounting to above seven Millions
of Ducats; which compared with his Receipts leaves him above two Millions
eight hundred Thousand clear.

Next, we come to a few Papers of more private or particular Concern again, as
a Remonsrance to the Lord Chanceller Hatton, and Lord Treasurer Burghley, with
the rest of the Council assembled in the Court of Star Chamber, against John
Crapnell, who was to have a Cause heard in this Court; being a violent
Invective against him; persuading, that he is, and has been, a Rogue in all
manner of Lights or Practices: But we here want the Conclusion of it. After
this we have an Estimate of the Livings of John Salusburie of Lleweny, Esquire in
Possession and Reversion. And the next is a very odd Story; entitled, The
Confession of Edw. Burnell: It Is comprised in six Pages, and the Substance of
it is this; This Mr. Burnell, as appears by his own Complaint, had met with
hard Usage in the Court of Wards and Liveries; was turned out of some
Possessions; and had brought his Adversaries into the Star Chamber for Perjury
and Forgery: But here, the Equity of his Cause not being heard; he thought he
had a right to say, her Majesty wanted faithful Hearts, to see, according to
her Disposition, Justice executed. Hereupon he prepares a New Year's Gift for
her Majesty, which was a Latin Oration; but he was taken up and examined before
Sir George Carey and Ralph Lane Esquire the very Day, yet so early as two o'clock
in the Morning, that he was to have made his said Speech, which was January 1,
1586. This Examination we have here, with that also of Mr. Burnell's Servant,
John Cartwright; and therein it appears, when they demanded what his New-Yea's
Gift was to be, he answered, he had it about him; so opening his Doublet, he
showed his naked Breast, and said, that after declaring to her Majesty his good
Meaning toward her by the Oration he had made in Latin, he would have ripped
his Body as far as he could, and his Breast, so far as he might, without Danger
of Death, to have shown her Majesty his Heart. They demanded, whom he
acquainted with this Device? He answered; he had advised with Paul Warren and
one Gyles, two Surgeons; had asked them, whether a Man being ripped down the
Body might not yet live? They answered, hardly; but upon his importuning
Warren, who was his Relation, he promised, if he continued resolute, that he
would meet him at Greenwich (where the Court lay) this Morning. Being required
to set down the Oration he meant to have pronounced; also to give them an
Account of what Places and Company he had been in for eight Days before: He
answered, by writing the said Oration down, which we have here, in half a Page;
with the Causes that moved him to give this Gift; also the Particulars where,
and with whom he had been, since Christmas Day last. And thus much for Mr.
Burnell's New Year's Gift.

This is followed with a Note of the Manor of Wymington in Com. Bedford, the
Rents and Parcels thereof, as they have been letten before the Lease made to
Mr. Edw. Onley by the Earl of Derby. A like Note we have here also of Prescot
Rectory, both as to the old Rents, and an Estimate of the thirteen several
Tithes demised thereunto: Where it appears that the Sum total of the Value was
then, in January 1586, near 500 l. per Annum. The next Piece is entitled, The
Manner of the Execution of the Queen of Scotts, the 8 of Feb. in the Presence
of such whose Names are underwritten. This takes up two Sides, and leads us in
the next Leaf to the Accounts of Sir Richard Shirburne, of Moneys received and
paid by Warrant from the Earl of Derby, to Henry Stanley of Crosshall Esquire
Muster-Master, for buying Arms for the trained Soldiers in Lancashire, and
repairing of Beacons there. The next is entitled, Fees allowed yearly to the
Earl of Derby, as Forrester of Bleasdall, etc. Another of Moneys received by
Sir John Byron, and paid to Henry Stanley and others, as before, by the Earl of
Derby's Warrant. A Note of the Number of Loads of Hay gotten to Lathome this
Year, 1589; which were 228 Loads. The next is a Letter from the English
Ambassador at Paris to a Privy Counselor, commending the good Offices and
Qualities of his Nephew there; and informing him that the King will receive the
Order on Thursday next, with as great Honor and show of Good Will as is
possible. The next Leaf contains an approved Medicine for the Stone; which is,
in a Gallon of new Milk, to steep, Pellitory of the Wall, wild Thyme,
Saxifrage, Parsley, each a handful, with two or three Radish Roots sliced, one
Night; then distill it all over a moderate Fire: So drink, six Spoonfuls of the
Water, with as many of Rhenish Wine, adding a little Sugar and Nutmeg,
lukewarm, fasting; and eat nothing three Hours after: It should be drank, the
first Week, three times together, and every Week after, but twice; for it
forces very much Urine. If no great Pain is felt in the Kidneys, it is better
to drink it but once every eight Days three Mornings together. Next, after a
Note of the Bedding in the Lodge at Pilkinton (a Seat of the Lord Derby's
aforesaid) we have Copies of two Letters in French; the one called, Responce de
la Royne a la Harangue de Monsieur de Bellieure Ambassadeur pour le Roy de
France touchant le Pardonne ensemble la Liberte de la Royne D' Escosse; and the
other, Coppie de la Lettre de la Royne de Navarre. Neither of which need be
further here particularized, the Translations of both into English being
transcribed at the beginning of this Volumne, as we have before observed. The
next is a Latin Letter, dated from Rome 10 May, 1586. beginning with an
Exclamation against Sir Francis Drake as a Pirate: And next to this, is
inserted a Latin Prophesy now applied to Sir Francis Drake, speaking no less in
his Commendation, and subscribed Merlin; and in the same Page we have a
Rehearsal of Sir Walter Ralegh's five Preferments (in the Year last mentioned,
or that following) the Words whereof are these: 1st. That he is appointed
Lieutenant General of all Cornwall. 2d, To be Deputy Lieutenant, under the Lord
Bath, of all Devonshire. 3d, To be Marshal of all the Forces raised in five
whole Shires. 4th, To have the Charge of twelve hundred Men. 5th, and lastly,
is made Warden of the Stanneries. In the next Leaf we have an English Sonnet of
six Stanzas, and for Sir Walter Ralegh's being the Author of it, we are
referred to good Authority, by a marginal Note, in the Leaf where it is
written. There are three or four little Memorials more in the Volume, of which
we need only mention, first, a List of New Year's Gifts, beginning with my
Cousin Katherine Howard's New Year's Gift, a Pillow-bear, wrought with black
Silk, and a Sweet-bag: In reward to the Man that brought it, twenty Shillings.
And ending with these; my Lord of Leycester 's New Year's Gift, a Garter, set
with Diamonds and Rubies; and all the Letters curiously enameled, in form of
Pictures: In reward to Mr. Arderne, who brought it, three Pounds. My Lord
Admiral 's New Year's Gift, a Ring set with five fair Opals: Reward mentioned,
but not particularized. And lastly, another List of the twelve Counselors of
State in Ireland. As this Miscellany contains some Particulars relating to
Cheshire, we cannot take our Leave of it, without being reminded thereby, to
acknowledge ourselves, for this Liberty of imparting it is Contents to the
Public, obliged to a Gentleman of an ancient and honorable Family in that
County, Nathaniel Booth Esquire of Gray's-Inn; among whose courteous Communications
of other curious Memorials, also, partly, relating to the Antiquities of the
said County, we cannot forbear mentioning one Letter concerning the said
Family, which was written on the Day that King Edward the VI. was born, viz. 12
of October, 1537, from Hampton Court, by the Queen his Mother, Lady Jane
Seymore, to George Booth, Esquire then not above 22 Years of Age; informing him,
that, "by the inestimable Goodness and Grace of Almighty God, we be delivered
and brought in Childbed of a Prince, conceyved in most lawful Matrimony,
between my Lord the King's Majestye and Us. Doubting not, but that, for the
Love and Affection which ye bear unto us, and to the Commyn-wealth of this
Realm, the Knowledge thereof should be joyous and glad Tidings unto Yone; we
have thought good to certitye yone of the same, etc" This George died the 35 of
Henry VIII. Aetat. 28, and was the Grandfather of Sir George Booth, Knight and
Baronet, who died at Dunham, October. 1652, aged 86 Years.


XLV. The DESCRIPTION of LEICESTERSHIRE: Containing, Matters of Antiquity,
History, Armory, and Genealogy. Written by WILLIAM BURTON Esquire Fol. 1622. Pages
320.
THE Title of this approved Work, is in a graved Frontispiece, which contains
Emblematical Representations (as was usual in these Times) of Fame crowning the
Pourtrait of Leicestershire, and Truth crowning that of Antiquity; with the
Sun, in a Compartment between them, in Eclipse, and this Motto, Relucera; over
a Cave, the Entrance of which is covered with a Curtain, upon which the said
Title is inscribed; and at the Bottom a Prospect of our Author's Seat, named
Lindley. In another Leaf, facing that Frontispiece, we have the Author's
Effigies in his Lawyer's Gown; Aetat. 47. 1622. his Arms at the Corners; and
for an Emblem at bottom, the Sun, with this Motto, Relumbre: Both graved by
Francisco Delaram.

He dedicates the Book to George Villers, Marquess and Earl of Buckingham,
Lord High Admiral, etc. He being a Native of that County, and none having the
like Power to defend his Work against the Adversaries of Truth. In the Preface
he apologizes for applying himself to Studies beside his Profession, by
intimating that if the Law admitted any Partner, the most necessary would be
this Study of Antiquities: And that his Constitution being weak, it disabled
him from following the Practice which his Calling required; which obliging him
to the Retirement of a Country Life, and depriving him of those Helps the City
would have afforded, must render his Discourse less equal to the Worthiness of
the Subject; yet rather than his Country should longer lie obscured in
Darkness, he adventures to restore her to her Worth and Dignity, animated by
the Examples of the never enough admired Antiquary W. Camden, and that
industrious and well deserving Master John Speed, who in his elaborate History
of England has well spoken of all the Shires, and by his great Travail and
Expenses added the Maps of each Shire, with the Plot of every City and great
Town therein inserted, never before performed by any: Also by the grave and
sage Lawyer W. Lambert, who from the Depth of Antiquity has restored the County
of Kent. Also the eloquent and noble Gentleman Richard Carew Esquire who very
worthily has surveyed all Cornwall; and that excellent Surveyor John Norden
Gentleman, who has briefly described the Counties of Middlesex and
Hertfordshire; and since has made certain chorographical Tables of some Western
Shires, and a fine Prospective of the City of London. He also acknowledges the
Encouragments he had from some of his Friends, as John Beaumont of Gracedieu
Esquire and that expert Genealogist, his Kinsman, Mr. Augustine Vincent,
Rouge-Croix, who imparted many worthy Notes to him from the Tower; and whose
Labors in this kind for the County of Northampton, would ere long come to
light. Further, that in this Description he has run through, in every Town,
those four Sections above mentioned in the Title Page. As for the Topography of
the County, he rectified some Years past Christ. Saxton's Map thereof, with an
addition of 80 Towns; which was graved at Amsterdam, by Jodocus Hondius, 1602,
(and since imitated by Speed, with an Augmentation of the Plot of Leicester)
and reduced into a lesser Form, is here inserted. Of the more eminent Places he
has spoken something throughout; and where any natural Passage offered, he has
not thought it impertinent to satisfy the Reader a little in this kind; also
adorned it with some historical Digressions, which have dependence upon the
Work; has observed, as near as he could, when Monasteries, Churches, noble
Seats, and other memorable Buildings were founded; also distinguished the
Descent of Titles to Lands, whether by Heirs or Grants; that the Antiquity of
Continuance in a Name might be discovered, and the ancient Owner known; not
intending to derogate from any Man's Right, or move Doubts or Questions
thereunto. But in setting down of Tenures he has been very sparing: The Soccage
Tenure he has expressed; but no Certainty of any other, unwilling to give any
Cause of Offense, as knowing there are more Differences and strange Proceedings
in these Businesses than in any one Thing of so common a Nature; though they
might be rectified if the truest and most probable Records and Evidences were
accepted. As for the Law Cases which have latterly happened in the Shire, he
has briefly remembered them. Touching the Genealogies and Arms of the Gentry he
only speaks of the Ancient, whose Families are extinct, lest not contenting the
Living, he should be questioned without Cause; yet has in this respect
remembered some few of his Friends. In Church Matters he has followed an old
Manuscript, compiled Anno. 1220, There is a Transcript of it above 300 Years
old in the Cotton Library.
wherein is discovered what Churches were Rectories, what, Appropriate: If
Rectories, who was Patron, who Incumbent; what Chapels belonged to them, and
how to be served: If Appropriate, to what Monastery, or religious House
belonging, etc. Has further added from the Records in the Office of the
Auditors of the Impressed, their Value in the King's Books; and shown, who are
the present Patrons of every Church. The Roman Antiquities and others he has
briefly touched as far as came to his Knowledge. And lastly, has added all the
Arms in all the Church-Windows in the Shire; and the Inscriptions of the Tombs;
which he took by his own View and Travel; for that they may correct many Errors
in Armory or Genealogy, and end many Differences in Law; the Evidence of a
Church-Window having been accepted by a Jury at an Assizes. Has also added the
Names to most of the Coats; not following herein the conceited Blazonry of
Gerard Leigh, or others of later Times; but used such Terms as himself was best
acquainted with, and might best serve for any one's understanding. Thus we have
the whole Scope of his Intention, or a general View of the Topics, not only
treated of in this Book, but to be treated of in Books of the like nature.

After the Preface, whereof we have here given the Substance, we have Saxton's
Map, therein spoken of, graved by William Kip. Then we enter upon a general
Description of the County, wherein it is observed, from Mercator, to be in the
Latitude of 54 Degrees, and in the Longitude of 20. It borders, on the East,
upon Lincolnshire and Rutlandsire; on the West, upon Warwickshire, separated
from it by the great Road called Watling-Street; on the North upon
Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire; and on the South, upon Northamptonshire. It
extends in length from the farthest North Angle in the Vale of Belvoir to the
uttermost South Point beyond Lutterworth, to about 33 Miles, and in breadth,
from East to West, at the broadest Place, about 27 Miles. Next we come to the
site and nature of the Soil; the Names of ancient Buildings, as Castles,
Abbeys, etc. Market Towns, Rivers, Parks, Forests, Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government; and hence we are led to a particular Description of the County,
descoursing of all the Towns, etc. in an Alphabetical Order. In the Entrance of
the Work we have some occasional Remarks upon the Antiquity of bearing Arms in
England, the meaning of Knights-Service, old Tenures and Escuage. In the Manor
of Allexton, we have a little Pedigree of the ancient Lords thereof, the
Bakepuiz, with an Account how it came to Sir Walter Blunt and his Widow by
purchase. In the Manor of Appleby, we have Accounts of the monumental
Effigies; also a Pedigree of the Family bearing that Name, and their Arms
represented in a wooden Figure at the Side thereof. At Ashby-de-la-Zouch, we
have an Account of the Descent of the Zouches, a Character of William Lord
Hastings, beheaded, 1483, with an Account of the Coats of Arms in the Church
relating to this Family; also some Figures of the Arms, and a Pedigree of the
Zouches and Hastings. At Ashby Folvile, we have the Arms and Pedigrees of the
Woodfords and the Folviles, and at Ashby Magna some Account of the Essebys. At
Atterton, we have the Lord Wake's Pedigree, and at Bardon Park we have a
Description of Bardon Hill, with a little Digression upon the natural Cause of
Hills and burning Hills, and the Authors who have writ upon that Subject, as G.
Agricola, Leand. Alberto, Conrade Gesner, etc. In the Manor of Barrow, we have
the Arms and Pedigree of the ancient Families of Somery and Erdington. In
Barwell, we have an Explanation of Tenants in ancient Demesne, and their
Privileges. In Beaumannor, we have the Arms and Pedigree of the Lord Viscounts
Beaumont, down to William Viscount Beaumont, Lord Bardolf. In Belgrave, he
takes occasion to show us how ungratefully John Bale has treated Leland's Book,
de Scriptoribus illustribus Angliae. Also observes, that through the Liberty
granted to Leland of using what Manuscripts he pleased in any of the religious
Houses, he collected many Things together in diverse Books, "four Volumes of
which I have in my Custody, says he, and must truly acknowledge them to have
afforded me many worthy Notes of Antiquity." Here we have also the Arms and
Pedigree of the Belgraves. In Bittesby, we have an Account of the Marriage and
Death of the renowned John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and thereby the Revolt of
the Duchy of Aquitaine in France, with our Losses therein. In Bosworth, a
short Notice of the Battle of Bosworth-Field, and Slaughter of King Richard
III. with the Antiquity of the Family of the Harecourts. In Bradgate, we have
an Account of the Body of Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset, removed out of his
Vault at Astley in Warwickshire in 1608, being 78 Years after he was buried,
and it was uncorrupted, in every respect, like an ordinary Corpse newly to be
interred: With a short Digression upon the Care all Ages have had to the
preserving of dead Bodies; and a Reference to those Authors who have written on
the Manners and Fashions of Funerals. In Brokesby, we have the Praise, Arms and
Pedigree of George Villiers Marquess of Buckingham. In Brougton Astley, we
have the Arms and Genealogy of the Astleys. In Burton-Lazers and the large
Hospital for leprous People formerly there, we have a short Digression upon the
Leprosy. In Burton-Noverey, we have the Arms and Pedigree of Meignell, in whom
that Manor continued for three Descents, then came to the Fitzherberts. In
Carleton-Curley, it is observed the Natives have a harsh and rattling kind of
Speech, uttering their Words with much Difficulty, and wharling in the Throat,
and cannot well pronounce the Letter R. which whether it be by some peculiar
Property of the Water, Soil or Air, or some secret Effect or Operation of
Nature, our Author thinks he cannot well discover; yet he hereupon takes
occasion to digress upon some remarkable Effects of those Elements. In
Charnwood, we have a particular Discourse of the Forest; the Deed for
disafforresting it; the Distinctions between a Chase and a Forest, and the
Forest Laws referred to, in Mr. Manwood's learned Treatise thereof. In
Cleybroke, we have an Account of some Roman Antiquities and Coins found
hereabouts, which might give some light of the ancient Roman City which once
stood near that Town: Two of these Coins we have here described, one of the
Emperor Caligula, the other of Constantine the Great; and then, as his Custom
is, a Reference to those Authors who have written of these Coins or given
Sculptures of them; And also to those who have written of Roman Inscriptions.
In Cotes, the Inheritance of Sir Henry Skipwith, we have a Commendation of his
Father Sir William Skipwith, among other Proofs of his Learning and Ingenuity,
for his acute Epigrams, Mottos, Devices, but chiefly his apt and fit Impresses;
with the Recital of several Authors Names who have written on this Subject. In
Croxton, a short Account of the Death of King John, by reason of the Abbot of
the Monastery there, embalming his dead Body. In Dadlington, we see the
Conveyance of that Manor to our Author. In Dalby Magna, the Descent of the
Lords de Segrave. In Dalby on the Woulds, a little History of that famous
religious Order, the Knights Hospitaliers of St. John of Jerusalem, which began
about 1124, after the recovery of Jerusalem, by Godfrey of Bullen. Here, in the
Account of the Conveyance of this Manor from Sir Andrew Noel, our Author takes
occasion to speak of his Brother Mr. Henry Noel Gentleman-Pensioner to Queen
Elizabeth, who, though he had nothing but his Pension certain, equaled the
Barons in Pomp and Expense; and of whom the said Queen made this Aenigmatical
Distich. The Word of Denial, and Letter of Fifty,
Is the Gentleman's Name, who will never be thrifty.


In Drayton, we have an Encomium upon the Poet of that Name; his Progenitors
receiving their Denomination from hence: Also a Pedigree of the Purefoys, Lord
of that Manor. In Edmundthorp, some Remarks on the painting of Arms and
Pictures in Church-Windows, and Reflections upon demolishing them; the Lady
Wiche's Action against the Parson of St. Margaret's, Lothbury, for taking down
the Trophies of her Husband, Sir Hugh Wiche Mayor of London; with the Reason
why a Sword is hung up in the Church at the Funeral of a Knight. In Elmesthorp,
the Pedigree of the Charnels and Trussels. In Evington, some Account of the
Cavendishes, particularly the most renowned Thomas of that Name, who sailed
round the World, and whose Course, as also Sir Francis Drake's, with all their
memorable Passages and Accidents, is exactly set down in a Globe-Map, by that
excellent Graver and cunning Mathematician Jodocus Hondius of Amsterdam. In
Foston, a History of the Family of the Faunts, particularly Arthur Faunt the
Jesuit, who died 1551; also their Pedigree. In Folesworth, that of the Wolfes.
In Gerendon, the Antiquity of the Cistercian Order. In Gracedieu, we have the
Arms and Pedigree of the Beaumonts; and in Groby the like of the Greys of
Groby. In Higham, an Account of certain old Coins and other Treasure found Anno
1607, many whereof were little silver Pieces of King Henry III. each weighing
three pence, representing on one Side the King's Head with a Scepter in his
Hand, circumscribed Henricus Rex; on the Reverse, a Cross Molin between
Roundels, with this Circumscription, Fulke on Luid: Also some Gold Rings, and a
Silver one with a ruddy Stone in it, whereon was engraved Arabic Characters,
importing a kind of Charm or Deprecation from Mischief; with our Author's
Reasons why they should be some Jew's Treasure. In Houghton, we have an
Explanation of the Words Villein and Villenage, with Breton's Opinion of their
Antiquity, and our Author's Observation that many great Houses now are, whose
lineal Ancestors were Villeins; who by their Surnames might easily be
challenged, but that he lists not to lay any Imputation. In Humberston, we have
the Arms and Pedigree of the Kebles; and in Huncote of the Burdets and the
Staffords. In Keythorp and Kettleby, some Account of the Digbys. In
Kibworth-Beauchamp, an Explanation of Tenants by Grand-Sergeanty, and Tenants
by Escuage. In Kirby, the Arms and Pedigree of the Herles; in Kirkby-Malory,
those of the Malorys. In Knighton, it is observed to be the Birthplace of the
learned Historian of that Name, whose Work extends from William the Conqueror
to King Richard II. in whose Reign he died. In Knipton, we have an Explanation
of Tenants by the Curtesy of England. In Langley, some Observations of the
Virgin Chastity affirmed to be visible in the shining Brightness of some holy
Women's Faces. In West Langton, a short Account of Walter de Langton Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield, a great Benefactor in his Time, who died 1321. In
Leicester, he shows that it was called Caer-Lerion, from it is standing on the
River of Legra or Leir now called Sore according to Leland, and not from the
fabulous King Leir, whom Geoffrey of Monmouth would have the Builder, and also
Founder of the Temple of Janus which was here; it being well known that Janus
was neither adored nor thought of by any but the Romans, and this King Leir
died at least 300 Years before Rome was built; which, with many other such
Contradictions, will easily convince this forged History of Brute, and of his
Progeny. Then follows an Account of some Roman Antiquities found in this City,
when it was made first an Episcopal See, and when united to Lincoln. A short
View of the ancient State of this City; the Foundation of a College there, and
the Abbey, and of some famous Men who were Abbots thereof, as Gilbert Foliot He
is not reckoned in the Catalogue of Abbots in Bibl. Cotton. Vitell. F. 17. Fol.
38. but he was Abbot of Gloucester. Vide Annal. Winton. et Annul. Wigorn. in
Anglia Sacra.
Bishop of London, who died 1187; also Henry de Knighton Nor is he reckoned
among them, in that Catalogue in the Cotton Library.
, before mentioned, and Philip Ripington a great Defender of Wickliffe; others
who were Archdeacons of Leicester, as Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln 1235,
who wrote near 200 Books, and translated out of Greek in 1242 the Testament of
the twelve Patriarchs, which, as Nich. Trivet, and John Abbot of Peterborough
say, was long withheld from the Christians by the Malice of the Jews: He died
at Bugden 1253, and had a marble Tomb with his Image in Brass on it. See more
of him in Leland, Bale and Godwin. Further, also, of some eminent Persons born
here, and some who also died here, as Cardinal Wolsey. Matthew Paris his Story
of the religious Maid, who died here in 1225, after having been shut up seven
Years and tasted no kind of Sustenance but the Sacrament of Bread and Wine upon
the Sabbath Days; refuted by John Wier in his Book de Commentitiis Jejuniis.
Also of some ancient Buildings here; the Market and Fair; Patronage of the
Churches, Arms in the Windows, Valuations of the Livings; with the Arms and
Pedigrees of the Earls of Leicester from Earl Leofric, Anno. 716, down to
Robert Sidney Viscount Lisle, Son of Sir Henry Sidney; who was created Earl of
Leicester by King James I. Of Lindley, we have, as might be expected, a
particular Account, where it appears, how a third Part of that Lordship
descended to one of our Author's Ancestors, by marriage with the Daughter and
Coheir of John Herdwik, Guide to King Henry VII. at Bosworth-Field, and by that
means to our Author himself, who assures us it has been observed in this
Lordship, that thereon was never seen Adder, Snake, or Lizard, though in all the
bordering Confines they have been found very often. And here follow the Arms
and Pedigrees of the Herdwiks and of the Burtons. In Loughborough, we have some
Account of the Family of the Hastings, to one of whom this Manor was given;
another, who was Edward Lord Hastings, Chamberlain to Queen Mary, our Author
observes to have been of a Disposition somewhat melancholy, and was much
delighted with Chesse Play, upon which Game our Author makes some short
historical Digressions, ending with a Note of those Authors who have written
thereupon; with other Games which have been invented in imitation thereof,
among which he mentions Metromachia or Ludus Geometricus, made by Dr. Fulk of
Cambridge, and printed in London 1566. In Lubbenham, we have some Remarks upon
the Appropriations of Churches, and how they must be made. In Lubbestorpe, the
Arms and Pedigree of the Zouches. In Lutterworth, a short Account of John
Wickliffe, who wrote above 200 Treatises, many of them against the Pope's
Authority, and Abuses in the Church: Most of them were burnt in Bohemia, by
Subincus Archbishop of Prague, as Aeneas Sylvius writes; and for which, the
Author was put to great Trouble in his Lifetime, though much favored by King
Edward III. and his Son John of Gaunt. He died 1384, and Dr. Thomas Gascoigne
has written some Particulars of the Manner of his Death, preserved by Leland in
his Collectanea. Forty one Years after his Death, his Corpse, after
Excommunication by Archbishop Arundell, was by the Command of Pope Martin V.
etc. burnt by Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincoln. In Misterton, we have an
Account of Sir John Poultney, four times Lord Mayor of London, and a great
Benefactor, witness the Church of St. Laurence Poultney, Allhallowes, etc. He
died 1349, and we have his Arms and Pedigree here drawn down, to our Author's
time. In Muston, we have the Arms and Pedigree of the Charnels and the
Binghams. In Newbould-Verdon, the Arms and Pedigree of the Lord Verdons. In
Newton-Burdet, we have a short Account of the Conquest made over the King of
Jerusalem and all the Holy Land in 1187, by Saladine, upon Occasion of Sir W.
Burdet's spending several Years in those Wars. Here is also mentioned, among
others of this Family, that Thomas Burdet, who, upon hearing that King Edward
the IV had killed a favorite white Buck in his Park, at Arrow in Warwickshire,
having wished the Buck's Head and Horns in his Belly, who moved the King to
kill it, was accused of Treason and beheaded, 1477; but the true Cause was his
being a Friend and Counselor to George Duke of Clarence, his Brother, between
whom there had been great Enmity. And here follow the Arms and Genealogy of the
Burdets, Camviles, Marmions, and Bruyns. In Normanton Turvile, the Arms and
Pedigree of the Turviles. In Norton, or Hog's-Norton, we have a curious old
Deed of the Grant of that Town, Anno 951, by King Eldred a Saxon, to his
Servant Elfeth. In Nouseley, among other Church Monuments those of the
Haselrigs, with their Arms and Pedigree. In Orton, there is a Contest decided
in Law about the Presentment made to this Vicarage. In Coal-Orton, so called of
the Coal-Mines which are there, we have an Observation that these Mines burnt
for many Years together unquenchably in the Reign of King Henry VIII, as in
Staffordshire they did at this time of our Author's writing; Whence we have a
Digression upon the subterraneous Fires in Italy, Sicily, Mount Heklia, Mons
Cruris, Terra del Fuego, etc. Here we have the Arms and Genealogy of the
Beaumonts, and in Osbaston of the Wichards, Suttons and Blunts. In Pekleton,
upon a certain Occasion of the vexatious Differences which happened between the
Issue of a first and second Wife, we have some Reflections on the second
Marriages of old Men: Here also we have the Arms and Pedigree of the ancient
Family of the Mutons, and of the Vincents. In Prestwould, the Arms and Pedigree
of the Neals and the Ashbys. In Querndon, of the Farnhams. In Radclive, of the
Cuileys. In Raunston, upon observing this Manor, tho'encompassed with
Leicestershire, is part in the County of Derby, we have some Conjectures upon
such Distinctions and other Divisions of the Land, particularly the Antiquity
of dividing it into Shires in the Britons time, about the time of King Arthur;
and that King Alfred was a Reformer of that Division. In Rodely, some Account
of the Order of the Knights Templars, which began 1113; of their Seat and
Church in the Temple; their Suppression in 1313; and that the Inner Temple is
the Mother or most ancient of all the other Houses of Court; into which Society
our Author was admitted 1593. Here, upon mentioning one Parker a famous
Farrier, we have a Digression upon this Science (relating to Horses) so
necessary in England, as those useful and willing Creatures are more abused
here than in any other Country in the World: Together with a Recital or
Reference to the most eminent Authors who have written upon this Subject. In
Sapcot, we are informed what the Qualification or Income of the ancient Barony
was, and of how much yearly value the Knights Fee consisted; also how those
Baronies were held. And here we have the Arms and Pedigree of the Bassets; as
in Shepey Magna, those of the Shepeys, and in Shepey Parva those of the
Odingsels: Here also we have an Account of one John Poultney, who used to walk
and do many other Actions in his Sleep; but was afterward frozen to death in
Sir Hugh Willoughby's Expedition. Our Author having touched upon the Cause of
this Distemper refers to a German Doctor, who has written of the Nature,
Causes, etc. of those who walk in their Sleep. In Skiffington, some Reflections
upon Jealousy; on occasion of a Knight of that Name, who was infected
therewith. In Sproxton, Reflections upon leaving Estates to younger Brothers;
allowing they should be provided for, but without Prejudice to the Dignity of
the House and Injury of the Heirs. In Staunton Herold, we have the Arms and
Pedigree of the ancient Families of those Names. In Stoke, the Steeple being
shaken down by the general Earthquake in 1580, we have here a short Digression
upon Earthquakes, and the three Sorts of them distinguished; with a Reference,
as our Author's Manner is, to some Writers on that Subject. In Stockerston, we
have an Account of a fictitious Case of Perpetuities argued, and the Judgment
thereupon; also the Arms and Pedigrees of the Boiviles and Southills. In
Swannington, on occasion of mentioning Sir John Talbot, who was of an
extraordinary great Stature, and whose Tomb is to be seen at Whitwick near
adjoining, we have a short Digression upon Giants. In Swimford, the Arms and
Pedigrees of the Malorys and the Vincents; and in Temple of the Temples. In
Thurcaston, the Arms and Pedigree of the Falconers and Champaines. In Tilton,
we have the Case of Sir Everard Digby, who conveyed this Manor with other
Parts of his Estate to his Son and Heir in Tail, before he was concerned in the
Gunpowder Treason, and the Question resolved, which after his Execution,
thereupon arose, whether the Wardship of the Heir, or the third Part of the
said Estate should be in the King? as recited from the Lord Coke's Reports. In
Twicrosse, the Arms and Pedigree of the Fitzherberts; and in Upton, a short
Account of Sir Anthony Fitzherbert the Judge. In Wanlip, the Arms and Pedigree
of Walleis or Welsh; and in Wellesburgh, those of the Family of that Name. In
Wikin, a short Account of Wightman the Heretic, who was burnt at Litchfield:
Also of other Herericks, as Hacket, etc. In Willoughby, an Account of Richard,
Son of Sir Richard de Angervile; who being born at Bury in Suffolk, and taking
upon him religious Orders forsook his paternal Name, and was called de Bury,
from the Place of his Nativity, as appears in Jo. Trithem. de Script Eccles.
and Bishop Godwin; but is yet called de Angervile by Rous, Leland, and Bale:
With some Observations upon this Custom; and further, of this Richard, who was
Bishop of Durham, Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer of England, but most
famous for his Love of Books, having more in his own Library than all the
Bishops in England, which afterward he gave to the Library he founded at
Oxford; but in the space of an Age it was pillaged of those excellent
Manuscripts, till Duke Humphrey repaired it again: But in the hot zealous Times
of the Reformation this Treasure was also embezled, till of late, through the
Bounty of Sir T. Bodley and his Friends the public Library there was, at the
Cost of many thousand Pounds, restored equal to the best in Europe. In
Wimondham, we have the Arms and Pedigree of the Berkeleys. In Woodhouse, we
have an Account of the fair and stately Chapel, built of Ashler Stone 1338, by
Henry Lord Beaumont, and repaired by Robert Farnham, the 28th of Henry VI. as
appears by the Deed of Covenant between him and a certain Free-Mason, for new
building the Steeple and repairing the Church: Also a Blazon of all the Coats
and Matches in the Windows there, as is performed for those of the rest of the
Churches. After the short mention of a Village or two more, we come to an end
of this alphabetical Account of what is most observable in the Antiquities of
Leicestershire, which our Author winds up with a modest Conclusion. To which is
joined, one Table, showing, to what Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, or other
religious Houses the Churches in this County were appropriated: Another, of the
Names and Arms of those Knights of the Garter which were of this County, either
by Title, Birth, or Dwelling: Another, of the Names and Arms of the Knights in
this County who served King Edward I. in his Wars; and another, of all those
Persons to whom the Counties of Leicester and Warwick were committed, and were
Sheriffs thereof: And lastly, we have a short Table or Index of the principal
Matters in the whole Work.

Thus we end our brief Recapitulation of this Book; not without some wonder to
observe, that after near sixscore Years since this Author thus broke through
those Clouds of Darkness and Oblivion, wherewith the Luster of this County had
been overshadowed, so few others should see the way to imitate his Example, by
their further Illustrations thereof: Insomuch that we know not of any one
County in England, which in that compass of Years has had fewer Publications
bestowed upon it relating either to its Antiquities, or natural History. Nay
even our Author's own improved Copy of this Work, very much enriched with
Roman, Saxon, and other Antiquities, has, to this day, been denied the Light.
Wherefore we thought it a Debt due to his Merit, as well as to the Subject he
has celebrated, to take the Notice we have here done of them, in order to
excite those whom it may concern, to oblige the Public either with that
enlarged Work of this Author, with further Continuations thereof, or any other
such Memorials of the Place and its Products, as may render them, with what
Justice they deserve, no less considerable than other Counties, and their
Productions appear in this Island.

XLVI. A RESTITUTION of decayed INTELLIGENCE in ANTIQUITIES, concerning the
most noble and renowned ENGLISH NATION. By the Study and Labor of R. V.
London. Quarto, 1634. Pages 338, besides Table, etc.
THIS approved Book is well known to be the Work of Richard Verstegan, a
secular Priest, who has printed his Name at the End of his Dedication thereof
to King James; for this is at least the third Edition, published here at London
soon after the Author's Death; the first, which he printed himself at Antwerp,
being in the Year 1605. The Author was skilful in Drawing and Limning; and has
embellished his Work with several Draughts, which are neatly graved, and have
not a little advantaged the Sale of the Work; insomuch that there have since
been two Editions more of it in Octavo, but the Impression of the Cuts are
therein worn faint, and not so valuable as those in the first Quarto Editions.

The Author, in his Epistle to the noble and renowned English Nation, among
other Motives for his Undertaking, intimates, his finding our English Writers
to stand so much upon the Descent of the Britains to be one; as if it concerned
the Original and Honor of the English Nation; whereby and through the want of
due Distinction between the two Nations (an Oversight which the Britains in
their Account of us will never commit) our true Original and honorable
Antiquity lie involved and obscured, etc. Thus John Boden would make us
believe, it is in Caesar's Commentaries to be found, That the Englishmen of his
Time had but one Woman to serve for ten or twelve Men: Whereas Caesar never
heard the Name of Englishmen, who came not into Britain near 500 Years after
his Death. And thus, not to let slip the Opportunity of a Lash at Mr. Fox, he
is censured for beginning his Acts and Monuments, with saying that Constantine
was the Son of Helen an English Woman: Thus another entitles his Dictionary,
which is in Latin and English, Thesaurus Linguae Romanae et Britannicae; which
would have been proper enough had it been written in Latin and Welsh. Having
reflected on the Confusion which such Indistinctions create, he shows that
Englishmen cannot but from the Saxons derive their Descent and Offspring, and
can lack no Honor in descending from such an honorable Race, as this Work
will specify; which our Author was induced to publish for his love to this
noble Nation, most dear to him, because it was his Birthplace, though his
Grandfather (who was driven into England by Wars and loss of Friends) was born
in Geldres. Toward the Conclusion of this Epistle he informs us that if in his
Etymologies he differs from some Germans, it is where he has found them mistaken
by having looked little further than the Language used among themselves, even
like those who have also written in the Netherlands; whereas the understanding
of the Teutonic used by our Saxon Ancestors, as also that of the ancient
Franks, is most requisite; and thereunto the High, Low, and Easterland
Teutonic, with respect also to the dependant Danish and Swedish, besides our
modern vulgar English: "In all which, says he, I have bestowed some time of
Travel; for that hereby, and not otherwise, the true Reason and Concurrence of
Things, properly appertaining to the true Original Teutonic Tongue, is best to
be found out, and made manifest."

After several Copies of Latin Verses by Richard White of Basinstoke, Richard
Stanihurst and others, and some English Verses by Tho. Shelton, Fr. Tregian, A.
Greneway, Ralph Badclyfe, and the Author himself, we enter upon the Work, which
is divided into Ten Chapters. The First is, Of the Original of Nations, and
consequently that from which Englishmen are descended. In this Chapter the
Author discourses, (after showing that the English are of German Descent,
heretofore called Saxons, and still in the British, as also the ancient Irish
Tongue, so called) of the Original of Nations from the Division, after the
Deluge, at the Tower of Babel; and upon the numerous Increase of Posterity,
illustrated in the Example of the Issue of one Person near our Author's Time,
and that was a Woman named Yoland Baillie, who died at Paris 1514, aged 88
Years, and in the eighth Year of her Widowhood; by whose Epitaph in the
Churchyard of St. Innocents, it appears there were 295 Children issued from
herself while she lived. Then we have an Account how the People after the Flood
inhabited the Mountains; how Nimrod took upon him the first Government.
Particulars of the Tower of Babel, as to its width and height, from Josephus
and Isidore. Of the Confusion of Tongues; whence the Original of Nations;
whence the Hebrews were so called. The Posterity of Sem, Cham and Japhet. That
the People were not mixed by the Confusion of Tongues. Concerning the
Inhabitants of the West Indies, we are referred to Augustine Carate's History
of those Parts. How the Dutch are descended from Tuisco. Whence some Days of
the Week are derived. That the Germans were the first and only Possessors of
their Country. Touching their Name of Germans and Almans; with their diverse
other Names. A Remark upon Leland's asserting that the Cimbri and Sicambri
received their Names of Cambria the Daughter of Belinus King of Britain.
Explanations of the Names of the Freislanders, Swevians, Goths, Danes, Normans,
Vandals, Longobards, and Saxons, who were so called from the crooked Weapons
they wore like a Scithe, still called in the Netherlands a Saisen. The watch
Word Nem eowr Seaxes. Examples of other People receiving their Denomination
from their Weapons, as the Scythians from Shooting, the Galliglasses from their
Poleaxes, as others anciently from the Clothes and Gowns they wore. And these
are the chief Contents of this Chapter.

The second Chapter shows how the ancient noble Saxons, the true Ancestors of
Englishmen, were originally a People of Germany. And here he asserts, That all
our Writers agree the Englishmen came from Germany. That all had their
Beginning in Asia. That the Affinity between the German and Persian Language,
affirmed by some, extended not to half a score Words, as our Author was
informed from the best Interpreters in the Train of Sir Ant. Sherley and Cuchin
Ollibeag, Ambassadors from Persia, in Italy, Anno 1601. That the Gauls and
Germans were by the Grecians called Celtae, from their frequent Riding. A
Specimen of the Persian Tongue, into which the Beginning of the first Chapter
of Genesis is here translated. A fabulous Narration of Occa Scarlensis,
concerning Friso, Saxo, and Bruno, with a Confutation thereof. That Brunswick
took its Name of Bruno Son of Ludolph Duke of Saxony, who first began to build
it in the Year 861. This is followed with Arguments to prove that our Saxon
Ancestors were originally of Germany, and did not come from other Parts
thither; with the Concurrence of Lipsius. Observations that no Nations call one
another, as each calls himself; and that the Germans who were the continued
Possessors of Germany, were never subdued; also unmixed both in People and
Language. That the French issued from the Franks in Germany; to whom the
ancient Gauls gave place, much about the Time that the Saxons came thence into
Britain. That the Longobards or People of Lombardy, and also the Normans issued
from the Germans; as the Nobility of Spain from the Goths. Then we have many
ancient Testimonies of the Worthiness of the Germans; with a Description of the
Country, as it was anciently; also the Virtues and Manners of the People:
Arguments and Examples to prove, That it is not the Climate or Temperature of
the Air makes the People of any Country more or less learned or ingenious. A
Recital of sundry rare Inventions, in Arts and Sciences, which had their
Original in Germany. Reflections upon their national Vice of Drunkenness.

The third Chapter describes the ancient Manner of living among our Saxon
Ancestors: The Idols they adored while they were Pagans; and how they grew to
be of greatest Name and Habitation of any other People in Germany. Here our
said Ancestors are very particularly described, as to their personal Appearance
in Attire, Arms, Exercise, the Orders or Degrees of People among them, their
Custom of Gavel-kind, Give all kind, or give each Child his Share; the nursing
of Children by their own Mothers; their counting of Time by the Nights, as
Se'nnights and Fortnights, and the Ages of their own Lives by Winters. Their
Computatation of Time they notched upon square Sticks, called Almon-aght, or
All moon heed, whence our Almanac. Here we have the old Saxon Names of the
twelve Months in the Year, with their Explanations; which we now call by Names
of French and Latin Derivation. Next of the ancient Government of Saxony; the
four sorts of Ordeal, or Trial of Right, by Combat, hot Iron, hot Water, and
cold Water: But, not thought fit to be continued among Christians, they were
abolished by Pope Stephen. Here we enter upon the Idolatry of the Pagan Saxons,
and their superstitious Customs for presaging of Events. More particularly of
their Idols for the seven Days in the Week, which we have here neatly
represented in Sculpture; as first, the Idol of the Sun, whence comes the Name
of Sunday; next that of the Moon, whence Monday; next the Idol of Thysco,
whence Tuesday; next is their Idol Woden or God of Battle, whence Wednesday;
the next is their Majestic Thor, sitting under a Throne with a Circle of Stars
behind his Head, whence Thursday; the next is Friga, an Idol that represented
both Sexes, with a Sword in one Hand and Bow in the other; was reputed the
Giver of Peace and Plenty, the Causer of Love and Friendship, and from the Day
of her Adoration we yet retain the Name of Friday. The last is the Idol of
Seater, represented standing on the sharp-finn'd back of a Perch, to signify,
the Saxons, for serying him, should pass without Harm in dangerous Places; also
holding a Wheel in his left Hand, to betoken their Unity and Concurrence in one
Course; and a Pail full of Water, Flowers and Fruits in the right Hand, to
denote that with kindly Rain he would nourish and dispose the Earth to such
Productions. After these, we have an Account of two other Saxon Idols, as that
named Ermensewl, or the Pillar of the Poor, which the Franks, with other
Germans, as well as the Saxons adored: And that also named Flynt, from the
Stone it stood on; besides three or four more, which are only named. And here
we have our Author's Reasons why the Romans mistook the German Idols to be
derived from their own, as Thor from Jupiter, Friga from Venus, and Seater from
Saturn: Also his Remarks on the horrible Excess of Idolatry their Votaries were
arrived to, in that Harold I. King of Norway sacrificed two of his Sons to his
Idols, that they might grant such a Tempest as would disperse and confound the
Fleet which Harold VI. King of Denmark was preparing to send against him.
Further, that in Britain none of their Idols were in greater Request than
Woden, as by several Places in Kent, Staffordshire, and Wiltshire may appear,
which retain their Appellations from him. But these Idols were all demolished
by Ethelbert, the first Christian English Saxon King, and others of those Kings
in their several Territories. Next we are informed how the Saxons extended
their Bounds in Germany beyond any other People there; and how they were
transported by Charles the Great into Transylvania and other Regions; which
introduces an incredible Story of a Transportation which happened in Saxony not
many Ages past. For there came into the Town of Hamel in Brunswick a Man, whom,
partly from his patched or motly-colour'd Coat, they called the Pied-piper, who
having agreed with them to rid their Town of Rats, wherewith it was much
annoyed; he with his Pipe drew all the said Vermin after him into the River
Weaser, where they were drowned. But the Townsmen then swerving from their
Agreement, the discontented Piper gave them another Tune through the Town again,
but it was a revengeful one, drawing all the Children therein, to the Number of
130, after him, till they came to a Hill, which opening on the side, let them
in, Piper and all, so closed up again, and they were never more seen or heard
of, to the great Lamentation of the Parents in that Town. In memory whereof, it
was ordained, that no musical Instrument should be sounded in the Street which
led to the Gate, through which they passed; that no Ostery should be there
held; and that in the dating of all public Writings, the Year from the going
forth of their Children, should be added to that of our Lord: Which they have
accordingly ever since continued, says our Author. And this great Wonder
happened the 22d of July, 1376.

Chapter the fourth, Of the Isle of Albion, afterward called Britain, and now
England, Scotland, and Wales: And how it showed to be Continent or firm Land
with Gallia or France, since Noah' s Flood. Here having shown the different
Opinions of the Derivation of the Word Albion from the Greek and Latin, and
from the Name of some chief Governor, he proceeds to display the like variety
of Conjectures touching the Name of Britain, from Sir T. Eliot, Humphrey Lhuyd,
and Becanus, not withholding his own Opinion that the Island had the Name of
Britain from Brute; however many fabulous Circumstances may have been by a few
obscure Authors heretofore added to this History, and so have made the whole to
be doubted of. Next he sets forth the imagined Descents from the Trojans; the
Cause of which fond Conceits possessing so many, he attributes to the want of
Learning in former Ages, their Druids themselves not having any Knowledge of
Letters. Our Author questions not only these Descents from the Trojans, but the
History of Troy itself; showing that Queen Dido never knew Aeneas, who was dead
a number of Years before she was born; and that Brute was more probably a
Gaulish Prince than a Trojan. So proceeds to show how this Island was anciently
firm Land with Gallia; naming several Authors of the same Opinion, among whom
are Sir Tho. More, John Twine, and Dr. Richard White; also producing many
Arguments and Examples to maintain such a Conjunction, and that there was an
Isthmus which joined our Island at Dover to Calais, about six Miles wide,
whereby the Island was some time Peninsular. Here we have several Instances of
the Intrusions and Demolitions which have been made by the Waters; how diverse
Steeples in the Netherlands do yet appear at Low Water of the Towns and
Villages that have been drowned. And that it is reasonable to think these flat
and level Countries have been Sea; the great Evenness thereof being so made by
the Waters wherewith they have been covered. This is proved by the Observations
here made of the Shells and Bones of Sea-Fishes found two Fathoms deep in these
Plains distant from the Sea; and we have here a Sculpture of some which our
Author had seen. As for the Fir-Trees found also buried in these Netherlands,
with the Roots commonly lying South-West; as the Soil is not by nature apt to
produce them, our Author thinks they might be driven hither in the time of the
Deluge. Anchors are also observed to have been found deep in the Earth, and the
Skeleton of a Sea-Elephant in these Parts; whence it is concluded, that as
these Parts of Flanders and Brabant are of Sea become Land, and cannot by any
Inundation become Sea again, it must be owing to the breaking of the German
Ocean through that Isthmus which joined Albion to Gallia. An Argument that this
Separation from the Continent was since the Flood, is urged from the great
Plenty of Wolves wherewith this Island was anciently infested, which no Man
would transport for the Goodness of the Breed out of the Continent into any
Island, no more than they will carry Foxes out of our Continent into the Isle
of Wight. They are therefore presumed to have passed over of themselves, and
grew most numerous till by King Edgar's Orders they were destroyed throughout
the Realm, before whose time two British Kings, Madan and Mempricius had been
killed by them.

Chapter the Fifth. Of the Arrival of the SAXONS out of Germany into BRITAIN,
and how they received the Christian Faith; possessed the best Part of the
Country, called it England, and leaving the Name of Saxons, came generally to
be called Englishmen. Here, after a little Note upon Brute's Entrance into
Albion, about 3000 Years after the Creation, and dividing Britain between his
three Sons, Locrine, who had England; Albanact, who had Scotland; and Camber,
who had Wales; we have a short Remark upon the Original of the Scots, and
another on the Picts, showing they were not so called from painting of their
Bodies, but from their being such notable Fighters. Next we learn that the
Britains were subject to the Roman Government from Julius Caesar to Valentinian
the Third, that is, almost 500 Years; till relinquished by them, they sought
Protection in the second Year of King Vortiger against the Scots and Picts of
the Saxons, who then Anno 447 arrived under Hingistus and Horsus in three great
Ships to the number of 9000, according to Pomarius: And here we have a
Sculpture representing their landing on the British Coast, with those who were
the first Englishmen in this Island; and particular Accounts we here have of
those two Leaders, as to their Birth, Arms, Names, Building and Settlement in
Kent. Also an Account of Old England or Anglia, whence they came, which was
situate near Sleswick, with the Signification of Angle, Engel, or England; and
that it was first caused to be so called by King Egbert: Also of the other
Saxons called Vites and Juites. The Signification of Wassail. The Creation of
Hingist King of Kent. The Arrival of a second Supply of Saxon Forces. The
Breach between the Britains and Saxons. The deposing of Vortiger, enthroning of
his Son Vortimer. The Slaughter of Horsus; and Return of Hingist into Saxony
for more Forces. Vortiger's Re-ascension of the Throne, and Alienation from the
Saxons. The bloody Banquet on May Day at Salisbury Plain, in which 300 of the
British Nobility, or more, were treacherously massacred by the Saxons under
Hingist, at the watch Word Nem eowr Seaxes, or take your Seaxes, which was
their Swords or crooked Daggers, whence they derived their Name. The Donation
of Kent, etc. to Hingist confirmed; and he reigned thirty four Years. After the
miserable Death of King Vortiger, we have a Series or short List of the British
Kings, and the Years of their Reign to the Death of Cadwalladar, whose Reign
ended 685, when began six Kingdoms more of the Saxons in Britain: So that in
all, with that of Kent they made an Heptarchy; and they are here distinguished.
Here also we have the Names of several Places in Britain mentioned, which were
changed by the Saxons, particularly of London, that it was not so called by the
Britains from Ludstown; Town being no British, but a Saxon Word: Besides then
Julius Caesar would have called it after that Name, but it was so called from
the famous metropolitan City of Lunden in Sconia, some time of greatest Traffic
in all the East Parts of Germany: Nor that Ludgate was so called from King Lud,
because Gate also is no British Word, but was called Leod-geat, the Gate of the
People or popular Passage, in respect of the greater Concourse through the same
than any other in those Days. York the Saxons called Euerwyc and Eberwyc, which
by vulgar Abbreviation came to be boric, uoric, and so York: Ever or Eber
signifying a wild Boar, and Wye, a Refuge, or Retreat; those Beasts heretofore
much infesting the Forest of Gautries within a Mile of the Town, insomuch that
there remains a Toll called Guid-Law, which is paid for Cattle at one of the
Gates of the City, which was granted for safe Conduct through the said Forest.
Here follow some Examples showing how Auxiliaries or Assistants to distressed
Inhabitants make themselves Sharers in their Country; so returning to Hingist,
and his Successors; we have a more particular Account of Ethelbert, who was the
fourth in Descent from him, and the first of our Saxon Monarchs who embraced
the Christian Faith; and of certain English Pagan Children, who being a few
Years before sold at Rome, were so admired by Gregory for their Beauty upon his
hearing they were called Angles, that he thought them not without reason so
called, for that, as he said in allusion thereto, they had Faces like Angels.
This St. Gregory who was himself coming to England, being afterward made Pope,
sent St. Augustine hither, who landed in the Isle of Tanet, where King
Ethelbert resorted to him. And here we have a Representation in Sculpture of
the said King on his Throne under a Tree, with the Manner of St. Austin's
bringing and preaching the Christian Faith, as described in Bid. An Account of
the said King's Conversion and others of the Saxon Kings; the Fruits thereof,
and their Manner of executing Deeds: With an Observation that 900 Years past
our Language, that of Saxony, and the Netherlands were all one. How our Country
came in general to be called England by King Egbert, about the Year 800; with
the Reason of our ancient Coin of Angels, both thought to be promoted by the
Allusion of Gregory aforesaid. The Names of Shires given by King Alfred. And
why the Name of Welshmen was given to the Britains because they were of the
ancient Gauls; with several Examples from other Countries to illustrate the
same.

The sixth Chapter. Of the Danes and the Normans, and their coming into
ENGLAND, and how the ENGLISH People have still retained the Body of the Realm.
These Danes are here observed to have renewed their ancient Wars against the
Saxons, now after they had been Britain about 350 Years, and about 156 Years
after they were become the sole Possessors of that Part now called England.
Here we have an Account of the Antiquity of these People, and the Cause of
their invading this Country. The Martyrdom of St. Edmund. The dividing of the
Kingdom between Canutus the second King of Denmark, and Edmund Ironside, and by
what Acquisitions that Dane became the greatest King for extent of Dominion
that England ever had. Of his Successors Harold and Hardicanute; which three
Danish Kings reigning about 27 Years, the Race of the Danes were expelled, and
the English Line recovered again under Edward the Confessor, who declared Edgar
Heir of the Crown; but Harold supplanting him, wore it till he lost both it and
his Life in Battle against William Duke of Normandy, near Hastings in Sussex,
in October 1066. Thus we enter upon the History of the Normans: From whence
they issued: That they were Robbers by Sea: Of their other Invasions, and their
Cruelty therein. Of Rollo's first coming into England, and of the seven Norman
Dukes from him down to that William. His Resolution upon the Enterprise of
England, with the three Causes thereof, though the Crown was never intended him,
by Edward the Confessor, as by Reasons also appears. The Particulars of this
Expedition from Megissier, Oudegerst, Crantzius, etc. His great Number of
Ships. The Place and Time of his landing, and his Victory. The Miseries of the
English Nobility and Gentry through the Insolence of the Normans; not undeserved
by such as rejected Prince Edgar the lawful Heir to the Crown. The Honor of
Kent. The English flying into Scotland, and their Tongue first spoken there.
The Union between the Crowns of Scotland and England. The Revival of the
English Credit; and the Death of the Conqueror after about 20 Years Reign; with
an Account of his Burial, and Epitaph in Latin and English. A Computation, that
of the 3 or 400 Gentlemen he brought into England with him, whose Names are in
the Roll of Battail-Abbey, scarce one quarter of those Names are now remaining;
whence it is concluded that Englishmen are not such a mixed Nation as some
suppose.

The seventh Chapter. Of the great Antiquity of our ancient English Tongue; and
of the Propriety, Worthiness and Amplitude thereof; with an Explanation of
sundry our most ancient English Words. Here it is asserted that the Ground of
our English is the Teutonic Tongue; and that this Language was undoubtedly
that, which, at the Confusion of Babel the Teutonic People, or those conducted
by Tuisco did speak: One Instance given, is our using the Word babble, or
babbling, from Babel, when one speaks confusedly or vain: Other Inferences from
our Language, being at first mostly Monosyllables. Here we have an Account of
Becanus his Opinion, That the Teutonic was the Language Adam spoke in Paradise,
with his Reasons from the Interpretation of the Words Adam, Eve, Cain, Abel,
Seth, Enoch, etc. Also of God, Devil, Heaven, Hell, Man, Woman, etc. Here we
have the Authorities of Toletanus and Lipsius for the vast Extent of this
ancient Language, and a Censure upon the Wantonness of borrowing Words from the
French or Latin in writing or speaking it. Instances of this Age being given
more to Variety than others. An Example of the Nearness of our Language to the
Dutch. How France and Spain came to speak broken Latin. Whence the Word Romance
or Romant is derived. Examples, showing the Old French and Old English were
much alike; from Du Haillan; Otfridus his Preface to the Gospels, translated
about 800 Years past; and Willeramus the Abbot, his Translation, into Old
French, of Canticum Canticorum. Of the Norman Mixture with our Tongue; and that
afterward Chaucer was a great Mingler of English with French; wherefore, though
our Author reverences him as an excellent Poet for his Time, he is not of their
Opinion who call him the first Illuminator of the English Tongue; and thinks he
might have the greater Affection to the French Language, because he was
descended of a French or rather Walloon Race. That since his Time, more Latin
and French have been admitted, than left out of our Tongue. From whence it is
inferred that our Language is discredited, by borrowing so much, even to the
making our selves unintelligible in our own Country, as that superfine Orator
did who declared, That "as he itinerated, he obviated a rural Person, and
interrogating him concerning the Transition of the Time, and the Demonstration
of the Passage, found him a mere Simplician:" Never dreaming 'twas himself who
made him so; and that if he had asked him in plain English, What it was
o'clock? And which was his way to the Place he wanted? he might have had a
satisfactory Answer. As such Examples are apt to raise Derision even among our
selves, much more may Strangers be inclined to be merry with us at them; since
they have naught else for the Loan of their Words; disdaining to borrow of our
Store, which we have rendered so obsolete and uncouth, by despising the Use of
it our selves. As an Example of this Neglect, our Author here gives an Alphabet
of our most ancient English Words with their Explanations in above thirty
Pages, and herewith concludes this Part.

The eighth Chapter consists of the Etymologies of the ancient Saxon Proper
Names of Men and Women. This begins with some general Rules to discern the
Saxon Proper Names; which leads us to the Alphabet of them, containing above
thirty Pages; and concludes with some Remarks upon the Wisdom of our said
Ancestors in the Choice and Significancy of them, according to the Custom of
the Hebrews, who so adapted, or had the like Propriety in their Proper Names.

The ninth Chapter shows how by the Surnames of the Families of England it may
be discerned from whence they take their Originals, whether from the ancient
English-Saxons, or from the Danes or Normans. Here, after observing how the
Saxons having given Names to Places in England, which Places afterward gave
Names to the Inhabitants, the Method is preferred, because our Surnames are
infinite, and it would be tedious to specify a Multitude of them at length, of
choosing out the most usual Terminations, each to serve for a kind of general
Rule, how to appropriate all such Names as do so end, or more clearly
distinguish thereby our ancient English Families; beginning with those ending
in all, proceeding to those ending in beke, berie, and so through the whole
Alphabet. After this we have another Alphabet of our ancient Surnames which are
of one Syllable, and sometimes serving for Terminations of other Surnames: Some
also of two Syllables, and not used to terminate other Surnames. At the end of
this we have a general Rule for the knowing of English Families, which is if
there be a k or a w in the Name, neither the Latin, nor any of the three
Languages depending thereon, using those Letters; which sometimes causes
Confusion in their writing of our Names: A notorious Example whereof we have in
our renowned Sir John Hawkwood, who in the Latin Epitaph upon his Monument at
Florence, is written Joannes Acutus; the h being left out as useless, the k and
w as unusual; and so, returned into English, they have made John Sharp of him.
Here follows an Observation upon such Surnames as have been supposed to take
their Original from the Danes: And lastly, the Surnames coming from the
Normans; the whole Chapter ending with a Remark upon the British or Welsh Names
which are thought to have been mixed with those of the Romans, the Britains
being under Subjection to these People about 500 Years. And hence concludes,
the honorable Family of Cecils, being issued from Wales, is originally
descended from the Romans.

The tenth and last Chapter treats Of our ancient English Titles of Honor,
Dignities, and Offices; and what they signify: Also the Signification of our
English Names of Disgrace or Contempt; beginning, in the first Part, with the
Name of King, and ending with Yeoman and Groom: And in the second Part,
beginning with Baud, and ending with Thief. And this, with Notice of the Table
or Index at the end, of the special Points in the Book, may give a sufficient
View or Intimation of what is comprehended in the whole Work.

We shall here take our leave of it, with recommending, whenever it arrives at
another Impression, those Animadversions to be added or subjoined in their
proper Places, which have been since occasionally made on some Mistakes in it,
by some learned Searchers into our Antiquities: As those made by Mr. Sheringham
on his Fancy of the Vitae, being the ancient Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight;
on the Saxons being in Germany before they came into the more northern
Countries; and on Tuisco's coming from Babel, and giving the Name to Tuesday:
But more especially should be admitted, the Corrections of the learned Mr.
Somner, he having left large marginal Notes upon Verstegan's whole Book, as we
are informed by Bishop Kennet, the late accurate Author of his Life.

XLVII. The FOUNDATION of the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD, with a Catalogue of the
principal Founders and special Benefactors of all the Colleges, and total
Number of Students, Magistrates, and Officers therein, etc. Quarto, 1651. Pages
17.
THE accurate Author of this compendious Tract, having recited the various
Opinions which have been advanced about the time of the Foundation of this
University, which is justly reputed one of the most famous in the World, says,
it is chiefly concluded and agreed, that Alfred King of the West Saxons, about
the Year 872, was the principal Founder thereof. And though by Wars, both before
and since the Conquest, its ancient Glory was much eclipsed, yet so has it been
restored by succeeding Princes, and other Benefactors, as to become conspicuous
among the most famous Academies in Europe: And however, the Hostels, Halls,
Inns, Schools, and Religious Houses, whereof, since the Conquest it did
consist, but now defaced or converted into the present Foundations there, were
for their Number and that of the Students in them beyond those now extant; yet
true and solid Learning has latterly prevailed there more than ever, and at
this present there are eighteen goodly Colleges and Houses maintained with the
Lands and Revenues of their Founders, and seven Halls, where Students live at
their own Charge: Besides there are public Schools, and a Library, whose
Fabric by the Bounty of many royal, noble, and religious Persons was of late
Years finished, which no University in the World can in all Points parallel.
Here follows their Names, the Times when, and Persons by whom they were
founded, with an Account of their present State.

I. University College: Founded by King Alfred, Anno Dom. 872, or in the second
Year of his Reign, and the Students were maintained out of the King's Exchequer
till William the Conqueror took the same from them. William, Archdeacon of
Durham repaired and endowed it anew in 1217, and since by the Bounty of Dr.
Walter Skirlaw, Henry Earl of Northumberland, Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester,
Charles Greenwood, and others, the Society and Revenues of this College are
much increased, so that there is at present therein, a Master, eight Fellows,
one Bible Clerk, with Officers, Servants, and other Students to the number of
73.

II. Baliol College: Founded 1262, by John Baliol, born in the Bishopric of
Durham, and his Wife Dervorgilla, Parents of John Baliol, King of Scots; giving
thereto Lands and Revenues for maintaining a Master, ten Fellows, and eleven
Scholars, which is recorded to be the first endowed College in this University.
It has since, by the Liberality of some Benefactors here named, and diverse
others, been much enlarged and adorned. The number of Fellows are at the
Discretion of the Visitor, Master, and three senior Fellows, as the Revenues
thereof increase or decrease. There are at present one Master, eleven Fellows,
eleven Scholars for Exhibitioners, besides Officers and Servants, in all 138.

III. Merton College: Founded 1274, by Walter de Merton Bishop of Rochester,
Lord Chancellor of England, and Counselor to King Henry III. and Edward I.
Endowing it in effect with all the Lands, etc. which at present belong to it,
appointing a Warden and no definitive number of Fellows. Yet since, by the
Bounty of Dr. John Williot, Sir Thomas Bodley, Dr. Wilson, Sir Henry Savil
Provost of Eton, who founded two Mathematic Lectures in the University and took
care for the Enlargement and Enrichment of this College; besides some others;
it is since much improved. There are at present one Warden, twenty one Fellows,
fourteen Scholars, besides Officers, Servants, and other Students, in the whole
80.

IV. Exeter College: Founded 1316, by Walter Stapuldon, Bishop of Exeter, Lord
Treasurer, etc. under King Edward II. by the Name of Stapuldon Hall; endowing
it for the Maintenance of one Rector and twelve Fellows, from whom, one to be
yearly chosen for the Government of the rest. In 1404 Edmund Stafford Bishop of
Exeter gave two Fellowships, reformed the Statutes, and altered the Name.
Afterward Sir William Peter Secretary of State to King Henry VIII. etc. gave
eight Fellowships, and augmented the Wages of the Fellows on the ancient
Foundation; Sir John Periam gave 560 l. Sir John Acland 800 l. and Dr. George
Hakewell (all three Devonshire Men) built the new Chapel. There are at present
one Rector, twenty two Fellows, two Pensioners, and one Bible Clerk, besides
Officers, Servants, and other Students to the number of 230

V. Oriall College: Founded 1337, by King Edward II. who began the Foundation,
dedicating it to the Virgin Mary, and endowing it for the Maintenance of one
Provost and ten Fellows; afterward augmented by King Edward III. and several
other liberal Benefactors, so that there was now one Provost, eighteen Fellows,
twelve Pensioners or Exhibitioners, and one Bible Clerk, besides Officers,
Servants, and other Students, in the whole 106.

VI. Queen's College: Founded 1340, by Robert Eglesfield Chaplain to Queen
Philippa, Wife of King Edward III. endowing the same for the Maintenance of a
Provost and twelve Fellows, to increase with the Revenue; but by the Royal
Bounties of King Edward III. King Edward IV. Queen Elizabeth, and King Charles,
besides some Archbishops and Bishops, etc. here mentioned; there were at this
time one Provost, fourteen Fellows, seven Scholars, two Chaplains, and fourteen
Under-graduates; besides Officers, Servants, and other Scholars to the number
of 160.

VII. New College: Founded 1375, by William of Wickham alias Perot, who was
Secretary to King Edward III. Keeper of the Privy Seal, Bishop of Winchester,
Lord Treasurer and Lord Chancellor of England; endowing the same for
Maintenance of a Warden, seventy Fellows and Scholars, ten Chaplains, three
Clerks, one Organist, sixteen Choiristers, besides Officers and Servants. He
also founded a College at Winchester with one Warden, ten Fellows, two
Schoolmasters, and seventy Scholars, etc. all maintained at his Charge; out of
which School, the best Scholars are chosen, to supply the vacant Places of the
Fellows in the College at this University. Since by the Bounty of several
Benefactors this College is much enriched, and the number in it is 135.

VIII. Lincoln College: Founded 1420, by Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincoln,
which he endowed for the Maintenance of one Rector, six Fellows, and two
Chaplains; afterward augmented by other Benefactors, particularly Thomas Scot
alias Rotheram, Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England and of Cambridge, and
Secretary to four Kings; who when he was Bishop of Lincoln did much enlarge the
Buildings of this College, and augment the Fellowships, as did afterward
several others: And there were now one Rector, fifteen Fellows, two Chaplains,
four Scholars, besides other Students and Officers, amounting to 109.

IX. All Souls College: Founded 1437, by Dr. Henry Chichely Archbishop of
Canterbury, who procured King Henry VI. to give thereto four Priories Alians,
and endowed his Structure for maintaining one Warden and forty Fellows, who
were to be Divines and Civilians, appointing that the number of Fellows should
never be augmented nor impaired; and that all Vacancies should yearly be
supplied: He also gave Maintenance for Chaplains, Clarks, and Choiristers sans
number. Since then, Cardinal Pole, Sir W. Peter, King Edward, Queen Mary and
Elizabeth were Benefactors thereunto. And there were now one Warden, forty
Fellows, two Chaplains, three Clerks, six Choiristers, besides other Students
and Officers, in all 70.

X. Magdalene College: Founded 1459, by William Pattin, commonly called
Wainfleet from the Place of his Birth, having been Provost of Eton, Bishop of
Winchester, and Lord Chancellor of England. He endowed the same for the
Maintenance of one President, forty Fellows, thirty Demies or Scholars, four
Chaplains, eight Clerks, and sixteen Choiristers. It has since had several
Benefactors, here named: The Fellows and Scholars never have been nor may be
increased, but to the number mentioned are added a Schoolmaster, and Usher,
three Readers of Divinity, natural and moral Philosophy; besides other
Officers, etc. to the number of 220.

XI. Brazen-Nose College: Founded 1515, by William Smith Bishop of Lincoln,
Chancellor of Oxford, etc. but dying before it was finished, it was perfected
by Richard Sutton Esquire establishing a Principal and twelve Fellows, maintained
partly at the Founder's Charge and partly at their own: Since, by the
Liberality of other Benefactors much improved, so that there now were one
Principal, twenty Fellows, besides Scholars, Officers, and Servants, to the
number in all of 186.

XII. Corpus-Christi College: Founded 1516, by Richard Fox Doctor of Laws,
Bishop of Durham, Secretary of State, etc. who endowed it for the Maintenance
of a President, nineteen Fellows, twenty Scholars, two Chaplains, two Clerks,
and two Choiristers. To this College Hugh Oldham Bishop of Exeter contributed
so bountifully, that, next to the Founder, he is entitled the principal
Benefactor: Since much improved by others, so that the whole number is 70.

XIII. Christ-Church College: Founded 1546. It was begun by Cardinal Wolsey,
and designed to be called Cardinal's College; but he being himself demolished
before it was raised, King Henry VIII. added to his Intentions, and altered the
Name; establishing therein a Dean, eight Canons, three public Professors,
sixty Students, eight Chaplains, eight Singing-Men, an Organist, eight
Choiristers, twenty four Alms Men, and a Free School for Scholars; and the
Revenues were advanced in Queen Mary's time to the Maintenance of forty
Students more, making up an hundred. Since that time Otho Nicholson expended
800 l, in building and furnishing the Library: And there were now of all sorts
223.

XIV. Trinity College: Founded 1556, by Sir Thomas Pope, in the room of Durham
College, who endowed it for the Maintenance of a President, twelve Fellows, and
twelve Scholars. Since, by the Lady Elizabeth Powlet and others, much
augmented; so that the whole number is 133.

XV. St. John's College: Founded 1557. Archbishop Chichely laid the first
Foundation, and called it St. Bernard's College. After its Suppression by King
Henry VIII. it was in a Dream (as reported) showed to Sir Thomas White Merchant
Tailor of London, and thereupon by him new built to the Honor of St. John
Baptist. He endowed it with Maintenance for a President, fifty Fellows and
Scholars, a Chaplain, Clerk, six Choiristers, and four Singing-Men. After many
other bountiful Contributors, the whole number now maintained therein were 110.

XVI. Jesus College: Founded 1572, by Hugh Price Doctor of the Civil Law; or
the Foundation procured by him; Queen Elizabeth being styled Foundress thereof
in Mortmain: She confirmed 27 Junii Anno Regni sui 13, Collegium Jesu, infra
Civitatem et Universitatem Oxon. ex fundatione Reginae Elizabethae. Wherein she
established a Principal, eight Fellows, eight Scholars: And Dr. Price is only
styled a Benefactor, as building one Part thereof. Since much augmented by
others, and has at present a Principal, sixteen Fellows, sixteen Scholars,
besides others, 109.

XVII. Wadham College: Founded 1613, by Nicholas Wadham Esquire who in the seventh
Year of King James, dying, bequeathed 400 l. per Annum, and left in ready Money
6000 l. to purchase more Land for endowing this College; and gave Orders for
raising 5000 l. more upon his Lands for the building of it, leaving Directions
with Dorothy his Wife, Sister to John Lord Peter, for erecting the same; who so
effectually discharged his Will, that no College in Oxford, for the Quantity,
exceeds the same; expending between 11 and 12000 l. in building thereof; and
settled a perpetual Estate of her own and her Husband's of near 800 l. per
Annum in present. Afterward, Dr. Philip Bisse gave near 1850 Books for their
Library, valued at 1200 l. And there are here maintained a Warden, fifteen
Fellows, fifteen Scholars, two Chaplains, two Clerks, besides other Students,
Officers, etc. The whole number being 129.

XVIII. Pembroke College: Founded 1620, by Thomas Tisdale Esquire who bequeathed
5000 l. for the Maintenance of seven Fellows, and six Scholars; with which
Money, Lands were purchased to the Value of 250 l. per Annum for that Use. And
Richard Wightwick Rector of East Isley in Berkshire gave Lands to the Value of
100 l. per Annum, for three Fellows and four Scholars. And a Charter was
obtained for the Foundation by the Name of Pembroke College, with Mortmain of
700 l. per Annum; so called in respect to William Earl of Pembroke, then
Chancellor of the University. It consists of a Master, ten Fellows, ten
Scholars, with others, to the number of 169.

There are also seven Halls in this University, in which many Students live at
their own Charge, viz. Gloucester Hall, first built by John Lord Grifford, for
five Monks of Gloucester, afterward augmented for the Benedictine Monks;
lastly, converted to a House for Scholars by Sir Thomas White, ut prius, and
nine Students. Edmund Hall, was built by St. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury;
wherein is a Principal and ninety three Students. St. Alban's Hall, built by
the Abbot of St. Albans for the Monks; wherein is a Principal and ninety nine
Students. Heart Hall, was built by Walter Stapuldon Bishop of Exeter; wherein is
a Principal and a hundred and four Students. New Inn was in the Tenor of New
College, wherein is a Principal, and one hundred and forty Students. St. Mary
Hall, was founded by King Edward II. wherein is a Principal, with one hundred
Students. Lastly, Magdalen Hall, founded by William Wainfleet Bishop of Winton:
And herein is a Principal with two hundred and twenty Students.

The Total of Students of all Degrees in this University of OXFORD, who had
Names in every particular College, with the Magistrates and daily Officers
thereunto belonging (besides diverse young Scholars who were relieved therein,
and had no Names in any of the Colleges aforesaid) were, in the Year 1622,
2850. And at this time (of our Author's writing) 3247.

The FOUNDATION of the UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE; with a Catalogue of the
principal Founders, and special Benefactors of all the Colleges; and total
number of Students, Magistrates, and Officers therein, etc. Quarto, 1651. Pages
17.
THIS Tract, written by the same Hand with the former, as appears by the Manner
and Method of it, begins also with reciting the various Opinions about the
Foundation of this University; but says, the chiefest agree, That Sigebert King
of the East Angles was the principal Founder thereof, about the Years 630 and
636; who assigned diverse Hostels and Houses for the Students, giving them large
Privileges and Charters, whereof some are yet extant; and procuring also great
Immunities from Pope Honorius I. which Sergius I. confirmed. Since which time,
though by Wars, both before and since the Conquest, it was much defaced; yet
recovering itself, it is reputed one of the most famous Universities in the
World. Much Honor it has received by the many Sons and Nephews of Kings who
have been Earls thereof. And though the ancient Hostels and Houses were more
numerous, yet at present it consists of sixteen goodly Colleges and Halls,
erected and maintained with the Lands of their several Founders; some whereof
no University can in all Points parallel: And they are as follows.

I. St. Peter's College or House: Founded 1280, by Hugo de Basham, afterward
Bishop of Ely. He settled the Endowments two Years after for one Master and
fourteen Fellows, and died before all Things were finished. Other Bishops of
Ely afterward added to their Means; and in process of time arose many
Benefactors, who are several of them here named. This College being the first,
now standing in this University, has in it a Master, nineteen Fellows, twenty
nine Bible Clerks, eight poor Scholars, besides other Students, Officers, etc.
in all 106.

II. University House, now Clare Hall: Founded 1326, by Richard Badew,
Chancellor; wherein the Students lived the first sixteen Years at the
University Charge. Afterward, the first Foundation was resigned into the Hands
of Elizabeth Countess of Clare, sometime Wife of John de Burgo Earl of Ulster;
which Elizabeth had formerly bestowed Favors upon this College. She then,
under License of King Edward III. altered the Name to her own. By whose
Benefactions and those of others after her, there is a Master, eighteen
Fellows, thirty six Scholars, twenty poor Scholars, besides other Students,
Officers, etc. 106.

III. Pembroke Hall: Founded 1343, by Mary St. Paul Countess of Pembroke,
Daughter of Guido Chastillon Earl of St. Paul in France, and third Wife of
Audomarus de Valentia Earl of Pembroke. She endowed the same for one Master,
six Fellows and two Scholars; which are since increased by other Benefactors to
one Master, nineteen Fellows, one Tanquam, thirty three Scholars of the House,
besides other Students, Officers, etc. in all 100.

IV. Corpus Christi College: Founded 1351, by Henry Monmouth, surnamed Torto
Collo, Duke of Lancaster. By his Endowments and the Augmentations made to it by
others there is a Master, twelve Fellows, thirty seven Scholars, besides other
Students, Officers, etc. 126.

V. Trinity Hall: Founded 1353, by Dr. William Bateman, afterward Bishop of
Norwich, to whose Endowments others being added, there is a Master, twelve
Fellows, fourteen Scholars, besides Officers, etc. in all 60.

VI. Gonvil and Caius College: Founded 1353, by Edmund Gonvil, Rector of
Terrington and Rushworth in Norfolk. Afterward John Caius, Doctor in Physic
and a learned Antiquary in 1557 was made a Co-Founder by Letters Patents; who
caused it to be called after both their Names. He added to the former
Quadrangle his fair Building of Free Stone, increased the Treasury, and
enriched it for maintaining three Fellows, twenty Scholars, and a Porter. Since
it had many other Benefactors, some of whom are here named, who farther
augmented it: So that there is a Master, twenty five Fellows, one Chaplain,
sixty nine Scholars, besides Officers, etc. in the whole 209.

VII. King's College: Founded 1441, by King Henry VI. consisting of one Master
and twelve Scholars: He two Years after enlarged it, and there is in it one of
the fairest Chapels in the World; but, by his untimely death, left his
Foundation incomplete. King Henry VII. partly finished the Stone-Work of the
Chapel, and his Successor paved, glazed, and finished it. By succeeding
Benefactors the whole has been much enriched; and the College maintains at
present, a Provost, 70 Fellows and Scholars, three Chaplains, one Master of the
Choiristers, six Clerks, sixteen Choiristers, sixteen College Officers of the
Foundation, besides twelve Servitors to the senior Fellows, six poor Scholars,
with other Students, in all 140.

VIII. Queen's College: Founded 1448. Being begun by Margaret Andegavensis,
Daughter of Reyner Duke of Anjou, titular King of Sicily, Naples, and
Jerusalem, and Consort of King Henry VI. But she dying left it imperfect; and
it was finished by Queen Elizabeth Wife of King Edward IV. Since, by the
Liberality of other Benefactors here named, increased to the Maintenance of a
President, nineteen Fellows, twenty three Scholars, eight Bible Clerks, and
three Lecturers of Hebrew, Arithmetic, and Geometry, besides other Officers,
etc. to the number of 190.

IX. Katherine Hall: Founded 1475, by Dr. Robert Woodlarke Chancellor of this
University; who dedicated it to the Honor of St. Katherine; and therein
established a Master and three Fellows. Since, by the Bounty of others here
mentioned, increased to a Master, six Fellows, ten Scholars, nine
Exhibitioners, besides others, in all 150.

X. Jesus College: Founded 1496, by Dr. John Alcock Bishop of Ely, and Lord
Chancellor of England; who converted thereinto the ancient Nunnery consecrated
to St. Radegund; and established one Master, six Fellows, and six Scholars.
Since, by others, increased to one Master, sixteen Fellows, twenty four
Scholars, besides others, in all 110.

XI Christ College: Founded 1505, by Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby,
Widow of Edmund Earl of Richmond, and Mother of King Henry VII. endowing the
same for a Master, twelve Fellows, forty seven Scholars and Officers: Which
number has been since increased by other Benefactors to one Master, thirteen
Fellows, sixty Scholars, besides other Students and Servants, in all 166.

XII. St. John's College: Founded 1508, by the aforesaid Margaret Countess of
Richmond, who obtained a License of King Henry VIII. to convert an Hospital of
Regular Canons into this College; but left the perfecting thereof to her
Executors Bishop Fox, Bishop Fisher, etc. Whereby, and the Bounty of many
others here named, there is in it a Master, fifty four Fellows, eighty four
Scholars, besides others, in all 282.

XIII. Magdalene College: Founded 1519, by Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham,
who entitled it after the Name of his own Dukedom; but in 1542 the Lord
Chancellor Audley altered the Name to that it now retains, and also endowed the
same; which now, with subsequent Bounties, maintains one Master, eleven
Fellows, and twenty two Scholars, besides others, in all 140.

XIV. Trinity College: Founded 1546, by King Henry VIII. who united three Halls
or Houses in this one; and endowed it with 1640 l. per Annum. It was afterward
augmented by Queen Mary, besides many other noble Benefactors; so that it is
one of the goodliest Colleges in Europe, maintaining one Master, sixty Fellows,
sixty seven Scholars, four Conducts, three public Professors, thirteen poor
Scholars, one Master of the Choiristers, six Clerks, ten Choiristers, twenty
Alms-Men, besides others, to the number of 440.

XV. Emanuel College: Founded 1584, by Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellor of the
Exchequer, etc. for the Maintenance of a Master, thirty Fellows and Scholars,
etc. For increase of which Foundation Queen Elizabeth gave a small Annuity out
of the Exchequer, and by other Donations, there are in it one Master, fourteen
Fellows, fifty Scholars, ten poor Scholars, besides others, to the number of
310.

XVI. Sidney Sussex College: Founded 1598, by Frances Sidney Countess of
Sussex, Sister of Sir Henry, Aunt of Sir Philip Sidney, Widow of Thomas
Radcliffe Earl of Sussex: Bequeathing by her last Will (besides her Goods) 5000
l. wherewith her Executors built and endowed the same for a Master, ten
Fellows, twenty Scholars; which being augmented by other Benefactors, has one
Master, twelve Fellows, thirty three Scholars, besides the Additions of Sir. F.
Clarke, and others; the whole number of Students and Officers is 210.

The Total number of Students of all Degrees in this University, who had Names
in every College, with the Magistrates and Officers, besides diverse Scholars
relieved therein, whose Names were not entered, was 3050, in the Year 1622; and
by reason of the Sickness in 1629 many were dispersed to OXFORD, etc. and no
Supply came the Year following; whereby there is now in the same but 2848.

The End of No. V.
XLIX. Sir THOMAS WRIOTHESLEY 's COLLECTIONS relating to the Institution, Arms,
and Characters of the KNIGHTS of the GARTER: With the Ceremonies of the ancient
ORDER of the BATH; illuminated in their proper Colors, and adorned with the
Pourtraits or Limnings of several noble Personages, etc. Fol. MS.
THIS ancient and valuable Collection begins with a Copy of the Interpretation
of, and Additions to the Statutes of the Order of the Garter, made by King
Henry VIII. with the Advice and Assent of the Companions of the said Order on
the 29th Day of May, in the eleventh Year of his Reign. There are Additions and
Interlineations in several Places, of some Corrections or Amendments in the
handwriting of Sir Thomas Wriothesley; and is entitled at the top of one of
the Pages, The now Statutes. This consists of nine Pages, and is followed with
The Ordonnaunces for the Officers of the Order; in the beginning of which, the
said King Henry is called Renovator of the noble Order of St. George, in the
13th year of his Reign or 1521. This Part treats of the five Officers of the
said Order; who are the Prelate, Chancellor, Register, King of Arms called
Garter, and the Huissier of Arms named the Black Rod; declaring the Charge or
Duty of every one of them, and their Privileges, Habits, Wages, and Liveries;
also the Liberties and Privileges granted to the thirteen Poor Knights, as is
expressed in the Introduction thereof. Moreover, here are the Pourtraits or
Limnings of these five Officers, in their proper Robes and Ensigns of the
Order, and all in their proper Colors. This Part fills eight Pages, but there
seems to be a Leaf wanting at the end, because it breaks off abruptly in the
Account of the Usher of the Black Rod and his Salary; and there is wholly
wanting the Privileges of the Poor Knights as before promised. Next follows,
which perhaps should have been bound first in the Book, a Translation of the
first Founder King Edward's Statutes of the Order. Beginning thus, "In the
worshipp of God, Saint Marie the glorious Virgyn, and Saint George; our
Sovereygn Lord, Edward the Third King of England aftir the Conquest, the 23
Year of his Reign, has ordained, establisshed and founded, in his Castle of
Wyndesore, a Company named the Order of the Gartier, in the Manner as follows:
First Himself, Sovereygn; his eldest Sone the Prince of Walys, the Duke of
Lancaster, Therle of Warwyke, the Captan of Bueth, Therle of Stafford, Therle
of Salisbury, the Lord Mortymer, Sir John Lisle, Sir Barthelmewe de Burghersh,
the Sone of Sir John Beauchamp, the Lord Mahun, Sir Hugh Courtnay, Sir Thomas
Holland, Sir John Gray, Sir Richard Fitzsymon, Sir Miles Stapulton, Sir Thomas
Wale, Sir Hugh Wryottesley, Sir Neele Loryng, Sir John Chandos, Sir Jayms
Dandeley, Sir Oetes Holland, Sir Henry Eme, Sir Sauchett Daprichecourt, Sir
Walter Panell. And it is accorded" etc. These Articles are comprised in
fourteen Pages, ending with these Words: "And also the said Colier shall not be
sold, put to pledge, given, nor aliened, for need, or cause whatsoever that it
be." There are some marginal Notes on it, in the same Hand as in the foregoing
Draught; and in the Margin at the End this Inscription, TH. WR. A. R. Greek;
which as we have been informed by a very knowing Person in these Studies,
signifies Thomas Wriothesley King of Arms of Grekelade; and under that in the
same hand, is also this Inscription, Statuta Regis H. VIImi tempore translata
Anglice per JO. WR. signifying, that these Statutes were thus translated in the
time of King Henry VII. by John Wriothesley King of Arms. Following this, in
the same Page there is written, but in another Hand, (which has been supposed
to be John Stow's) Necessaryes of a strange Prince chosen a Brother and a
Companion of the Order of the Garter. Also, The Oath of a King byeng a Stranger
when he recevyth the Order of the Garter.

After a Copy of an old Deed, in another hand, upon the next Leaf, executed in
the Reign of King Edward III. we enter upon a View of the Arms and Crests of
the Knights of the Garter, blazoned all in their proper Colors. There may be
near two hundred, most of them finished, in the compass of about seventy Pages;
and what is a very great Curiosity in a Work of this nature, we have the Badges
to about fourscore of them, painted or drawn with a Pen, against, or at the
sides of so many of the said Coats. Further, what still inhances its value to
the historical Inspector, is, that not only the Names of most of the Knights
Companions are appropriated to the greater part of those Arms, but Characters
also given of upwards of threescore of them, containing a short Account of
their Actions, Marriages, Issues, Benefactions, Death and Burial. Which
Particulars of such ancient Record, as this Writing, and these Draughts seem to
be, must be esteemed most authentic, as being so near the original Fountains of
Intelligence. In the seventh Page of these Draughts we find, against one of the
Coats, this Writing; " John King of Portugal 20 li Gown, JO. WR." and against
the next, " Maximilian King of Romans, transolatt to the Princs stall; Gown,
Clothe of Gold, furred with Martres; the Cape of Bever. JO. WR." and against
the next, " Phillipp King of Castille, Archiduc of Awstriche: Gown, Clothe of
Gold, lyned with Damask; 40 Scutes for Dobelet. TH. WR." The former part of
this Work seems plainly as old as King Henry VII. because in the third Page of
these Draughts, where his Arms and Badges are displayed, it is thus written of
him, "and now gloriously reigns owre Soveryne Lord King Henry the VII.
which in his Youth has endured many great Duresse; and blessed by God
has won two great Bataillis; the first, the Bataile of Redmore, etc. the
second, the Bataile of Stoke, etc." Yet four Leaves further we have this
Inscription over the Arms of that King's Son, "The Duc of Yorc, Henry, aftir
Prince, and aftir King Henry the Eight; wiche conqred the Cytes of Terwen and
Tourney with their Appurtenances, Anno quinto R. 1513." From these Observations
it may appear that Sir John Wriothesley Garter King of Arms was Author of some
of these Characters, and Sir Thomas, who was Garter afterward, and died 26
Henry VIII. Vide Weever's Fun. Mon. fol. 660. who says Sir Thomas Wall
succeeded him that Year.
Author of others, and probably the greater part; wherefore we have entitled
the Collection to him.

The principal Personages whose Arms, Badges, and Characters are thus drawn
forth, are first, King Edward III. who, in his beginning did many great Acts,
here briefly mentioned. After him, King Richard II. who kept a triumphant
Household, built Westminster Hall, and made many Dukes and Earls, etc. After
him, King Henry IV. which distressed King Richard, etc. After him, his Son King
Henry V. that won Normandy and the Substance of the Realm of France, proclaimed
Regent and Heyritor thereof, etc. founded the Monasteries of Syon,
Charter House, Schene; the Officer of Garter Principal King of Arms, and diverse
other Foundations. After him, King Henry VI. an holy Man; for whom God showed
many Miracles; for he was more heavenly than worldly: He was first buried at
Chartsey, and now is removed to the Colege of Wyndesore, where he was born.
Next, King Edward IV. Flower of Knighthood, Beawte, Liberalite, and Wisdom
with Manhod, etc. After him his Brother King Richard III. which being evil
counceyled, disenherited his Nephewis, under whom, also, they dyed; which,
before he was King, and did that foul deed, was preysed for a coragious
Knight, etc. The next is King Henry VII. of whose Character we have given a
part as above. So we go on to Henry Earl of Derby, Duke of Lancaster, Hugh Earl
of Stafford, and Edward Lord Spencer. Then we have no Characters to four Coats
following till we come to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, against whose Arms and
Badges, it is written, that he was a wise Prince, a great Clerk, and a great
Benefactoure to the Universitees of Oxenford and Cambrigge: Brake the Sege of
Cales; put Duc Phillip of Burgoigne to flighte, and brent several Places in
Flanders: Bilded Grenwiche and Baynardis Castle: Murdered at Bury, and buried
at Seynte Albons. We have also little said of any others till we arrive at the
noble Duc Richard of York Regent of France, etc. And after him, an Account of
Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, Capeteyne of Cales, and Admyrell of the Sea; who
wan the great Hulkis, and faught with the great Shippis of Bretegne, and
kept our Sees well in his Days, thet all Nations dred our English Shippis;
and made good Roodis into Scotland, and was with King Edward in his
beginning, both at the Bataile of Northampton and of Towton: And he was sleyne
at Barnet. The next Character, of English Extract, is that short one above
related of King Henry VIII. After these we have also some brief Characters of
Edmund Earl of Stafford, Richard Nevill Earl of Salisbury, William Earl of
Arundel, Edmund Earl of Cambridge, Sir Walter Mawny, Thomas Earl of Buckingham,
Anthony (Wydeville) Earl Ryvers who did Armies, both on horsbak and on foot,
with Anthony, Bastard of Burgoygne, in Smythfeld; kept, triumphantly, Turney
at Westminster; a courageous Knight, and a gentill; pituously put to death at
Pumfret, and by ried in the Quere of the Parisshe Church. After him also Sir
John Conyers, Humphrey Earl of Stafford, the Lord Sudeley Rauff, Sir William
Stanley Steward of Household with Prince Edward, afterward called King Edward
V. and Chamberlen to King Henry VII. with whom he was at the Bataille of
Redmore; and after comytted high Treason, for the which he was beheaded at the
Towre-Hill; and, at Wyndesore, disgradid of the Order of the Garter, etc. John
Lord Dudeley, George Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir John Cornwall, Sir John Asteley,
and Sir John Savage. After these we come to the Character of the noble Prince
Edward; who in his Youth, at sixteen Year old, faughte in the fowarde, at the
Bataille of Cresey, where the Frenshe King was put to flight, another King
slain, and besides many other Persons of Distinction, 30,000 other People; and
there he wan the Ostriche Feather. At Poitiers he wan the Bataille, took King
John of France Prisoner, and with him the Flower of Knighthode of his Party:
Wan the Bataille of Nazaroth in Spain, put King Henry of Spain to flight, and
then took Bertram Conestable of France Prisonnier, and restored King Peter;
faught on the Sea with the Spainardes and wan themme; and he is buried at
Canterbury. The next Characters are of John of Gant, the Earl of Pembroke, and
the Duke of Bedforde, George Duke of Clarence, Ralph first Earl of
Westmoreland, and Sir John Fastolff, a rich Knight, a great Bilder, who bilded
Caster-Hall in Northfolk, and a Royal Palace in Southwork, another in
Yarmouthe; a special good Master to the Officers of Arms; and was most
thriumphantly brought in Earth that I have hard (says our Author) of a Man of
his Degree. His Arms are, Or and Azure quarterly, three Scollops Argent in a
Bend Verd. The Crest, a Plume of Ostridge Feathers. Badges, a Book with a
Pencil in it; and a Shield with a Branch of Laurel springing out of it. Next
follow some short Accounts of Thomas Lord Stanley Earl of Derby, Sir Barth.
Borowashe, John Lord Menil, Thomas Lord Scalles, Sir Tho. Holland, Henry Earl
of Northumberland, Sir John Stafford, Sir Edward Wideville, and Richard Earl of
Warwick, a noble and courageous Knight; he did Arms three Dais syngly on
horsback, beside Calais, against all Comers; Gouvernour of King Henry VI. in
his tender Age; a Fader in nourture, and a Patron; died in the Castle of
Rouen; nobly enterred in the College of Warwick. Afterward we have such
another short Character of Waultier first Lord Hungerford, and Richard Earl of
Rivers. Also of Sir James Audeley, a noble Warrior, who accompanied Prince
Edward in all his Wars: One of the special Causers, through his Courage, of the
wynnyng of the Bataille of Poitiers: And of John Lord Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury, the noblest Warrior that was in his Dais; and of his Estat: His
noble Acts, so many fold done in the Realm of France, to his great Renoune,
sprenge over all Crestendome: a very true English Knight; a great Justicier:
Be his Counseill, Pope Nicholas bilded the Castle Saint Angel of Rome: Died
be Fortune of War in France; buried at Whichurch. The two last Knights
Companions of this Order, who are, in this Manner, most signally spoken of, are
first Gaillard Lord Duras; who, for England's Sake, left Gascongue; was long
Marshall of Calais; attended King Edward in Flanders, etc. And lastly Sir
Thomas Mongomery a wise Knight, and of King Edward the IVth's Counseil, and
with him in all his noble Deeds; which often was sent in Ambassade to Ducs,
Princes, etc. And thus we end our Survey of this Part, containing the Arms and
Characters of our ancient Knights of the Garter down to, about the middle of
King Henry the VIII. his Reign.

On the second Page of the same Leaf where the former Work ends, begins another
of a different kind, being nothing but Pourtraiture without any Introduction or
verbal Explanation, and continues for twenty four Pages successively. It
contains a distinct Representation in so many painted Draughts of the ancient
Ceremonies used in creating the Knights of the Bath. The Figures in these
Limnings, though they are not every where in exact Proportion, or finely finished
off to the Eye, are yet so very observable for the punctual Regard that seems
to have been paid to the due Representation of all Parts of the Solemnity, all
proper Persons that should appear, all Officers and Attendants, with all the
Distinction of Habits, Ornaments, etc. that above fourscore Years since these
Draughts were thought worthy of being graved and brought into Print In Nich.
Upton de Studio Milit. etc. Fol. Land. 1654.
; wherefore we shall only observe further of them here, that in the said
Sculpture they are nothing so intelligent as in these the original Paintings,
because the whole Ceremony being contracted all into one Sheet Print, and the
Colors all reduced to black and white, we are deprived of several remarkable
Distinctions in the said Copy, which in these Illuminations might give great
Light to some Parts of our History and Antiquities.

After these Views of this Ceremony we have, two or three Tables or Genealogies
of Hungary; of the Kings of Castille, and the Fitzhardings, etc. Then we come
to some Pourtraits of certain noble Personages two in a Leaf, at full length,
painted in their proper Habits and Robes for twelve Pages together. Among these
are King Edward I. and his Queen; Richardus de Monthermer Earl of Gloucester
and Hereford, with Joanna Lady Acres his Wife, Daughter of that King; Tho. de
Monthermer his Son, and Edward his Son: Also John the Son of William de
Montacute, and Margaret Daughter of Thomas de Monthermer; John Earl of
Salisbury, and Thomas his Son, with their Countesses; Richard Nevyle Earl of
Salisbury, and his Lady Alice; Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, and Anne his
Lady; King Richard III. and his Queen Anne; William Lord Ferres of Groby, and
Lady Margaret his Wife; also the Duke of Exeter and his Duchess. Of which
Pictures the Men, being most of them in Armor; have their Helmets closed over
their Faces, all but the two King Richards, and Thomas and Edward Sons of
Richard de Monthermer. After these we have in four Pages more, some unfinished
Draughts of the Standard Bearers; between two of which are some of the Knights
Companions of the first and second Stall mentioned.

Then follow a few Leaves of some Coats of Arms without Crests or Badges, and a
Pedigree of Dampetre, Earl of Flanders; with a Draught of two or three
monumental Figures: And then we come to an Account of the Fees that William
Brugys alias Garter had of the Prelate and Knights of the Order, besides the
Sovereign: Which Brugys was in the time of King Henry V. and King Henry VI. in
his Beginning. Also a Memorandum of about sixteen Knights who were created
Peers in the Reign of King Henry VI. and the Days when. The next is a List of
the Knights of the Garter the Third of King Edward VI. in French; but either
the Account is not finished, or the number of them were then but Eighteen
including the Sovereign. The next Piece is the Pedigree of the Lord Perse of
Luxemburgh Earl of Saint Poule. Toward the Conclusion of this Pedigree, we
learn that it was made for the Lady Margaret Vaux, and that the Brother of this
Lady was named William Lord of the Vaux, who was then alive: And further we
have these Words, "Lo now have ye the Pedigree of the Fader, of the Mother of my
Lady Margaret of the Vaux now being alyve, Mother unto Therle of Sent Powle, and
unto Thebaut Lord Fynes, now being Bishop of Manns, and of my Lord Jakes of
Lugburgh, and of the Doghter my Lady Jaquetto Duches of Bedford, my Lady
Isabell Countess of Mayn, and of my Lady Kateryn Duches of Britayn, now all
being on lyve." And here ends, as we conjecture, the ancient Collections in
this Book which were made, for the most part, by the Wriothesleys, that is, all
but a few of the odd Pedigrees, and perhaps also one or two of the last
Articles which are here mentioned. For we observe all the Paper (except one
Leaf, containing only an Illumination of some monumental Ornament, and might be
inserted at the last binding up of the Volume) from the Beginning of the
Knights of the Garter's Arms to this Place, has one Maker's Mark upon it, viz.
Three Flower de Luces in a Scutcheon with a Coronet over it.

What follows in this Volume (bound into it by a later Owner) are, first, two
Sheets printed in Queen Elizabeth's time, the one from a Copper-Plate, and is
called, The Union of the Roses of the Families of Lancaster and York: With the
Arms of those who have been chosen of the most Honorable Order of the Garter,
from that Time to this Day, 1589. It was composed, that is the Arms and Dates
were settled by Thomas Talbot a noted Antiquary of those Times, and graved by
Jodocus Hondius of Flanders in London the Year abovementioned. The other Sheet
is stuck upon Canvas, and is so soiled it is scarce legible; but it contains a
short Account in Latin of all the Orders of Knighthood Ecclesiastical or Civil
that are famous through the Christian World. I think it is dedicated to Dr. Tho.
Hesketh by John Clapham.

There are further two Latin Tracts in this Volume, which also never belonged
originally to the aforesaid Collections, but are both bound in with them,
(Parchment Covers and all) the one called Libertates Collegii. The other
contains the Accounts of Owen Oglethorp Treasurer of St. George's Chapel, from
the last Day of October in the 38th of Henry VIII. to the last of September in
the first of King Edward VI. The rest of the Book consists only of several
Sheets of the printed Titles and painted Arms of some Knights of the Garter in
King Charles the Second's time; such as are usually dispersed at their
Installations, and only bound in here, at the End, to make it a Volume as
portly and magnificent to outward Appearance, as it is intrinsically valuable.
The Care of thus gathering and binding together these Collections is owing to
that eminent Antiquary and Herald Mr. Elias Ashmole, whose Book it appears to
have been by the Impression of his Arms which we see on the Cover: But the
Liberty of thus obliging the Public with the Contents of it, we owe to the
gracious Favor of a noble Peer, who is most worthily possessed thereof; having
besides the Generosity of this Communication, also been at no small Expense in
honoring the Memories of those illustrious Personages whose Pourtraitures are
before mentioned.

L. A DEFENSATIVE against the Poison of supposed PROPHESIES: Not hitherto
confuted by the Pen of any Man; which being grounded either upon the Warrant
and Authority of old painted Books, Expositions of Dreams, Oracles,
Revelations, Invocations of damned Spirits, Judicialles of Astrology, or any
other kind of pretended Knowledge whatsoever, de futuris contingentibus, have
been Causes of great Disorder in the Commonwealth, and chiefly among the Simple
and Unlearned People, etc. London printed by John Charlewood Printer to the
Earl of Arundell. Quarto, 1583. Pages 324.
THIS Work, replenished with Variety of learned Authorities from the Ancients,
and historical Examples of all Times, is dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham,
from Howard House, by Henry Howard, afterward Earl of Northampton and Lord
Privy Seal. The noble Author, ingeniously bespeaks the Patronage of his Friend,
in the said Dedication, by introducing it with an Allusion from Vitruvius; who
allows, "no Building to be fully finished, which wants a Cover to bear out a
Storm." Therefore, having made an end of this rude Pile, presumes to grace it
with the Louver of his honorable Name. Further confessing his particular
Affection and Zeal to him was so much increased from his steadfast Friendship in
the Days of Proof, that not only his Hand was ready to subscribe, but his Heart
withal to acknowledge the great Merit of his undeserved Favor. For who may be
more securely trusted in the Port of Liberty, than he that once vouchsafed with
a favorable Hand to waft him out of the Surges of uncertain Chance? And a
little further, we observe, that from the sixteenth Year of his Age till this
Day, his Custom had been, in the Course of his Reading to store up all such
Reasons and Examples as occurred in Philosophy, the Civil Laws, Divinity, or
Histories, to the Ruin of pretended Prophets and their Prophesies. The Readers,
of whose Censure he is most apprehensive, are of three Sorts: The first,
looking not into the Subject but the Writer, with such Partiality, that Battus
shall sooner be crowned with Laurel, if he bear their Livery, than Homer with
an Ivy Garland, etc. The second Sort, are the close sullen Censors, who injure
no less by silent Scorn and malicious Innuendos, than by open Exclamations. And
the last kind, are the false Prophets and their Favorites, who neither upon
Spleen against the Writer, nor overweening of themselves, but only with a
mortal Fear lest their Diana should be robbed of her silver Shrine, are like to
bend their whole Endeavor against the Contempt of their inveterate Abuses.
This is followed with some curious Reflections upon the Vanity of Prophesies
and Oracles; by the utmost Pretensions whereof, we cannot alter the determinate
Course which is prefixed in the Providence of God, nor prognosticate of any
future Accident. We may change our Vessel, like Sea-sick Passengers, but not
our Pain; our Bed, but not our Fit; our Climate, but not our Quality: For he
that stinted and confined us to Government upon the Ground, forbade us, as it
were by Consequence, ambulare in Mirabilibus; and he that made us ignorant of
many present Matters for our own Behoof, would not entangle us with Guesses and
Conjectures de futuris, for a greater Inconveniency. The Trees which are most
backward in putting forth their Blossoms, prosper long; whereas Almonds are
most commonly decayed and starved by the Frost, for putting out before their
Fellows. Of Time past, there is no Comfort; of Joy present, no Stay; of Chance
future, no Certainty. Why then should not all Sorts of feigned Prophets look
into the Devil's Craft? Who deals like the Eagle with a Shellfish, or a
cunning Wrestler with his Mate, in hoisting us up to the nicest, and most
fickle Points, that afterward the Fall may be more dangerous, and his Prey
easy; which would never come to pass, if Men would look into the Works of God
with the Eyes of Humbleness, not pry into the Secrets of his Purpose, with the
Spectacles of Vainglory, etc. Then, after submitting to the Judgment of his
said Patron, whether this Work should be destroyed or committed to the Press,
and praying that he might be blessed with his heavenly Favor in as ample
Measure as himself had tasted of his honorable Friendship, he concludes this
Dedication; which is followed with a short Epistle to the Reader. Wherein we
perceive he has reformed to advantage his first proposed Method of dispatching
all his Answers to the several Branches of Prophesy together in one Mass or
Lump, before the winding up of the Discourse, by answering every Part
distinctly under its proper Head, for good Reasons here given. After which he
had some Thoughts of detecting the false Virtues and Properties imposed upon
Herbs and Stones; but considering how despicable these Abuses were held in the
Days of Sozomen, and that such Fantasies come never further out of Season, than
when grave Matters are debated with Authority, he pursued no further this
Purpose: So closes his Epistle with his good Wishes to his Reader.

The Work it self is introduced with the Story of Ulysses loitering with Circe
the Sorceress, in his return from Troy; and the Confession of Echinis a reputed
Prophet, how vain all Pretensions are this Way. Here we have a Division of
Prophesies, into diverse Kinds, with a Rejection of them, and a compendious Way
offered to be satisfied in the Justice of such Treatment thereof. First, by
pointing out the Causes which induce Men to embark their Hope on so faithless a
Bottom as that of Prophesies. Secondly, by disproving all these Kinds thereof,
to make it appear what Pains have been taken to seduce the illiterate and
unthinking Part of Mankind. Thirdly, by showing how our adhering to such
Vanities is inconsistent with the Duty of a true Subject or a good Christian;
from which Data or Principles is to be known what kind of Prophets may be
tolerated in a State. Fourthly and lastly, by giving a full Answer to such
Arguments as have been used in Defense of such Practices. The first Cause then,
is a Desire in Man to soar above the State he was put in by God. Secondly, a
Distrust of God; while we think he is not as willing by his Mercy, as able by
his Might to help us. Thirdly, a Credulity in being apt to believe things we
wish may come to pass: Also showing that many Times there needs no more to the
making a Prophet than a natural and easy Deduction of an Effect from a Cause;
with several Instances hereof. Fourth and lastly, an Impatience to know
beforehand, the Revolutions of Government, etc. Here we have some Reflections
on the Burden of Honor, the Depravity of Ambition, and Vanity of Divination;
that it is unwarranted both by Divinity and Philosophy: That if Reason cannot
compass it, neither will any other Principle in Man; and in what Cases he may
be provident, but not prophetic: That Melancholy is insufficient to qualify Men
with this Faculty: And that Passion is the Parent thereof, as Porphiry
maintained, is proved erroneous. Hence we pass to

Chap. II. Of Dreams. Plato the chief Patron of them. No Certainty to be
gathered from any Thing he has writ on this Head. Aristotle nearer the Truth;
who maintains, That the Limits of our Knowledge are adequate only to the
Strength or Abilities of the Soul, which in its present State, being always
immersed in Matter, etc. seems unable, upon the Reception of Images in sleep,
to judge whether they are answered by any Thing external or no. If Sleep were a
Means to discover Things to come, then the sounder and deeper the Sleep, the
greater would be the Discovery; but we find contrariwise, that Things of Moment
are revealed in slumbers. This Kind of Divination moreover is contingent to the
Vulgar, and not to the best and wisest sort of Men; and Dreams are the
Amusement also of Infants, and even Brutes as well as human Creatures: The most
affecting, often broken, confused and effaced out of the Memory. After some
Reasons of the Ancients for raising our Regard to Dreams, we have our Author's
for not heeding them. As 1. That since they are so soon forgot, the Print they
make must needs be shallow. 2. That no judicious Man will choose Fancy for his
Guide; but Dreams are Fancies. 3. If Allegories please us, Apollo's Robe was of
Purple with a Gloss, not shadowy. 4. The Gods are wont to reveal their
Mysteries to Men sober and discreet; but we find none dream more than the
Fickle and Ungodly. 5. God, who is Purity itself, will not make Dreams the
Shadows of his ordinary Grace. 6. We may not expect him to give so fair a
Color for Man to depend more upon the Pride of his Nature which is frail, than
upon the Rule of Providence which is certain. 7. To be exploded, as what would
be Causes of Strife and Debate. 8. And withdraw our Mind from our Duty. 9. As
they could not be distinguished, the Certain from the Frivolous. 10. As they
could not be valued for Grounds of Truth without detracting from the sacred
Majesty. 11, and lastly, As we are not to measure Truth by the Line of
Imagination. Moreover, if any Aim were to be taken or Guide designed from
Dreams, some Interpreters would be found so expert that we could not err; but
they appear not: And though the Events should answer some Expositions, who can
say this is not Chance? As for admitting some Dreams to have been suggested by
Angels, they cannot be admitted for ordinary Dreams, therefore make not for the
Diviner's Trade. And since neither any Dreams bring one Effect to diverse
Persons, nor to the self-same at all Times, it may be taken for a senseless
Practice to justify the Follies of a number by the Events of some. And
concerning God's not revealing himself by this Means, as well now, as he may
have anciently done, here are Reasons given to show that his Will in this Point
is not correspondent with his Power. Hence we proceed to

Chap. III. Of Oracles. And here we have the ridiculous Accounts which the
Heathens gave of Divinations thereby, exposed. With Cicero's Notion, That the
Mind being inspired or blown up by certain Vapors or Exhalations, delivered
those Oracles. And Cotta's Question to the Collectors of Apollo's Offering,
viz. If he were a God, why did he shroud himself in the Bowels of the Earth?
That the Island Delphos, where stood the Idol of Apollo, was inspired by
Exhalations from the Ground, as maintained by Plutarch, but disproved by our
Author; who ascribes the Prophesies from such Effect, more to the Ploughmen
than the Priests. His Comparison of the Fable, which supposes the first Prophet
to have been found by Chance in an old Vault in Hetruria, to the Tale in
Nubrigensis, concerning two young Children brought to Wolpet in Suffolk with an
Eastern Wind. The Answer of Apollo's Proctors to the Question of some
Philosophers, why Delphos remaining the same in Substance, Situation, and
Quality as usual, was notwithstanding deprived of the Virtue of affording
Oracles, if Exhalations were interested in the Cause: With the Shift of
Demetrius upon this Objection. Also, the Argument of a wild Man for the Silence
of this Oracle; who said, Apollo was doing Penance for certain Familiarities
with Daphne, etc. So could not attend as usual, to the giving out Oracles.
Cicero confesses this Silence; but evades the Debate of the Cause. And the
Opinions of others are produced; but the coming of Christ is concluded to be
the real Occasion of such Silence.

Chap. IV. Of Astrology. Its Definition. That the Houses, Faces, Images,
Aspects, etc. which it ascribes to Planets, are neither apparent to Sense, nor
revealed in Philosophy: That it is impossible for one or all the Planets to
suppress the Properties of Nature; as that a Child which is born under a
frowning Planet should never laugh. A cold Property in Planets vainly asserted.
The Peripatetic Principle, that no Planet, the Moon excepted, changes Property,
but by regard of Place. The Opinion of others, that all Planets are favorable
in their Kind, but forced to degenerate by Malice in the Bodies on which they
work. That they work according to the Matter which they find, without giving a
second Nature, or correcting the first. The Reason why St. Augustine renounced
this Study of the Stars, with the ridiculous Subdivision of the Zodiac by the
Pretenders to this Art. The Conceits about the Aspects of the Planets,
sufficiently shaken by this Rule in Philosophy: That the Disposition of diverse
Causes tending to one certain End, cannot forego their Virtue by mere Distance,
and nothing else. Things sublunary only subject to Passions and Affections;
and, therefore, not the supreme Bodies or their Beams, as Astrologers imagine.
Upon what the Consideration of Aspects depends. The Notion of Aspects taken up,
in the Author's Opinion, from the sundry Shapes and Figures of the Moon. Next
is the Divination from certain Parts of a Planet confuted, by the Authority of
its Inventors. That the Chaldees admitted but eleven Signs: the Forms of which
accounted for by our Author. The absurd Reasonings of Astrologers from these
Signs; as also their Inability to account for supposed Images in the Front or
Face of every Sign; with their want of Reason or Authority for culling out only
a certain number of fixed Stars as influential. Ptolemy's allowing to the
Planets ordinary Luck, but to the fixed Stars Happiness, inconceivable. Bonatus
his Shift against the Objection drawn from the Use of only a certain number of
Stars, followed by the Reason why Philosophers defined Chance and Fortune to be
Causes not in themselves, but by Accident. The Argument, That Events, which
draw their Virtue rather from the Means which happen by the way, than from the
first Intent; from Fortune than from Foresight; seem to be brought to pass by
Chance altogether, in respect of us; objected to, by a Comparison which in no
wise holds, viz. That we may guess at the Course of Things by poring on the
Stars, as well as a Carpenter at the Goodness of a Frame by knowing the Timber.
Wherefore all Knowledge from remotest Causes, as from the Planets, is obscure.
Plato, though nearest the Truth, when he says, That all Planets are benevolent,
is yet opposed by the Planetarians to keep up their Scheme. No prescribing with
certainty, where, upon one Change, so many others follow; as in this Art. The
Divisions of Astrologers in their Fundamentals. Also a Question put to them,
Whether, touching Things which are perfected in Time, we should guess according
to the Minute wherein the Work is first conceived in our Thought, or when it is
begun, or when it is perfected; or when only part and not the whole is
finished. Some Opinions herein; with the Application of the Question: As that,
since the time of Conception is uncertain, we must take our Aim by that of the
Birth, as the only Mark we have to guide us. Haly's Attempt to prove the time
of Conception and Birth to be the same; with the diverse Accidents concurring
before we can take the certain Minute of any Birth. The absurd Reply of some
hereto. Commonwealths also, as presumed to have their Fates, the Object of
these Pretenders. They are questioned again, whether they believe that
Influence they talk of, universal; from all the Heavens, or from the Planets
only? Showing that it pinches them which way soever they take it. And after
observing, that the Angels know nothing but as God has revealed it to them,
concludes, we must be Fools in thinking that any Thing can be discerned in an
Ephemeris, which is but the Device of Man. Here we enter upon the Arguments to
be drawn from Experience upon this Subject; and after its Definition we have
the Reasons why it will make nothing in favor for astrological Divinations.
That from the Flights of Birds and Bowels of Beasts Guesses and Inferences were
sometimes answered by Events, but not from the Influence of those Things which
were supposed to be the Causes. Thus though a War should follow an Eclipse, we
may find a more real and rational Cause. Next we have an Examination of the
dreaded Events of Comets. How divided the Opinions of the Ancients about them.
The Objection drawn from Experience, of Comets that have brought forth one
Effect, answered. That nothing can be predicted from them, because of their
Inconstancy in time and place of Appearance, Motion, Figure, Continuance,
Qualities, etc. The Arguments for their denoting the Deaths of Princes
disproved in every Branch. That they have died oftener after the glaring of a
Rainbow. That many great Princes here named, had not their Deaths foretold by
any Comets. Observations on the Plenty and Prosperity that rather followed
them; and Health, exemplified in Queen Elizabeth, who never was in better State
of Body than during the twenty five Years of her Reign, in which many Comets
appeared. And here our Author affirms, as an Eyewitness, "That when diverse
scrupulously dissuaded her Majesty at Richmond from looking at the Comet which
appeared last (in 1572) with a Courage answerable to the greatness of her
State, she caused the Window to be set open, and cast out these Words, Jacta
est alea; The Dice are thrown: Affirming that her steadfast Hope and Confidence
was too firmly planted in the Providence of God, to be blasted or affrighted
with those Beams, which either had a Ground in Nature whereon to rise, or at
least no Warrant in Scripture to portend the Mishaps of Princes. Behold a
Woman, and a Queen, which seem to be the Kinds and Callings, upon which the
Comets, if Astrologers speak Truth, are wont to prey; and yet she not only
relenteth not to common Fear, but insulteth rather upon common Folly! Then we
have a fine Compliment paid to her Majesty for her numerous Virtues, which
might make her an Exception to the common Rule; because Wisdom governs the
Stars." Next we have the Fancies of those who ascribe the Cause of Earthquakes
to Planets, condemned; with an Answer to the Demand why we may not as lawfully
seek out the Properties of Stars as of Stones, Metals, etc. Showing, that to
search for that in the Sky which may be found nearer hand, is repugnant to
Philosophy. And because some countenance their Pretensions by Astronomy, it is
here distinguished what Parts of Nature this Science considers, and in what
Manner the Rules or Propositions of any Art should be lawful, true and
agreeable to Nature, which cannot be found in Astrology. Arguments taken from
Physic, Physiognomy, and Navigation to prove it an Art of no avail. Against
the Assertion that it is impossible to gather any certain Knowledge of Things
which are brought forth by the Concourse of diverse disunited Accidents; it is
affirmed by the other side, Poverty, Sickness, Death, etc. should rather bear
the Name of Adherents than of Accidents, forasmuch as they claeve to the
Subject, having a certain Foundation or Ground at the Bottom of our Natures;
and the falsity of this Affirmation exposed. Did Planets convey such Qualities
and Influences as are pretended? then must they work the like Effects on
Beasts. No Credit to the Art, that Aristotle affirms, these lower Parts or
Earth do confine upon the higher; nor that Persons inhabiting under the
Meridian are exceeding timorous, effeminate, etc. Nor lastly, what Melanchton
affirms, That Children which are born in the eighth Month never live. The
Doctrine of Inundations, Plagues, etc. proceeding from the Contagion of the
Air; the Air receiving this Contagion from the Planets, and the Planets being
the Causes of our Misery, considered and answered, by a parallel Case of the
Heart in Man. Haly's Instance also of Floods, and parching Heats from Planets,
being some cold, others hot, excepted to. With the Author's Advice to
well-disposed Wits, to direct their Enquiries only to Things that may be known.

Chap. V. Of Conference with Familiars or damned Spirits. Herein is set down,
the belief of some, That there neither is certain Hell, nor shall be Spirits
till the latter Day: However, the Existence of Spirits argued for. To dispute
about the Manner or Mean, where the Messenger is wicked, or the Message false,
would be needless. The Means whereby Spirits may be thought to guess at Things
future, proposed in several Instances. That the Illusions of Sedechias the
deceitful Jew, presented before Lewis the Emperor; and of others, ought not to
seem strange, since the Works of God are far more deep: And since Scotto the
Italian Jugger could play such Slights before Queen Elizabeth, that those who
undertook to discry them were no less beguiled than the rest, who presumed less
upon their own Penetration, it is thought we may deem Familiars to be more fine
and nimble. Further, of these incorporeal Messengers, as the Demon of Socrates,
the Spirit that daily called upon Alaricus, and that named Orthon, which
brought Intelligence from all Corners of the World to Gaston Earl of Foix, as
Froissart has at large (and perhaps too largely) related. Some Arguments in
defense of Familiars, and wicked Spirits, considered, and refuted: But the
Abettors of this Art being at a Nonplus for want of Reasons to defend the same,
appeal to the pretended Apparition of Samuel; and tell us that as the Sorceress
called him up, so surely may the Conjurers of these Times invoke the Souls of
godly Men. But our Author denies that it was the real Samuel. If it be urged,
Why are Conjurers sometimes so desirous of a dead Hand, as Athanasius was
accused to have cut off that of Arsenius to abuse with magical Practices; or
that a Hair, a Pin, etc. is desired by wicked Spirits and Witches, of the
Parties they would have Power over? It Is answered, the Gift is naked and
impotent, unless vested with Consent: The Hand no more able to sway the Soul,
than the Forecastle of a Ship to guide the Stern; that the Belief is rather
craved than the Benevolence; the Heart than the Hand; the Trust than the Token.
That the Souls of Men indeed sleep not after death, but Bodies do; and shall
not be awaked before the Knell which rings all in to Condemnation or Paradise:
Wherefore he concludes, That neither Souls nor Bodies can appear to Conjurers
but by a Figure or Shadow of Illusion, so far as it may take a seeming Color
by the Practice of our Enemy; and shows how unlikely it is in the Case of
Samuel, That either God should suffer a Prophet of his own choosing to turn
Deceiver, as Samuel certainly had been, had he delivered himself to Saul in
such Terms as the Spirit did, or that the Devil by his nicest Art could restore
a Body to its former Shape, which was long before this dissolved to Dust and
Ashes.

Chap. VI. Of the Cabalistick Art. Its Antiquity, Meaning, and why so called.
The two Species thereof defined. From these Definitions hardly conceivable, how
this Art can afford either Help or Credit to the Prophet. Here we have an
Account of the Conference held by our noble Author, six Years before, with one
Brocado a Jew, then in the Court, who was a Pretender to this whimsical Art of
expounding the Scriptures; and from thence took upon him to divine what Fortune
should betide the Low Countries, as he said he had foretold what should befall
Paris, at least five Years before the Massacre fell out. But our Author, among
other Arguments, told him, "That Examples which fell out by Chance, were never
current where the Cause was to be justified by Reason: And therefore, till he
could as readily product a certain Ground to make his Guesses good, as score up
a Register of blind Events, I must (says he) rather praise his Luck than his
Learning; for as well might he prognosticate that the Cockpit in Shoe-lane
should sink on the third of June, because a Theater fell down about that time
at Rome in the Reign of Claudius; as that either Antwerp or Paris should be
plagued by the Pattern of Edom or Samaria. We may be generally taught by the
Precedents of God's righteous Judgments upon former States, that whosoever sins
or transgresses against either Table of the Moral Law, should either be
corrected by his Justice, or forborne by his Mercy; but by whether of these
Means God purposes to cure the Carbuncle of Man's Iniquity is concealed from
our Knowledge, and therefore were it vain to guess what his Pleasure is to
execute. The safest Course is to suspect the worst, because Extremities are
due; but yet we cannot determine and resolve of neither."

Chap. VII. Of the Scripture Authorities for Prognostication. Showing how, in
several Instances, it is there prohibited. The falsity of the Assertion made by
the Pretenders to these Arts, That they never make Enquiries into any thing
unlawful. The High German's Proof of the Certainty of Star-Divinity, in the
Warning given to Friar Savanorola, by Bellantius the Astrologer, exposed;
evidencing how vain and ineffectual such Warnings are; since what is decreed by
Destiny, cannot be prevented by Intelligence. Then the Enquiry is made, Whether
the Warning that this Friar should be put out of the way for Heresy were true
or not? If he affirm it to be true, then must he grant that Doctrine to be
Heresy which himself and his Country maintain against Rome: That the Pope's
Pardons are of no Effect. That he abuses his Authority, etc. For these were the
Matters in defense whereof Savanorola died: If he deny these Articles to
deserve the Name or Note of Heresy, which either he must do or confess himself
a Heretic; then it is evident that Bellantius was very much beguiled in
believing or advertising that Savanorola should be swept away for ungodly
Doctrine. The Case is passing hard, which drives a Man either to renounce his
Faith, or to forsake his Fancy. Were there a Register among the Stars, we
needed not to seek the Scripture for our Order, but the Planets for our
Fortune. In the Moderns, to say, they regard the Stars, as Means only, by which
God brings his Decrees to pass, and so ought not to be set upon a Level with
the Ancients, who looked upon them as Gods; will not serve, and wherefore.
Observations on the two next Centuries after Christ being rifest with Miracles,
as the Air is warmest at the setting of the Sun, and the People apter to
believe the Gifts and Doctrine of Miracles, the fresher their Sufferings were
who propagated them. The Antiquity of Astrology examined, with its Derivation.
The Singularity of Porphiry; who alone of all the Philosophers gave into it.
And the vain Assertion of Melanchton, That Moses, Essay, etc. impugn not all
kind of Divination, but rather the Pride of Man, in presuming to understand
those Secrets which are reserved to God alone, as the Last-Day, etc. The
Objections drawn from Scripture, as Moses being learned in the Mysteries of
Egypt; and from these Words, Mine Hour is not yet come, etc. and from the Star
which conducted the wise Men at the Birth of Christ; considered, and answered.
Cardan's Error in assigning the Hour of that Birth; with the foolish reasoning
of him, and others, from the Face of the Heavens at that time. The Knowledge of
Seth, Abraham, etc. urged in vain, since their Remarks of the heavenly Orbs
tended to the Knowledge of their Courses, Eclipses, etc. for the Distinction of
Times and Seasons, so needful in the Observance of their religious Feasts and
Ceremonies: Wherefore some have gathered from certain Expressions in Scripture,
That the Tribe of Issachar was bound by Order, to the Study of the Stars; as
diverse Colleges in Cambridge are enjoined by the Statutes of the Founders, to
give Allowance to certain Persons for this End.

The Remainder of the Volume is a Collection of Arguments, Authorities, and
Histories further detecting the Delusions of these pretended Prophets, and
their Ambition in all times, of supplanting what is certain in God's Providence
by what is probable in Man's Conjecture. Their Subtilty herein further laid
open. Their little Arts, Shifts, and Equivocations to gain themselves Profit
and Honor, where they happen to be lucky in their Predictions; and shelter or
subterfuge, where they answer not what they had raised the Apprehensions of
Mankind to expect; with abundance of Examples to prove how justly such
presumptuous Impostures deserve the Detestation of all sober and ingenuous Men;
as conducing to the Miscarriage of so many Undertakings, which have depended on
their Authority. Also pointing out the various Means of discerning such
Counterfeits; which by how much more successfully they have deluded the
Generality in all Ages past, should so much more effectually arm the Future
with Precaution. Among these Examples in this concluding Part, we cannot be
here further particular than to mention those of Manfredus the Astrologer, who
promised an Italian Prince many Years Life, and that he himself should live to
discover many Wonders by his Art, but died in the approaching Spring before he
could declare them. The Experiment of the Earl of Arundel, who would note in
his Almanacks, the Changes of the Weather, every where contrary to what had
been asserted by the Writers of them; and found his own Predictions oftener true
than theirs. The Persages of Dearth in 1558 confuted, by its proving a
plentiful Year. The Disappointment of the Abbot who built him a House on
Harrow-Hill, to secure him from the threatened Deluge, when it proved a Year of
great Drought. The Delusions, by Figures and Images, in the old painted
Manuscripts, and in the Herald's Books, and those pretended to be preserved in
religious Houses; as Merlin's Prophecies, which were chained to the Desks in
many Libraries. The Use made of Women in these prophetic Cozenages: Thus
Montanus wrought by Maximilla, the French by their Pucelle de Dieu, and our
English Anabaptists by their Holy Maid of Kent. The vain Presumption of
Verdungus a Prophet in the Reign of King Henry VIII. Instances of the Ruin of
several Princes by adhering to the Advice of Magicians, Astrologers, and
Prophets. Other late Instances of some learned English Men deluded thereby: How
Bellantius, who predicted Savanorola's Execution, could not foresee his own.
When Cardinal Wolsey superstitiously avoided Kingston upon Thames, though his
ready Way from Asher to the Court, for a quibbling Prophecy, that Kingston
should be his End: Was it not a lying Prophecy? For even Sir Anthony Kingston,
to whose Custody the Cardinal was committed, proved not his End, nor brought
him to the Tower, as he was charged; for he died of his Illness at Leicester.
And the Rood of Darvill Gathren, how did it burn a Forest, according to the
Welsh Prophecy that it should? When in scorn to superstition, the Lord Cromwell
burnt a Friar with that Image. But we might quote half the Book to mention the
Examples of this kind, wherewith it is all over so elaborately embellished;
which would have been much easier commanded, had it been furnished with a Table
or Index, whereof the second Edition in Fol. 1620. is also deficient; but we
hope it will be supplied therewith, if ever this Work arrives at a Third.

LI. ANCIENT FUNERAL MONUMENTS within the united Monarchy of GREAT BRITAIN,
IRELAND, and the ISLANDS adjacent, with the dissolved MONASTERIES therein
contained: Their FOUNDERS, and what eminent PERSONS have been in the same
interred. Also the Death and Burial of certain of the ROYAL BLOOD, the NOBILITY
and GENTRY of these Kingdoms entombed in foreign Nations, etc. Illustrated with
variety of historical Observations, etc. from approved Authors, Records, Leiger
Books, Charters, Rolls, old MSS. and the Collections of judicious Antiquaries.
Whereunto is prefixed a Discourse of FUNERAL MONUMENTS, etc. by JOHN WEEVER.
Fol. 1631. Pages 770. besides Preface, Index, etc.
THIS Collection of Antiquities is adorned with a neat Frontispiece,
representing the Figures of Death and the Resurrection: Also with another
Sculpture of the Author, in a laced Cap, with his Hand on a Skull; round the
same there is an Inscription in Latin, showing that he was fifty five Years of
Age at this time that the said Work was published; and at the bottom, four
English Verses, informing us he was born in Lancashire, and educated in the
University of Cambridge: Both which Prints were engraved by Thomas Cecil.

The Work is inscribed by the Author to King Charles; and in his Preface or
Epistle to the Reader we find he had not only observed what Honor Foreign
Nations had received by thus putting into print their monumental Antiquities,
but that he had with painful Expenses traveled over most Parts of England, and
some Part of Scotland to collect the Funeral Inscriptions of all the Cathedral
and Parochial Churches: But being much discouraged to proceed by the many
malignant and avaricious Defacements he beheld of those venerable Remains, and
the many Obstructions and Troubles he met with from petulent Officers and
Churchwardens for want of a Commission, he had Thoughts of burying all in
silence, till he was animated afresh, to publish what he had thus gathered, by
Augustus Vincent Esquire Windsor Herald and Keeper of the Records in the Tower; Sir
Robert Cotton, newly dead, on whom we have here a Latin Elegy set forth; Sir H.
Spelman, Sir Simon D'Ewes, John Seldom Esquire besides Sir Richard and Sir Henry
St. George, John Philpot and W. Le Neve Esqrs. From all whom he had Assistance,
which encouraged him thus to finish this first Part; and to complete the rest
of the Work, now in good forwardness, he entreats the Communications of the
Public But the Reason why we had not the Author's said Continuation of this
Work, was, that he died the next Year after this first Part was printed, as
Anthony Wood informs us.
. The remainder of this Epistle contains Advice to the Tomb-makers; that they
would be careful to preserve the Inscriptions which they engrave; with some
Apologies for extolling the ardent Piety of our Forefathers in these their
Ecclesiastical Liberalities; and for the Method he has pursued; his Punctuality
in following the ancient Orthography; and the Possibility of some Errors which
may have escaped, through his having had the Helps and Collections of many; and
others, through the common Fate of the Press; whereof the greatest he had met
with he has amended But there are yet left several, which are very material;
especially in the Numerical Letters and Figures of the said Inscriptions, which
are, as to those Particulars, often erroneous, as Mr. Wharton in Angl. Sacra,
Part I. Page 668 has observed: Whether chargeable upon our Author's own
Transcripts, or those of his Friends, though not distinguishable, so as to fix
the Imputation of Ignorance or Negligence upon him; yet, be the Defect in one,
or the other, the Chronological Readers are equally liable to be misled: To
apprise those Readers whereof, was one Reason for our present Review of this
Book; as another Reason is, to oblige historical Readers with the Notice of
many eminent Persons characterised therein, from ancient and credible
Authorities.
. So concludes with a Distich from Chytraeus, warning us, from the Funerals of
so many others in one Book, to consider the Certainty of our own.

Then follows The Discourse of Funeral Monuments, which comprises 196 Pages,
and is divided into eighteen Chapters. The First, treats of Monuments in
general: From the ancient Poets, and some of the Moderns, as Du Bellay, Spenser
and Drayton. 2. Of Funeral Monuments, Graves, Tombs, or Sepulchers: Of the
ancient Custom of Burials. Epitaphs and other Funeral Honors from several
ancient Authors. 3. Of Sepulchers answerable to the Degree of Persons deceased;
the various Manner of bearing them to the Grave, and when both Sexes began to
be borne alike. 4. Of the excessive Expenses bestowed at Funerals in former
Times. 5. Why so many have made their own Monuments in their Lifetime. The
Care generally taken for decent Burial. That the Burial of the Dead is
acceptable to God; with an Hymn to that purpose by Prudentius, translated by
Sir John Beaumont. 6. Of the ancient Care and Cost in preserving the Bodies of
the Dead; with strange Customs and Fashions of Burial. 7. Of Cenotaphs,
honorary and religious, with the Reverence attributed to these empty Monuments.
8. The Sanctity ascribed to ancient Monuments; and the Desires of Men to visit
the Sepulchers of worthy Persons. 9. Of the Punishments, Human and Divine,
inflicted on the Spoilers of Monuments, and Robbers of Churches. 10. Of the
Destruction of Monuments under King Henry VIII. and Edward VI. with Queen
Elizabeth's Care for the Preservation of them. Her Proclamation, in the Second
of her Reign, against defacing them. Here we have Remarks upon some
Schismatics of those times, as Hacket, Coppinger, Arthington and Penry. 11. Of
the Conversion of our Nation from Paganism; including the Foundation of
Religious Houses, and the Piety of the Primitive Times, from ancient
Authorities, especially of the old Poets, Robert of Gloucester, Chaucer,
Harding, etc. 12. Of their falling from the said Piety; showing the Degeneracy
of the Clergy, their spiritual Monopolies, Adulteries, etc. in Prose, from
ancient Histories and Records; and in Poetry from Petrarch, Gower's Vox
Clamantis, Chaucer, and the Leiger-Book of Rufford Abbey. 13. The Extinction of
the Pope's Authority in England; with three Letters of King Henry the VIII. for
abrogating the same. 14. The Policy used by the said King and his Council in
expelling the Pope's Authority; beginning with a Letter from the Duke of
Norfolk and Viscount Rochford to Cromwell for the Invitation of P. Melanchton
over. A Proof of the Supremacy of Kings, from the Chartulary of King Offa, for
the Foundation of St. Albans. A Letter of Bishop Shaxton to Cromwell,
persuading him to persevere in shaking off the Pope's Authority, with a
Character of the King's Council. 15. Their Policy for the extirpation of
Religious Houses and Orders. Of the Reformation of Religion: Of Inscriptions in
Churches. The King's Warrant for the Surrender of religious Houses. An
Information to Queen Elizabeth of the Abuses of the Power given by her Father
for the Suppression of Abbeys. And here we have some Instruments of Surrendry,
as of the Prior of St. Andrew's in Northampton, St. Francis in Stamford from
the Records in the Office of Augmentation. Some ancient Inscriptions, which
were defaced, with the Pictures of the Trinity, Christ, Holy Lamb, etc. Also
some Indulgences and Pardons on the Walls of Churches, which were defaced; and
Inscriptions on the Bells. 16. The Time of the Institution of Religious Orders
in the Church; their several Names and Authors, with the infinite increase of
their Fraternities and Sisterhoods; with their Corruptions, set forth by
Chaucer, and in the Vision of Piers Plowman, the Author of which he calls
Robert Longland, sive Johannes Malverne. Among other Orders, here is an Account
of the Carmelites, from John Bale's large Treatise of that Order, a MS. in the
Hands of Robert Treswell Esquire and a Translation, from his English Votaries of
Nigellus Wircker in Speculo Stultorum, of some Verses upon the Friars and Nuns.
After his Summary of these Orders, which were at the Dissolution, he speaks of
the Anchorites and Hermits, which were also dispersed about. And of an old
Psalter, translated by Richard the Hermit, extant in the Earl of Exeter's
Library, with Specimens of the Old-English Language; as also from another
Psalter, quoted by Seldom, englished about the time of Edward II. etc. 17. Of
the various Ways by which the Clergy enriched themselves: Of Pardons,
Pilgrimages and Romescot. The Articles of the Bull of the Holy Jubilee, copied
from a Roll belonging to Sir Simon D'Ewes. The Tax upon those who would receive
the Grace thereof. Articles of the Bull of Dispensation with Simony, Usury,
etc. Piers Plowman quoted upon the Popes, Cardinals, Pardons, and Pilgrimages.
18. Of Parishes, Bishoprics; the Power and Sanctity of Bishops and Priests; of
Sanctuaries; and the Ecclesiastical State of England and Wales. Concluding with
a Table of all Ecclesiastical Promotions at the Taxation of the First Fruits
and Tenths; with the yearly value of each Bishopric, Deanery, and
Archdeaconry, and the Tenth of the Clergy in every Diocese: At the end of
which it appears, the number of Benefices were 8803. And here ends these
preliminary Discourses, consisting of 196 Pages.

In the next Page begins his Collection, with the Funeral Monuments in the
Diocese of CANTERBURY. And here, having spoken of the Foundation of Christ
Church, he enters within the said Cathedral, to speak also of the eminent
Persons buried there; and begins with Archbishop Becket, who was slain in this
Church by four of the King's Guard on the 28th of Dec. 1170. and of whose Life,
Death, Sepulture, Shrine, etc. we have here a Narrative in six Pages. Hence we
pass to the sumptuous Monument of Edward the Black Prince, who died 8 June
1376, in the 46th Year of his Age; with his Epitaph in French, and a
Translation of it into English: Also a short Character of him from Samuel
Daniel, in English, and from the compendious Chronicle of Canterbury, written
by T. Haselwood a Canon of Leeds, in Latin. This is followed with some
Characters of King Henry IV. also buried here; in Poetry, from the Additions to
Robert of Gloucester, from John Harding, and (in Latin) from John Gower's
Tripartite Chronicle, a MS. also from his English Ballad to this King; and in
Prose, from Caxton's Continuation of Polychronicon, and Fabian. Also a Copy of
the said King's Will: With his last Words at his Death, as recorded by John
Harding. Here are also Accounts of his two Wives buried here. And other like
Memorials of Margaret Duchess of Clarence, and her Husbands John Earl of
Somerset, and Thomas Duke of Clarence; with a Character of this last from
Harding's Chronicle. A little further we have short Histories of the
Archbishops of this See, buried here; the first of whom was Cuthbert, who died
758. The next here mentioned is Odo Severus. Next we have Accounts of Laufranc,
who died 1089; and A^selme, who died 1109. The next are Theobald, Richard,
H^bert, and Stephen Langton, who died 1228; of which last here is a Character
out of Harding. Next, of John Peckham, who died 1294; and W. Reynolds. Simon
Mepham, John Stratford, John Ufford, and Simon Islip, who died 1366. W.
Wittlesey, and Simon Sudbury, murdered by the Kentish Rebels 1381. Tho. Arundel
1413, whose Praise is here recorded in Latin Verse, out of John Gower's
Tripartite Chronicle. The next is H. Chichley, who died 1443, whose Inscription
we have here. Also of John Stafford and John Kemp, who died 1453. These are
followed by the like Accounts of T. Bourchier, John Morton, H. Deane, and W.
Warham; with a brief Description of the Ceremonies of his Inthronement, the
sumptuous Feast upon that Occasion, and the Verses celebrating the same, taken
from the Record thereof more at large, which we find to have been printed many
Years before See The Account of the Euniture of the Inthronization of W. Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury; with the Entertainment of the Emperor Charles V.
Henry VIII. Cardinal Wolsey, and many of the Nobility, etc. by the said
Archbishop: Also the Bills of Fare for the several Days. Imprinted on a Paper
Roll above three Yards long. Land. 1560. 1561.
: This Archbishop died 1532; and our Author finds no other Archbishops buried
here, but Cardinal Pole, whom he reserves for another Book. Next we have some
Accounts of Sir William Molyneux, Sir John Guilford, Sir Thomas Fogge, etc.
Also the Epitaphs of several Priors and other Ecclesiastics here buried. Then
we proceed to the like Memorials of others interred in the other Churches in
Canterbury; and likewise of the Foundations of the religious Houses there. Here
we have King Ethelbert's Charter, for the Foundation of the Monastery of St.
Peter and St. Paul, commonly called St. Austins: With further Memoirs of him,
and his Wife, Queen Berta; and of other Kings of Kent. An Account of St.
Augustine the first Archbishop of this See, from John Harding, and others: Also
of several succeeding Archbishops, and of sundry Abbots buried in this
Monastery, which were at least 70. The Abbots of this House were ever Barons in
Parliament: And the yearly Revenues of it in the Exchequer above 1412 l. In
Hakington, or St. Stephen's Church by Canterbury, we have a short Epitaph of
John Gower Vicar of that Church, who died 1457. And some Notice of Sir Roger
Manwood's Almshouses. The Legend of the Foundation of Minster Abbey in the
Isle of Tenet, from Capgrave. In Sibbertswood, an Account of the Philpots;
especially that worthy Lord Mayor of London Sir John Philpot, who with Sir W.
Walworth, performed such good Services against Wat. Tyler, and against the
Spanish Pirates, taking fifteen of their Ships; for which gallant Action he was
most ungratefully accused by the sloathful Nobility. Chiselherst is remarked,
only for being the Burial-Place of the Wasinghams. In Dover Church, the
Ashtons. At Folkston, some Reflections on the Policy of the ancient Clergy, in
making of Saints. In Lidde, some Account of St. Crispin and Crispinian. In
Bilsington, an Account of the Mansels. In Asford, several of the Fogges; and
some goodly Pourtraitures in the Windows, of King Edward III. Edward the Black
Prince, Richard Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl Rivers, the Lord Hastings,
Scales, etc. In Feversham, besides the Monuments, an Account of the Foundation
of the Abbey by King Stephen; also some historical Remarks upon him and his
Queen Maud, and Eustace their Son. In Settingborn, of the Crowmers, one of whom
was sacrificed in Jack Cade's Rebellion 1450. In Shepey, the Foundation of
Minster Nunnery; with a List of the Constables of Queenborough Castle. In
Ulcombe, of Archbishop Courtney, and his College of secular Priests. In Bocton
Malherb, the Family of the Wottons; and in Pluckley, that of the Derings. In
Charing, of the Brents; and especially that mad Warrior Fulco de Brent; and of
the Church being consumed in 1590, by the Fire it caught from a Gun, discharged
at a Pigeon perched thereon. In Sevington, of the Barrys and the Finches. Here
ends the Account of Burials and Inscriptions in this Diocese, which is
followed with a Narrative of the Archbishops of Canterbury, who were canonized
Saints; beginning with St. Austin, and the fabulous Legend of the Judgment upon
the Natives of a Town in Dorsetshire, who disregarding his Doctrine were born
with Fishes Tails, as written by Alex. Esseby; and those of Strode in Kent, for
a Contempt of Tho. Becket and his Horse, in cutting off his Tail, born with
Tails of Horses or other Beasts, according to the foolish Assertion of Pol.
Virgil. These Archbishops thus canonized, of whom we have here a short History
or Character, are thirteen in number, ending with St. Edmund, who died 1242.
And this Part concludes at Page 307, with some Observations upon the
Enlargement of the Archbishopric, and the Contentions between Canterbury and
York for the Primacy. Hence we pass to

Ancient Funeral Monuments within the Diocese of ROCHESTER. "This Bishopric,
says our Author, is so overshadowed by the nearness and greatness of the Sea of
Canterbury, that it looks but like a good Benefice for one of his Grace's
Chaplains; yet for Antiquity and Dignity of a long Succession of Reverend Lord
Bishops, it may equally compare with its Neighbor of Canterbury." For they had
both one Founder, Ethelbert King of Kent; who built this Church to the Honor
of St. Andrew, and endowed it; whereof Justus a Roman was consecrated Bishop by
St. Augustine. Here follows a short Description of the City; the Limits of the
Diocese, and the four Deaneries it consists of: The Valuation in the
Exchequer; First Fruits, and Peter Pence: That eighty one Bishops (more by nine
than in Canterbury) have sat in the Chair of Rochester; and the present Bishop
is Dr. John Bowls; but more particularly of the three first Successors of
Justus, named Paulinus, Gundulphus, and Gilbertus, who were buried here, though
no Monuments remain of them. Then we come to Walter de Merton Bishop of this
See, who founded Merton College in Oxford; whose Monument here was renewed by
Sir Henry Savile Warden of that College; and by the Inscription thereon, it
appears the said Bishop died 1277. After three Bishops more, here mentioned,
our Author observes, That he finds no more of this Diocese to have been buried
in this Cathedral Church; because commonly they were removed to another See,
before they were translated to another Life, this Preferment being only a Step
to a higher: Therefore after a Word or two of St. William the Baker and Martyr,
here inshrined from Capgrave; and the like of the Priory, our Author proceeds
to other Churches, the rest of the Funeral Monuments in this, being of later
Times; which he reserves for another Volume. At Ailesford, we have an Account
of the Interment of Catigern the Brother of King Vortimer, and Horsa the Saxon,
who killed each other in a pitched Battle. In Otteham, the Foundation of the
Abbey there; and also of Begham Priory; with some Account of the Sackviles, and
also of Sir Robert Turnham, from Robert of Gloucester. In Pensherst, the
Monument of Sir Stephen Pensherst; with the Copy of a Record from the Tower
concerning him, dated the first of King Edward I. Here also is mention made of
the renowned Family of the Sidneys, buried in this Place, more particularly Sir
Robert, and his elder Brother Sir Philip Sidney, who was shot before Zutphen in
Gelderland the 22d of September, died at Arnheim the 16th of October 1586, and
was buried most magnificently at St. Paul's Cathedral, London, the 16th of
February following: And here we have his Epitaph, imitated from that composed
by Isaac du Bellay in memory of the Sieur de Bonivet, and some Elegies made
upon him both in Latin and English by King James. In Tunbridge, we have some
Account of the Lord Staffords; the Clares and Audleys Earls of Gloucester, and
Andrew Jud Founder of the Free School here. In Sevenoke, an Account of the poor
Foundling there named William Sevenoke, who, in 1418, was Lord Mayor of London,
and then built a Hospital and a Free School in the said Town where he was
found. In Chidingston, of the Willoughbys. In Cobham and in Shorn, the ancient
Family of the Cobhams; the Braybrokes and Brooks; who were also since Lords
thereof. Swanscombe, noted for the resort of Madmen in Pilgrimage, for the help
of St. Hildeforth. In Stone, of Sir Richard Wingfield Knight of the Garter. In
Dartford, an Account of the Priory. In Lesnes, of the Lucies. In Eltham, of the
Ropers. And in Lewsham, an Account of the Foundation of the Priory. In
Greenwich, of the Consecration of the Church to St. Aelphege, with the
Foundation of the Friery and the Priory. In Deptford, Pope Martin's Bull to the
Staple Merchants for a portable Altar, and a Mass-Priest. Election of their
Priest and Confessor. The Form of an Absolution. The Definition of a Merchant.
What Pedlars are; and what the Staple. In Chetham, a Narrative of a strange
Burial by priestly Delusion in this Churchyard, as related by Lambard in his
Perambulation of Kent. In Otford, an Account of some Battles anciently fought
by Saxons and Danes there; where Alrick the last King of Kent was slain: Also
of St. Bartilmew a good Purveyor of Poultry for the Parson of the Town; all the
Women therein who desired to have Male Children, offering him a Cock-chicken,
and all who coveted Females, a Hen. Likewise of the Worship paid to St. Tho.
Becket in this Town; and the Miracles he wrought here; as the springing a Well
out of dry Ground; enjoining no Nightingale to sing thereabout, because one had
disturbed him in his Prayers; which is as true doubtless as that other pious
Prohibition of any Smith to thrive in the Parish, because one had pricked his
Horse in shoeing. Here, from the Victories of the Kentish Men over the Danes in
Holmes Dale, and the many brave Warriors interred there, our Author takes
occasion to conclude this Part with some general Characters of this flourishing
County of Kent, beginning with Michael Drayton's Encomium, and Mr. Selden's
Notes upon the Place; concerning their throwing off the Norman Yoke; with John
of Salisbury's Testimony, That Kentish Men had to his Time the Prerogative of
the Vantguard in the Wars. More particularly of the Gentry and Yeomanry of
Kent; which with several Instances of their Privileges and Prerogatives;
together with the Courage and Happiness of the Church in upholding her Rights
against the Monks, and even Archbishops, and maintaining her Chair immoveably
in this one Place, brings us, at Page 349, to an End of the Observations upon
this little See of Rochester. The next is

Ancient Funeral Monuments within the Diocese of LONDON. These are introduced
with several Commendations of this famous Metropolis in Verse and Prose, by
John Johnston, Sir Robert Dallington, Speed, Robert of Gloucester, Camden,
Adrian Junius, W. Warner, and Robert Fabian. So we enter into St. Paul's
Cathedral, founded by King Ethelbert; and here we have his Charter, with the
Donations and Confirmations of his Royal Successors, and other Benefactors. The
present Government, Extent, and Value of the Bishopric. Whence we proceed to
the Monuments; beginning with King Sebba's, so pass to other Saxon Princes, and
several Bishops of London, who were here interred, particularly, that William,a
Norman, who was Bishop of this Diocese at the Conquest, and who obtained of
William the Conqueror, a Grant to this City, of Liberties in as ample a Manner,
as it enjoyed them under Edward the Confessor: Which in our modern English runs
thus, " William, King, greets William, Bishop, and Godfrey, Portgrave, and all
the Borough of London, French, and English, friendly. And I make known to you,
that ye be worthy to enjoy all That Law and Privilege which ye did in the Days
of King Edward: And I will That every Child be his Father's Heir after his
Father's Decease: And I will not suffer that any Man do unto you any Injury.
God you keep." But because the Words of this Grant (which was sealed with green
Wax) were written in the English spoken at the Conquest, that is, the Saxon
Tongue; we have here gratified the Curious with a Transcript of it at the
bottom of the Page Williem, King, grets Williem, Bisceop, and Godfred,
Porteresan, and ea^ ya Burghwarn binnen London, Frencisce and Englise,
frendlice. And ickiden eoy, yeet ic will yeet git ben ealra weera lagay weore,
ye get weeran on Eadwards daege Kings: And ic will yeet aelc child by his fader
yrfnume. aefter his faders daege: And ic nelle ge wolian yeet aenig Man coy
aenis wrang beode, God coy heald.
. We have here also some Inscriptions and Memoirs of certain noble Personages,
who were there buried; as John of Gaunt, and his Wives, Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, Sir Simon Burley Knight of the Garter, Sir Ralph Hengham Chief Justice
of the King's Bench. The like also of Dr. John Colet the Dean of this Church,
William Lily the Grammarian, Dr. Tho. Linaker, W. Harington the Apostolic
Prothonotary, Sir John Poultney the famous Lord Mayor, John Nevil Lord Latimer,
Sir John Beauchamp Lord Admiral, who died 1360, whose Tomb by the Ignorant, has
been called Duke Humphrey's, but who indeed had none here, he being buried at
St. Albans; however, upon that fond Conceit, some Men would, latterly, have
Meetings here on St. Andrew's-Day, says Stow, and conclude on a Breakfast or
Dinner, as assuming themselves to be Servants, or to hold diversity of Offices
under the said Duke Humphrey. Here we have also Margaret the second Wife of
John Talbot, the renowned Earl of Shrewsbury; who died in June 1468. And
because in our Annals, Brute is reported to have been buried in this City, of
his own Foundation, we have here his Story recorded, as it is generally
received. Then follows an Account of some Jews in this City, who crucified
English Children in derision of our Savior and his Sufferings on the Cross. An
Account of the Cloister of Pardon Churchyard, on the north Side of the
Cathedral, where the finest Monuments were erected, and round the Walls of
which was artfully painted the celebrated Dance of Paul's, or Death's Dance,
being the Picture of Death, leading forth all Degrees of Men. With an Account
of the demolishing the Chapel in that Yard, founded by Tho. Becket's Father,
and other adjacent Chapels and Monuments in St. Paul's, by Edward Duke of
Somerset. Some further mention of Sir John Poultney and his Benefactions. And
of several Shrines in honor of Holy Persons buried here. Also the Dimensions
of the Cathedral or Edifice itself, and Altitude, being 534 Foot high from the
Ground, before it was fired with Lightning in 1087. With a Comparison between
this Cathedral and that of Nostre Dame at Paris. As to the Succession of
Bishops in this See of London, they were 89 in number, Bishop Laud governing
the same at this time. And these Remarks upon this Church concludes with an
Account of the Cardinals thereof. So we move on to St. Faiths, St. Martins,
Ludgate, Christ-Church, Black-Fryars, and the rest of the Parishes, giving an
Account of their Religious Foundations, the Interments, and ancient
Inscriptions in them; of which we cannot be further expressive than to observe,
that the most considerable Persons and Antiquities most copiously treated of
are, in St. John Zacharies, Tho. Thorp Baron of the Exchequer, who was beheaded
by the Rebels in 1461. In St. Michael's Woodstreet, the Head of James IV. King
of Scots, who was slain in the Battle of Flodden-Field, 9 Sept. 1513. with
other curious Remarks upon this King, from Stow, the Lieger-Book of Whalley
Abbey, Bishop Lesly, Camden, and John Jonston's historical Inscriptions of the
Scottish Kings. In St. Mary Aldermanbury, upon occasion of a Man's Shank-Bone
twenty eight Inches long, hanging in the Cloister about this Churchyard, we
have a short Dissertation upon Giants, from the Verses of Havillan a Poet, who
flourished above four hundred Years before our Author's writing hereof, as
quoted by Camden in Cornwall; also from Robert of Gloucester's poetical
Chronicle, from Ralph the Monk of Coggeshal, and Selden's Notes on Drayton's
Polyolbion. In St. Laurence in the Jewry, we have a short Account of the Family
of the Bullens. In Guild Hall Chapel, on account of an Inscription upon the
Emperor Charles V. and King Henry VIII. is shown why the Title of Defender of
the Faith was attributed to them: And in Mercer's Chapel, an Account of the
noble Family of the Butlers. In St. Mary Aldermary, some Notice of the Blounts
Lords Mountjoy. In St. Michael's Paternoster, the Foundation of Whittington
College, by Richard Whittington four times Lord Mayor of London; who was three
times buried in his own Church; with his Latin Epitaph; and some further
Memorial of his Benefactions. In St. Michael's Crooked Lane, the Burial and
Epitaph of Sir William Walworth Lord Mayor of London, who slew Wat Tyler the
Rebel, and died 1383. In St. Peter's Cornhill, an Inscription asserting it to
be the first Church founded in London, by King Lucius, Anno 179. and further of
the Archbishop's See he founded in this City, and the Succession therein. In
St. Bartholmew's Exchange, of Empson and Dudley. In Augustine Friars, the
Burials of Bohun Earl of Essex, Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel, John Vere
Earl of Oxford, William Marquess Berkeley, Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham,
and Edward eldest Son of Edward the Black Prince. In Crouched Friars, John
Bartelot's Petition to Secretary Cromwell against the Prior of the said Crosed
Friars, who was found naked in Bed with a Wench at noonday. In St. Katherine's
by the Tower, the Burial of the puissant John Holland Duke of Exeter, who died
1447. In St. Botolph's Algate, some of the Darcies. In Clerkenwell, of the
Foundation and Prioresses there. In the Charter House, the Foundation by Sir
Walter Manny Knight of the Garter, and famous in the French Wars, who died
1371. In the White Friars, of that valiant and victorious Commander also in
those Wars, Sir Robert Knolles, and his Benefactions, who was buried in 1407.
In Black Friars, in Holborne, a Character of that noble Benefactor Hubert de
Burgo Earl of Kent, who died 1243. In the Temple Church, of its Foundation, and
the Knights Templars; with some Monuments there of the Marshalls Earls of
Pembroke; and others buried there. In the Savoy, of its Foundation by Peter
Earl of Savoy; its Destruction by the Kentish Rebels, and its Reparation by
King Henry VII. and Queen Mary; with the Ordinances and Rules of the Hospital
by the Founder. There are a few more Foundations and Inscriptions mentioned of
the Roll's Chapel, St. Martin's, St. James's, etc. So we come to Westminster.
And here, as the Foundation thereof with the ancient Monuments have since been
more publicly historized, we shall only name those eminent Persons, with the
Dates of their Death, who are most distinctly commemorated by our Author. And
these are, Edward the Confessor, 1066. and his Wife Edith, 1074. Queen Maud
Wife of King Henry I. 1118. King Henry III. 1273. and Edward I. 1307. Queen
Eleanor, 1290. King Edward III. 1377. and his Queen Philippa, 1369. King
Richard II. 1399. and his Queen Anne, 1394. King Henry V. 1422. and his Queen
Katherine, 1437. King Henry VII. 1509. and his Queen Elizabeth, 1503. Margaret
Countess of Richmond, 1509. Queen Anne Wife of Richard III. 1485. Edmund Earl
of Lancaster, and William de Valence Earl of Pembroke, both in 1296. Simon
Langham Archbishop of Canterbury, 1376. Tho. Ruthal Bishop of Durham, 1524.
John Islip the Abbot, 1510. And lastly, Geffery Chaucer, 1400. (but falsely, as
may appear below Dr. Fuller, in his Worthies of England, has rightly observed
(though he gives us no Authority for it) That Chaucer was living in 1402. for in
that Year I find he wrote and dated one of his Poems entitled, The Letter of
Cupid. However Mr. Brigham, by his Date upon the Monument he erected in honor
of this Poet at Westminster, Anno 1555. puts a Period to his Life even two
Years before that Date of Chaucer's; in which Error many others besides our
Author have implicitly followed him.
.) With several Characters of him, as collected in the Narrative of his Life,
before an old Edition of his Works, by Tho. Speght. After which, our Author
concludes his Account of the Monuments in this Abbey, with Edward the
Confessor's Charter of Sanctuary, and a Memento for Mortality, in Verse. Then
follow some short Accounts of certain Chapels, Hospitals, and other Religious
Foundations which were adjacent, or in distant Parts of the City, and seem to
have been before omitted. Among these are the Chapel of our Lady in the Piew;
which, with the Image of our Lady richly decked, was burnt to Ashes; and
re-edified by Anthony Wideville Earl Rivers, etc. who was unjustly beheaded by
Richard III. St. Peter's Chapel within the Tower; where we have a pretty large
Account of John Fisher Bishop of Rochester: With his Letter to King Henry VIII.
to clear away the Imputation of his being of the Council with Elizabeth Barton
the Holy Maid of Kent, who pronounced some treasonable Menaces against the
King, if he proceeded in his intended Divorce: Also another Letter of his to
Secretary Cromwell, concerning the Oath of Supremacy; both from the Cotton
Library. Also the Tenor of the said Bishop's Indictment; with Verses on him, by
Adr. Junius and Corn. Musius in opposition. The like Particulars we have of Sir
Tho. More; and also of the foresaid Tho. Cromwell Earl of Essex; with some
Letters written by, and Verses upon them: Concluding with a List of the
Services done by the said Cromwell to King Henry, from the Autograph in the
Exchequer. Then we have some Account of Queen Anne Bullein, and Queen Catharine
Howard. So we pass to the Notice of some ancient Burials in the Fields about
London; especially certain British Kings. The uncertain Burial of the young
Princes Edward and Richard, murdered 1483. Then we come to the Towns about
London; as Chelsey, and the Burial there of Sir Tho. More; with his
Inscription. In Kensington, an Explanation of the Remembrancer's Office, on
occasion of one buried there who had executed the same. In the Account of Sion
Monastery, Rich. Layton's Letter to Secretary Cromwell, certifying the
Incontinence of the Nuns and Friars there. In Hackney, an Explanation of the
Offices of Auditor and Filazer, upon the mentioning some Persons buried there,
who bore those Offices. And here we have the Monument of Christopher Urswick
the King's Almoner, who died 1521, much praised for refusing so many
Ecclesiastical Preferments, and contenting himself with a private Parsonage:
Therefore thought an Example for all our great Prelates to admire, and for few
or none to imitate, says our Author. After a few ancient Inscriptions more in
four or five other Parish Churches about London, we come to those in
HERTFORDSHIRE, the Ecclesiastical Government of some Part thereof belonging to
this Diocese of London, as the rest, to that of Lincoln: But because this is
so large, our Author is so free as to borrow the Inscriptions which belong to
that Diocese, and print them with those which are properly for London. Here
the Interment of several ancient Families is mentioned under the respective
Parishes of this County; but none amply commemorated till we arrive at St.
Albans, and there we have several Particulars, in Prose and Verse, upon the
Protomartyr of that Name; with the Foundation of the Abbey. Also some
Characters in praise of Humphry Duke of Gloucester there buried, from Camden
and Abbot Whethamsted; with some Intimations of Queen Margaret's fatal Malice
toward him; his being strangled in 1446; his Benefactions to Oxford, and this
Abbey; the Epitaph pencil'd on the Wall near his Tomb; with an Item of the
Miracle which he wrought upon the blind Impostor. And here we have the
Succession of all the Abbots of St. Albans from the Foundation by King Offa
down to John Whethamsted aforesaid; of whom, more copiously than of all the
rest, especially his Benefactions, Buildings, etc. with abundance of Verses and
Inscriptions in Latin thereon. Here also we have an English Inscription
declaring this Town to be the Birthplace of Sir John Mandevile that famous
Traveller, who wrote in three Languages his Itinerary of thirty three Years:
Also his Latin Epitaph in Prose and Verse on his Tomb in the City of Liege, as
copied by our Author from thence, by which it appears Sir John died on the 16th
of November 1371. Further of several eminent Persons buried here, who have no
Inscriptions; as Egfrid King of the Mercians, who died Anno 796. Robert Mowbray
Earl of Northumberland, and Monk, who died 1106. And Alexander Necham Abbot of
Cirencester, who died 1217. Then follow Drayton's Verses on the Foundation and
Fall of this Abbey; a short Memorial of some Nobility slain in this Town in the
Quarrel of York and Lancaster, from some ancient Verses of John Gower and
Harding. Also certain Epitaphs in Latin for several religious Persons and
others here interred, by the Abbot Whethamsted aforesaid: Concluding with a
short Account of the Privileges of this Abbey. So we proceed to other Churches
in this County, and the Inscriptions in them till we come to Sopwell, and some
adjacent Spittles; near which, they have the large Manor of Gorombery, where
the Lord Keeper Sir Nicholas Bacon, a Man of rare Wit and deep Experience,
built a Seat; the Ornaments and Inscriptions whereon, and especially in the
Banqueting House, are here described. At Redborne, we have an Account of St.
Amphibalus the Martyr. In Mergate, the remarkable Petition of three Nuns there,
from an old MS. in the Cotton Library: The Words whereof are significant and
modest, if not misinterpreted. In Kings Langley, the Foundation of the Friery,
and a Character of Edmund Plantaginet Duke of York, from Harding and Stow, who
says he died 1402. Also of Pierce Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, from Speed, Robert
of Gloucester, Stow, Daniel, Leland, and some Records in the Tower. In Standon,
a Character of Sir Ralph Sadleir. In Digswell, an Explanation of the Word
Esquire; and hence, after a Parish or two more, we are led into ESSEX, and a
View of the Religious Foundations, with the Monuments and Inscriptions therein,
beginning at Westham with the Foundation and Interments there: Also an
Explanation of the Office of Sewar. At Barking, an Account of the first Nunnery
in England. At Ralegh, Copies of some rhiming Deeds of Gift by Edward the
Confessor, King Athelstane, and William the Conqueror. At Malden, of Cunobeline
or Kimbaline King of Britain, and some of the Darcies. At Colchester, of the
first Builder thereof Prince Coel, and of the Abbey founded by Robert Lord
Fitzwater. At Earls Colne, of the ancient Family of the Veres; and further of
them in Castle Henningham. In Sible Heningham, an Account of the famous Sir
John Hawkewood a Tanner's Son in this Village, bred a Tailor, but being pressed
into the Wars under King Edward III. performed such gallant Actions that he was
knighted by that King, married the Daughter of the Duke of Milan's Brother,
died 1394, and had a noble Equestrian Monument erected to his Memory, by the
Florentines; also one in this Church, and another in the Priory of Heningham
Castle. In Saffron Walden, the Inscription of Thomas Lord Audley. Here also
somewhat of Audley End, and of Geffrey de Mandevile Earl of Essex, the Founder
of Walden Abbey, who being slain with an Arrow, was hung up in his Coffin on a
Tree in the old Temple Orchard in London, because, being excommunicated, the
Knights Templars could not bury him. Here also of Humphrey Earl of Buckingham,
and his Character in Latin Verse, from Gower's Vox Clamantis. In Little Easton,
of the Bourchiers, Earls of Essex. At Little Dunmow, the Burial of Matilda the
Fair, Daughter of Robert Fitzwater, the most valiant Knight of his time. Here
it appears that King John's unlawful Love of this Lady was one Cause of the
Barons Wars: And for her Refusal to consent to him, she was poisoned in an Egg,
Anno. 1213. Her banished Father then served in the French Wars; where he so
valiantly overthrew one of his own Countrymen who had given a Challenge, that
King John received him into his Favor, and restored him to his Estate, where
he flourished long in Honor and Riches, and dying 1234, was here buried near
his Daughter. In Boreham, of the Radcliffes Earls of Sussex, and their
succeeding to the Inheritance and Honors of those Fitzwaters; with Queen
Mary's Grant of License to Henry Radcliffe Earl of Sussex, for wearing of
Coifes or Caps in her Presence. In Pleshy, of Thomas Plantaginet Duke of
Gloucester, who at Calais was smothered under a Bed 1397, by the Procurement of
Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshal. Here we have the Epitaph of Eleanor his Duchess;
and a further Account of him and his Death from Gower's Latin Poem aforesaid, a
MS. in the Cotton Library. In Waltham Abbey, of King Harold the Founder, and of
Cordelion, the Title of King Richard I. but the Act of one of his special
Familiars, Hugh Nevill. In Upminster, the Monument of Gerard Dewes. In Great
Thorndon, of the Tyrells; and in Ashdon, of the Cloptons: And here ends the
Monuments in the County of Essex.

Then follow Additions of Epitaphs in the City of LONDON, of which few or none
are remaining in the Churches. Beginning with part of an Inscription that was
in St. Paul's for Sir Pain Roet, Guyen King of Arms, Father of Catherine Wife
of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and Anne Wife of Chaucer the Poet. In St.
Giles's Cripplegate, the Interment of Sir John Wriothesley Garter Principal
King at Arms, is mentioned; and the Patent for his Creation 18 Edw. IV.
recited: And here takes occasion to give us several Sections upon the Heralds
and their Office, as the Manner of Creating them, the Oath, and Necessaries to
be provided for the Ceremony: With a Catalogue, showing, what Kings of Arms
were in former Ages, and now out of Use in this Realm: Also the Succession of
the King's Heralds, and Pursuivants of Arms, with the Privileges granted to
them; their College, and Body Corporate, in 27 Pages; ending with a Reference
to Sir Henry Spelman's Account of the Heralds College in his Glossary. In St.
Michael le Querne, we have an Account of John Leland's laborious Collections of
the Antiquities of this Kingdom, as we have it from his own New Year's- Gift to
King Henry VIII. which is here inserted: But he died frantic in 1552. which is
thought the Cause that many of his Works were not printed. In St. Botolph's
Aldersgate, some Inscriptions of the Cavendishes, especially that John
Cavendish Esquire who slew Wat. Tyler, 4 Ric. II. with an Account of the Offices of
Clerk of the Pipe, Clerk of the Privy Seal, and Sergeant at Arms. In St.
Michael Bashishaw, a further Account of some Ancestors of Sir Simon D'Ewes,
with the Fenestral Portraits of two of them. After some few short Inscriptions
that were in three or four Parishes more, the Author concludes with these
Words, "Many Monuments of the Dead in Churches in and about this City of
London, as also in some Places in the Country are covered with Seats or Pews,
made high and easy, for the Parishioners to sit and sleep in; a Fashion of no
long Continuance, and worthy of Reformation." Then, as before of the other
Diocesses, is described that of London. Also, more particularly, the Situation
and Dimensions of Middlesex and Essex; the Battles therein anciently fought;
and the Burials of the Dead there; which is followed with a short Account of
the Bishops of London who were canonized Saints. And here ends our Author's
Review of the said Diocese of London, at Page 716. The rest of the Book
consists of

Ancient Monuments in the Diocese of NORWICH. Beginning with Dunwich in
Sussex: The ancient State of it, also the more modern, from a large Treatise of
Dunwich, written in Queen Mary's Reign, by a nameless Author, to one Mr. Dey;
in the Custody of Sir Simon D'Ewes. In St. Edmundsbury, we have a short History
of the Foundation of the Abbey; the Burials therein; an Interpretation of the
Words, Conge d'eslire, (from Dr. Cowel:) Also a Character of John Lidgate Monk
of Bury, a noted Poet in his Time, who died about 1440. In St. Mary's, several
of the Drurys: And in Clare, a Dialogue, from an old MS. Roll, in Latin and
English Verse, between a Secular and a Friar at the Grave of Dame Joan of
Acres; showing the lineal Descent of the Lords of the Honor of Clare, from the
Foundation of the Friery, Anno 1248 to 1460. Further of this Lady Joan, who was
Countess of Gloucester, and of Lionell Duke of Clarence, who were both buried
here. In Stoke Clare, of Edmund Mortimer Earl of March; his miserable Bondage
and Death 1424. With an Account also thereof from Harding. In Sudbury, an
Account of the Burial of Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury, and his
Foundations, his Preferments, and Slaughter in Wat. Tyler's Rebellion, with an
Account thereof from Gower's Vox Clamantis: As also a further Description of
that Insurrection from the said Poem. In Hadley, we have a short History in
Prose and Verse of Gurmond the Danish King, christened Athelstane. In
Woodbridge and Ufford, the noble Family of the Uffords Earls of Suffolk,
particularly Ralph de Ufford the wicked Lord Chief Justice of Ireland. In
Letheringham, the Wingfields and the Nauntons; with an Exposition of the Office
of the Court of Wards. In Wingfield, of the de la Poles Earls of Suffolk. In
Blithborrow, of Anna King of the East Angles, and his Issue. In Brom, the
Cornwallises. In Neyland, an Observation that all the Monuments in this Church
which bear any Face of Comeliness or Antiquity are erected to the Memory of
Clothiers. In Stoke, many of the Howards, with their monumental Effigies in
Wooden Cuts. A little further we have a Copy of certain Church Collections
within this County (of Suffolk) taken by William Harvey Clarencieux King of
Arms; among which we find the Fastolfs, Yaxleys, Walworths, Jernegans,
Sulyards, Wingfields, etc. Then we come to NORFOLK, the other Part of this
Diocese. Here we have the Foundation of the Bishop's See at Norwich, with a
Succession of the Bishops thereof. Then follow the Particulars of the Burials
there: Some Account of John Baconthorp the resolute little Doctor, and Sir
William Boleyn Great Grandfather to Queen Elizabeth, Robert Walsingham, Friar
John Thorp, and many others; ending with the Praise of Norwich, from the Latin
Verses of John Jonston in Camden, and their Translation by Philemon Holland. In
Thornage, we have an Account of the Highams; and Montaign's Observation that it
was the Surname of his Ancestors: Here also of Sir Nicholas Bacon. In Hyngham,
of Sir Oliver de Ingham. In Tirrington, of Sir Frederick Tilney. In Narborough
and in Stow, of the Spelmans: And in Rougham, of the Yelvertons. In Hunstanton
of the Lestranges. In the Account of the Founding of Thetford Monastery, some
Memoirs of the Bigots, the Mowbrays, and Howards; with Praises of the Duke of
Norfolk, from Sir John Beaumont's Poem on the Battle of Bosworth-Field,
particularly of Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, and Duke of Norfolk, who died
1524, and was buried (as his Father John also was) here in Thetford Abbey; with
a Copy of a long Character inscribed on a Table affixed to his Monument. At
East Winch, more of the Howards, and Pictures of their Monuments in Howard
Chapel. Also Pourtraits of others of this noble Family, in the Churches of
Weeting and Farsfield. At Framlingham, of Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, and
Frances his Wife; also of Sir Thomas Wyat. The principal Names of Note further
descanted on, are the Heveninghams, Derhams, Knevets, Erpinghams, Filbriggs,
and the Glanviles, till we come to Walsingham, where we have an Account of the
Foundation of the Priory there, famous for the great Resort of Pilgrims to our
Lady as they called her, or the Virgin Mary; with Erasmus his Account of the
said Pilgrimage; the Building, and the Riches wherewith it was adorned. In
Loddon, an Account of the Foundation by Sir James Hobard; and in the Priory of
Carmelites or White Friars, an Account of the College of St. John Baptist,
refounded by John Fastolfe Esquire Father of Sir John Fastolfe that martial Knight
of the Garter, who had a fair Seat at Castre. Here we have also others of this
ancient Family mentioned; for the Souls of whom, the religious Votaries in and
about Yarmouth, were bound to pray; from the Collections of Thomas Talbot
Keeper of the Records in the Tower; as Margaret Wife of Sir John Fastolfe,
Daughter of Sir John Holbrook; and several others. In Snoring, an Inscription
of Sir Ralph Shelton; and an Acknowledgement of Thanks to Dr. Robert Pearson
Rector of this Church, our Author's Tutor at Queen's College, Cambridge.
Further of the Sheltons, in the Parish of that Name. In Tilney Smeeth, an
antique Sepulcher, upon which an Axle-Tree and Cart-Wheel are carved, in memory
of Hikifrick, who with those Weapons instead of Sword and Buckler, put to
flight an encroaching Landlord and all his Forces, who would have monopoliz'd
their Common. Much like what is here also recorded, of one Hay a Scotch Man,
who reinforced his Countrymen against the Danes, with no other Weapon than an
Ox Yoke, which is here also celebrated by Johnston the Scotch Poet before
mentioned. After which follows, The Succession, Names, and Number of the
Bishops of Dunwich, Elmham, and Norwich; and of such as had been reputed
Saints. Among which the ninth, was William de Ralegh, who was removed to
Winchester; and the fourteenth, Ralph de Walpole, translated to Ely; and the
last mentioned is Dr. Francis White, a learned Man, as his Works testify. But
from describing the Situation, Circuit, Commodities, etc. of this Diocese, as
he had done of London, our Author excuses himself, in that it had been already
exactly performed by Sir Henry Spelman in his Book called Icenia. And here ends
this Collection of Funeral Monuments at Page 871, as it should have been
printed in our Title of this Book; which, because it has preserved a great many
religious Foundations, and many hundred ancient Families (as may appear by the
Index alone, at the End) has been, and will be a Work of great Use to many
succeeding Collectors of our Antiquities, and Writers of our History, either
local or personal, general or particular; notwithstanding some Inaccuracies may
have escaped in it, as was before observed, whereof other Works are not exempt,
which adventure to revive such a Variety of ancient Memorials.

LII. ANTHROPOMETAMORPHOSIS: MAN TRANSFORMED: Or, the ARTIFICIAL CHANGELING;
historically presented, in the mad and cruel Gallantry, foolish Bravery,
ridiculous Beauty, filthy Fineness, and loathsome Loveliness of most NATIONS,
fashioning and altering their Bodies from the Mould intended by NATURE; with
FIGURES of those Transfigurations. To which artificial and affected
Deformations are added, all the native and national Monstrosities that have
appeared to disfigure the Human Fabric. With a Vindication of the regular
Beauty and Honesty of NATURE. And an Appendix of the Pedigree of the ENGLISH
GALLANT. Scripsit, J. B. Cognomento Chirosophus, M. D. Quarto, London 1653.
Pages 559, besides the Introduction, Table of Contents, etc.
AT the Beginning of this Edition (for the Book was first published in Twelves,
1650, without any Figures or Prints, but one in the Front, of diverse distorted
or disguised Heads and Faces) there is prefixed a comely Sculpture of the
Author Dr. John Bulwer, engraved by W. Faithorne; and likewise another Title of
the Book, not much differing from the true Title above, but seemingly added by
the Printer to advance the universal reading of the Author, being entitled, A
View of the People of the whole World, etc. Next we have a Device in Sculpture,
representing the awful Tribunal of Nature, by Commission from Heaven, trying
the artificial Changeling, or Miscreants of all Nations, for the abuse of their
Bodies; with a short Explanation. Then follows a Specimen of the Author's
Poetry, in an Anacephalaeosis or Recapitulation of his Work, intimated by the
Frontispiece; wherein he briefly recounts the many Scoffs and Rapes made on the
natural Form of the Human Body. After this we have the Author's Dedication to
his Friend Thomas Diconson; and likewise several epistolary Poems, some in
Latin, and others in English, to the Author in honor of his Performance; one
of these is written by Francis Goldsmith, anoby Adolet Hogeresa of High Cross.
There is also a Letter to the Author from R. Mason of the Middle Temple,
discovering the Ground of all Man's Prevarications. Next follows a short Hint
of the Use of this Treatise; also an anonymous Piece of Latin Poetry, called
Diploma Apollinis, being a Bull or Writ of Apollo for translating the Author to
the Celestial Orb. After, a List of near 300 Authors, Historians, Physicians,
Anatomists, Travelers, etc. referred to in this Work, we come to the
Introduction; which highly extols the native Beauty and Excellency of the human
Fabric; shows the Impiety of varying from Nature; and the depraved Figures
introduced thereby; "insomuch," says the Author, "that it may seem the first
Men only were made by God, but the rest were of Men's Invention: And," continues
he, "while we dispute in Schools, whether if it were possible, it were lawful
for Man to destroy any one Species of God's Creatures, though but of Toads and
Spiders; Because this were a taking away one Link of God's Chain, one Note of
his Harmony; we have taken away the Jewel at that Chain." He then recommends my
Lord Bacon's Opinion of the Helps toward Beauty, and good Features, and
reducing the Blemishes of Persons to their natural State: And so introduces his
Work.

The Work itself is represented in 24 Scenes, and is all along illustrated with
wooden Prints, of the Forms and Fashions treated of. Scene 1. Exhibits certain
Fashions of the Head, affected by diverse Nations; as Sugar Loaf Heads, long and
short Heads, round and broad Heads, thin narrow Heads, square Heads, Dog's
Heads, headless Nations, whose Countenance is in their Breast, and their Eyes
as it were in their Shoulders, as related, among other Ancients, by St.
Augustine, who says he saw them, and repeated by Sir John Mandevill, Sir Walter
Ralegh, Purchase, and others: Next, of horned Nations; and here is instanced the
Tale of one Margaret Owen an horned Welsh Woman. Hydrocephalos, or Heads
extended with Water between the Skin and Muscles; and Bicipites, or Men with
two Heads. Then is shown the Head's true Figure; and lastly, of Hard-heads and
Block-heads; and through this whole Scene are interspersed many philosophical
Observations upon the Brain's participating of the Figure of the Head, and its
being affected thereby. Scene 2. Treats of the Fashions of the Hair and
Hair-Rites; and first of bald-pated Men and Women; then of the natural Use and
Comeliness of the Hair, fantastical Tonsures, long haired Men, the Regulation
of the Hair and Tonsure, artificial Affectations of black and yellow Hair; the
tinging, anointing, powdering, plating, frizling, and curling of Hair; and
lastly, of Perukes: All illustrated with many historical Examples and
philosophical Reflections, as the other Scenes or Chapters are. Scene 3. Of
Frontal Fashions, and here of low, high, and broad Foreheads, prominent
Foreheads, cloudy Foreheads, Foreheads stigmatized, spotted and painted
Foreheads. Scene 4. Of Eye-brow Rites, beginning with Foreheads stiff strained
with Fillets, and Beetle Brows; then of the Beauty of the Eyebrows, hairless
and great Eyebrows, triangular and high-arched Eyebrows; Painters and Dyers
of Eyebrows. Scene 5. Of Eyelid Fashions; Eyelids distorted from the Eye,
the Use of Eyelids, and of the Hair on the Eyelids, Eradicators of the
Eyelid Hair; Painters of the Eyelid and Eyelid Hair. Scene 6. Of Properties
and Affectations of Eyes; amongst which, of one-eyed Nations, Nations without
Eyes, others with four Eyes, and Eyes misplaced; Eye Painters, sundry kinds of
Eyes, and which is most elegant. Scene 7. Of Forms of the Nose; Nations that
pare and cut off their Noses, slit Noses, short, long, and great Noses, Noses
turned broad upwards, flat and saddle Noses, ape-like and hawk Noses, the
natural Perfection and Beauty of the Nose; Nose-Jewels. Scene 8. Of Auricular
Fashions; Men with Ears down to their Feet, others who cover themselves with
their Ears, Earrings, Ears full of gilded Nails, with diverse other Marks of
auricular Bravery; and of the natural Proportion of the Ear. Scene 9. Of Cheek
Gallantry; Nations with artificial Scars in their Cheeks, others that bore
Holes in them, and therein put Turquoises, Emeralds, etc. and of the modest
Grace of the Cheeks. Scene 10. Of Mouth Fashions; wide Mouths, the natural
Proportion of the Mouth, Nations without a Mouth, living by Breath and Odours;
others with Lips hanging down to their Breasts, discovered by Mr. Jobson at the
River Gambia; of great thick Lips, and how these affect the Speech, and of
Hair-Lips. Scene 11. Of Lip Gallantry; Nations with Streaks or Lines in their
Lips; others with Holes, in which they wear Pegs, precious Stones, Pearls, etc.
of Lip-Rings, the Office and Ornament of the Lips, the decent and proper Manner
of eating and drinking; the French Manner; of the Throat, the Windpipe and the
Gullet or feeding Channel, and the natural Use and Action of the Gullet in
conveying Meat to the Stomach, with many philosophical Observations on the
Operations of the Muscles and Fibers in these Parts. Scene 12. Of Beards and
Manhood about the Mouth; and here the Author shows the Cavils raised against
the Beard, which he answers, and maintains the Dignity and Use of the Beard and
of the Mustachoes, and condemns shaving as a Note of Effeminacy; of the Manner
of the ancient Britons; of Eradicators of Beards and beardless Nations, half
Beards, thin, long, and formal Beards, Beard-Dyers, and bearded Women. Scene
13. Of Dental Fashions; Nations that affect red, white, and black Teeth, others
that file and indent their Teeth, others that pull out Teeth for Bravery, the
Use and natural Beauty of the Teeth; artificial Teeth; the Perfection and
Renovation of Teeth. Scene 14. Of Devices about the Tongue; Nations attempting
the Improvement of the Body by cleaving their Tongues; "Yet this Device," the
Author shows, "is destructive of the Perfection of the Body, for Nature neither
abounds in superfluous Things, nor is defective in Necessaries; she does
nothing in vain, nor creates any thing diminished, unless hindered by Matter; so
that the Provision of Nature being doubled by a supernumerary Particle, the
Instrument is hurt in it is Operations;" of the Bridle of the Tongue, and in
what Case, and how it ought to be cut. Scene 15. Of the Face; the just
Proportion of the Face, Nations with Platter-Faces, long and square Faces, Dogs
Faces, some that stick Feathers in their Faces, others that cut Streaks in and
tear and stigmatize their Faces; of Face-Painters, and here we have Instances
of several Nations painting their Faces, as related by Grimston, Capt. Smith,
Herbert's and Sandy's Travels, with Dr. Donne's Reproof to the Face-Painters;
then is laid down how far Face-Painting is allowable; of Patches; in what
Manner the Face is disfigured by performing vocal and instrumental Music.
Scene 16. Of the Neck; the Inconveniency of a long Neck, Nations that have no
Neck; the Cause of Swelling in the Throat. Scene 17. Of Shoulder Affectations;
Men with Shoulders higher than their Heads; others with broad Shoulders; "but
these last," says the Author, "are not in Favor with the Women, because they
for the most part beget great Children;" narrow Shoulders and crook'd Backs; of
the hereditary Deformities of Parents, and natural Marks. Scene 18. Of Arms,
Hands, and Nails; the Portuguese Artifice of making their Hands long and small;
painted Hands and Nails, prodigious long Nails, the natural Growth and Use of
the Nails; then the Author recommends the Reformation of the Nails as a noble
Care, "for," says he, "Cleanness and the civil Beauty of the Body were ever
esteemed to proceed from a Modesty of Behavior and a due Reverence toward
God, toward Society, and toward ourselves." Of Persons born with many Arms,
others without Arms, amongst whom of the remarkable John Simons of Hagbourne
near Abbingdon, born without Arms, Hands, Thighs, or Knees; of supernumerary
Fingers and Nations without Hands; of the miraculous Helluo Lapidum, Francis
Battalia an Italian, who was in London about the Year 1653, born with two
Stones in one hand and one in the other, who at his Birth rejecting the Pap,
and having those Stones offered him, swallowed them down, and fed all his Life
on Stones and Pebbles. Scene 19. Of Pap-Fashions; the Proportion, Use, and
Decency of the Breasts, and several strange Monstrosities affected therein; why
shameful Parts; of Male-Nurses; the Amazonian Amputations, and the needless
Wish of Momus and Don Alonso for a Casement in the Breast. Scene 20. Of
Affectations about the Breasts and Waist; here the Author inveighs most
bitterly against our pernicious Custom of swathing and lacing of Infants;
showing by many physical Arguments what innumerable Diseases ensue from it, as
Rickets, Consumptions, etc. and then gives us the Fashions of many Nations in
this Particular; with the Cause of Crookedness; and how Children unborn may be
disfigured. Scene 21. Of the Privy-Parts; seeing the Author could not have
answered to Nature his Silence on this Head; after a modest Apology he takes a
View of these Parts in order, first, to show the Abuses of them, with several
national Deformities; secondly, to teach their natural Use, Honesty, and
Perfection, by the many grave and curious Observations he intersperses; and
first he speaks of Yard Balls and Rings, fixed by many Nations on the Foreskin
to prevent Venery; of Semi-Eunuchs and Eunuchs; how far the Testicles are
instrumental in forming the Voice; the Castration of both Sexes; the Trial of
Clearke the Sow-Gelder at Lincoln, for spading Margaret Brigstock; of the
Jewish and Mohammedan Circumcision; and of other Nations, as related by Mr.
Jobson; of the Hymen a Note of untainted Virginity; Hermaphrodites; one buried
alive in Scotland 1461 of Female Purgations, Contractions; of Padlocking and
sewing them up; the just Proportion of the Virile Member; of the Navel, with
Sir Tho. Brown's Opinion of it; Attempts to transform Women into Men, and Men
into Women; with other strange Abuses of these Parts. Scene 22. Of
Tailed-Nations and Breech Gallantry; the Reason why Man has no Tails; Kentish
Long-Tails recorded in our Chronicles and by diverse Popish Authors, whereof
Delrio gives this Account, " Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury being in
Disgrace with Henry II. and riding through Stroud near Rochester, the
Inhabitants to affront him, cut off his Horse's Tail, which ever since was
entailed upon them, inasmuch as you may know a Man of Stroud by his Long-Tail."
Of the Irish Long-Tails slain at the Storm of Cashell in the County of
Tipperary, by the Lord Inchequine; of the tailed Islanders of Bornea, of whom
Dr. Harvey gives an Account; and other tailed Nations: Of the flagrant and
unnatural Sin of Sodomy; "yet," says he, "a great Cardinal" ( Joannes de la
Casa Archbishop of Benevento in his Book in Commendation of Sodomy) "could
profanely say it was suave et divinum Opus." Scene 23. Of Leg and Foot
Fashions; how much little Feet are affected by the Chinese and Spanish Women,
"inasmuch, as the Proverb says, in voting for a handsome Woman, let her be
English to the Neck, French to the Waist, Dutch below, and for Hands and Feet
let her be Spanish." The natural Proportion of the Feet; the Motion of the
Legs, Feet, and Toes in sustaining and transferring the Body; the Inconveniency
of little Feet; diverse national Forms of Feet; of Monsters partly human and
partly mixed of diverse Species, whereof "St. Augustine denies that they shall
rise again," with the Author's Reflections thereon: Nations affecting great
Hips, Thighs, and Calves; of riding, and the Fluxion of the vital Spirits; the
Way to bring Legs to a convenient Magnitude; Baker and Tailor Legs; national
Deformities of Feet; Centaurs and Onocentaurs; of the Peruvians that mingle
with Apes; the Indian Satyr described by Tulpius, which was bestowed on Henry
Frederick Prince of Orange; the Original of Satyrs; the Guinea-Drill, shown in
1652 at Charing Cross; of Baboons, Monkeys and Apes, and the rational Acts of
these Kind of Creatures, with the Observations of Scaliger and Camerarius on
this Head, and of a modern Poet, who sings; "When Men began to grow unlike the
Gods,
"Apes grew to be like Men." --
Then of Seamen and Men-Fishes, Semi-Men and Semi-Beasts; of the Causes of
monstrous Deformities, and the Conception of Brutes by Men, and of Women by
Brutes; the upright Stature of Man; a Description of diverse foreign Monsters,
particularly one seen by Hoffman at Rome. Scene 24. Of Inventions practiced by
Men to deform the human Fabric; Nations with embroidered, carbonado'd and
painted Skins, discovered by Sir Francis Drake; an Enquiry about changing the
Color of the Body; of feathered and hairy Men, with the Story of John of
Leiden mentioned by Sir K. Digby in his Treatise of the Soul; and Lord Bacon's
Cause of Pilosity; how overfat and corpulent Bodies encounter Nature; the Cause
of tall Stature, and the Means to accelerate and increase Growth; the natural
Magnitude of the Body; Rhases and Albertus's Art of getting little Men;
Paracelsus his Artifice of forming Men in Horse-Dung, etc. with the Opinion of
the Learned thereupon: A Vindication of the Symmetry and just Proportion of
Woman's Body for Generation; of Pigmies of diverse Nations, and here he
instances Master Jefferey the Queen's Dwarf, and others; and shows the Art of
making Dwarfes, with the Reason of dwarfish Stature; of Giants of diverse
Countries, spoken of by Hakluyt, Sir Francis Drake, Goulart, and others; and
Observations on the Decay of Stature by too early Marriages; the Devil's
venerious Acts with Women; the Art of restoring Men to Youth; Man's
Metamorphosis and Transmigration into other Creatures; the Power of Witches;
that the Soul of Man cannot inform a Beast's Body, nor the reverse; of
Transubstantiation; Mr. Scott's Opinion of the Devil's transforming himself
into diverse Shapes; and of the Legerdemaine of Changelings.

We have now gone through the 24 Chapters of this Treatise, upon which it will be
needless here to add any Panegyric, since whoever has read it, cannot but be
acquainted with the Author's Skill and Accuracy in the Philosophy of the humane
Fabric, as well as his Wit and Humor in censuring the depray'd and
pragmatical Inventions of Men. We will therefore take a View of his APPENDIX,
exhibiting the PEDIGREE of the ENGLISH GALLANT, which he thought proper to
annex, (having first prosecuted his principal Design) to answer the Expectation
of the Public, who thought him necessarily engaged to touch upon the Deformity
of Apparel, of which almost every Scene afforded emergent Occasion; herein
explaining the Proverb, God makes, but the Tailor shapes.

The English, and the more civilized Nations, had hitherto in a great measure
escaped his Sentences of Treason against Nature, whereof many others were
convicted; yet here they must bear to have their affected Vanities laid before
them; "It were not impossible," says he, "to prove, that there was never any
Conceit so extravagant, that ever forced the Rules of Nature; or Fashion so
mad, which fell into the Imaginations of any of these indicted Nations, that
may not meet with some public Fashion of Apparel among us, and seem to be
grounded upon the same pretended Reason." Our Sugar Loaf Hats, he attributes to
the same Conceit as the Sugar Loaf Heads of Foreign Nations; our square Caps
are owing to their square Heads; our flat Caps to their flat Heads; our French
Hoods imitate the Unicorn-like Dress of Hair among the barbarous Indians: He
then shows the foreign Extraction of our Masks, Painting, and Black-Patches,
our Pendents and auricular Bravery; our Pease-cod-bellied Doublets emulare the
Gordian and Muscovite Fashion, and other Gorbellied Nations. The slashing and
pincking our Doublets, our Cod-Piece Fashion, and Trunk-Hose have all their
Semblances in Barbarian Nations; as likewise our indecent Fashion of naked
Breasts and Shoulders, our vain and foolish Verdingales (or Hoops:) Our
affected long Shoes, our broad Shoes (which in Queen Mary's Time occasioned a
Proclamation that no Man should wear his Shoes above six Inchches square at the
Toes) and our high Shoes have all their Original from abroad. The Vanity of
disguising our Shapes is also farther exposed by some poetical Quotations from
Alex. Barclay's Translation of the Ship of Fools; and from an ingenious old
Comedy in the Character of Lupa. He then concludes the Appendix with this apt
Recommendation, "That whoever will reduce Clothes and Garments to their true
End, must fit them to the Service and Commodity of the Body, whence depends
their Original Grace, and Comeliness, which can no way better be done than by
cutting them according to the natural Shape and Proportion of the Body; as we
may probably imagine the Skin-Garments were, wherewith the Lord God, who best
knew their Shape, first clothed the Nakedness of our first Parents." And he
shows that we ought not to allow Fashions for their Rareness and Novelty, when
Goodness and Profit are not joined to them We think it not improper to take
Notice of a Catalogue of the Author's Works subjoined to this Treatise; which
are as follow: Works already published; 1. The natural Language of the Hand. 2.
The Art of manual Rhetoric. 3. The deaf and dumb Man's Friend. 4. A Dissection
of the Muscles of the Affections of the Mind. 5. The Artificial Changeling.
Works accomplished by him, not then published. 6. The national Expressions of
the Hand. 7. The natural Language of the Head, or the Notions of Physiognomy.
8. The Art of Cephalical Rhetoric. 9. The moral Anatomy of the Body. 10. The
Academy of the Deaf and Dumb, teaching them to hear with their Eyes, and to
learn to speak. 11. Physiognomia Medici. 12 Tractatus de removendis Loquelae
Impedimentis. 13. Tractatus de removendis Auditionis Impedimentis. And at the
End of this Catalogue, the Author notes, in a short Latin Advertisement, the
great Fatigue of writing and reading many Books, and that he must for the
future wholly employ himself in the Business of his Profession.
.

POSTSCRIPT.
THUS has the British Librarian given a Specimen of his Undertaking, to the
Extent of one Volume, in a diligent Abstract of above fifty of our Scarce,
Useful, and Valuable Books. In the choice of them, though here are some of
considerable Valuation extracted; yet the high Price to which many are advanced
in the Shops, has been no Temptation for his making that the Rule to prefer
them. He has rather thought those which are most useful, the most valuable; and
such of them, as are grown most scarce, most needful and deserving of this
Recommendation. Accordingly, it is not doubted but they will appear worthy of
it, by what is here advanced to the Reader's Notice from them; being all
fraught with much observable Matter, as may be easily perceived by this Scheme,
for compassing the readiest Knowledge and Command thereof, which may have
escaped the Notice or Memory of several, who are even possessed of the Books
themselves which contain it; and also give Intelligence to others, of many
remarkable Things, Places, and Persons which they would never otherwise have
known; no Work, of the like size among us, having pointed out such a variety of
those Particulars, or drawn into so close a compass, the Substance of so much
Reading. He might perhaps have been more amusing to some Readers, in being more
ample upon some parts of his Authors; by extracting Pages of Controversies, or
Paragraphs of the pretty Stories, surprising Passages, or eloquent Speeches in
them; but as many Topics in an Author must be sacrificed to gratify a few
Indulgences in this kind, and to divert some, the Enquiries of abundance remain
unsatisfied; the Plan has been followed which was at first laid down, to make
it a Work rather of general Information, than particular Entertainment.

Among the Books conducive to this Purpose, those for which Gratitude here
demands chiefly the Publication of our Thanks, are the Manuscripts. Such in the
first place, is that here called, Sir Thomas Wriothesly's Collections;
containing the Arms and Characters of the Knights of the Garter, and Views of
the ancient Ceremonies used in Creating the Knights of the Bath, etc. For that
Sketch which the Librarian has here given the Public of it, they are both
beholden to the Permission of his Grace the Duke of Montagu, the noble Owner of
that valuable Volume;and to some Explanations thereof, which were also
courteously imparted by John Anstis Esquire Garter, Principal King of Arms, whose
extensive Knowledge in these Subjects, his own elaborate Publications, in honor
of both those Orders, have sufficiently confirmed. Nor will it be thought a
Repitition unnecessary, by grateful Minds, that the Librarian here renews his
Acknowledgments to Nathaniel Booth Esquire of Gray's-Inn, for his repeated
Communications; having been favored not only with that curious Miscellany,
containing many of the old Earl of Derby's Papers, which, in one of the
foregoing Numbers is abridg'd; but others out of his choice Collections, which
may enrich some future Numbers, when Opportunity shall permit the Contents
thereof to appear. Other Manuscripts herein described, were partly the
Collection of Mr. Charles Grimes, late, also of Gray's-Inn, and in the
Bookseller's Possession for whom this Work is printed; except one ancient
Relic of the famous Wicklife, for the use of which, many Thanks are here
returned to Mr. Joseph Ames, Member of the Society of Antiquaries. The Author
of this Work is moreover obliged to the Library of this last worthy Preserver
of Antiquities, as also to that of his ingenious Friend Mr. Peter Thompson, for
the use of several printed Books which are more scarce than many Manuscripts;
particularly some, set forth by our first Printer in England; and others, which
will rise, among the Curious, in Value, as, by the Depredations of Accident, or
Ignorance, they decrease in Number. We must take some further Opportunity to
express our Obligations to other Gentlemen who have favored us with such like
Litterary Curiosities; and to some hundreds unknown, who have shown a relish
for the Usefulness of this Performance, by encouraging the Sale of it.

There can be added nothing more for the Reader's further Convenience, to this
general Table or Contents, but an Alphabetical Index to it; as a Master-Key
that will give immediate recourse to those Topics, in so many Volumes thus
abstracted, which had been locked up, or secreted from their Knowledge to whom
they would have been useful. And as from those ancient Springs it is hereby
obvious to all Readers, what a new River of Intelligence is conducted for their
Benefit; so the Author (from the Example of others in suchlike Attempts) may
be sure of that Satisfaction which arises from the Contemplation of having been
instrumental to so much public Good. Those who know the nature of such Works,
may think one Volume, comprehending the principal Matters in such a Library of
Books, and near one half of them Folios, expeditiously published within the
Space of one Year: But as, in Performances of this kind, the most industrious
Part, is that which is most invisible, and the Fatigue is accounted of, from
the small Quantity of Writing which appears, not the vast and unseen Mass of
Reading required therein; the Operation is apt to be thought dilatory, by those
who are unacquainted with the Labor of it. And for the same Reason, that they
convey the Mind to such multifarious Advantages of Information, their own
Merits also are usually disregarded by the Generality, who are unexperienced in
the Execution, but enjoy the Advantages of the Work. Like those who look down
with Admiration, at the Cost and Pains which are bestowed upon the curious
Compartments into which a Piece of Ground is divided, and the flowery Groups,
the verdant Mazes, or the fragrant Bowers wherewith it is adorned; yet overlook
those artificial Mounts and Terras Walks, which they are at that instant upon,
which give them all that Command over this Variety of Prospects, and are
indeed, the most expensive and laborious Ornaments in the Garden.

All we shall say more of our Librarian, is, If he is prevailed on to proceed,
in cultivating this Undertaking without Intermission, he will continue his
utmost Pains to make it answer all the Accommodations proposed from it: Or if
through other Engagements it should be suffered to lie fallow for a Season, it is
in hopes of increasing its Vigor, and making the Returns equivalent to the
Toils thereof.

Gray's-Inn, Feb. 18. 1737. W. O.

FINIS.
INDEX.
ABassines, 162. Abbey-Lands, 187. Abbeys, 25. 95. 298. 347. Abbot, Geo. 202.
248. Abbots, 87. 349. 358. Abdelmalec, 147. Absolution, 352. Abstinence, 269.
Academies, 111. Achelnotus, 82. Acland, 314. Acres, 329. 361. Actors, 62. Adam,
309. Adams, 139. 149. Adders, 295 Adhelm, 206. Administration, 262.
Admonitions, 265. Adrian, Pope, 84. Adversaries, 196. Adultery, 81. Ady, 214.
Egypt, 146. Africa, 33. Affability, 266. Agard, 189. 190. Age, 176. 183. Ages,
24. Agitius, 3. Agriculture, 184. Agrippa, 216. Air, 176. 291. 302. Air-Pump,
118. Alban, 2. 358. Albania, 200. Albertus, 370. Albion, 79. 304. Alchemy, 223.
Alciat, 43. Alcock, 320. Alcuinus, 80. 206. Ale, 184. 234. Algebra, 117.
Alfgina, 81. Alfred, 135. 189. 239. 296. 312. 313. Algier, 144. 145. Alington,
197. Allen, 62. 248. Allom, 102. Almanacks, 185. 303. 343. Alphabet, 45.
Alrick, 352. Alumnus, 45. Alva, Duke, 222. Amazons, 156. Ambassadors, 163.
America, 33. Americans, 161. Ames, 374. Amiens, 77. Amphabale, 185. 359.
Amulets, 222. Angelo, Mic. 48. Angels, 227. 308. Angervile, 298. Angles, 307.
Animals, 56. 118. 161. 176. 179. 180. 185. Animals, Artificial, 44. Anjou, Duke
of, 70. 320. Anna, King, 362. Anne, Queen, 77. 166. 356. Annealing, 48.
Annuities, 94. Anselm, 12. 13. 83. Anstis, Mr. 72. 189. 374. Anthony, Dr. 38.
Antichrist, 80. Antillas, 153. Antipodes, 28. Antiquaries, 188. Antiquities,
185. 188. 289. 292. 294. 299. Apes, 370. Apothecaries, 39. Apothegmes, 65.
Apparel, 266. 371. Apparitions, 95. Appleby, 290. Apples, 179. Appropriations,
295. Aquitaine, 77. Arabic Tongue, 160. Archbishops, 12. 20. 80. 348. 350.
Archer, Sir Sim. 230. Archery, 74. 217. 265. Architecture, 184. Arians, 2.
Aristotle, 114, to 118. Arithmetic, 113. 117. Arletta, 82. Armenia, King of,
143. Armenians, 162. Armignac, Earl of, 76. Arm, 368. Arms, Coats of, 105. 170.
171. 172. 175. 189. 190. 233. 289. 290. 324. 330. Arms, Officers of, 323. 324.
329. Arnold, 23. Arthur, King, 85. 122. 137. 192. Arthur, Prince, 130. Arts,
42. 58. 184. 302. Arundel, 73, 76. 77. 264. 295. 343. 348. Ascham, 87. Ashley,
171, 172. Ashmole, 72. 119. 120. 121. 331. Ashton, 349. Asia, 33. Aspects, 336.
Astley, 291. Aston, 168. Astrologers, 41. 336. 337. Astrology, 114. 221. 336.
342. Astronomical Ring, 27. 30. Astronomy, 114. 117. 338. Athanasius, 340.
Atheism, 119. Athelstane, 359. 362. Aty, 280. Auditor, 357. Audley, Lord, 75.
186. 187. 321. 351. 359. Audley, Sir James, 328. Audry, St. 80. Augury, 221.
337. Augustine, 12. 80. 307. 349. 350. Augustines, 84. Aurelius Ambrosius, 3.
Aurum Potabile, 38. Authors, 207. Automata, 44. Auxiliaries, 307. Azores, 148.
B.
Babel, 301. 309. Bacon Flitch, 186. Bacon, Roger, 44. 53. 117. 176. 178. 247.
Bacon, Sir Nich. 98. 213. 359. 362. Bacon, Sir Fran. 46. 117. 118. 244.
Baconthorp, 83. 362. Badew, 319. Badges, 324. Bagot, 179. Baillie, 301. Baker,
222. Bale, 78. 80. 83, 84. 86. 291. 347. Baliol, 313. Ballad, 25. Balsham, 182.
318. Bankers, 98. 99. Bankrupts, 104. Banks, 58. arbary, 147. Barckley, 27.
372. Barking, 82. Barlow, 60. Barnes, 58. 196. Barometer, 118. Barons, 108.
109. 190. Baronies, 254, 297. Bars, 76. Barry, 350. Bartilmew, 351. Barton,
219. 343. 357. Baskervile, 155. Basset, 297. Bassompierre, 167. Bastards, 81.
181. Bateman, 319. Bath, Order of, 323. 328. Battalia, 368. Battles, 352. 361.
Beachamp, 354. Beards, 367. Beasts, 56. vid. Animals. Beaumont, 238. 288. 291.
293. 296. 298. 346. Beauty, 365. Beauvise, 264. Becanus, 309. Becket, 12. 13.
18. 76. 84. 348. 350. 352. 354. 369. Beer, 25. 185. 186. Bees, 185. Bedford,
Duchess of, 64. 330. Beggars, 195. Behmen, 113. Belgrave, 291. Bell, 69. 70.
Bellantius, 341. Bells, 189. 190. Benedictines, 84. Benefactors, vid. Colleges.
Benefices, 25. 347. Benevolence, 267. Bentley, 279. Berengarius, 82. Berkeley,
298. 355. Bermudas, 154. Berthelet, 5. 261. Besance. 76. Berwick, 74, 75.
Bibles, 60. 188. 204. 209. 238. Bigots, 362. Biography, 121. Birds, 57. 58.
180. Births, 181. Bishops, 12. 19. 20. 80. 82. 83. 84. 85. 183. 351. 353. 354.
361. 362. Bishoprics, 347. Bisse, 317. Blesensis, 84. Blindness, 182. Bloet,
83. Blood, 117. Blount, 355. Boadicia, 2. Boars, 307. Bocace, 127. Bodin, 72.
216. 217. 219. 300. Bodley, 208. 239. 248. 250. 298. 313. Boethius, 200.
Boethius, 43. Bohun, 355. Boniface, 6. 19. 80. 94. 225. Books, 207. 208. 239.
245. 247. 298. 317. Booth, 286. 287, 374, Borough, 141. Borough English, 181.
Bosco, 2. Boso, 83. Boulde, 279. Bourchier, 67. 68. 76. 348. 360. Bourgh, 144.
Bows, 141. Bowls, 351. Boil, 118. Bradshaw, 233. Brahe, Tycho, 43. Bramble,
76. Brandon, 222. Brasil, 156. Bread, 23. Breasts, 368. Brereton, 235.
Brerewood, 159. 234. Bretaylles, 64. Bridges, 189. Bridgman, 173. 229. Brent,
350. Brewing. 184. Brigstock, 369. Brinsley, 113. Bristol, 138. 139. Britain,
1. 80. 189. 198. 304. 305. Britains, 12. 133. 190. 300. 306. British Tongue,
199. Brocades, 49. Brocardo, 340. Brokers, 23. 24. Brook, 352. Broughton, 189.
Brown, 175. 198. 230. 369. Bruce, Rob. de, 73. 74. Brunswick, 102. 247. 302.
304. Brute, 79. 200. 294. 305. 306. 354. Buchanan, 248. Buck, 62. Buckhurst,
279. 280. Buckingham, 75. 167. 168. Buildings, 82. 85. 177. 184. 189. Bullen,
355. 357. 362. Bulenger, 47. 48. Bulwer, 365. Bungie, 226. Burdet, 293. 295.
Burghley, Ld. 98. 133. 141. 151. 279. Burgo, de, 359. Burials, 345. 346. 352.
357. 361. Burley, Sir Sim. 76. 353. Burnell, 284. Burning-Glasses, 53.
Borough, Sir J. 148. Burton, 172. 287. 295. Bury, Rich. de, 208. 239. 298.
Butler, 283. 355. Byron, Ld. 105.
C.
Cabalists, 221. 340. Cabota, 139. 149. 156. Cade, 350. Cadenet, 166. Cadiz,
142. 148. 158. Cadwallader, 307. Caius, Dr. 319. Calais, 74. California, 152.
Calixtus, 83. Calvin, 206. 228. Cambria, 200. Cambridge, Earl of, 75.
Cambridge, University of, 318. Camden, 160. 287. Campian, 43. Canaries, 146.
Candia, 144. Candish, 151. 292. Canol, 75. Canterbury, 348. Canute, 81. 82.
308. Caradoc, 2. 132. Cardan, 225. Cardinals, 82. 354. Cards, 265. Carew, 288.
Carleton, 165. Carlisle, 151. Carmelites, 347. Carve, 109. Carving, 263.
Cautares, 223. Castles, 190. 350. Castile, King of, 76. Castorius, 135.
Castration, 369. Cathay, 139. Catigern, 351. Cavendish, 361. Caxton, 47. 63.
65. 66. 127. 191. 255. Celtae, 302. Cecylls, 135. 142. 155. 311. 344. Celsus,
83. Cenotaphs, 346. Ceremonies, 61. 163. 268. Chaldee Language, 160. Chaloner,
144. 230. 238. Chancellors, 173. 190. Chancellors, of the Exchequer, 254.
Chandos, 75. Changelings, 364. 371. Chaplains, 82. 83. Charity, 267. Charles
the Bald, 94. Charles V. 75. 355. Charles I. of England, 314. 344. Charles II.
11. 120. 121. 169. 183. 187. Charms, 221. Chartereuse, 84. Charters, 22. 25.
230. Chastity, 80. 81. 84. 85. 293. Chaucer, 88. 89. 138. 218. 223. 309. 346.
347. 356. 360. Cheeks, 367. Cheese, 25. 234. Chenay, 165. Chesse, 265. 295.
Chester, 229. Chester, Earls of, 83. 135. Chester, Shipping of, 277. Children,
212. 301. 304. 307. 335. 354. 369. Chichely, 315. 316. Chilton, 153. China,
147. 157. Chio, 144. Chivalry, 191. Chorography, 28. Christ, 6. 21. 196. 341.
342. Christiana, St. 217. Christianity, 11. 12. 80. 160. Chrysostom, 209.
Chronology, 237. Church, 9. 61. 81. 298. Churches, 24. 25. 95. 184. 289. Church
Windows, 289. 292. Cicely, 82. Cicero, 255. Cinque Ports, 138. Circumcision,
161. 162. 369. Cisteans, 84. Cities, 190. Clapham, 330. Clare, 361. Clarence,
348. 362. Clarendon, E. of 14. 173. Clearke, 369. Clench, 173. Clerc, 165.
Clergy, 3. 6. 7. 12. 13. 19. 81. 346. 347. Climates, 30. 302. Clocks, 31. 42.
Clog, Staffordsh. 185. Clopton, 360. Cloth, 24. 48. 49. 97. 101. 102. 104.
Clothiers, 362. Coals, 177. 296. Cobham, 239. 245. 352. Cock-fighting, 62.
Coenalis, 199. Coins, 139. 189. 190. 253. 292. 293. Coke, 173. Cokers, 224.
Colet, 354. Colfride, 80. Collars, 122. 170. 324. Colleges, in Oxford, 313.
Colleges, in Cambridge, 318. Collier, Jer. 62. Columbus, 149. Colures, 29.
Comets, 176. 337. Comfort, 196. Commandments, 21. Commonwealth, 9. Companies,
101. 102. 104. Compass, 32. 54. 56. 118. Conanus, 3. Conjuration, 224. 340.
Constantine, 3. 11. Constantinople, 143. 145. Continence, 269. Continents, 161.
Cophtics, 162. Cornwallis, 362. Corodies, 25. Corpulence, 370. Corraghes, 54.
Cortez, 152. Coryate, 249. Cosbye, 277. Cosmography, 26. 28. 114. Cotta, 34.
Cottington, 106. Cotton, 190, 345. Covetousness, 22. 195. Council, 253.
Councils, 202. 204. Consultation, 269. Courteney, 75. 350. Courts of Justice,
169. Crapnell, 283. Crashaw, 207. 209. Creed, 21. Crema, 83. Cressy, Battle of,
74. Crew, 173. 230. Crispin, 349. Cromwell, Oliver, 62. Cromwell, Tho. 81. 197.
343. 346. 355. 357. Cross, 116. Crucifix, 85. Cryptography, 45. Cumberland, E.
of, 148. 149. 154. 157. Cuneglasse, 3. Cunegunda, 226. Cuningham, 26. 46.
Cunobeline, 359. Curates, 23. Curiosity, 85. Curtana, 108. Custom, 183. 186.
253. Customs, 183. Cuthbert, 80. 348. Cut-work, 185.
D.
Damps, 177. Dance, of Death, 47. 354. Dance, Hobby Horse, 186. Dancing, 264.
Danes, 12. 81. 82. 308. Darcie, 355. 359. Davenant, 62. David K. of Scots, 70.
75. Davie, 216. Davis, 150. Dawes, 124. Day, 26. 33. Days, 24. 303. Deafness,
182. 372. Death, 183. 195. Declination, 28. 29. Dedication, 248. 331. Dee, Dr.
44. 53. 114. 138. 141. 142. Deeds, 24. 25. 308. 359. Defense, 9. Deformations,
364. Degradation, 125. 126. Degree, 28. Delaram, 287. Demonologie, 214. Derby,
E. of, 74. 77. 143. 270. 277. 282. 285. Dering, 350. Descents, 230. Detraction,
269. Devil, 216. 219. 220. 224. 226. 227. 228. 371. Devotion, 268. Dewes, 360.
361. Dials, 42. 184. Dicing, 265. Diconson, 365. Dido, 305. Digby, 44. 57. 293.
297. 370. Digges, 165. Dignities, 311. Dioclesian, 2. 4. Dioptrics, 118.
Discretion, 265. Diseases, 35. 36. Disinheriting, 212. 213. Disputes, 81.
Divination, 220. 226. Divines, 201. Divinity, 113. 115. Divinity, Writers, 60.
61. Domesday Book, 189. 253. Dockenfield, 274. Dockwray, 144. Dodderidge, 190.
Dodsworth, 238. Dole-penny, 183. Dollars, 100. 102. Donations, 186. Dorset, Ld.
291. Douglass, E. 76. Dove, 222. Drake, Sir Fran. 148. 152. 153. 154. 156. 157.
286. 293. 370. Drake, George, 151. Drake, John, 156. Drapery, 101. vide Cloth.
Drayton, 292. Dreams, 220. 334. Dress, 371. Drugs. 146. Drunkenness, 302.
Druids, 79. 305. Drury, 361. Drusius, 249. Dubartas, 52. Duddely, 26. 154. 158.
313. Dugdale, 169. Dukes, 107. Dulwich Col. 62. Dumbness, 372. Duncalf, 183.
Dunmow, 186. Duns Scotus, 5. Dunstan, 81. Dunwich, 361. Durham, Bp. of, 76.
Durham, William of, 82. Dwarfs, 370. Dyars, 25. Dyer, Sir Ed. 86.
E.
Earls, 107. 108. 235. 236. Ears, 367. Earth, 29. 177. Earthquakes, 177. 297.
Easter, 80. East Indies, 145. 146. Ebbs, 32. Ecclesiastical Supremacy, 11. 14.
18. Echoes, 176. 225. Eclipses, 30. 337. Ecliptic, 28. Eden, Rich. 139. 147.
153. Edgar, 81. 137. 268. 308. 309. Edinburgh, 76. Editha, 81. 356. Edmund, K.
81. Education, 61. 263. Edward, Confess. 12. 189. 356. 357. Edward, St. 82. 84.
Edward, I. 17. 19. 20. 138. 329. 356. Edward, II. 314. 318. Edward, III. 68.
71. 73. 74. 75. 122. 125. 138. 314. 325. 350. 356. Edward, IV. 63. 139. 146.
258. 296. 314. 315. 326. Edward, VI. 139. 150. 187. 286. 346. Edward, Pr. of
Wales, 69. 74. 75. 327. 348. 350. 355. Edwin, 80. 81. Effigies, 173. Effingham,
Lady, 164. Egbert, 306. Eggs, 129. 180. 360. Eglesfield, 314. Eldest Sons, 212.
213. Eldred, King, 296. Eldred, Abbot, 84. Eleanor, Queen, 356. Elements, 24.
29. 291. Elephants, 57. 161. Elfled, 135. Elgine, Queen, 81. Elizabeth, Queen,
99. 140. 141. 144. 145. 146. 149. 157. 187. 194. 270. 274. 275. 292. 314. 315.
316. 320. 321. 338. 346. 356. Elizabeth, Princess, 164. Elmer, 82. Eloquence,
52. 264. Elphegus, 81. Elyot, 89. 189. 199. 261. Emma, 82. Empericks, 35.
Emperors, 82. Empson, 355. England, Contents of, 24. 33. England, Charter of,
25. England, Abbeys of, ib. England, Kings of, 105. England, Arms of, 110.
England, Dimensions of, 190. England, Names of, 190, 200. 308. England,
Chancellor of, 190. England, Vale Royal of, 229. England, Conversion of, 92.
94. 308. 346. England, Taxes of, 253. England, Conquest of, 308. 309. England,
Ecclesias. State of, 347. English Church, 80. English History, 20. 288. English
Divines, 59. English Poets, 86. English Tongue, 128, 129. 308. 309. 347.
English Voyages, 136. English Policy, 138. English Laws, 169. 251. English
Descent, 300. 302. 306. English Families, 311. Englishmen, 306. 309. Envy, 195.
Epact, 32. Epitaphs, 190. 197. 346. Ephemerides, 117. Equinoxial, 28. Erasmus,
44. 203. 209. Erigena, 143. Erkenwald, 80. Escuage, 290. 293. Esdras, 161.
Esquire, 191. 359. Esseby, 350. Essex, Earl of, 108. 142. 158. 241. 246. 272.
274. Essex, County of, 359. 361. Ethelburge, 80. Ethelbert, 304. 307, 349. 350.
353. Ethelwold, 81. Etymologies, 252. 253. 310. Eunuchs, 369. Europe, 33.
European Languages, 162. Eutyches, 162. Evelyn, 118. Evenus, 181. Events, 336.
Examples, 95. 212. Exchange, 97. 98. 101. Exchequer, 173. 253. 254. Executions,
276. Exeter, Earl of, 165. Exhalations, 335. Exorcists, 224. Experience, 35.
36. 41. Eye-biters, 217. Eyes, 366. Eyst, Bp. of, 93. 94.
F.
Fabian, 146. 150. Faces, 368. Fairy Circles, 176. Faithorne, 173. 365 Fairfax,
183. 238. Familiars, 217. 227. 339. Families, 311. Fanshaw, 48. Farriery, 296.
Farthings, 101. Fascination, 226. Fashions, 366. 371. Fasting, 182. 294.
Fastolfe, 255. 260. 327. 362. 363. Fathers, 202. 203. 204. 205. 208. 209. 249.
Faunt, 293. Faustus, 47. Feast, 25. 124. 125. 170. 171. Feathers, 50. 85. Feet,
369. Fenton, 157. Fern, 235. Ferral, 215. Festivals, 61. 95. Fiat, de, 167.
Fidelity, 268. Field Mice, 179. Filazer, 357. Finch, 350. Fines, 170. 254.
Finett, 163. Finger Stocks, 185. Fires, 14. 24. 197. 296. 350. Firrs, 179. 305.
Fish, Sim. 195. Fisher, Bp. 206. 321. 357. Fishery, 101. Fishes, 180. Fitzalan,
355. Fitzharding, 329. Fitzherbert, 297. 298. Fitzrauf, 206. Fitzwalter, 186.
359. 360. Flatterers, 268. Flax, 49. Fleming, 89. 91. 170. 295. 314. Fletcher,
141. Floods, 32. Florida, 152. Flud, Dr. 115. Fogge, 349. Foix, E. of, 70. 76.
339. Folc Right, 251. Foliot, 294. Folvile, 290. Fools, 183. 372. Foreheads,
366. Foresta, 190. Fornication, 181. Forest, 291. Fortescue, 170. 171. 246.
250. Fortitude, 268. Fortune, 194. Founders, 344. vid. Oxford and Cambridge.
Fox, John, 5. 144. Fox, Bp. 316. 321. France, 304. Frank Almoigne, 254. Franks,
302. Free Masons, 183. French, 76. French, Tongue, 160. 170. 309. Fresne, du,
72. Frideswide, 82. Friendship, 255. 257. 258. 267. Friars, 84. 347. 357.
Frith, 196. Frobisher, 148. 150. Froissart, 67. 68. 69. etc. 76. 77. 122. 200.
339. Fruits, 180. Frying-Pans, 180. Fulco, 85. Fulk, Dr. 295. Fuller, 157.
Funerals, 291. Funeral Monuments, 344. Furniture, 266.
G.
Gabor, 167. Gale, Dr. 2. Gallantry, 371. Galliglasses, 301. Gallileo, 53. Game
Cocks, 185. Gardener, Bp. 190. Garments, 49. Garter, Order of, 72. 74. 119.
122. Gascoigne, 88. 91. 267. 295. Gauls, 302. 308. Gavel-kind, 253. 303.
Gaveston, 359. Genealogies, 289. 329. Genethliacs, 221. Geffery, Archbishop,
85. Gemma, 32. Generation, 217. 218. 370. Gentry, 230. 344. Geography, 26. 28.
117. 118. 198. 199. Geomety, 113. 117. George, St. Order of, 74. Gerard, 124.
147. Germans, 301. 302. Gerson, 196. Gervass, 176. Giants, 297. 355. 370.
Gibbon, 213. Gifford, 94. Gilbert, 150. 151. 254. Gilbertines, 84. Gildas, 1.
201. 206. Glamorgan, 135. Glanvill, 116, 363. Glass, 52. Gloucester, D. of, 26.
64. 67. 138. 360. 361. Gluttony, 85. 195. Glyndoure, 135. 136. Goia, 55. Golden
Number, 200. Golding, 73. 89. 90. Godiva, 185. 235. Gods, 227. 228. Gondomar,
165. 166. Gonvile, 319. Gonzaga, 272. Goodfellow, Rob. 218. 227. Goodrick, St.
85. Googe, 89. Goose, 186. Goths, 302. Gourney, 143. Governments, 252. 306.
Governor, 261. Gower, 87. 346. 348. 349. 359. 360. 362. Grammar, 113. Granada,
24. Grant, 198. Grants, 102. 187. 296. 353. Graunge, 89. 91. Gray's-Inne, 171.
Greaves, 190. Greek Tongue, 159. Greenfield, 135. Greenwood, 313. Gregory, St.
94. 307. Grenvile, 148. 151. 152. Gresham, Sir T. 98. Gresham, John, 144.
Gretser, 202. 205. Grimbald, 170. Grimes, 374. Grocery, 25. Grosthead, 294.
Guddesden, 278. Guiana, 155. Guide Law, 307. Guilford, 349. Guinea, 146. 147.
148. Guttenburg, 46.
H.
Hacket, 298. 346. Hair, 49. 366. 370. Hakewill, 189. 314. Hakluyt, 136. Hamel,
304. Hanaper Books, 187. Hands, 368. 372. Hanging, 182. Harding, 83. Hare, Kts.
of the, 74. Harington, 354. Hariot, 152. 155. 245. Harley, 188. Harold, 12.
304. 308. 360. Harp, 81. Harpyngham, 76. 363. Harvey, 86, 89. 92. 362. 369.
Haselrig, 296. Hastings, 290. 295. Hatton, 273. Hawking, 264. Hawkins, 147.
153. 154. 155. 156. Hawkwood, 143. 311. 359. Hay, 363. Haynault, Sir J. 69. 72.
Head, 366. 372. Hearing, 372. Hearne, 23. 188. 199. 239. Heart, faithful, 284.
Heath, 173. Hebrew Tongue, 160. Hegesias, 92. Heirs, 211. 212. 297. Helena,
142. Hell, 30. Helmont, 56. Hemp, 49. 184. Hengest, 306. Hengham, 353. Hennage,
271. Henrietta, Queen, 167. Henry I. K. 83. 87. 263. Henry II. 82. 85. 143.
Henry III. 14. 16. 17. 18. 135. 293. 356. Henry IV. 68. 138. 144. 266. 325.
348. Henry V. 138. 266. 325. 356. Henry VI. 25. 26. 138. 315. 320. 326. Henry
VII. 125. 149. 264. 320. 324. 325. 356. Henry VIII. 67. 139. 144. 187. 262.
316. 321. 323. 325. 346. 355. 357. Heptarchy, 307. Heralds, 190. 360. Herbert,
83. Heresies, 80. Heretics, 195. Herrings, 25. Hermaphrodites, 369. Hermits,
347. Hertfordshire, 358. Heyla, 82. Hickifrick, 363. Higham, 362. Hildebrand,
82. Hildeforth, 352. Hildegard, 83. Hills, 290. History, 20. 269. Historians,
61. 73. 85. Historiographer, 120. 121. Hobard, 363. Hobgoblins, 220. 227. Hogs,
185. Holbrook, 363. Holland, Jos. 190. Dr. Phil. 46. John, 279. Sir John 76.
355. Rich. 274. Hollands, 49. Hollar, 173. Hollock, 281. Holy Land, 143. 295.
Hondius, 288. 293. 330. Honorius, 49. Honor, 120. 255. 259. Hop Garden, 214.
Hopkinson, 267. Horns, 181. 366. Horizon, 28. 32. Horsa, 306, 351. Horses, 57.
223. 264. 296. Horse Stealers, 223. Hours, 42. Howard, 137. 142. 148. 155. 331.
357. 362. 363. Howel, 163. Howel Dha, 135. Howson, 249. Hubertus, 205. Hudgin,
227. Hugh, Bp. 85. Humphrey, Duke, 239. 298. 326. 354. 358. Hunnis, 88. 91.
Hunsdon, 154. 157. Hunting, 264. Hussy, 101. Hyde, 239. Hydraulics, 44. 45.
51. Hydrography, 26. 114.
I.
Jack of Hilton, 186. Jacob's Staff, 31. James IV. of Scotland, 355. James I.
of Eng. 96. 164. 177. 214. 351. James II. 175. James, Tho. 202. 239. Jane,
Queen, 287. Janus, 294. Japan, 147. Java, 156. Iceni, 185. Idol, Speaking, 81.
Idols, Saxon, 303. Idolaters, 161. Idolatry, 304. Jealousy, 297. Jeffery, 370.
Jenkinson, 144. Jernegan, 362. Jerusalem, 143. 295. Jewel, Bp. 204. Jewels,
164. Jews, 61. 161. 354. Images, 44. 80. 195. 222. Imitations, 182. Impatience,
268. Impresses, 292. Improvements, 116. Ina, 135. Inchequine, 369. Incubus,
217. Indices Expurg. 205. Indulgences, 347. Ingham, 362. Ingratitude, 267.
Ingulphus, 143. Inheritances, 211: Ink, 25. Innocent, Pope, 15. Inns of Court,
170. 190. Inoiosa, 166. Inscriptions, 160. 170. 173. 234. 289. 292. 345. 347.
Insects, 180. Installation, 123. Inventions, 302. Investiture, 123. Joan, Pope,
81. Queen, 275. 276. Jofrancus, 32. John, King of Eng. 14. 15. 17. 18. 143.
292. 360. John, K. of France, 74. 75. John of Gaunt, 186. John, Oliver St. 135.
Johnson, 62 355. Jonas, Arn. 142. Jones, 189. 190. 249. Josippus, 249.
Josseline, 2. Joyner's Work, 184. Ireland, Description of, 33. Duke of, 76.
Kings of, 77. Wars of, 99. Irish Long-Tails, 369. Iron, 25. Iron Works, 184.
Isabella, Queen, 72. 76. 77. Iseland, 142. Island, 305. Islip, Sim. 47. 348.
356. Israelites, 161. Italian Language, 160. Ives, St. 82. Jubilee, 347. Judd,
351. Judges, 169. 173. Jugglers, 223. 339. Juites, 306. Justice, 268. Courts
of, 169. Justices, List of, 276.
K.
Katharine, Queen, 356. 357. Keble, 293. Kellison, 94. Kemp, 59, 348. Kenred,
83. Kent, 288. 309. 352. Kent, Earl of, 74. Kentish Long Tails, 80. 350. 369.
Kercher, 118. Keymis, 155. Killegrew, 139. King, Dan. 229. Kings, 11. 12. 14.
80. 96. 105. 106. 138. 231. 276. 307. 308. 346. 357. King's Evil, 166. 177.
Kings of Arms, 360. Kingsfield, 223. Kingston, 343. Knevet, 249. 363.
Knighthood, 120. 121. 190. 191. 283. Knights of the Garter, 119. 298. 323. 329.
330. Knights of the Round Table, 122. 125. 192. Knights Hospitaliers, 138. 292.
Knights Templars, 296. 356. Knight's Fee, 109. 297. Knight's Service, 290.
Knighton, 239. 294. Knolles, 356. Knowledge, 116.
L.
Lacy, 353. Lake, Sir Tho. 189. 247. Lambard, 138. 171. 288. Lambert, 111.
Lancashire, 277. Lancaster, Duke of, 72. 75. 76. 77. 319. 353. 360. Lancaster,
Jam. 156. Lands, 210. 289. Lane, Hen. 140. 141. Ralph, 152. Tho. 175. John,
183. 185. Lanfranc, 82. 83. 348. Langbain, 188. 190. Langham, 356. Langley, 27.
Langton, 293. 348. Languages, 113. 129. 133. 159. 162. 199. 238. 301. 302. 309.
310. Lathom, 285. Latitude, 30. 155. Laud, 190. Law Cases, 289. Suits, 101.
104.Terms, 252. 253. Salic, 252. Laws, 6. 10. 25. 169. 189. 211. 251. Layton,
357. Learning, 111. 116. 263. Leases, 187. Leder, 197. Lee, 236. Legerdemain,
222. Legs, 369. Leicester, Earl of, 98. 144. 145. 271. 279. 280. 281. 283. 286.
294. 313. Leicestershire, 287. 290. Leiden, John, 370. Leigh, 190. 289. Leir,
293. Leland, 291. 301. 361. Leofric, 185. 235. Leporius, 80. Leprosy, 291.
Lespagnol, Dr. 92. Lestrange, 362. Letchery, 82. 85. Letters, 25. 26. 197. 245.
270. 346. 357. Letters, initial, 64. 161. Levant Trade, 144. 146. Leveller,
111. Lewis, 22. Lewkner, 163. 167. Ley, 189. 190. Lhewelyn, 135. Lhoegr, 200.
Lhuyd, 73. 131. 132. 198. Liberality, 267. Liberties, 353. Librarians, 45. 242.
243. 247. 373. Library, Theological, 59. Library, at Oxford, 190. 208. 239.
298. 312. Library, Vatican, 209. Licanthropia, 218. Lightning, 176. Likeness,
36. 183. Lilly, 90. 354. Limning, 47. Linacre, 264. 354. Lincoln's End, 171.
Lindley, 287. 294. Linum Vivum, 49. Lioba, 94. Lion, 51. Life, 21. Linne, 43.
Linne, Nicholas of, 138. Linen, 49. Linschoten, 148. Lips, 367. Liquors, 25.
Lisle, Lord, 163. Litchfield, 185. Liturgies, 162. Lives, 93. 119. 121.
Loadstone, 56. 178. Lock, Mat. 141. 144. John 144. 147. William, 144. Lo,
Kath. 218. Logarithms, 117. Loggan, 173. Logic, 113. 115. London, 22. 23. 138,
307. 353. London Bridge, 25. Bishop of, 361. Longcamp, W. 85. Longing, 181.
183. Longitude, 29. 31. 155 Longland, 347. Looking Glass, 54. Lords, 108.
Lotteries, 221. Lotherwits, 181. Low Countries, 271. 281. Lucie, 352. Lucius,
11. 355. Ludgate, 307. Lupus, Hugh, 235. Lust, 22. Luther, 5. 195. 220.
Lydgate, John, 88. 121. 361. Lynsey, Sir Jam. 76.
M.
Madan, 306. Madera, 146. Madoc, 135. 149. Maddox, 254. Madmen, 352. Madre de
Dios, 149. Magic, 222. Magistrates, 263. Maglocune, 3. Magna Charta, 25.
Magnanimity, 268. Magnus, St. 25. 26. Magus, Sim. 218. Mahumetans, 160.
Maidens, 21. Majesty, 266. Malborne, 225. Malcolm, 84. Malory, 293. 297.
Malverne, 347. Malynes, 96. 97. Man, Isle of, 230. 237. 278. 279. Mandeville,
25. 96. 358. 359. 366. Manfredus, 342. Manny, Sir Walt. 74. 326. 356. Mansell,
349. Manufactures, 102. Manwood, 349. Manuscripts, 21. 105. 120. 187. 189. 208.
209. 254. 267. 270. 323. 343. Maps, 28. 31. 149. 157. 175. 232. 288. 290. 293.
Marcian, St. 278. Mareth, 165. Margaret, Queen, 320. 358. Margaret, Lady, 320.
321. 356. Maronites, 162. Marquess, 107. Marriage, 22. 61. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83.
84. 94. 183. 186. 213. 296. Marshall, 356. Mary, Virgin, 357. 363. Mary, Queen,
139. 315. 321. 356. Mary, Abbess, 84. Mason, 365. Massacre, 307. Masses, 82.
Mass-Mongers, 80. Mathematics, 113. 117. Maurice, Count, 281. May, 209.
May Day, 306. Mayors, 23. Maximus, 2. Measuring, 24. 29. 139. 146. Mecca, 145.
Medal, 267. Medicine-Mongers, 35. Meekness, 21. Melancholy, 216. Melanchton,
342. 346. Meliader, 70. Men, 118. 181. 364. Men, Artificial, 370. Mercator,
Ger. 141. Merchants, 25. 139. 352. Mercia, 231. 237. Mercy, 267. Meridian, 28.
30. Merlin, 80. 133. 135. 218. 343. Merton, 313. 351. Metius, 43. Mexico, 152.
153. 154. Microscope, 53. 118. Middleton, 63. Middlesex, 361. Mildmay, 167.
321. Milk, 182. Mills, 44. 184. Milton, 2. Miracles, 80. 81. 94. 341. 358.
Mirandula, 195. Miscellanies, 270. Moderns, 117. Modesty, 265. Moluccas, 150.
156. Molyneux, 349. Monarchy, 250. Monasteries, 13. 80. 95. 344. Money, 98.
103. 146. 189. Montgomery, 328. Monks, 12. 24. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 85.
Monmouth, Geff. 298. Monopoly, 101. 102. Monro, 182. Monsoons, 146. Monsters,
370. Montagu, 329. 374. Montaigne, 73. Montanus, 205. Months, 303. Monuments,
344. 346. Moon, 30. 31. 32. 53. 176. More, Sir T. 194. 218. 249. 252. 357.
Morocco, 147. Morses, 151. Mortimer, Earl, 74. 135. 362. Morton, 25. 348.
Morwin, 190. Mosaic Work, 48. Mosely, 183. Moss-Wood, 179. Mottos, 190.
Mountains, 161. Mountjoy, 246. Mouths, 367. Mowbray, 143. 358. 360. 362.
Monday, Ant. 89. Moscovy, 139. Muses, 269. Music, 50. 61. 82. 113. 263.
Music, Meetings, 186.
N.
Nails, 368. Names, 72. 182. 183. 310. 311. Namure, Sir Rob. 69. Napier's
Bones, 117. Nations, 301. Natural Hist. 118. Naunton, 362. Navarre, Q. of, 275.
Navel, 369. Navigation, 26. 136. Navy, 275. Neal, 296. Necham, 358. Neck, 368.
Negatives, 253. Nestorians, 161. Nevill, 75. 326. 354. 360 Newbery, John, 146.
Newfoundland, 150. Newnam, 212. New-Year's-Gift, 284. 286. Nicholas, Pope, 23.
24. 82. Nicholson, 21. 22. 23. 73. 174. 316. Nigellus, 84. Nobles, 76. 105.
106. Nobility, 107. 263. 266. 344. Noel, 292. Norden, 233. 288. Norfolk, 362.
Duke of, 346. 362. 363. Normans, 12. 302. 308. Norrington, 219. Norris, 175.
271. 272. 270. 280. North, Ld. 273. Northampton, E. of, 331. Northburie, 279.
North-East Passage, 141. 142. North-West Passage, 150. Northumberland, E. of,
75. Norwich, Map of, 28. Bp. of, 75. Sir William of, 84. Diocese of, 361.
Noses, 366. Nourse, 190. Nova Hispania, 153. Novaunt, Bp. 85. Nubrigensis, 335.
Numerals, 72. Nuns, 12. 13. 84. 347. 357. 358. Nunnery, 82. 359.
O.
Oaks, 179. 182. Oaths, 24. Occham, W. 5. 206. Ocland, Christ. 86. Octher, 137.
Odingsells, 297. Odo, Abp. 81. Odoricus, 143. Odger, Bp. 94. Odulphus, 81.
Offa, 189. 346. 358. Offering, 23. 81. Offices, 311. 357. 361. 362. Offley,
179. Oglethorp, 330. Okeover, 180. Old Age, 183. 255. Oldham, 316. Oldsworth,
190. Onley, 285. Optics, 113. 117. 118. Oracles, 216. 220. 335. Orange, Pr.
of, 224. 370. Ordeal, 170. 303. Orders of Knighthood, 121. 323. 330. Orders
Religious, 84. 293. 347. Ordination, 61. Orenoque, 155. Ores, 178. Organs, 44.
50. 54. Ortelius, 199. Orthography, 64. Orthon, 339. Osalineskie, 166. Osborne,
105. 145. Osith, St. 80. Osmond, Bp. 83. Oswald, 81. Otters, 185. Outlawries,
170. Owen, of Wales, 75. 136. Owen, Thomas, 212. Mrs. 249. Margaret, 366.
Oxford, 80. 190. University of, 189. 312. Benefactors of, 313. Students of,
318. Earl of, 88. 110. 198. Oxgang, 109. Oxnam, John, 154. Oil, 95. 151.
P.
Paget, 248. Painting, 47. 263. Palatine, Count, 164. Palatine, County, 231.
Palumbus, 82. Papacy, 80. 82. Paper, 46. Paracelsus, 370. Paradise, 30.
Parallels, 30. Pardons, 24. 347. Parents, 212. 213. Parishes, 347. Parker, 135.
250. 296. Parkhurst, 151. Parmenius, 151. Passports, 145. Pasture, 177.
Patents, 187. 253. Pater Noster, 21. Patience, 21. 268. Patriarchs, 162.
Patrick, St. 80. Paul's, St. 353. 354. Pawn-Houses, 104. Pearson, 363. Peckham,
Abp. 135. 348. Peckham, Sir Geo. 151. Pedigrees, 267. Pedlers, 352. Peireskius,
43. 44. 48. 53. Pelagius, 80. 142. Pembroke, Earl of, 75. 271. 317. 319. 356.
Pens, 46. Penance, 80. 81. Pensherst, 351. Pensions, 253. Pepper, 100. Percy,
76. Pern, 189. Perpetuities, 297. Perrot, 272. Perry, 182. Persia, 140. Persian
Tongue, 302. Perspective, 223. Perukes, 366. Peter, St. 6. Peter Pence, 85.
351. Peter, King, 75. Peter, Sir Wm. 314. 315. Petit, 201. Pews, 361. Phaer,
Dr. 88. 90. Philip, K. of Fran. 74. Phillippa, Queen, 69. 74. 356.
Philosophers, 63. Philosophy, 83. 113. 114. 115. 116. Philpot, 349. Philtres,
181. 219. Physic, 34. Physiognomy, 372. Picts, 2. 200. 306. Pictures, 48. 185.
222. Pigeon, 222. 350. Pigmies, 370. Pilgrims, 80. Pilgrimages, 13. 94. 145.
195. 347. 363. Pious Works, 182. Piper, 304. Pirates, 100. Placability, 266.
Planets, 28. Plantagenet, 171. 359. 360. Plantin, 47. Plants, 118. 178. 184.
Plate, 99. 103. Play Houses, 62. Plays, 248. Plot, Dr. 175. 186. Ploughman,
Piers, 88. 347. Pneumatics, 44. 45. Poetry, 86. 87. etc. 194. 264. Pointing,
64. 191. Poisons, 85. 218. Poitiers, Battle of, 74. Pole, Cardinal, 315. De la
Pole, 362. Poles, 28. Polybius, 30. Polygamy, 61. Pope, Sir Tho. 316. Popes,
12. 13. 19, 82. 346. La Popeliniere, 72. Popham, 155. Porphiry, 2. 334. 342.
Porta, 52. 53. Portuguese, 146. 148. Possevine, 202. Post Fines, 187. Potters,
177. Poultney, 295. 297. 354. Poultry, 352. 354. Pourtraits, 329. 350. 361.
363. Poverty, 238. Powell, 42. 131. Power, 5. Powlet, 316. Powys, 135.
Precedence, 163. 166 Prelates, 82. 83. Premonstratenses, 84. Presbyterians, 61.
Prescot, 285. Prescription, 9. Preston, Capt. 154. Price, Hugh, 316. Pride,
195. Priests, 12. 24. 79. 80. 81: 82. 83. 84. 85. 218. 220. Primacy, 350.
Primogeniture, 211. Prince, 107. Printing, 46. 63. 118. 191. 209. Prints,
Wooden, 26. etc. 134. 365. Prints, Engraved, 173. 176. 230. Prior, 25. Prise,
Sir John, 4. 133. Privileges, 9. 148. 231. Privities, 369. Processions, 124.
125. Proclus, 29. Promises, 268. Promotion, 268. Prophecies, 220. 331. 333.
343. Prophets, 118. 332. 342. Prosodia, 86. 92. Proxies, 123. Prynne, 11. 14.
17. 20. Punick Language, 160. Purbeck, Lady, 168. Purgatory, 80. 82.
Putherbeus, 206. Pynson, Rich. 67. 68. Pythonists, 219.
Q.
Quacks, 35. 37. Quadt, 167. Quakers, 61. Quarries, 178. Queen, 252. 253.
Queenborough Castle, 350. Quicken Tree, 179. Quintin, St. 135. Quivira, 152.
R.
Raby, Ld. 187. Radcliffes, 360. Radegund, 320. Ralegh, 142. 148. 149. 151.
152. 155. 165. 169. 172. 246. 286 364. 366. Ralph, Abp. 83. Rain, 177. Ramea,
151. Ramsey, Abbey, 83. 84. Ramusio, 141. 149. Randolf, 83. Rastal, 175. 194.
Rats, 304. Rates, 25. Read, 45. 144. Readers, 332. Real Character, 113. Record,
Dr. 29. Records, 15. 18. 20. Redshanks, 200. Reformation, 346. Regalia, 106.
Religions, 159. Relics, 94. 95. 195. Repulses, 268. Resumption, 253.
Revelations, 85. Revenue, 25. 253. 254. 283. Rewards, 269. Reynolds, 246.
Rhodes, 144. Richard, St. 94. Richard I. King, 11. 12. 23. 85. 143. 169. 360.
Richard II. 70. 71. 75. 76. 77. 138. 325. 356. Richard III. 193. 195. 291. 326.
329. Riches, 95. Rights, 211. Rings, 43. 44. 293. Ripley, 234. Rives, Dr. 177.
Rivers, Earl, 63. 64. 326. 328. Roe, Sir Tho. 122. 123. Robert, St. 84. Robert,
D. of Normandy, 82. Robin Hood, 227. Rochester, 350. Rollo, 308. Rolls, Master
of, 173. Roman Tongue, 159. 160. Roman Government, 306. Romances, 309. Romans,
2. 11. Rome-Scot, 81. 82. 347. Rood of Grace, 219. Roper, 197. 249. 352.
Rotheram, Tho. 315. Roy, Sir Raynold, 76. Royal Society, 61. 116. 118.
Rozencrantz, 167. Rubens, 48. Rupert, Prince, 184. Rush, Friar, 227. Russel,
272. Russia, 139. 140. 141. Ruthal, 356. Ruttiers, 155. 156. Rygeway, 182.
Rymer, 72.
S
Sabbath 61. Sackvile, 351. Sacrament, 84 196. Sacrifices, 221. Sacro-bosco,
29. Sadlier, 359. Sailing, 32. 54. Saints, 79. 80. 195. 349. 350. Salisbury,
Countess of, 74. Salisbury, Earls of, 75. 326. 329. Salt, 231. 234. Salusburie,
John, 85. 284. 352. Samothites, 79. Sanctorius, 53. Sanctuary, 82. 95. 347.
357. Sandys, 249. Saracens, 25. 76. 159. Sarmiento, 148. 165. Satyrs, 370.
Sauvage, Denis, 73. Savanorola, 52. 341. Savile, 209. 247. 248. 313. 351.
Saxons, 12. 80. 251. Saxons, Language, 252. 253. 300. 301. 302. 304. 306. 312.
Saxton, 288. Sayings of Philosophers, 63, Scarborough, 139. Schismatics, 346.
Schisms, 61. School Divinity, 113. Schoolmasters, 264. Schoolmen, 83. 84.
Schools, 112. Science, 269. Scot, Reginald, 213. 371. Scot, Tho. 315. Scotland,
33. 85. 200. Scots, 1. 74. 75. 76. 306. Scots, Queen of, 248. 274. 275. 276.
285. Scriptures, 61. 196. 202. 341. Sea, 138. 139. 161. Seasons, 24. 29.
Seaxes, 301. 307. Sectuaries, 61. 161. Seldom, 72. 170. Seraglio, 146.
Sergeants, 170. 173. Serjeanty, 293. Sermons, 201. Seville, 158. Sevenoke, 352.
Sewar, 359. Seymore, 287. Shadows, 30. Shapes, 372. Sheffelde, 129. Shelton,
363. Sheriffs, 23. 173. 298. Sheringham, 311. Shipping, 54. 137. 138. 158. 277.
Shirley, 155. 167. Shires, 189. 296. 308. Shoes, 372. Shoulders, 368. Showers,
176. Shrewsbury, E. of, 83. 175. Shooting, 184. Short Hand, 45. Shriving, 25.
Sidney, Lady Frances, 321. Sir Philip, 86. 131. 271. 273. 351. Sir Henry, 132.
133. Sir Robert, 246. Sigebert, 318. Signs, 336. Signior, Grand, 146. Silence,
65. Silk, 48. Simons, 215. 368. Simony, 83. 347. Sin, 7. 22. Skeleton, 88. 125.
130. Skipwith, 292. Skrymsher, 180. Slavonic Tongue, 160. Sleepers, 182. 297.
Sleidan, 6. 73. 200. Sloth, 195. Smith, W. 229. 230. 315. Dr. Tho. 190. Sir
Tho. 249. Snakes, 295. Soap, 25. Sobize, 166. 168. Socrates, 65. Sodomy, 83.
85. 369. Solomon, 144. Somner, 312. Somerset, Earl of, 164. Duke of, 187. 354.
Somervile, 186. Summers, 154. Sophy, 141. Soul, 22. 52. 190. 371. Sounds, 176.
South Sea, 157. Southworth, 280. Spain, 283. Spaniards, 142. 148. 149. 153.
154. Spanish Tongue, 160. Species, 365. Speech, 291. 372. Speed, 233. 288.
Spells, 39. Spelman, 171. 362. 364. Spenser, Sir Hugh, 72. 73. Edm. 51. 86. 87.
90. Spheres, 28. 29. 43. Spicery, 25. Spinning, 48. Spirits, 84. 224. 227. 228.
339. Spitting, 183. Spots, 24. Sprats, 25. Springs, 177. Stafford, 76. 321.
348. 351. 355. Staffordshire, 175. Stage, 62. Stanley, 272. 276. 278. 285. 327.
Staple, 352. Stapuldon, 313. 317. Stars, 28. 56. 336. 341. Stature, 182. 370.
Stepdames, 212. Stephen, K. 84. 350. Stigandus, 82. Stiklebow, 219. Stone, 285.
Stone-Eater, 368. Stones, 177. Stradling, 135. Streights, 156. 157. Strength,
182. Stuarts, 135. 200. Stubbes, 117. Students, 243. 318. 322. Stukeley, 147.
Subscription, 187. Succession, 211. Succubus, 218. Sudbury, 348. 362.
Sufficiency, 38. Suffolk, E. of, 165. Suliard, 86. 362. Sultan, 24. 143. Sun,
28. 32. 176. Sun-Dials, 42. Supremacy, 346. 357. Surnames, 310. 311. Surgeons,
38. Surrey, 283. Surrey, Earl of, 88. 91. Sutton, 315. Swanus, 82. Sweicker,
Tho. 45. Swimming, 264. Sword, 108. 292. Sylvanus, 217. Sylvester, Pope, 81.
Symmetry, 370. Syriac, 160. Synod, 82. 83.
T.
Tails, 369. Tablot, 189. 291. 297. 328. 330. 354. 363. Taliessin, 133.
Talismanics, 45. Tartars, 161. Tartary, 138. 143. Tate, 34. 189. 190. Taxes,
253. Tecla, St. 94. Teeth, 36. 367. Telescopes, 53. 117. 118. Temple, 170. 296.
356. Temporalities, 7. 8. 25. Temptation, 21. Tenants, 24. 290. 293. Tenures,
289. 290. Teonville, Jean de, 64. Terms, 170. 190. Testament, New, 61. 196.
Teutonic, 300. 309. Thanes, 108. 109. Theology, 113. 115. Thermometer, 53. 118.
Theurgy, 225. Thompson, 374. Thoughts, 65. Thorn, Rob. 139. 150. 156. Thorn,
Nicholas, 153. Thorp, 355. 362. Thunder, 176. Thurstinus, 82. Thynne, Fran.
189. 190. Tides, 32. Tiles, 184. Tileson, 105. Tilney, Sir Fred. 143. 362.
Time, 42. 303. Tims, Tho. 43. Tin, 102. Tiptoft, 258. 260. Title-Pages, 63.
Titles of Honor, 106. 253. 311. 355. Titles of Right, 289. Tippet Men, 83.
Tobacco, 102. 103. Tongues, 367. Tonnage, 24. Tonstal, 1. Topiary Works, 184.
Tostius, Earl, 83. Tournaments, 189. Towns, 190. Trade, 96. 100. 138.
Tradescant, 59. Transformations, 218. 226. 364. 369. Translations, 129.
Transmigration, 371. Transportation, 304. 335. Transubstantiation, 371.
Travels, 136. Trees, 23. 24. 52. 179. 184. 235. Trial, 170. Tribute, 9.
Trinidad, 154. Tripoly, 145. Trivet, 76. Trojans, 305. Tropics, 29. Troutbeck,
234. Truce, 75. 77. Tryvylyan, 76. Tuisco, 301. 312. Tundalus, 84. Turbevile,
140. Turianus, 44. Turkish Language, 160. Turks, 42. 61. 144. Turnham, 351.
Tusser, 88. 90. Tutbury, 186. Tutors, 263. Twyne, 88. 198. 199. Tyler, Wat. 75.
355. 361. Tyndale, 195. 196. Tyrell, 360. Tyrone, Earl of, 99. Tysdale, 78.
317.
V.
Valence, W. de, 356. Valeresso, 166. Vale Royal, 231. Vainglory, 22. Van
Drebble, 43. 44. 53. Vandyck, 48. Van Meteran, 142. Vasilivich, 139. 141. 142.
Vatican, 209. Vaughan, 173. Vaulting, 264. Vaux, Ld. 88. 329. 330. Vaz, Lopez,
154. 156. 157. Vele, Abr. 78. Velvet, 102. Ventriloquy, 219. Verdun, 295.
Verdungus, 343. Vere, 198. 247. 355. 359. Verse, English, 86. 91. etc.
Verstegan, 299. Virtue, 22. 120. Vic, Sir Henry, 120. Vigils, 124. Villeins,
293. Villiers, 287. 291. Vincent, 288. 296. 297. 345. Virgil, 127. Virgil,
Polydore, 1. 4. 122. 133. 200. 201. 350. Virginia, 151. Virginity, 80. 369.
Viscount, 108. Visions, 84. 85. 225. 278. Vites, 306. 311. St. Vitus Dance, 51.
Vortiger, 306. 307. Vortimer, 306. Vortiper, 3. Vossius, Ger. 2. Isa. 72.
Votaries, English, 78. Voyages, 136. Udal, 246. Ufford, 348. 362. Ugolin, 52.
Ulla, St. John de, 152. 153. Union, 309. 330. Universal Character, 113.
Universities, 118. 189. Unthriftiness, 212. Upton, 273. Urban, Pope, 75. 276.
Urine, 41. Urrey, 245. Ursula, St. 80. Urswick, 357. Uscomb, 141. Use of Sarum,
83. Usury, 104. 347.
W.
Wadham, 317. Wainfleet, 315. 318. Wake, 290. Walburg, St. 92. Waldenses, 84.
Wales, 76. 83. 131. 200. Wales, Prince of, 266. Wales, Princess of, 76. Wall,
277. Walpole, 364. Walsingham, 98. 131. 151. 331. 349. 362. Walstane, St. 82.
Walter, Bp. of Hereford, 82. Walworth, 349. 355. War, 74. 100. Holy, 85. Ward,
Dr. Sam. 204. Seth, 117. Luke, 157. Wardmote, 24. Wares, 25. Warham, 348.
Warwick, Earl of, 326. 327. 329. Wassail, 306. Watches, 42. Water, Holy, 81.
82. Waters, 32. 176. 291. Water Glasses, 42. Water Motions, 44. Watson, 92.
Ways, Roman, 185. Weapons, 301. Weaving, 48. Web, Wm. 86. 91. 229. 233.
Web, Dr, 113. Webster, 111. Weever, 344. Weights, 25. 139. 146. Weisman, 168.
Welshmen, 308. Welsted, 175. Wenceslaus, 70. Wenefride, 201. Werberg, St. 233.
West Indies, 149. 154. 301. Westminster, 82. 356. Weston, Eliz. 47. Weston, Sir
Wm. 144. Wethemsted, 358. Whale, 161. Whale-fishing, 141. 151. Whear, 190.
Whetstone, Geo. 89. White, 173. 316. 317. 364. Whitehead, Geo. 43. 59.
Whitlock, 190. Whittington, 139. 355. Whores, 80. 81. Wiche, 292. Wicelius, 93.
Wickham, 314. Wicliffe, 22. 249. 294. 295. 374. Wier, John, 219. 227. 294.
Wightman, 298. Wightwick, 317. Wilfhilda, 82. Wilfride, 80. Wilfrith, 81.
Wilibald, St. 93. 94. Wilkes, 279. 280. Will, 21. William, St. 84. 351. William
Conqueror, 82. 87. 308, 309. 353. 359. William II. 83. William III. 187.
Willoughby, 139. 272. 352. Wilson, 197. Winchester, Cardinal of, 26. Windham,
147. Wind Motions, 44. Winds, 32. 146. 176. Windsor, 122. Wine, 25. Winfred,
94. Wingfield, 148. 352. 362 Winibald, 94. Winter, Capt. 157. Winwood, 165.
Wircker, 347. Wisards, 40. Witchcraft, 39. 213. 371. Witch-Elm, 179. Withernam,
252. Woden, 304. Wolfhard, 93. Wolley, 280. Wolsey, 25. 103. 294. 316. 343
Wolves, 81. 306. Women, 37. 66. 81. 83. 181. 217. 218. 343. Women, Religious,
95. Women, Scolding, 185. Wonders, 38. 222. Woodlark, Dr. 320. Woods, 24. 282.
283. Wool, 49. 101. Words, 65. 265. Words, Saxon, 252. 253. 310. World, 24. 28.
Worldliness, 22. Worseley, 247. Worship, 268. Wotton, 47. 165. 249. 350. Wrath,
195. Wren, Sir Christ. 177. Wrestling, 264. Wright, Edw. 148. Wriothesley, 323.
324. 325. 360. Writers, Theological, 60. Writers, Law, 169. Popish, 93.
Writers, Wanton, 264. Writing, 45. Wrongs, 268. Wulfrick, St. 84. Wulstane, 83.
Wyat, 363. Wydeville, Ant. 63. 326. 357. Wymington, 285.
X.
Xantonge, 278.
Y.
Yale, Dr. 135. 198. Yaxley, 362. Year, 253. Year Book, 173. Yelverton, 362.
Yeoman, 311. York, Sir J. 147. 156. York, Rowland, 273. York, Duke of, 358.
York, City, 307. Young, 249. Younger Brother, 210. 297. Younger Sons, 181.
Youth, 371.
Z.
Zenith, 28. Zodiac, 28. 336. Zomoisci, 165. Zones, 29. 295. Zuegara, 158.
FINIS.

