THE General History OF PRINTING, FROM Its first Invention in the City of
MENTZ, TO Its first PROGRESS and PROPAGATION through the most celebrated Cities
in Europe. Particularly, Its Introduction, Rise and Progress here in England.
THE Character of the most celebrated PRINTERS, from the first Inventors of the
Art to the Years 1520 and 1550; with an Account of their Works, and of the most
considerable Improvements which they made to it during that Interval.

BY S. PALMER, PRINTER.

LONDON: Printed by the Author, and sold by his Widow at his late
Printing House in Bartholomew-close: also by J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane, and by
most Booksellers in Town and Country. M DCC XXXII.

PREFACE.
AS it is very natural and commendable for every man to be ever inquiring after
any discovery or improvement that may be useful to his profession, and to
communicate it to the public, I am willing to hope that the care and pains,
the time and expense I have bestowed on the following History, will be approved
by every one who considers the nature, use and extent of it; and the rather,
because nothing has been yet published, at least in English, on the subject of
PRINTING, so methodical and comprehensive either in the Historical or Practical
part of it. As to the History, I could not, without some regret, observe that
we had nothing in our own language but some few fragments dispersed in several
Authors, who only spoke of it occasionally, whilst so many Italians, Germans
and French had wrote so copiously upon it, and ex professo. Though even these
seem rather to have had a view to the introduction and progress of the Art in
their respective countries, than to the displaying of its excellency and
improvements. Neither did I find that any of them had given so particular a
History of the Invention and Inventors, or so general a one of its progress and
promulgation through Europe, and beyond it, as I could have wished, or as I
thought might be compiled.

However, neither these considerations, nor the discoveries I had made from
some ancient and valuable editions I met with in some of our noble libraries,
nor even the examples of several men of my profession abroad, who have writ
largely on both the subjects, could have prevailed upon me to have undertaken
this Historical part, which I knew deserved a much better pen. The Practical
being more within my province, my ambition reached no higher than to have
published such a complete system of it, from the helps I had received from Mr.
Fertel and Mr. Jn. Andr. Endters, (two eminent Printers, the first at St.
Omer's, and the other at Nuremberg, who have published two curious treatises of
it) and from my own observations and improvements on them; as few of my
profession would have failed of being the better for in some branch or other of
the Art. And I could with the utmost pleasure have communicated all the other
discoveries which I had occasionally made, to any person that would have been
at the pains of writing this History. But when I discovered my design, I found,
to my surprise, that the Practical part would not meet with that encouragement
and approbation I expected, particularly from those for whose benefit and
improvement I had chiefly designed it, though the public could not but have been
the better for it, by having much better and neater impressions than are
generally done.

Upon this account my friends and patrous persuaded me to alter my Design, and
to suspend the Practical part, till the Historical, which they pressed me also
to undertake, had in some measure made way for it. Pursuant therefore to this
new plan, I resolved to spare neither cost nor pains to get a sight, or at
least a certain intelligence of all the Old editions that were valuable either
for their antiquity, elegancy, or for any light they could give me into this
History, and to add my own observations upon them, not only as an historian,
but more especially as a PRINTER. The Reader will find, by the sequel, that
none but one of that profession, and one that is well versed in those old
ancient works can form a right judgment of them; and this is the reason that so
many of them have been mistaken for Manuscripts, or have been supposed to have
been printed upon wooden blocks, even by persons otherwise very learned and
judicious, whereas it is even demonstrable that they were done by separate
metal types.

My next care was to read over all that has been writ hitherto upon the
subject, especially by the judicious Malinkrot, by De la Caille, Chevilier,
Endters, P. Pater, Orlandi, and by the learned Mr. Maittaire, from all whom the
Reader will find I have received no small helps, and which I do here gladly
acknowledge; and if I have at any time ventured to dissent from them, I hope he
will find my opinion backed with sufficient authority; but where that could not
be obtained, I have contented myself with leading the Reader to the most
probable side. And it is with no small pleasure that I have found one or two of
my conjectures since confirmed by the discovery of some latent pieces, which
were not known to them. They had indeed access to the most celebrated Libraries
of their own countries, but this History will convince them that all that is
valuable and curious is not confined to them, and that we have many as nobly
and richly furnished in our own as any in theirs.

And here I should be extremely ungrateful, if I did not take this opportunity
of acknowledging the great helps and curious informations I have been favored
with by several of the Patrons and Encouragers of this work, as well as my
great obligations to the Right Honorable the Earls of Pembroke and Oxford, to
whom I am proud to own myself beholden (but more especially to the former,) for
all the discoveries which this History has above any other extant. My free
access to those two Libraries, as well as to those of my very good friends Dr.
Mead, Dr. Rawlinson, Mr. Richardson, and others, besides some of our public
ones, such as those of Oxford, Cambridge, and of the Middle Temple, have
afforded me the satisfaction of seeing many of those scarce editions, which
have been mentioned by most Annalists, if we except Mr. Maittaire, either from
Catalogues or hearsay. And here I gladly take this opportunity of returning my
thanks to these learned Correspondents, who have favored me with any ourious
intelligence from those Libraries, which my Business and the bad state of
health, would not permit me to visit.

The order of this History is as follows.

The first book contains an account of the Discovery and Inventors of the Art,
whether really such, or only pretended, with remarks on their first trials upon
Blocks, and their first editions.

The second book treats of the promulgation of PRINTING into all the several
cities and places in Europe, and the improvements made to it by the most
eminent Printers down to An. 1520.

The third gives an account of its first introduction into England, its rise
and progress in several cities, towns and monasteries; with the characters and
works of the most famous English Printers to an. 1550, a fuller account of all
which may be seen in the following Table of CONTENTS.

This Performance I entirely submit to the approbation or censure of the
curious and candid, as it shall deserve. And I shall gain the main end I
proposed, if what I have done shall contribute to some more full and elaborate
productions of this nature.

Thus far Mr. PALMER's Preface to the Historical part, as to what relates to
the Practical, we need not trouble the Reader with it here. What the Author
designed to treat of in it, may be seen by the Table of Contents prefixed to
the first Number of this work. In this Table he will likewise find several
particulars which were promised to be added to this History, but which we have
been obliged to omit, either for want of materials, or because they were not
thought so necessary to this work by the promoters of it. Of the first sort was
the History of Printing in Scotland and Ireland; concerning the former of which
we can add nothing to the short account which was printed at Edinburgh by Mr.
Watson the King's Printer there; and as for Ireland we are still more in the
dark for want of Memoirs. Mr. PALMER had likewise promised the Prints of the
Rebus's of all the foreign eminent PRINTERS, but, as he had not got them cut
before his death, and has given an account of them at the end of their works,
it was thought that charge might as well be spared; so that we have only added
those which were used by the most considerable ones of our own nation. His list
of the most excellent PRINTERS from 1500 to this time; the several acts for
regulating the Press, and for securing the property of Copies, being left very
imperfect, the charge of finishing them was likewise thought unnecessary; for
which reason they are also omitted.

All that needs be added with regard to his Practical part, is, that, as it was
intended to have been printed first, the Author has left it in such perfect
order, that, if the Public will be pleased to encourage it, an Edition may be
easily printed from his Manuscript. 'Twere needless to tell the world how fit
he was for such a work, what pains he has taken, and what improvements he made
to it; those who knew Mr. PALMER will think it sufficient to say that the
subject is the Art of Printing, and he the Author of it.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. CHAP. I. AN enquiry into the rise of Printing -- Page 1 II. An account
of the different manners of Printing by blocks of wood and separate metal types
-- 4 III. Testimonies of writers from the middle of the 15th century in favor
of John Faust, and the city of Mentz 8 IV. Authentic facts in favor of Faust
and Mentz -- 27 V. The pretensions of Harlem examined and confuted -- 37 VI. An
enquiry into the first books printed on blocks of wood, viz. the Donatus
Speculum, etc. -- 49 VII. The pretensions of Stratzburgh confuted -- 59 VIII.
The time of the discovery of Printing -- IX. Of the first books printed by
Faust and Schoeffer -- 71 X. Remarkable occurrences between the year 1450 and
the promulgation of the art -- 85 XI. The conclusion, with an account of the
ancient method of Printing -- 91 XII. An account of the first printed Bibles
before the year 1501 -- 97
BOOK II. THE history of the dispersion, progress and improvements of Printing
from an. 1462 to 1520 -- INTRODUCTION -- 108 CHAP. I. The city of Mentz,
monastery of Subiaco, and the city of Ausburgh. 1. Faust and Schoeffer continue
to print at Mentz, after the dispersion of most of their servants at the taking
of that city -- 115 2. The monastery of Subiaco -- 120 3. The city of Ausburg
-- 121
CHAP. II. The first Printers at Rome. Their patrons and correctors petition to
the Pope, etc. The city of Tours, and the town of Reutlingen -- 122 III. The
city of Venice, 1469. The names, character, etc. of the Printers who flourished
in this city from that year to Aldus Manutius's time, an. 1494 -- 140 IV. Aldus
Pius Manutius Romanus, a Venetian Printer, his life, character, and Greek
editions, etc. Inventor of the Italick letter. An account of the other Printers
at Venice till the year 1500 -- 151 V. Of the three first Printers at Paris,
and their successors. The encouragement they met with. Some account of the
books printed by, and other particulars relating to them. A second
Printing House set up in the Louvre by King Lewis XI. with the rest of the
Paris Printers -- 165 VI. The settlement and progress of Printing in the cities
of Cologn, page 178. Milan 180. Stratzburg 183. Bolonia 186, and Treviso 189.
The names, dates, and other particulars of their Printers -- APPENDIX to the
foregoing Chapter. Printing set up at Ratisbone, Amberg and Colle, 1471 -- page
190 CHAP. VII. Printing brought into the cities of Naples, page 191. Florence
193. Ferrara 197. Nuremberg 199. Verona 206. Parma 207. Mantua 208. Derventer
209, and Padua ibid. etc. -- VIII. Note, This is printed CHAP. IX. by a
mistake, and all the rest follow that course. The cities of Louvain, page 210.
Ulms and Utrecht 212. Turin and Genoa 213. Brescia 214. Alost 215. -- X. [IX.]
The cities of Basil, p. 216. Placentia, Pignerol and Esling 228. Vincentia 229.
Lubeck 230. Valentia 231. Rostoch and Brudges ibid. Delft 232 -- XI. [X.] The
cities of Spire, p. 232. Lions 233. Geneva, Brussels, Coscence and Pavia 242.
Goude, Zwol, Caen, Ceulen, Genzano and Quilembourg, 243. Lignitz, Hasselet,
Reggio, Mount Royal and Wartzburgh, 244. Pisa, Aquila, Erford and Langres, 245.
Gaunt and Memining, 246. -- XII. The rest of the cities and places which began
to print before the year 1500. Soncino, p. 246. Leipsick 249. Vienna, Urbino,
Antwerp, Heidelbergh, Cremona and Harlem, 250. Abbeville and Toledo 252.
Modena, Boisleduc, Eychstadt, Tubingen, Rouen, Gaeta and Toulouse 253. Siena
and Hagenaw 254. Lisbon, Sevil, Dole and Ingolstadt, 255. Luneburgh,
Magdeburgh, Thessalonica, Fryburg, Angoulesme, Liria, Madrid, Barcelona,
Grenada, Montferrat, Mirandula and Pampeluna, 256. Avignion, Leyden, Provinz,
Bergamo and Bemberg, 257. -- A list of editions printed with cuts -- ibid. and
258 CHAP. XIII. An account of some eminent Printers from 1500 to 1520. The
great improvements they made to the Art, and the encouragement they met with
from the learned; with a catalogue of their most considerable impressions in
the oriental tongues, Polyglots, etc. -- 259 XIV. Of the abuses of the Art of
Printing. -- 285 APPENDIX. An account of a new and discovered edition printed
by John Guttembergh at Stratzburgh in 1458, now in the possession of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Pembroke -- 299 A list of some of the most eminent
Persons, Authors, Editors, etc. who condescended to prepare Manuscripts, and to
correct for the Press during the 15th century, with the character of some of
the most considerable of them -- 30^
BOOK III. Of English Printing and Printers. CHAP. I. OF the Art's being first
brought into England 313 II. Printing at Oxford by Frederick Corsellis, other
Printers, and their works -- 321 III. Printing set up at Westminster by Wm.
Caxton and Winken de Word. An account of their works -- 327 The city of
London. An account of the London Printers, and their works -- 352 Printing and
Printers. The cities of York and Cambridge. Monastery of Tavistock. The city of
Worcester, and town of Ipswich -- 386 etc. An Appendix to the general History
of printing of Books, being an additional History of the rise and progress of
Prints which are incused. Exactly copied from the Right Honorable the Earl of
Pembroke's book of those Prints, etc. -- 390 A list of XVI volumes of Drawings
and Prints relating to the same subject, and taken from the Manuscript-titles
of the books themselves in the same library. A chronological and alphabetical
Table of all the cities and places in which the Art of Printing began to be
exercised before an. 15^0, and in England to an. 1550.

ERRATA.
PAGE 2. Note l. 8. for sciae r. scire. p. 22. l. 28. r. Regio montc. p. 93. l.
2. dele of. p. 150. l. 6. r. BACTIBOVIUS. p. 151. l. 23. r. VITALIS. p. 173. l.
ult. marg. for fient r. tient. p. 178. for CHAP. V. r. CHAP. VI. p. 182. l. 15.
r. SCINZENZELER. Ibid. l. 27. r. Montegatiis. p. 190. l. 3. r. BERNARDIN. p.
190. l. penult. dele 15. p. 193. l. 22. r. L'Aquila. p. 196. l. 2 r. dci. Ibid.
l. 30. r. Tanaidis. p. 198. l. ult. r. Tradidit, and Ferrariensis. p. 208. l.
19. r. 1472. p. 210. CHAP. IX. for CHAP. VIII. and all that follow are wrong,
etc. p. 224. l. 4. from the bottom dele, p. 236. l. 8. r. ENGELHARD. Ibid. l.
13. r. Asc. p. 249. l. 3. r. MINCHAR Happenim. Ibid. l. 5. r. BECHINATH. Ibid.
Not. 1. l. 6. r. (...). p. 250. l. ult. r. Verdnsen. p. 252. l. 6 from the
bottom, r. edition. p. 253. l. 4. r. ROUEN. Ibid. l. 6 from the bottom, r.
Rotomaginm. p. 255. l. 6. r. Hebraice. Ibid. l. 4. fsom the bottom, r.
Epidemiae. p. 256. l. 12. r. ABARBANEL. Ibid. l. 14. r. Josuae. p. 258. l. ult.
join the last word with the first in the next page. Ibid. l. 13. r. ALBUMAZAR.
Ibid. l. 22. r. Hypnerotomachia. Ibid. l. 5. from the bottom, r. Montegna. p.
260. l. 28. r. 1516. p. 266. l. 19. r. 1514. p. 270. l. 17. dele in. p. 271.
Not. 2. l. 6. r. aptandos. p. 281. l. 26. r. bought. p. 283. l. 4. r.
propaganda. p. 285. r. CHAP. XIV. p. 290. l. 8. r. Chapuis. Ibid. l. 12. r.
creditnr. Ex Dc, etc. Ibid. l. 18. r. puro. p. 294. Not. l. penult. r.
literaria. Ibid. ult. r. luat. p. 295. Not. l. 3. r. aberratum. p. 345. l. 7.
r. heraldica. p. 356. l. 15. r. Poet. p. 364. l. 12. r. cum. p. 365. l. 20. r.
Muster. p. 367. l. 3. from the bottom, r. MD XXXVII. p. 372. l. 4. r. 1539. p.
375, 376, 377 and 378, in the Printers dates, dele the redundant I between the
XX. p. 380. l. 16. r. Retractation.

A GENERAL History of Printing:
BOOK I. Of its Origin, Improvement and Progress by JOHN FAUST from 1440. to
1462.
CHAP. I. An Enquiry into the Rise of Printing.
MY design is to give an historical account of the authors, discovery,
improvement and progress of the Art of Printing; an Art so highly beneficial to
mankind, by preserving and transmitting to posterity the treasures of ancient
and modern learning, that its original has been esteemed divine. I shall begin
with a previous enquiry into the causes and concurrent circumstances, which
excited the inventors of it to a discovery, that might answer this end, with
more expedition and exactness, than Transcribing, the only method known before.

THE world at this time began to recover from a state of ignorance, under which
it had labored many centuries; learning revived, and was patronized in almost
every country of Europe; its votaries exerted a laudable zeal in searching the
libraries for those valuable books, which had lain buried in obscurity, and
were become extremely scarce, great numbers being lost in the times of
ignorance. Manuscripts were procured and multiplied; but the price of them was
such, that none but men of fortune could purchase them: 120 crowns for a Livy,
and 80 crowns for three volumes of Plutarch's Lives De tribus voluminibus
PLUTARCHI in quibus parallela viginti quatuor continentur, titulos sumpsit, ut
mones; pretium minus LXXX aureis esse non potest, etc. Papiens. p 114. vet.
edit.
, was then a moderate price: a few manuscripts were thought a portion worthy a
nobleman's daughter; and one or two entitled the donor and his posterity to the
perpetual prayers of a monastery: nay kings themselves disdained not the office
of procuring them for their learned friends, as appears from a letter of
Antoninus Bocatellus, sirnam'd Panormus, to Alphonsus king of Naples and Sicily
Significasti mihi nuper ex Florentia extare TITI LIVII opera vaenalia, libros
pulcherrimos; libro pretium esse CXX aureos. Quare majestatem tuam oro, ut
LIVIUM, quem regem librorum appellare consuevimus, emi nomine meo, ac venire ad
nos facias; interim ego pecuniam procurabo, quam pro libri pretio tradam, Sed
illud a prudentia tua sciae desidero, uter ego an Pegnius melius fecerit; is,
ut villam Florentiae emeret, LIVIUM vendidit, quem sua manu pulcherrime
scripserat; ego, ut LIVIUM emam, fundum proscripsi. Haec ut familiariter a te
peterem, suasit humanitas and modestia tua. Vale and triumpha. Epistel. lib. 5.
; and an old manuscript hebrew bible was a present from the Emperor Frederick
III. to Reuchlin, who was sent ambassador to him. Paulus Jovius relates a
pleasant story of one Jason Mainus, a student of Pavia, whose extravagance
having brought him to a goal was obliged to deposit a manuscript Codex Juris on
parchment, into the hands of an usurer, in order to procure his enlargement:
Petrarch's rhetoric master likewise, by pledging two volumes of Cicero's works,
saved himself from a prison.

As this excessive price tempted some to purchase estates by the sale of their
books, and exchange learning for money; so the learned at that time freely
parted with their wealth to procure those invaluable remains of antiquity, out
of a generous design to communicate them to the world.

THE Transcribers now had a favorable opportunity of enriching themselves,
which they might have enjoyed much longer, had not they (possessed with the
most mercenary views) done an incredible, and in some cases irrecoverable
damage to learning, by mutilating and corrupting the best authors: hence arise
those frequent complaints against their negligence and ignorance, which have
cost the learned an infinite deal of labor to remedy: to evince this the
following instance will suffice.

JOHN ANDREAS, bishop of Aleria, one of the greatest critics of that age,
tells Pope Paul II. in his dedication prefixed to Pliny's Natural History In
nonum annum premi non potuit emendatio, ne futura quidem exacta post
nonagesimum.
, printed at Rome in the house of the Maximis by Panaratz and Sweynheim, anno
1470, that though he had spent nine whole years in correcting that author; yet
ninety more would not complete a correct edition. This demonstrates what
difficulties the republic of learning encountered with at it is revival;
namely, the scarcity and excessive price of books, and the sordidness of the
Transcribers, from whose hands they came so maimed and incorrect, that the
great Printer Stephens truly said, they were a plague to the purchaser. These
were motives sufficient to excite the Inventors of this Art to a discovery so
beneficial to the world, and of such honor and advantage to themselves: who
those excellent persons were, and where it was made, will come under our
enquiry in its proper place. And here the reader will find just cause of
wonder, that this Art, which has been styled the nurse and preserver of arts
and sciences, should (if I may use the expression) be so forgetful of itself,
as not to leave us the least sketch of its own history, the inventors being
more ambitious of deserving, than of purchasing praise. Some light indeed we
receive in this affair from a few inscriptions used by Faust at the end of his
first printed books, to this purpose. This present work, with all its
embellishments, etc. was done, not with pen and ink, etc. but by a new invented
Art of casting Letters, Printing, etc. by me John Faust and my son-in-law Peter
Schoeffer in the famous city of Mentz upon the Rhine, anno --: but recourse
must be had to the writers of those times for the history of this Invention.
Many cities have contended for the glory of it, and engaged the learned in
defense of their claim; but those on the side of Harlem have managed the
controversy with great warmth, and charged Faust the Inventor with robbing his
supposed master Laurence John Coster of many thousand weight of his materials,
on Christmas-Eve, when the whole family and city were in prayer at church; with
other such ridiculous stories, invented merely to deprive this Great Man of the
honor, which he had so long incontestably enjoyed. Had this been published in
his lifetime, when he might have defended himself, or presently after his
death, when his son-in-law or some of his friends might have done it for him,
he had undoubtedly been cleared; but such an accusation was not hinted till 125
years after, and then grounded only on suspicion, as Dr. Junius owns Ut fert
suspicio.
, who was the first that attempted to transfer this Discovery from Mentz to
Harlem. However Faust's name died not with him, though some Dutch writers made
use of his art to asperse his memory: and others of several nations rose
immediately in his defense; in particular the learned Malincrot, dean of
Munster, in his treatise De Ortu and Progressu Artis Typographicae, has not
only refuted what was advanced on the other side, but made such researches
after the old monuments of the Art, and collected so great a variety of
testimonies, supported by undeniable facts, as seem at once to determine the
controversy. Boxhorn indeed attempted an answer; but whoever reads it over,
cannot but be convinced, that an over-fondness for his country's honor has
made him deaf to the most evident demonstrations of his antagonist. However as
he and his followers, have given up the point as to separate Metal Types in
favor of John Faust, and lay claim only to the invention of Printing on Blocks
of Wood, which they affirm to have been stolen from Coster by Faust, whose next
invention they would have to be only an improvement of the former; I shall give
the reader an idea of both, and show the difference between those first essays
of Printing, and that perfect one, which succeeded and continues to this day.

CHAP. II. An Account of the different Manners of Printing by Blocks of Wood,
and separate Metal Types.
IT IS agreed by most writers on this subject, that about the year 1440, several
attempts were made by some persons, with vast expense and labor, which proved
abortive; but that the discovery of separate Metal Types was not brought to
perfection till about the year 1450. We find that their first essays were by
carving or cutting letters with a sharp-pointed knife upon Blocks of Wood, each
Block containing a page or one side of a leaf; that instead of the common Ink,
which is the sort they first used, they invented a more glutinous one which
succeeded better, being less apt to spread; that they pasted the two white
sides of each leaf together, to make them look like single leaves: but of this
I shall have occasion to speak more particularly in some of the following
chapters. In the mean time I shall endeavor to demonstrate that this invention
has not that merit for ingenuity, usefulness, or novelty, which the Dutch
writers boast of.

WITH respect to the first, the only requisites are a tolerable genius, sharp
tools, and a good copy: as to its usefulness, the only advantage resulting from
it, is, that whatever the book be, the forms remain entire, so that as many
editions as the author pleases may be printed without the expense of a new
composition; but on the other hand, if we consider that those forms are of no
use to any other work, and the time and expense in cutting them very great,
with the great space so many Pages of Wood must take up, we shall perceive the
necessity of inventing moveable Metal Types: But farther, this method of
Printing was far from being novel, it is even demonstrable from authentic
testimonies to have been practiced in China and Japan, above four centuries
before it was known in Europe: it is not easy, I grant, to prove that we
received it from them, because of their vast distance, and the little commerce
between us before the year 1440: yet there is no impossibility, but that it
might have been brought us by some merchant either by the way of Muscovy or the
Red Sea, the Persian Gulf or Arabia: of which opinion I could mention many
authors. Gonzala de Mendosa, in his history of the Marvels of China, written in
Spanish, Book III. Chap. 16; and Martin Martini in his Atlas Sinensis, tell us,
that they could prove by good arguments, that the Invention of Guns, of the
Loadstone and Printing was known to us by their means. What adds to the
probability of my conjecture is, that the Chinese to this day send with their
goods, printed papers in the manner of our shopkeepers hand-bills, several of
which I have seen; and it is not impossible but the hint of Printing on Blocks
of Wood might have been taken this way.

WHOEVER has a just idea of the genius of the Chinese and Japonese, will own
their capacity to have invented the method of Printing with separate types, if
their manner of writing had admitted it; but as they are known to write, not
with letters, as other nations, but with characters, each of which stands for a
whole word; and that the number of those characters amount at least to 10,000,
(though some authors reckon above 40,000); it would be impossible to have cases
large enough to contain 'em, besides the insuperable difficulty of
distinguishing and retaining them in memory. To return from this digression,
let us now take a short view of the other new and more expeditious method.

IF we duly consider it in all its branches, it will evidently appear the
result of no small study, time and cost. The cutting the counter-punches and
punches and sinking them into the matrices, the adjusting them to the mould,
that curious piece of mechanism, for casting single letters; the difficulty of
the whole manual operation of Letter-founding: in the Printing, the disposition
of the cases, the curious contrivance of the several parts of the work between
the compositors, correctors and press-men, etc. add to all this the fine
invention of the Printing-press, so admirable for its mechanical fabric,
together with the curious apparatus necessary for a Printing House, for an
explication of whose terms we must refer to the second volume of this work:
these are things which require a genius vastly superior to devise, better hands
to execute, greater forecast to obviate, and readiness to remedy all unexpected
defects, more time and patience to go through all its various parts, more
resolution to overcome all difficulties, and lastly the expenses necessary to
this invention vastly larger than those of the former; and consequently we
shall be far from thinking an interval of ten years too long, but rather admire
that such a prodigious design could be contrived and perfected in so short a
time.

WHAT has been said on this head, will sufficiently demonstrate the disparity
between these two methods, and convince the reader how much the former is
inferior in every respect to the latter; nay, if we dare rely on the judgment
of the learned, we should scarce think it worthy the name of Printing, since it
has nothing common with it except the ink; and even a rowler, covered with
cloth, would supply the place of a press to print their Pages of Wood.

NOW whether it be Faust or Coster, who practiced this method on wood first,
whether Mentz, Harlem, or any other city, gave it first encouragement; whether
the afore-nam'd persons had the hint from China, or happened on it
accidentally, (though if we admit of the latter supposition, Faust and Mentz have
the better title); this must be granted from what has been said, that by
Printing we do not understand the method of Printing on Blocks of Wood claimed
by Harlem, but the present Art of Printing by separate Metal Types, which is so
justly admired for its expeditious and correct way of preserving and
propagating knowledge; and to which we owe the improvements made in most arts
and sciences for near three centuries past.

HENCE it appears how little reason the Dutch writers have to value themselves
upon an imaginary victory, which, were it granted in its fullest extent, would
be despicable in comparison of the other. Yet Boxhorn in his Theatrum
Hollandiae, page 142. places his hero Coster in a kind of triumphal chariot,
dragging his vanquished enemies the Germans and French after him, with a
pompous inscription, which I think worthy the curious readers notice Quem
Flos urbium,
HARLEMUM
Patritia familia edidit.
LAURENTIO COSTERO,
Qui incredibili and prope inhumana
Ingenii felicitate,
Moguntinis nequidquam negantibus
and
Gallis frustra obstrepentibus,
ARTEM TYPOGRAPHICAM
Primus invenit,
MONUMENTUM
hoc
L. M. P. Q.
Typis
Posuimus.

. He exults as if every sentence in that book was demonstration, and imposes an
eternal silence on all those nations, which have appeared in defense of Mentz,
in a stanza of short verses after the manner of Claudian, which for its
singularity is likewise here quoted Serrarii libelli,
Streperi tacete Galli;
Taceat sonourus author.
Solus Ovantem Batavus
Emeditatus artem.
Haec vox aetheriis insonet axibus,
Haec vox per populos, per mare transeat;
HARLEMUS Typicam prodidit artifex.

. However, I persuade my self that two or three of the following chapters will
convince us of the vanity of these triumphs, unless this piece of divinity and
poetry composed by Scriverius shall alter our sentiments; it contains four
verses, to be placed under Coster's statue, and cited in the Theatrum Holland.
abovementioned p. 156 Vana quid archetypos and praela Moguntia jactas?
Harlemi archetypos praelaque nata scias.
Extulit hic, monstrante deo, Laurentius artem:
Dissimulare virum hunc, dissimulare deum est.

. I shall only inform the English reader, that the author of them pronounces it
as rank atheism to deny Coster the glory of this invention, as to deny God that
of the creation. I shall now leave Harlem and the Dutch writers, and pass over
to the city of Mentz, to examine the testimonies brought in favor of her,
after having returned Boxhorn four lines from a learned Italian poet, who may
be supposed a more impartial witness in this controversy Abstulerat Latio
multos Germania libros;
Nunc multo plures reddidit ingenio.
Et quod vix toto quisquam perscriber et anno,
Munere Germanica conficit una dies.
Laur Valla.


.

CHAP. III. Testimonies of writers from the middle of the 15th century in
favor of John Faust.
MALINCROT has collected the testimonies of writers on either side of the
controversy, from the promulgation of the art to the time in which he wrote.
viz. ann. 1640. and ranged them in the beginning of his book in the following
order.

Those who declared for Mentz, before the dispute was started by Dr. Junius,
and quoted by him in that work 62 Those, who have written on the same side
since Junius 47 109 Those who have written in favor of Harlem 13 Those who are
neuters 11

BY this list it is manifest where the advantage lies as to numbers, but lest so
many testimonies should be thought tedious, it will not we hope be improper to
select the most considerable, especially from those authors, who wrote soon
after the discovery, and were better acquainted with this matter, than those
who lived any time after it, and may be justly supposed to have followed their
predecessors. But I would therefore avoid, as much as possible, clogging or
interrupting the thread of this history. I shall only extract the most material
authorities out of them, and in such a manner as shall be consistent with it,
by inserting the passages themselves in the notes, that the reader may use his
pleasure either in reading or omitting them.

BUT before I proceed any farther, it will be necessary to obviate an
objection, that will infallibly occur to the reader's mind; which is, that in
mentioning the first inventors of printing in the two preceding chapters, I
have not so much as named John Guttenbergh: whereas the greatest part of the
authors, whom we are about to quote, place him in the first rank, and mention
only the other two as co-adjutors to him. In answer to this it will be
sufficient for the present to say, that the sequel of this History will show
that Guttenbergh had no other share in this invention, than by furnishing the
other two with necessary supplies to defray the great charges of it; and that
the authors of the Mentz and Cologn Chronicle, whom the rest seem to have
followed in this, as also the learned antiquary Trithemius, have certainly
confounded Guttenbergh with Faust, that is, mistook the one for the other, as
will hereafter appear in its proper place.

OF all the authors, to whom the world is indebted for a particular account of
this Discovery, Abbot Trithemius justly claims the pre-eminence, both upon the
account of his living nearest the time of this discovery, which he tells us
happened in his younger years Tempore infantiae meae apud Moguntiam, etc.
Trith. Epist. Fam. Epist. 48.
, as well as for his care to derive his intelligence from its origin. We have
two noble testimonies out of his Chronicle; the one from the first part,
entitled Chronicon Spanheimense, where His quoque temporibus ars imprimendi and
characterizandi libros, de novo reperta est in civitate Moguntina per quendam
civem, qui Johannes Guttenberg dicebatur: qui cum omnem substantiam propter
nimiam difficultatem inventionis novae in eam perficiendam exposuisset,
consilio and auxilio bonorum virorum Johannis Fust and aliorum adjutus, rem
inceptam perfecit. Primus autem hujus artis dilator fuit, post ipsum
inventorem, Petrus Opilio de Gernsheim, qui multa volumina suo tempore
impressit. Morabatur autem praefatus J. Guttenberg Moguntiae in domo
Zumjunghen, quae domus usque in praesentem diem illius novae artis nomine
noscitur insignita. Chronic. Spanheim. ad ann. 1450.
speaking of the year 1450 he says; "That about this time the Art of Printing
and Casting Single Types was found out anew in the city of Mentz by one John
Guttenberg, who having spent his whole estate in this difficult discovery, by
the assistance and advice of some honest men, John Faust and others, brought
his undertaking at length to perfection: that the first Improver of this Art,
after the Inventor, was Peter Schoeffer (in Latin Opilio) de Gernsheim, who
afterward printed a great many volumes: that the said Guttenberg lived at
Mentz in a house called then Zum-junghen, but afterward known by the name of
the Printing House." But lest the reader should be startled at the word anew
(de novo) it will be requisite to acquaint him that Trithemius was in all
probability of the same opinion with some other writers, who from a passage of
St. Cyprian misunderstood, wherein the invention of Printing (by which is meant
no more than that of stamping of Letters and Hieroglyphics upon Medals, Coins,
etc.) is attributed to Saturn, took occasion to reckon it among the arts
perditae, and consequently esteemed this rather a revival of the art than a new
discovery; but he sufficiently retracts that error in the next passage we shall
quote from him, which was not wrote till many years after, and that from a more
diligent enquiry into the discovery and merit of this new, and till then
unheard of, Art; for this will appear from his words as you will see
immediately.

THIS next passage, which is fuller, and for its singularity and decisiveness
deserves to be set down at length, is taken out of the second part of
Trithemius's Chronicle, entitled Chronicon Hirsaugiense. This book was unknown
to the learned till the year 1690. when the Benedictins of the monastery of St.
Gall in Switzerland begged leave to publish it from the original manuscript,
which had lain hid all that time. The Abbot wrote this toward the close of his
life, after he had been informed of many particulars, relating to this
invention, from the mouth of Peter Schoeffer (in English, Shepherd) sirnam'd de
Gernsheim, to whom Faust, for the many helps he had received from him, namely,
in devising Punches, Matrices, and Moulds for casting their Metal Types (in
which the main perfection of the Art consisted) gave his only daughter
Christina in marriage, and from a servant took him into partnership with him,
as appears by the inscriptions to the first books published by them, of which
we have given a sketch already. The passage is as follows His temporibus in
civitate Moguntina Germaniae prope Rhenum, and non in Italia, ut quidam falso
scripserant, inventa and excogitata est ars illa mirabilis, and prius inaudita
imprimendi and characterizandi libros. per Johannum Guttenberg civem
Moguntinum, qui cum omnem pene substantiam suam pro inventione hujus artis
exposuisset, and nimia difficultate laborans, jam in isto, jam in illo
deficeret, jamque prope esset ut desperatus negotium intermitteret, consilio
tandem and impensis Johannis Fust aeque civis Moguntini, rem perfecit
incoeptam. Imprimis igitur characteribus literarum in tabulis lignois per
ordinem scriptis, formisque compositis, vocabularium, Catholicon nuncupatum,
impresserunt; sed cum iisdem formis nibil aliud potuerunt imprimere, eo quod
characteres non fuerunt amovibiles de tabulis, sed insculpti, sicut diximus.
Post haec inventis successerunt subtiliora, inveneruntque modum fundendi formas
omnium Latini Alphabeti literarum, quae ipsi matrices nominabant; ex quibus
rursum aeneos sive stanneos characteres fundebant ad omnem pressuram
sufficientes, quos prius manibus sculpehant: and revera, si uti ante triginta
ferme annos ex ore Petrus Opilioni^ de Gernsheim civis Moguntini, qui gener
erat primi artis inventoris, audivi, magnam a primo inventionis suae haec Ars
impressoria habuit difficultatem; impressuri namque Bibliam, priusquam tertiam
complessent in opere quaternionem, plusquam 2000 florenorum exposuerunt. Petrus
autem memoratus Opilio tunc famulus, postea gener, sicut diximus, Inventoris
primi Johannis Fust, homo ingeniosus and prudens, faciliorem modum fundendi
Characteres, and artem, ut nunc est, complevit. Et hi tres imprimendi modum
aliquandiu tenuerunt occultum, quousque per famulos since quorum ministerio
artem ipsam exercere non poterant, divulgatus fuit in Argentinenses primo, and
paulatim in omnes nationes. -- Et haec de impressoria mira subtilitate dicta
sufficiant, cujus inventores primi cives Moguntini fuerunt -- Habitabant autem
primi tres artis impressoriae inventores, Johannes videlicet Guttenber,
Johannes Fust and Petrus Optlic, gener ejus Moguntiae in domo Zumjunghen dicta,
quae deinceps usque in praesens Impressoria nuncupatur. Chronic. Hirsaugiense
ad ann. 1450.
. "About this time (ann. 1450.) in the city of Mentz in Germany upon the Rhine,
and not in Italy, as some writers falsely affirmed, the wonderful and till then
unknown Art of Printing Books by Metal Types [characterizandi] was invented and
devised by John Guttenberg, citizen of Mentz; who having almost exhausted his
whole estate in contriving of this new Method, and laboring under such
insuperable difficulties, in one respect or other, that he began to despair of,
and to throw up the whole design; was at length assisted with the advice and
purse of John Faust, another citizen of Mentz, and happily brought it to
perfection. Having therefore begun with cutting characters of the letters upon
wooden planks, in their right order, and completed their forms, they printed
the vocabulary entitled Catholicon; but could make no farther use of those
forms, because there was no possibility of separating the letters, which were
engraven on the planks, as we hinted before. To this succeeded a more ingenious
invention; for they found out a way of stamping the shapes of every letter of
the Latin Alphabet, in what they call Matrices, from which they afterward cast
their letters, either in copper or tin, hard enough to be printed upon, which
they first cut with their own hands. It is certain this art met with no small
difficulties from the beginning of its invention, as I heard 30 years ago from
the mouth of Peter Schoeffer de Gernsheim, citizen of Mentz, and Son-in-law to
the first Inventor of the Art. For when they went about printing the Bible,
before they had worked off the third quire, it had cost them already above 4000
florins. But the afore-mentioned Peter Schoeffer, then servant and afterward
Son-in-law to the first Inventor John Faust, as we hinted before, being a
person of great ingenuity, discovered an easier method of casting letters, and
perfected the art as we now have it. These three kept this manner of printing
very secret for some time, until it was divulged by their servants, without
whose help it was impossible to manage the business, who carried it first to
Strasburg, and by degrees all over Europe. -- Thus much will suffice concerning
the discovery of this wonderful art, the first inventors of which were citizens
of Mentz. -- These three first discoverers of printing, viz. John Guttenberg,
John Faust and Peter Schoeffer his Son-in-law, lived at Mentz, in a house then
called Zum-junghen, but ever since known by the name of the Printing House."

FROM this authentic testimony, I shall beg leave to make the following
observations, viz. 1. That when the author concluded his Chronicle, ann. 1514.
two years before his death, and above 64 years after the discovery, this
invention was indisputably ascribed to Mentz; he says indeed that some writers
had attributed it to Italy, but without any foundation; and therefore he
rejects this notion as absolutely false. Yet Junius, as has been already
hinted, first started a dispute in favor of Harlem, almost 130 years after the
art became known; and after him Dr. Mentel began another in favor of
Strasburgh, ann. 1650, both which shall be answered in their places.

THE next observation is, that though the passage quoted out of his first
Chronicle seems to be taken, if not copied out of that of Mentz, which is
likewise a very ancient and authentic monument, yet our author seems not to
have been satisfied with it, till he had it confirmed by surer hands. Other
authors indeed have written concerning the origin of this art, according to the
best memoirs they could procure, whether true or false; but our author alone
has been at the pains to fetch his information from the fountain head, and
delivered the particulars of it, as he received 'em from the principal agent in
the invention, in the quotation from his second Chronicle: so that his
testimony, were it the only one we could produce for Mentz, ought still to be
esteemed unquestionable and decisive.

ANOTHER particular worth our observation is, that though he mentions two books
as printed immediately upon the discovery, viz. the Catholicon and the Bible,
yet he sufficiently shows the difference between the methods of their
impression; the former being done upon wooden planks, cut with a knife after
the Chinese manner, as our wooden cutts are done now; whereas the Bible was
printed with separate types, which, as we showed in the preceding chapter, is
the only way that merits the name of Printing. This seems plainly intimated by
the words in the citation beforementioned, When they came to print the Bible;
and by the vast expense they had been at before they finished the third quire
of it: from which it is evident, that this sacred book was the first work of
consequence which the authors of this art made choice of to signalize the
first fruits of their invention.

THE last thing I would observe is, that though Trithemius gives the precedence
of this discovery to John Guttenbergh, in the beginning of this passage, yet
within a few lines after, he twice gives the title of The first inventor of
Printing to John Faust; which contradiction cannot be well reconciled
otherwise, than by supposing that he, through inadvertency, wrote the name of
John Guttenberg instead of John Faust and this is far from being improbable,
since their christian names are the same: and though he again puts Guttenbergh
first, when he speaks of the house in which they lived, yet this might be done
only out of respect to him, either as being a knight (according to the writers
of that time), or because he was the most opulent of the three, and had
contributed most to the charges of the invention.

THIS must be allowed, unless we could suppose that the editor having compared
the two passages together, namely, that out of the first, and this out of the
second Chronicle, had corrected, as he imagined, the latter by the former, upon
a suspicion, that the author writing the last almost 30 years after he had
received the account from Schoeffer, might have mistaken one name for the
other; but to be certain of this, it would be necessary to consult the
original. However, what confirms me in my conjecture is, that the author or his
editor have committed a mistake, and that Guttenberg had no other interest in
the discovery than by assisting them with money to promote the design, is, the
lawsuit which he commenced against Faust at Mentz about the money expended,
and the judgment of the court thereupon; of which the learned Salmuth has given
the following account in his appendix to Pancirol's commentaries Eodem tempore
Moguntiae commorebatur Johannes Guttenbergius, honestis parentibus natus, qui
proxime Fausti aedibus habitabat. Hic cum animadvertisset insignem hancartem
Typographicam, non solum omnium ore passim celebrari, sed etiam admodum
lucrosam esse, familiaritatem cum Fausto contraxit; and quia opulentus erat,
pecuniam ei ad sumptus necessarios obtulit; quod Fausto minime ingratum fuit,
quandoquidem comperiebat sumptus, quos in artem faciebat, quotidie crescere,
and tunc opus chartae pergamenae imprimendum sub manibus habebat: quapropter
cum Guttenbergio convenit and pactus est, ut quicquid in illud opus
impenderetur, communi utriusque lucro vel damno cederet. Quoniam vero Faustus
plus insumpserat, quam Guttenbergius necessitatem postulasse arbitrabatur: hic
dimidiam suam partem exsolvere detrectavit; qua exre cum lis orta esset, alter
alterum Moguntinae in jus vocavit, ubi, partibus auditis, pronunciatum fuit; si
Johannes Faustus interposito juramento affirmare posset, omnem pecuniam, quam
mutuam sumpsisset in commune opus erogatam, non autem in proprios usus
conversam fuisse, Guttenbergium ad solvendum obligatum esse Cui sententiae
Faustus paruit, sicut ex archetypo instrumenti, quod etiamnum superest, anno
1455 sexto novembris a Johanne Ulrico Helmosperger notario de ea re confectum
fuit, liquido demonstrari potest. Unde evidenter apparet Guttenbergium
nequaquam artis typographicae inventorem and primum authorem esse, sed aliquot
annis postquam ea inventa fuisset, a Johanne Fausto in consortium adscitum,
pecuniam ei suppeditasse -- Cum igitur Guttenbergius ad sumptus resundendos
damnatus fuisset, and ex eo simultates inter illum and Faustum magis
exarsissent, ille autem interea artem vidisset and didicisset, siquidem inter
tot operas, quae ad illam excudendam requiruntur, fieri non potuit, ut ea
diutius occultaretur, quod etiam Deus proculdubio noluit, Moguntia Argentinam
se contulit, quo aliquot ex operis secum attraxit. Post illud dissidium alii
quoque, qui apud Faustum artem illam didicerant, eum deseruerunt, and
Francesurtum atque in alia loca se receperunt; cum praesertim anno 1462
Moguntia capta, and pristina sua liberate privata fuisset, quo factum est, ut
haec praeclara ars omnibus innotesceret, and publici juris fieret. App^ndic. ad
Commentar. Paneirol. ad titul. 12. qui est de Typographia.
; and this may be esteemed another pregnant testimony for Faust, since it is
extracted from an original record of the lawsuit. The narrative as related by
our author is as follows.

"ABOUT this time there lived at Mentz one John Guttenbergh, born of honest
parents, who dwelt next door to John Faust: he observing this famous art of
Printing was not only cried up every where, but also very gainful, contracted a
friendship with Faust; and being exceeding rich, offered to supply him with
money to defray the charges of it, which was gladly accepted by Faust, who
began to find the expense grow too fast upon him, and wanted vellum to print a
work then in hand. Upon this he agrees and covenants with Guttenbergh, that
whatever sums were laid out in the work, should turn to their common profit or
loss. But because Faust had disposed of more money then Guttenbergh imagined
the business would require, he refused to pay his moiety; upon which a
dissension arose between them, and they summoned each other before the judges
at Mentz. The parties being heard, it was decreed, that if Faust would make
oath, that all the money which he had borrowed, had been expended in carrying
on the common business, and that he had converted no part thereof to his own
private uses; Guttenbergh should be obliged to pay him. Faust submitted to this
decree; as may evidently be proved from an original instrument still extant,
which was drawn Nov. 6. ann. 1455. by Uldric Helmosperger, a notary public,
pursuant to the said sentence. Hence it manifestly follows that Guttenbergh was
in no wise the inventor or first author of Printing; but that he had been
admitted by Faust into partnership with him some few years after the discovery
of the art, and had lent him money to prosecute the design. -- Guttenbergh
being cast, and obliged to pay cost and charges, and new quarrels arising daily
between Faust and him, and he having seen and learned the business, as it was
impossible that among so many hands requisite to the carrying on of the art, it
should continue longer a secret, which probably God would not suffer it to be,
he [Guttenbergh] went off to Strasburg, taking some of the workmen along with
him. After this breach, others having learned the art from Faust, left him, and
settled some at Frankfort, and others elsewhere; especially when the city of
Mentz, was taken The city of Mentz formerly a very wealthy city of the Empire,
was taken through a strategem, by the Archbishop Adolph, in the night preceding
St. S. Simon and Jude in the year 1462, and plundered and deprived of its
freedom.
ann. 1462. and deprived of all its former liberties, whereby this excellent
art became more public and universally known." Thus far Salmuth, whose account
is confirmed by the author of the Encomium Chalcographiae Vid Malinkrot. p. 77.
. J. Arnold Bergellanus (who wrote an elegy upon the dissension between those
two persons, in which he seems to favor Guttenbergh more than Faust, and to
have followed Wimpheling; who out of love to his fellow-citizen, for he
represents Guttenbergh as born at Strasburgh, and not to have removed to Mentz,
till he had almost perfected the art) makes him the chief person in this
discovery; yet mentions both the lawsuit and the decree, as well as the deed
before mentioned; but differs from Salmuth in affirming that the lawsuit was
not yet ended when he wrote his book, which might arise from Guttenbergh's
hanging it upon the hooks, and escaping to Strasburgh, as Salmuth observes, or
to Harlem, as others believe. However, this is evident, and agreed on by all
hands, that there was an end at once to all their partnership, into which he
was only admitted for the sake of his purse, which was absolutely necessary to
Faust.

FROM all these testimonies, which are not only quoted, but strongly assented
to by the judicious Malincrot Vid. Malinkrot. c. ^
, I shall make one or two remarks in favor of Mentz and Faust, which are; 1.
that among all the learned I have conversed with, whose curiosity has lead
them to search into the rise and progress of Printing, and all the writers upon
this subject I could ever meet with, not one has pretended to have seen any
book printed in John Guttenbergh's name, even in the oldest monuments remaining
of the infancy of this art, whether printed upon wood, or by separate metal
types: 2. That on the contrary, where there is any mention made of either
printer or place, it is still in Faust's and Schoeffer's name.

THEREFORE until there is some better proof of Guttenbergh's name, either
jointly with the other two, or separately, or some book produced with it, it
seems evident beyond contradiction, that the glory of this invention is wholly
due to John Faust, and the improving and perfecting it to his son-in-law Peter
Schoeffer, exclusive of John Guttenbergh: this I hope, will suffice to justify
my conjecture, that either Trithemius mistook the names, or the editor of his
second chronicle changed them, to make it agree with his first, and to sa^^sfy
the reader, that I had good reasons and authority to forbear mentioning
Guttenbergh among the first inventors: I shall only add with respect to the
learned Salmuth that he prefaces this account with a succinct relation of the
improvements which the ingenious Peter Schoeffer made to the art, as the
invention of Punches, Matrices, etc. as likewise of the difficulties which they
met afresh, by reason of the softness of the metal in which they had cast their
first types, and of his finding out a new mixture which fully answered the
design: lastly that Faust was so pleased with his servants ingenuity, that he
made him his son-in-law. This passage which I have here subjoined Caeterum in
exercenda hac nova art, operis quibusdam usus est Faustus, in quibus fuit
Petrus Schoeffer Gernsheimensis, qui cum heri sui institutum percepisset, magno
illius artis studio incensus est and quia ingenio valebat, any mum ad illam
amplificandam adjecit, ac singulari Dei instinctu, rationem inivit, qua
Characteres Matrici, ut vocant, inciderentur and ex ea funderentur. Alphabeto
hoc modo inciso, characteres inde fusos, Fausto hero suo ostendit, quibus ille
usque adeo exhilaratus est, ut ei protinus filiam suam unicam desponderet, ac
paulo post in uxorem daret: quam vis autem in hoc genere Characterum aliqua
difficultas suborta esset, propterea quod materia mollior esset quam ut
pressurae resistere posset, tamen mox ejusmodi mixtura inventa fuit quae vim
praeli aliquandiu sustinere potuit. Appen, ad tit. de Typogr. p. 312.
is so exactly like that out of Trithemius's second Chronicle that one might
easily be induced to think he had copied it from him, were it not that this
letter was neither printed or indeed known, till almost a whole century after
Salmuth wrote, as appears by Camerarius's letter prefixed to his book, and
dated from Nuremberg ann. 1596.

THE learned Wimpheling claims the next rank, as being contemporary with
Trithemius, and a no less diligent searcher after the memorable things of his
own country. He wrote his book ann. 1502 or 1504, wherein is the following
account, viz. "That in the year 1440, when Ferdinand was Emperor of the Romans,
that great and almost divine gift, the discovery of a new way of writing, was
bestowed upon mankind by John Guttenbergh; who having first invented the art of
Printing, went afterward to Mentz, where he perfected it." -- The rest of the
passage, which relates chiefly to the promulgation of the art, and the Printers
who enriched and signalized themselves by it, we shall refer to the second
book, to which it properly belongs.

I have already remarked something of Wimpheling's partiality to his own city
Strasburg: and indeed it is what the reader may observe in all authors, whose
country laid the least claim to this invention; Faust for having carried on the
business with all possible secresy, and scarce being known out of his own city
till the dispersion of his workmen; they, wherever they settled, challenged to
themselves the honor of this discovery, or at least of being co-adjutors to
the inventor, as we shall show in its proper place. However the reader will see
with pleasure how our author retracts his too great liberality to his
fellow-citizen, in another work, viz. his catalogue of the Bishops of
Strasburg, wherein he expresses himself thus: "Under that Bishop Robert of
Bavaria was the noble art of Printing found out by a certain Strasburgher, though
in an imperfect manner; but upon his going to Mentz unto other practitioners of
that art, by the directions of one John Gensfleich, an old gentleman blind with
age, the art was perfected, in the house called Guttenbergh in [English
Good-hill] where the College of Lawyers now stands, to the eternal honor of
the German nation."

THERE is no need to observe to the reader, the difference between this passage
and the former; nor to inquire whether it was out of remorse, or upon better
information, that the author gave this latter account; but it will be proper to
remark, that Gensfleich is another name given by several writers to Faust, or
perhaps a nickname which he was known by, it signifying goose-flesh: so that
our author has attributed to him at least the glory of having practiced the art
at Mentz before Guttenbergh came, and to have directed him in perfecting what
he had in vain attempted at Strasburg. The reader may likewise observe that
Guttenbergh seems to have been thus denominated from the house so called, in
which Faust and he carried on the business, till their mutual discords parted
them.

JOHN NAUCLERUS author of the universal history, which is divided into
generations, Histor. Univer. Gen 49.
tells us, that this art of Printing with metal types was discovered at Mentz
under the Emperor Ferdinand III. ann. 1440; and extols the genius of Germany,
as for other glorious inventions, such as Guns, etc. so more particularly for
this of Printing, which he makes a large encomium upon. He lived near the times
of this invention, viz. ann. 1450, and though he mentions not the authors of it,
yet since he says it was discovered at Mentz ann. 1440, it is plain he could
mean none but Faust, seeing no books were printed there for many years after,
but by him and his son-in-law.

NEITHER have the poets of those times been wanting in celebrating this
invention, from which alone they and their works could expect that immortality,
which they confer upon the Great and Good. We have quoted some of them in the
preceding chapter, as Laurentius Valla an Italian, and Sebastian Brand a
German; though this last being a native of Strasburgh, and afterward Mayor of
that city, we will not pretend to determine whether what he sings of the
Rhenish nation and the German genius be meant of Mentz or his own city: however
it is evident that he never dreamt of Holland or Harlem. But let us now hear
Conrad Celt, the first German Poet-Laureat, who speaking of the river Rhine has
the following Tetrastich upon the city of Mentz Amor. lib. 3. Eleg. 13.
;

Jamque Mogunciacam vastus te flectis in urbem,
Quae prima impressas tradidit aere notas;
Qualem ego te memorem? talem qui invenerit artem,
Italicis, Graiis plus memorande viris.
IN another elegy he expresses his desire of visiting that famous city, which
had taught the Germans this excellent method of writing without Ibid. Eleg. 1.
pen, etc. I hope to be excused the pains of a larger collection of this
nature; the reader may find plenty of such poetical encomiums upon this art in
Malinkrot's history, chap. 2. and elsewhere. But I cannot omit inserting a
short passage out of the famous Swedish poet Nicodemus Frischlin, who in his
Julius Redivivus, a comedy in praise of Germany and the Art of Printing, has
these lines, -- primus Inventor [Typographiae] Moguntiae
Vixit, fatale nomen adeptus Fausti. --
soon after which he gives an elegant description of the wonderful change
produced by this art: which rendered the Germans, (before a rude and illiterate
people) able to teach the most polite nations of Europe, by its admirable
quickness in multiplying of books, which is elegantly expressed by Campanus
bishop of Aleria in this verse,

Imprimit illa die quantum non scribitur anno. To return to the historians of
later date; Peter Apian, who for his incomparable skill in mathematics had the
honor to be tutor to the Emperor Charles V. assures us Cosmograph. lib. 2.
that Mentz, a frontier town between high and low Germany, was the place where
Printing was discovered by John Faust, ann. 1453. Sebastian Munster, another
Cosmographer, gives a larger account of this invention Ab anno 1440 usque ad
ann. 1450 nobilis ars imprimendi Moguntiae reperta est; ca Moguntia Coloniam,
deinde Argentinam, and Basileam, tandem Venetias delata est. Primus ejus author
and inventor Johannes Gutte bergius, qui Zunjungen dicebatur, isque cives alios
duos Moguntinos adjutores habuit: Johannem Faustum and Johannem Medimbachium,
qui artem hanc in secreto tenuerunt, famulis de ea non propalanda jurejurando
constrictis, Munster. Cosmograph. lib. 5. c 159. apud Malinkrot c. 2. p. 14.
, though he seems to follow Trithemius and those who place Guttenbergh at the
head of the triumvirate: his words are these, "From the year 1440 to the year
1450 the noble Art of Printing was discovered at Mentz; thence it was carried
to Cologn, then to Strasburgh, Basil, and at last to Venice. Its first author
and inventor was John Guttenbergh, otherwise called Zumjungen, who had two
other citizens for assistants, viz. John Faust and John Medimbach, who kept
this art very secret, having sworn their servants not to divulge it." Mutius,
who wrote his German Chronicle ann. 1539 attributes the invention of Guns, and
soon after that of Printing, to Mentz. But the most illustrious testimony in
favor of Faust, is that of the great collector of German antiquities John
Aventine, to this purpose: Hoc anno 1450. magnum ac vere divinum beneficium
Johannes Faustus Germanus, civis Moguntinus, generi humano contulit, novum
scribendi genus haud dubie coelitus revelatum (quod chalcographiam, excusoriam,
impressoriamque vocare solent) invenit and biennio complevit. Consuluit pater
indulgentissimus honestis literis, autoribus praeclaris, de quibus actum
fuisset; ita torpore languescimus, adeo delicatuli sumus, fugitantesque
laborum; tantum literarum uno mense ab uno homine imprimitur, quantum uno anno
a pluribus scriberetur; quod Campanus Aprutinus pontifex uno versu
clegantissime scribit.

Imprimit illa die etc. ut supra.

Hinc indies magis ingenia vigent, studia literarum florescunt, copia librorum
parvo aere egenis suppetit, omnes ad capessendas praeclaras arts tantum
librorum commoditate alliciuntur. Hoc coelestissimum munus a Fausto and Petro
Schoeffer de Gernsheim genero suo, cui unicam filiam Christsnam desponderat,
inter secreta, adactis omnibus sociis ad fidem jurisjurandi religione habitam.
Decimo post anno Fausti minister Johannes Guttenbergius Argentoratensis in
Germania vulgavit. Municeps hujus Ulricus Han, hoc est Gallus, and Xystus
Resius Romae, Italiaeque intulere; ubi hoc artificio, mea memoria, Aldus ille
Manutius, vir ad instaurandas literas natus, claruit. -- Annal. Boicor. lib. 7.
de Typographia.


"In the year 1450 John Faust, citizen of Mentz in Germany, conferred on mankind
a great and truly divine gift, viz. a new method of writing, undoubtedly
revealed to him from heaven, commonly called Chalcography or Printing, which he
invented and perfected within the space of two years. This gentleman, like an
indulgent father, studied how to preserve learning and excellent Books to
posterity, which must otherwise have perished, through the carelessness and
indolence of these times; had not this art (by which one man can print as many
pages in a day, as several hands can write in a year,) quoted before, given new
vigor to men's genius, made learning flourish, rendered books so cheap as to
be a purchase for students of the lowest fortunes, and excited men to the study
of arts and sciences by the plenty of learned works which it has afforded us.
This divine invention was kept private by John Faust and Peter Schoeffer de
Gernsheim, to whom he had given his only daughter Christina in marriage; and
all their workmen were bound by an oath not to disclose it. Ten years after
this, John Guttenbergh of Strasburgh, one of Faust's servants, divulged it in
Germany. Ulric Han a fellow-citizen of his, and Xyxtus Resius brought it to
Rome and Italy; where, within my memory, Aldus Manutius, a person designed for
the restoration of learning, signalized himself, etc." The remainder of this
passage chiefly relates to the dispersion and promulgation of the art; and
therefore is unnecessary to be set down here. There is but one thing in this
quotation that can puzzle the reader; which is, that the author makes
Guttenbergh to have been one of Faust's servants, instead of his partner and
usurer as has been showed already; in the rest he exactly agrees with the
writers quoted before. With respect to the disagreement among authors
concerning the names of the first inventors, if we remember that Guttenbergh,
to evade the sentence pronounced against him at Mentz, departed with some of
Faust's workmen to Strasburgh, it will not appear improbable that some, who
wrote at a distance, might confound him with those servants, especially
considering that his name was never in any Book printed at Mentz. However it is
plain that a place of one writer mistaken by another, has been the occasion of
leading many more, who have followed him implicitly, into the same error. An
instance of this, which will be no digression from our history, is as follows.

THE authors who have followed Peter Ramus, from Sabellicus, Zuringer, etc.
down to Paul Pater, author of the treatise De Germaniae Miraculo [the Art of
Printing] published ann. 1709 have ascribed this invention to J. Regiomontanus,
and thought they did the Art no small honor, in making so great a
Mathematician its author. What seemed to confirm their opinion was, that Faust,
Guttenbergh and he were contemporaries, and it is probable, lived near each
other; though he afterward removed to Nurembergh. What made this still more
probable was, that Regiomontanus perfectly understood Mechanics, so that, as
it is said, he made an iron Flyspring from under his hand; fly round the room
with a humming noise, and return back under his hand; he is likewise reported
to have made a wooden Eagle, which flew from Nurembergh to meet the Emperor,
hovered over his head in a tonick motion, and went back the same way with him.
It would be dangerous now to assert the truth of these stories, since such
flights of ingenuity have been so long discouraged, to make way for more useful
inventions; yet Jul. Scaliger was so far from doubting of them, that he
pretends to have found out the Art, and bragged that he could perform the like
with a wet finger. However this was sufficient to persuade our authors that
Regiomontanus, reputed so universal an artist, was most probably the person who
invented the method of Printing, and communicated it to Faust and Guttenbergh;
in consequence of which they have placed him at the head of the other two.
Nevertheless this notion seems to take its rise from a passage in Purbach's
tables, wherein it is said that the discovery of Printing is to be referred to
the times of Regiomontanus, as Malinkrot has fully proved. This story, I hope,
will both convince the reader of the danger of following an author too
implicitly, and justify my differin from the generality of those who attribute
the discovery to John Guttenbergh, whose opinion I apprehend to be sufficiently
confuted. Setting aside this mistake of P. Ramus with respect to Regiomontanus,
he agrees with the rest of our other testimonies in favor of Faust; and I
conceive it to be not in the least improbable, that the inventors might, in
such a variety of tools, implements, and other things necessary to the
perfecting this Art, have recourse to him or some other ingenious person, for
advice and assistance.

HOWEVER it is certain that Regiomontanus was a very early printer, though not
taken notice of as such by any writer I have met with. I did indeed believe him
to have been an assistant in perfecting of the Art, but never could meet with
any sufficient authority to fix the honor upon him, till I was admitted into
the Library of the Right Hon. the Earl of Pembroke, whom I beg leave to take
this first opportunity of mentioning with honor and gratitude, not only for
his great condescension in allowing me a free access to his noble Collections
of ancient Editions, but likewise for several very curious hints upon this
subject, which shall be mentioned in their proper places; here it was that his
Lordship was pleased to show me the following great curiosity, viz. Manilius in
4to. with these words at the end.

Ex Ossicina Johannis de Regiomente in Nuremberg. THE antiquity of this curious
Edition shows it self at first sight, though there be no date to it, a
circumstance much to be lamented, though too common to many of those ancient
monuments in the infancy of the Art. I must therefore be obliged to rank it
with the rest of these dateless works, of which I shall have occasion to speak
in the sequel of this history: it is evident this is an older edition than that
mentioned by Fabricius of 1474, which it is reasonable to suppose, not only by
his being contemporary with, but assistant to, Faust in perfecting this art:
however as Regiomontanus was a man of such profound skill in astronomy,
mechanics, and several other branches of learning, I am willing to hope time
will bring forth some further testimonies concerning him.

BUT what convinces me that he had no share in the first discovery of the Art,
is that in his long dedication prefixed to his Astronomical Tables, the first
piece he ever published, which I have seen, and which is dedicated to the
Primate of Hungary, he does not make the least mention of his having been
concerned in such a noble discovery, which it is reasonable to suppose he would
have done, could he have claimed such a singular piece of merit to have
recommended him to so great a patron; especially when he expatiates so much
upon the difficulties that attended the work he dedicates to him: but to return.

I apprehend a probable objection against the testimonies before quoted (which
are scarce a fourth part of those collected by Malinkrot,) that they are taken
from Germans, who may be reasonably supposed too partial to their country, and
consequently less to be relied on than foreign writers, whose authority would
be of far greater weight in this case. This I shall obviate by showing, that
learned authors of other nations are consistent with the Germans in this
particular. I have already cited two poets, the one an Italian, the other a
Swede; the former of whom ascribes this discovery to Germany, and the latter to
John Faust of Mentz. My next design is to produce some of those, who are
eminent for their enquiries into the antiquities of their own and other
countries. At the head of these stands Polydore Vergil, an Italian, who in his
Book de Rerum Inventoribus, after an elegant encomium upon the Art, and a
description of its important benefits to mankind, proceeds thus "Wherefore that
the author of such a discovery may not be deprived of his due praise, and that
posterity may know to whom we are indebted 1 Quare tantae rei author non est
sua laud fraudandus, praesertim ut posteritas sciat, cui divinum acceptum
beneficium refer debeat. Itaque Johannes Guttenbergius natione Teutonicus,
equestri vir dignitate, ut ab ejus civibus accepimus, primus omnium in oppido
Germaniae, quam Moguntiam vocant, hanc imprimendarum literarum artem
excogitavit, primumque in ea exercere coepit; non minore industria reperto ab
eodem, prout ferunt, authore, novo atramenti genere, quo nunc literarum
impressores utuntur. Decimo sexto deinde anno, qui suit salutis humanae M CCCC
L VIII. quidam nomine Conradus, homo itidem Germanus, primum in Italiam
attulit, etc. lib. 2. cap. 7.
for this divine gift; it was John Guttenbergh, by nation a German, and a
Knight, who first devised this Art of Printing Books in the city of Mentz, and
began to practice it there, as we have been informed by the citizens
themselves; he is reported likewise to have made another discovery, viz. of a
new kind of Ink, used now by all printers. Sixteen years after this, ann. 1457,
one Conrad a German, brought it first to Rome, etc." -- Our author makes no
mention of any but Guttenbergh; yet as he says the Art was first practiced at
Mentz, it is plain from what has been said before, that he deserved not the
first name in this invention. The citizens who gave this account, were
certainly those that dispersed themselves from Faust; who, though they learned
the Art of him, yet might esteem Guttenbergh the first author, because he was
most considerable; and not unlikely lorded it over the rest, who he knew, could
not carry on the business without his purse; whilst Faust, whose chief care was
to conceal the Art, till he had reimburs'd himself so far as to be able to
carry it on without his help, might let him enjoy the honor of the discovery
in the mean time. What confirms my conjecture is, that if Conrad arrived at
Rome in the year 1457 he must have left Mentz before Faust and Schoeffer had
printed any Books with their names. However in this case Faust would not be the
only man, whose indigence and honesty have been inducements to part with the
credit of a beneficial discovery to a person of less merit, rather than to let
it die with him, for want of means to carry it on.

THE following author Jacobus Philippus Bergomensis, ^ Jacob. Philip.
Bergomens. lib. 15. supplem. Chronic. ad ann. 1458. Ars imprimendi libros his
temporibus in Germania primum enata est, quam alii repertam esse asseverant a
Cuthimbergio Argentino: alii a quodum alio, nomine Fausto; alii a Nicolao
Genson praedicant; pro qua innumerabiles authors ipsi congregarunt divitias,
etc.
who is doubtful concerning the genuine inventor, may easily be set right, from
what has been already said. He tells us, "that the Art of Printing was first
brought to light in Germany, about the year 1457; that the discovery was by
some attributed to Guttenbergh of Strasburgh, by others to one Faust, and by a
third sort to Nicholas Genson or Jenson, that the authors of it got immense
riches, etc." With relation to this Jenson, it will appear by the sequel of
this history, that he was only one of those who first carried the Art into
Italy, where he distinguished himself by his fine impressions, etc. but never
made the least pretenses to the invention. There is no necessity of repeating
what has so often been said concerning Guttenbergh, whom Palmerius of Pisa
asserts to have been the author of this discovery about the year 1440; his
words are as follow: " Quantum literarum studiosi Germanis de beant nullo satis
dicendi genere exprimi potest: namque a Johanne Guttenberg. Zum-junghen, equite
Moguntiae, Rheni, solerti ingenio librorum imprimendorum ratio anno 1440
inventa, hoc tempore in omnes fere orbis parts propagatur, qua omnis
antiquitas parvo aere comparata posterioribus infinitis voluminibus legitur.
Chronic. ad ann. 1457.
What obligations the learned world has to the German nation, cannot be
sufficiently expressed; for the Art of Printing, which had been invented by
John Guttenbergh Zum-jungen, a knight of Mentz upon the Rhine, about the year
1440, is at this time (viz. ann. 1457) divulged almost throughout the world; by
which the works of the ancients may be purchased at a small price, and be read
in an infinite number of volumes since printed." There are a prodigious many
more authors, who, though they do not mention either the names of the inventors,
or the place of the discovery, yet unanimously give the honor of it to
Germany; and even Paulus Jovius, who ascribes the invention of wooden planks to
the Chinese, from whom it was brought into Europe, by the way of Scythia and
Muscovy, when he speaks of the other method of Printing, says, it is no wonder
that several arts and sciences owe their birth to the Germans, since the noble
discovery, of metal types, as well as that of brass cannons, was found out by
them Lib. 14. histor.
.

MY next testimony is that of the celebrated politician John Ruterus, who not
only in his historical relations attributes the invention of Guns and Printing
to the German nation, but confirms it more fully in his book de fortuna
illustrium virorum, etc. where he says, "That he will not contend about the
author of Printing; but gratefully acknowledge the singular gift of God in it,
seeing one man can print as much in one day, as the best hand can write in a
whole year; for there is scarce (continues he) a Press, especially in the
German Printing 3 Ruterus's his words, as I find them translated by Gaspard
Eusius in Malinkrot, p. 19. are these. "De Authore artis impressoriae hie non
digladiabor: summum id Dei beneficium grato animo nos sedulo decet agnoscere;
ab uno enim homine uno die tantum literarum imprimitur quantum vix toto anno
scribi posset; singulis enim diebus in quolibet prelo in Germanorum
typographiis ter mill sexcentae chartae, nonnunquam etiam quater mill,
interdum ultra, etc."
houses, which does not print off 3600 sheets per diem, nay some 4000, and
others exceed even that number."

I shall conclude this chapter with a passage out of the great Monsieur Thevet,
cosmographer to the king of France, not only because his authority will easily
out-balance that of all the Dutch writers, but likewise because there are some
particulars in it which will be acceptable to the reader. As it is something
prolix, I shall only extract the most remarkable part, as follows: Thevet's
Lives and Pictures of Illustrious Persons, chapter 97.
"This art [of Printing] is believed to have been first invented at Mentz in
Germany, about the year 1442. by John Guttenbergh, a German knight; who began
his first essays of it there, and found out a new sort of ink, now used by the
Printers: but there are some writers of opinion that this honor rather
belonged to John Faust and Ives [in latin Ivo] Schoeffer two years before that
time, and affirm that Guttenbergh, John Mentel and others [whose names our
author quotes out of Pantaleon] all Germans, improved afterward the art, and
divulged it in several parts of Germany; and at length carried it to foreign
nations. Others write that this art came originally from China and Cathai; but
this assertion is without any foundation, seeing the East Indies were not
discovered by the Portugese till about 65 years ago; whereas Printing has been
invented and practiced ever since 1442. Paul the Venetian-indeed gave the first
description of that country about 400 years ago, but made not the least mention
of Printing being used there. A confirmation of my opinion is, that the Greeks,
Mingrelians, Abyssines, Turks, Persians, Moors, Arabs and Tartars write all
their books by hand, this method was ordained in Turkey by an edict of Bajazet
II. who prohibited the use of printed books under pain of death ann. 1483;
which edict was confirmed by Selim I. Bajazet's son ann* 1515. Besides this,
whilst I was in Egypt, I saw several books so neatly written on the bark of
palm trees, that they might be taken for printed ones. The merchants, which
bring their wares from India through the Red Sea, make use of the same sort of
written books, some of which are now to be seen at the library of the Queen
dowager at St. German's in the fields near Paris. Others pretend that this art
of Printing has been carried as far as Mexico, which kingdom is directly
opposite to Cathai, the one being in Asia toward the south, and the other in
America toward the north pole. However it must be owned that the Americans
write with characters, representing several kinds of beasts, fish, fowl, the
different parts of human bodies, and the like; by which they express their
mind, as the Egyptians did formerly. -- I have two of those books by me, with
an interpretation of their hieroglyphics. The goddess Minerva is said to have
been the inventress of learning and war; and the Germans have imitated her in
both these respects, by the invention of bombs and printing, which were
certainly discovered by them. One fault however that nation labors under,
which somewhat eclipses their glory, which is, that they know not how, or at
least neglect to improve those inventions, that were so easily found out by
them." -- The author proceeds in an encomium upon the art and those who raised
it to greater perfection; but that belongs to another chapter.

I hope that the testimonies produced hitherto will be more than sufficient to
fix the palm upon Faust and the city of Mentz; and that the reader will follow
me with pleasure to the next chapter, where they will be confirmed by
incontestable matters of fact.

CHAP. IV. Authentic Facts in favor of Faust and Mentz.
IF the testimonies alleged in the preceding chapter are insufficient to
convince any person that this invention is due to Faust; what follows in this
will, I conceive, put it quite out of doubt, unless he be more incredulous in
this case than a Dutchman: for the great Erasmus has not only owned himself
convinced of this truth by one single fact, but even transmitted it to
posterity. I shall therefore begin with that noble testimony, which is a
privilege granted by the Emperor Maximilian to John Schoeffer, grandson of
John Faust, not only for the sole printing the works of T. Livy (at the end of
which, the privilege is annexed, printed by the said John Schoeffer at Mentz,
ann. 1499), but likewise prohibiting all persons to reprint either the said
book, or any other which should be afterward printed by him, in consideration
of his being grandson to the first Inventor of the art of Printing: concerning
whom Erasmus, who first published that work, speaks in his preface to it as
follows: "If those, who furnished Origin and St. Jerome with writers and
parchments, have merited the highest commendation; what praise is due to
Printers and Booksellers, who supply us with whole volumes for a small price?
If Ptolemy Philadelphus acquired such reputation, for collecting so great a
library; what recompense can be made to those, who furnish us daily with books
in all languages? But amongst all these, to whom we are so much obliged, we
must gratefully remember the first inventor of this divine secret; John Faust
grand father to John Schoeffer." Thus far Erasmus, without the least mention of
his countryman Coster. With respect to the Emperor's privilege, it could not
be suspected of any partiality to Faust rather than to Guttenbergh, or to Mentz
rather than Strasburg, etc. since they were equally under his dominion.

THE next fact to be related, is that of the tools, old types, etc. of the
inventors, preserved in Mentz, above 130 years at least after the sacking of
that city ann. 1462, and viewed before that time by some eminent persons, as
curious relics of the art: among others, John Arnold Bengellanus Hodie
vetustissima quaedam in eum (imprimendi sc) usum ab authoribus comparata, quae
vidi, instrumenta extant Moguntiae. Bergellan. in praesat. Encom. su^ Typograph.
assures us, that he had seen them there; and Nic. Serrarius -- adjiciantur
primi denique artis hujus modioli, quos antiqua hic (Moguntiae enim scribebat)
domus in Cesariae horti platea custodit, quosque mihi insuper Albinus
typographus, monstrabat. Nichol. Serrarius de Rebus Moguntin. l. 1. c. 37.
says, they were then kept at Mentz in a house in the street called Keyser's
garden, and shown to him by one Albinus a Printer. We need not bring a greater
number of authors to attest this, seeing it may likely be esteemed but a weak
proof by some of our readers; but if they will consider what noise Junius and
Scriverius have made about some trifles (compared to these) preserved at Harlem
in memory of Coster, according to a tradition of two or three old gentlemen;
they will not wonder that I lay some stress upon this, and choose sometimes to
make use of their own weapons against them. I shall therefore subjoin another
fact, which is the inscription set up at Mentz by Ives of Witigen or Venza,
doctor of laws, and professor in that university, in the inner court of the
college of lawyers. Johanni Guttenbergensi Moguntino, qui primus omnium literas
^re imprimendas invenit, hac art de toto orb been merenti, Ivo Witigensis hoc
saxum pro monumento posuit, anno 1508. This inscription though it favors
Guttenbergh more than Faust, is more authentic than any of those three brought
by Junius for Coster, the last of which as Malinkrot observes, is either
written or at least published by him; the second is but a few years older, and
the first not placed over Coster's door 'till after Junius had published his
description of Holland.

A proof still stronger is the inscriptions found in the oldest books printed
at Mentz, wherein that city is styled the mother and inventress of printing. If
Harlem or any other city could have shown a juster title to this honor, it is
surprising that this place should have enjoyed it for above 125 years without
the least contradiction, and that no Dutch writer did so much as attempt, in
all that long interval, to confute those known and remarkable colophons or
inscriptions, which Faust began to print at the end of his books, when he could
no longer conceal his discovery; and in which he gives an account of the
inventors and manner in which the books were done, first negatively, viz. not
with pen and ink or any other writing instruments, and then affirmatively, but
by a new art of casting types and printing; to which he adds the city of Mentz
as the place where they were printed; and concludes with the date of the month
and year when they were finished. We shall only subjoin some of the oldest and
most remarkable of them for the present.

I begin with that which is at the end of the Codex Psalmorum, printed an.
1457, and consequently the oldest book known to be printed with a date or
inscription. It is in the Emperor's library at Vienna; and Peter Lambec who was
library keeper, gives this account of it Reperi interea unum impressum in
membrana, in cujus fine de origin artis typographicae hoc legitur testimonium.
"Praesens psalmorum codex, venustate capitalium decoratus, rubricationibusque
sufficienter distinctus, ac inventione artificiosa imprimendi ac
characterisandi, absque calami exaratione sic effigiatus, ad eusebiam Dei
industry est consummatus per Johannem Fust eivem Moguntinum and Petrum
Schoeffer de Gernsheim, anno Domini Millessimo CCCCLVII in vigilia
assumptionis." Lib. 2. Bibliothec. Viadobon. page 939.
; that he met with one of them there printed on vellum, at the end of which was
this remarkable account of the origin of printing, viz. This present Book of
Psalms, embellished with beautiful capitals, and illuminated with all necessary
rubricks, was thus formed by an ingenious invention of printing by separate
Types, without pen or wrinting, and finished with great care, for the service
of God, by John Faust, citizen of Mentz, and Peter Schoeffer de Gernsheim, in
the year of our Lord One Thousand CCCCL VII, on the eve of the assumption, i.
e. Aug. 14.

THE next impression is the Rationale Divinorum Officiorum of William Durand,
printed at Mentz an. 1459. in fol. Malinkrot has it, and tells us that it had
been formerly bequeathed to the monastery of Galilea near Zutphen (a place
afterward destroyed in the civil wars,) to be kept chained in the library; and
for which the donors were to be prayed for, together with their whole
generation. The inscription at the end of it being exactly the same with that
of the Book of Psalms, needs not be repeated here. It is likewise mentioned by
Hoffman in the second volume of his Lexicon Universale printed at Basil ann.
1677, who says he saw it in the library of that university, bearing date 1459,
he calls it Officiale Durandi, p. 508, and gives this inscription at the end,
praesens hoc, etc. as before.

THE next in date is the Catholicon, a latin vocabulary, the same which is
affirmed by Trithemius to have been printed in wood some time before 1450, and
which was reprinted at Mentz ann. 1460. I have seen two of these books, one in
the Earl of Pembroke's library, and the other in the learned Dr. Mead's, with
this very remarkable colophon at the end; Altissimi praesidio, cujus nutu
infantium linguae fiunt disertae, quique nimio saepe parvulis revelat, quod
sapientes celat; hic liber egregius Catholicon, Dominicae incarnationis anno
MCCCCLX, alma in urbe Moguntina, nationis inclytae Germanica (quam Dei
clementia tam alto ingenii lumine, donoque gratuito, caeteris nationibus
praeferre illustrareque dignatus est) non calami, styli, aut pennae suffragio,
sed mira patronarum formarumque concordia, proportione and modulo impressus
atque confectus est

Hinc tibi, sancte Pater, Nato, cum Flamine sacro

Laus and honor, Domino trino tribustur and uno; Ecclesiae laud libro hoc
Catholice plaude; Qui laudare piam semper non linque Marium.

Deo gratias.


"By the assistance of the most high God, at whose nod the tongues of infants
become eloquent, and who often reveals that to babes which he conceals from the
wise, this excellent book, the Catholicon was finished in the year of our
Lord's incarnation 1460, in the city of Mentz belonging to the noble German
nation (which God of his goodness has vouchsafed to prefer to other nations,
and of his free gift to make conspicious by this glorious invention) this work
was done, not by the help of quil, pencil or any writing instrument, but by the
agreement, symmetry, and proportion of the printing-press." then follows a
doxology in four latin verses to this purpose;

To thee Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three in one, be honor and praise: O
Catholic reader give thanks for this book in the church, and never cease to
praise the blessed Virgin Mary.

Thanks be to God.

THIS book, though it mentions not the printers, yet is easily known to have been
done by Faust and Schoeffer from the likeness of the types, and because at that
time there were no other printers at Mentz, or any where else.

TWO years after this came out the great Latin Bible in solio, which I also saw
in Dr. Mead's library, which according to Trithemius and the Cologn chronicle
must be the second edition of it, the first having been printed soon after the
year 1450, though without any colophon, whereas this has the following; Praesens
hoc opus finitum ac completum and ad eusebiam Dei industry in civitate
Moguntina per Johannem Fust civem, and Petrum Schoeffer de Gernsheim clericum
diocesis ejusdem* est consummatum anno incarnationis dominicae 1462, in vigilia
assumptionis gloriosae virginis Maria.
"This present work was finished and completed, designedly for the service of
God, in the city of Mentz, by John Faust citizen of it, and Peter Schoeffer de
Gernsheim clerk of the said diocese in the year of our Lord's incarnation 1462,
on the vigil of the assumption of the glorious virgin Mary."

IT is unnecessary to remark that the word Clerk [Clericus] does not here
signify a clergyman, for it is plain that Schoeffer was not so by his marrying
Faust's daughter, and leaving a son to succeed him; but it was usual then to
give that title to men of moderate literature. Father le Long in his
Bibliotheca sacra gives us the colophon of this Bible something different from
ours, though of the same date, the reader may see it at full length in the
ingenious Mr. Mattair's Annals page 60, not. 6.

CONCERNING this bible some writers give us the following account, which is not
a little in favor of Faust; that it was so like handwriting, and the titles
and capitals so finely painted on vellum, that Faust sold some of them at Paris
for a prodigious price: but the buyers finding a greater number upon him, than
it was possible for several men to transcribe in their whole life, and the
pages of each copy so exactly alike, that he was seized, tried and condemned
for Magic and Sorcery, and was accordingly dragged to the stake to be burnt;
but upon discovering his Art, the parliament of Paris made an act to discharge
him from all prosecution, in consideration of his admirable invention. However
it is not a miss to inform the reader, that his Black Art, for which he was so
roughly treated, was printing his Bible on the Black Letter. I shall in its
proper place give my reasons for my opinion, that the bible, which Faust sold
for MS. was the first printed by him; in the mean time this process against
him, and his discharge from it by order of that Parliament, being matter of
fact, it was not foreign to our purpose to mention it here.

THE last book which we shall speak of, is, Tully's Offices printed ann. 1465,
at the end of which are these words Praesens Marci Tullii clarissimum opus
Johannes Fust Moguntinus civis, non atramento plumali, canna, neque aerea, sed
art quadam perpulchra manu Petri de Gernsheim, pueri mei, feliciter effeci,
finitum an. MCCCCLXV die IV Februarii.
,, John Faust, citizen of Mentz, happily perfected this famous Work of Marcus
Tullius, not with pen and ink, etc. but by a new beautiful Art, by the
assistance of my Boy Peter de Gernsheim, Feb. 4. ann. 1465, the edition at
Oxford is dated 1466, though generally thought to be the same. This inscription I
saw in the book which that great Lover of the antiquities of the Art of
Printing, and Promoter of learning, the Right Honorable the Earl of Oxford,
showed me the first time I had the honor to wait on his Lordship, and to whose
kind reception and information I stand greatly indebted.

THE next inscriptions I shall mention, are those in Peter Schoeffer's name
alone, in which there is a constant and remarkable strain of gratitude and
respect for the city of Mentz, from which, besides other ample encouragements,
he had received his freedom as a reward for his improvements in the art. As
every one of them has an encomium upon that city, I shall content my self with
abridging some of the first, and giving the last, which has something singular
in it, at full length; and conclude this head with a remarkable one used by his
son John Schoeffer at the end of some of his books.

IN the book called the decisions of the Rota printed ann. 1477, and said to be
still extant in the library of Franckfort, he styles the city of Mentz the
inventress and protectress of printing; in some other books, viz. Justinian's
Institutions, printed ann. 1468 and 1477, etc. he calls her the noble city
which God has preferred to all others, and signalized with such superior gifts,
etc. the like is also to be seen at the end of Harpianus's Speculum december
praeceptorum, printed, ann. 1474.

THE last is at the end of St. Jerome's Epistles in Latin, printed in folio upon
vellum ann. 1470, one of which is in the library of St. Victor, and another at
the College of Sorbon at Paris, Vide de la Caille's history of Printing, Paris
1689 page 13 Jam decet ut nostris concordent ultima primis.
Sit Decus illi, qui dedit hoc opus initiare;
Et qui finire dedit ipsum, sit decus illi.
Est decus ecclesiae pugilis tot scripta tenere:
Si quibus intendas est decus ecclesiae.
Igitur Sophronii Eusebii Ieronymi, orthodoxae ecclesiae Christi propugnatoris
clarissimi, liber Hieronymiantes, aut si mavis, quod and ipse velim, liber
epistolaris explicit, ut dignitas nominis Ieronymenus egregio viro Job. Andreae
permaneat, qui hoc ipsum, zelo devotionis erga virum sanctum affectus, tempore
prisco vulgavit in orbem. Est autem opus praesens art impressoria feliciter
consummatum per Petrum Schoeffer de Gernsheim in civitate Moguntina, cujus
nobilitati vir beatus Ieronymus scribens ad Ageruntiam de monogamia,
testimonium perhibet sempiternum, multis millibus incolarum ejusdem in ecclesia
p^o fide Catholica sanguine proprio laureatis.

Huic Laudatori reddit Moguntin vicem,
Tot sua scripta parans usibus ecclesia.
Anno Domini MCCCCLXX,
septima mensis Septembris,
quae est vigilia Nativitatis Mariae.
Da gloriam Deo.


and runs in English thus;

Now it behooves us to conclude as we began,
The honor be to him, who was with us at the beginning;
And also honor to him, who has been with us to the conclusion:
It Is the churches honor to preserve so many writings of her champion,
If you design them for any, let it be for the churches honor.
"THIS book therefore of Sophronius Eusebius Jerome and [worthy its author] a
most eminent defender of the orthodox church of Christ; or, if you rather
choose to call it with me, the book of his epistles is finished, that the
honor of Jerome's name may be preserved, which is owing to the excellent John
Andreas, who moved with a devout zeal toward that holy man, formerly published
this work to the world. This book was happily finished by the art of Printing
by Peter Schoeffer de Gernsheim in the city of Mentz, to the honor of which
city the blessed St. Jerome, writing to Ageruntia concerning monogamy (or
marrying but once,) has given this lasting testimony, that many thousands of
its inhabitants are honored in the church, for having suffered martyrdom in
defense of the catholic faith."

Mentz now returns him (Jerome) praise for praise,
by publishing so many of his writings for the service of the church.
in the year of our Lord 1470, the seventh day of September, which is the eve
of the nativity of the Virgin Mary. Give glory to God.

THIS is an instance how ready Schoeffer was to take all opportunities of
expressing his love and gratitude to that city, and rendering her praise as
lasting as his own works.

THE last inscription which gives a succinct account of the discovery, is at
the end of Trithemius's breviary of history, and is as follows Impressum and
completum est praesens Chronicorum opus Anno Domini MDXV, in vigilia Margaretae
virginis in nobili famosaque urbe Moguntina, hujus artis impressoriae
inventrice prima, per Joannem Schoeffer nepotem quondam honesti viri Johan.
Fust civis Moguntini, in emoratae artis primarii auctoris; qui tandem
imprimendi artem proprio ingenio excogitare specularique coepit ann. Dom.
nativitatis MCCCCL indictione xiii regnante illustrissimo Romano imperatore
Frederico Ill, praesidente sanctae Moguntinae sedi Reverendissimo in Christo
patre Domino Theodorico Pincerna de Erbach principe Electore; anno autem
MCCCCLII perfecit, deduxitque eam (Divina favente gratia) in opus imprimendi
(opera tamen ac multis necessariis adinventionibus Petri Schoeffer de Gernsheim
ministri suique filii adoptivi) cui etiam filiam suam Christinam Fusti^ pro
digna laborum multarum. que adinventionum remuneratione nuptui dedit.
Retinuerunt autem hi duo jam praenunciati, Johan. Fust and Petrus Schoeffer,
hanc artem in secreto (omnibus ministris ac familiaribus eorum, neillam quoquo
modo manifestarent, jurejurando adstrictis,) quae tandem anno Domini MCCCCLXII
per eosdem familiares in diversas terrarum provincias divulgata, haud parum
sumpsit incrementum, Cum Gratia and Privilegio Caesariae Majestatis, jussu and
impensis honesti Joannis Haselperg ex Asia Majore Constant. diocesis. Breviar.
Truhemian. Part. 1.
"This present chronological work was printed and finished an. 1515, on the eve
of St. Margaret Virgin, in the noble and famous city of Mentz, first inventress
of this art of Printing, by John Schoeffer grandson of the worthy John Fust
citizen of Mentz, the first author of this art, who found it out at length by
his own ingenuity, and began to practice it anno 1450, in the time of the
thirteenth indiction, Frederic III being then Emperor, and the most reverend
father in God Theodorick Pincerna de Erbach being Prince-Elector and Arch
bishop of Mentz: anno 1452. he perfected this art under God, and began to put
it in practice, with the assistance of Peter Schoeffer de Gernsheim, first a
servant, and then his son-in-law; who having made many necessary inventions in
it, had his Daughter Christina Fust in marriage, as a just recompense for his
labor, and useful discoveries. These two above-named, viz. John Fust and Peter
Schoeffer kept this art secret, having taken an oath of all their workmen and
servants not to divulge it in any manner whatsoever: but afterward it was
divulged by those very workmen anno 1462, and spread it self over several
provinces of Europe, etc."

THE like inscription is at the end of the Breviarum Mindense, printed anno
1516, by the same person: In both which the reader will be pleased to observe,
that there is not a word mentioned of John Guttenbergh.

UPON the whole it is my opinion, that were there no other evidence but these
inscriptions, they would be sufficient to determine this controversy, seeing
neither Harlem, Strasburgh, nor any other place can produce any thing
equivalent. Had Harlem, for instance, any such authentic impressions in favor
of Coster, all other testimonies of the best writers for Mentz would have been
rejected as inconsiderable: or if Dr. Mentel could have produced any single
book printed by his progenitor, of older or even equal date with the oldest of
these, he would infallibly have triumphed over all his antagonists. It Is
certain that there is no book known to be printed at Harlem or any other place,
of equal date with the last which were done by Faust, though it has been proved,
that he continued printing near ten years before he put his name to his
impressions: whence it follows, that he was not only the first Printer with
fusile metal types, but likewise the first inventor of them, according to the
testimonies quoted in the preceding chapter.

I doubt not but the reader is now willing to hear what methods the competitors
with Faust take, in order to evade such a cloud of authentic testimonies; and
what arguments they can allege in defense of their claim: in short, what
grounds they have of triumphing in such an extraordinary manner. But I must
here acquaint him, that if he expects evidence answerable to those clamours, he
will be extremely disappointed in the two next chapters. However, since a
controversy cannot be fairly decided, unless both parties be heard in their
turn; I shall not desire the reader to believe me implicitly, but propose their
pretensions in as just a light, and brief a manner as possible, together with
the answers of Malinkrot and others to them; to which I shall take the liberty
to add my own thoughts and observations, whether they chance to illustrate and
confirm, or to contradict the concurrent testimony of the early, and the
established notion, of the modern writers, upon the subject, and leave it to
him to judge of the merit of the cause.

I hope what I said last will not be looked upon as either a piece of
presumption or ostentation in me: no man can be more ready, than I am, to own
the great helps I have received from these great men, especially from
Malinkrot, Chevalier, Mattaire, Orlandi and some others of less note, or my own
insufficiency for such a work as this, without such an assistance; but though
they are all great and learned men in their way, yet for want of a sufficient
acquaintance with the business of Printing, it was impossible for them not to
overlook some things of moment, which a printer would easily discover at first
sight, viz. Whether a book be MS. or printed; whether printed from pages of
wood or with separate types, in both which respects, many of them have been
either puzzled or mistaken: I shall add but one instance more, not foreign to
our purpose; the famous Mons. Naude directed his readers how to know the books
printed by Faust by the mark in the paper, which he calls the Heifer's Horns;
Mr. Mattaire, who has been as curious and diligent as any one, tells us he
could never observe that mark or any thing like it, whereas the very first book
the Earl of Pembroke showed me of Faust's printing, by holding a leaf against
the light, the mark appeared very plain; I shall beg leave to add, that the
hints and helps I have had from the curious and learned, and my access to
several noble libraries, have moreover enabled me to make many more curious
observations, on this subject, than I could otherwise have done. Let this be
said once for all.

CHAP. V. The Pretensions of Harlem examined and confuted.
I Have more than once hinted, that this controversy in favor of Harlem was
not started till above 125 years after the discovery of the art, when Hadrian
Junius, M. D. began the dispute. During that long interval, the invention was
universally ascribed to the city of Mentz, though the names of the inventors were
sometimes confounded; and what ought to surprise us most of all is, that not
one Dutch writer, during that time, ever offered to contradict the received
opinion concerning Faust and Mentz; though many of them were men of great
learning, and some either natives of Harlem, or had been educated in that
university. It Is really wonderful, that neither regard to truth, or their
country's honor, nor the common ambition of being the author of a new
discovery, should have inspired some of them to undeceive the world in this
point, if they had the least grounds of suspicion. But whatever be the reason
of this unpardonable supineness in them, Dr. Junius, rather than fall under
such a charge, undertook a task, as difficult as that Egyptian one, of making
brick without straw. For from a collection of old traditions, wooden types, and
two or three books, printed on wood, without name, date, or any other mark (by
which it might be guessed when, where, and by whom they were done), with some
other transmuted relics of the first essays of the art, he has formed a story,
which he thinks will baffle all the testimonies urged on the other side, and
turn the panegyricks, bestowed by the learned on the noble inventor, into the
vilest calumnies. As his story is very prolix, and unnecessary to be set down
at length, the following abstract may suffice.

"THOUGH the glory of this art is entirely due to the city of Harlem; yet I am
sensible how deep the contrary notion in favor of Mentz is rooted in the minds
of men. -- Were I blessed with that eloquence which Carneades is so famed for,
who never affirmed any thing but what he fully proved, nor opposed any error,
but what he clearly confuted; I might have just hopes to reduce this stolen
glory to its owner, and bring to light the truth, which has so long lain hid in
Democritus's well. -- For if those ancients, who contended for the invention of
letters, in behalf of their favorite heroes, have merited such applause; what
hinders but that I, influenced neither by partiality to one place, nor envy
toward another, but with a sincere love to truth, should appear in so just a
cause, which has been suffered to sink for want of advocates? -- And if
Plutarch esteems him the best evidence, who is not biased by favor or
affection; I have a sufficient claim to it, since none of Coster's posterity
can reward me for my performance. I shall therefore relate what has been told
me by some grave and worthy old Gentlemen, who have filled the best offices in
the city, and heard it from others of equal weight and authority; viz. That
about 128 years ago, there lived at a noted house, standing to this day, over
against the Royal Palace, one Laurence John, sirnam'd Coster, (which word
signifies a sexton or churchwarden; or, in the Romish sense one who is
entrusted with all the rich plate, sumptuous robes, etc. belonging to the
parish church; a place hereditary in his family,) who was the person to whom
the Art of Printing owes its original, though he has been unjustly deprived of
that honor. -- That walking by chance in an adjacent wood, according to
custom, after a full meal, or on holy days, he cut some letters out of the bark
of beech-trees; which being inverted and joined together, he began to print
some words, and then whole lines, in hopes that this might turn to the
advantage of his grandchildren: that the success of this prompted him to
greater discoveries, he being a man of an extraordinary genius: that he with
Thomas Peter his son-in-law, finding the common ink apt to spread, invented a
more glutinous sort, and began to print whole pages; of which kind I saw some
essays in an anonymous work, printed only on one side, and entitled the Mirour
of our Salvation, written in Low Dutch, the white sides of the paper being
glew'd together to hide the chasms: that after this he changed his wooden
letters into lead; and then into tin, which was still harder and more durable:
some of these old types being cast into drinking-cups are still to be seen at
the aforesaid house, out of which Gerard Thomas, Coster's great-grand-son, died
a few years ago. But as all new inventions meet with encouragement, this art
began to require a greater number of hands, which proved the first cause of
mischief to this family: for one of his servants named John (but whether Faust
or not I shall not now enquire) being employed in this business, after having
taken an oath of secrecy, had no sooner learned, as he thought, the method of
casting and joining the fusile types, etc. but he took the next opportunity of
robbing his master of all his printing-tools, together with his art: to which
end he chose the night before Christmas, as the most proper for his design,
when the whole family, with the rest of the city were at church at
midnight-mass. Thence he escaped to Amsterdam, next to Cologn, and at last
settled at Mentz; where the year following, viz. ann. 1442 he printed Alexandri
Galli doctrinale, a grammar much in vogue at that time, with those very types
that his master Coster had used before. THIS is the substance of what I had
from those gentlemen of veracity, who told me they had it handed down by
tradition; and this has been likewise confirmed to me by others of equal
repute. I remember to have heard my tutor Nich. Gallius, an old gentleman of a
very tenacious memory, say, that when he was a boy, he heard one Cornelius a
printer, an old man, who had been one of Coster's workmen, mention the story of
the first trials of printing, with a great deal of vehemence, and even with
tears, especially when he came to the thievish part of it; protesting he could
execute the rogue himself with the utmost pleasure, if he had been alive then;
cursing those nights, in which, for near three months together, he had lain
with so vile a miscreant. A story like this one Quirinus Talesius reports that
he had heard from the same Printer.

THIS is what my sincere love of truth obliged me to publish, whatever the
consequence be, -- but I am fearful that prejudice in this case will
out-balance reason and authority. The passing of this invention into Germany in
a lawful way had been no harm; nay, I believe that it pleased God to make it
the means of perfecting and divulging so useful an art, etc."



HERE is all that our author could collect in defense of his cause, which he
had made the best of after his way: it were indeed to be wished, the Doctor had
rather imitated the modesty of Carneades, than wished for his eloquence; since
that great philosopher (however he seems to forget it) never was known to
affirm any thing. Convinced as he was of the weakness of human understanding,
and of the power of prejudice; he always contented himself with confuting the
opinions of others, without ever showing that he held any of his own: but such
an excellent talent would have spoiled his design, and condemned both his book
and his old men's fables to obscurity and oblivion, and saved some other
authors the trouble of writing in the vindication of either; but though he has
been followed by about a dozen of his countrymen, yet no additional
testimonies are to be expected from any of them: for even Boxhorn, who wrote
with the greatest vehemence and spleen against Malinkrot, has been obliged to
content himself with palliating the account of Junius, and endeavoring to
show, that it is not quite so improbable as his antagonist has represented it.
However it must be owned, that except the two last named authors, and one or
two more, viz. Berchius and Scriverius, the first of whom has been confuted by
Nicholas Serrarius a Jesuit in his book de rebus Moguntinis, lib. 1. Cap. 36,
37, 38, and 39; and the later by the learned Mons. Naude, George Draude and
others; I say except these, all the rest write more moderately, without
invectives or ill language, and some of them even with doubt; whilst others
modestly contend only for the invention of printing on wooden-planks, leaving
that of metal types to Faust: but even this is inconsistent with the story of
Junius, who asserts Coster to be the inventor of them both, and Faust the
thief. It would be superfluous to multiply quotations out of the writers on the
side of Harlem, since they follow Junius upon his bare testimony; and a
confutation of him will easily dispatch all the rest. I shall therefore examine
the probability of his account, and see how far it outweighs, the testimonies
and authorities alleged on the other side: in the execution of this, the best
method will be to follow the steps of the learned Malinkrot, who has
sufficiently exposed the numerous absurdities, which this story is attended
with. Setting aside therefore the oddness of Coster's fancy, in choosing to make
his first letters of the bark of beech, which will bend whilst green, and break
when dry; whilst the wood itself would have been much more proper to bear the
weight of the press; and the improbability of his changing them into metal
ones, which is barely asserted by Junius, and contradicted by Berkius, Boxhorn,
and other Dutch writers, as we hinted before: nothing can be more ridiculous
than the converting those types into drinking cups to perpetuate the memory of
their discovery; they had certainly been more authentic in their former state;
at least, if some notable work or inscription had been printed with them: or
would it not have been a better method to celebrate the name of the inventor,
to have distributed annually a portion of wine out of them, in order to inspire
their poets with songs in his honor and Faust's shame; or to have hanged them
up, as trophies, in the town hall or great church, etc. with respect to the
stolen types, (which were turned to a better purpose by the thief, who the next
year printed with them Alexandri doctrinale, and the works of Petrus Hispanus,
if Junius may be credited, who was the first that said or thought of this;)
well might Serrarius say after the Emperor Julian, Who will be found innocent,
if one accusation makes a man guilty? One would naturally think that this story
was devised in the woods and walks about Harlem; for several of the writers
before mentioned, and particularly the Colognian Chronicle alleged by Boxhorn,
agree that the Latin bible was the first book printed by Faust at Mon^^^^^.
It Is surprising that these gentlemen of Harlem should pretend to tell us what
was done with their types in the very heart of Germany, and yet be entirely
ignorant of what was done in their own city: besides at that time it is
certain, as we have already shown, that separate types of any sort of metal
were unknown -- But to proceed; this treacherous servant, it seems, went off at
12 a-clock at night, when the whole family was at church. -- It is highly
improbable, that a Dutchman should leave his shop so open and exposed at that
time of night, when it was filled with all the tools and apparatus of an
invention so important, and known only to himself and his man: for it is
downright absurdity to think, that he might depend on the oath, with which he
had engaged the latter to secrecy. Such a night as that, wherein the
inhabitants of the city were going to or coming from mass, was by no means
proper for such a design; and supposing he might have passed undisturbed with
his stolen treasure, yet he could not with the same facility pass through the
gates, or leap over the walls, with at least a thousand weight of letters on
his back: or if his booty was those wooden planks, with which the two large
books mentioned before were printed, as some of the Dutch writers seem to hint
against Junius, it was sufficient to load two or three carts: that he should go
with them to Amsterdam, then to Cologn, and at last to Mentz, without being
taken notice of, is no less astonishing. I shall not insist upon his rashness
in choosing to go through such public roads and noted cities, and thereby running
the danger of being seized; the consequence of which would have been capital
punishment: nor upon the unaccountable supineness of his master in not pursuing
nor causing him to be apprehended, when he opened shop at Mentz, where he could
easily have reached him: nor yet upon the probability, that the public must
have been obliged, by this daring attempt of robbing the country of such a
glorious discovery, to prosecute the robber with the utmost severity where ever
he could be found.

IN the next place should we grant that Faust, or some other servants had
stolen the types; does it necessarily follow that he carried away the art with
them? Could neither Coster, nor his son-in-law and assistant Tho. Peter, nor
any of his grandchildren, recover a new press, cast new types, and publish
something that might expose the thief, and show to whom the world was indebted
for this invention? Besides, it appears from Junius that some of the types were
left behind, which were afterward transformed into drinking-vessels: if these
were not sufficient to set them to work again, the interval of ten years, viz.
from the pretended robbery anno 1441, to the divulging of the art anno 1452,
was more than enough to have completed a new set; seeing the first inventors
devised, tried, and perfected this method in less time. But it is urged that
Coster died either of grief or otherwise before he had brought the art to any
perfection; so that Harlem was anticipated by Mentz. This is affirmed by
Majolus and Quadi, though without grounds; for Junius tells us, that he invented
the separate metal types, as well as wooden-blocks; and met with such
encouragement that people came far and near to purchase his books, though at very
dear rates: now if he was alive, as he and Berkius relate, anno 1447, six years
after this pretended flight; during that interval he might have renewed his
works, there being no want of buyers, and inscribed his books after this or
some such manner; This work was done at Harlem by L. J. Coster, the inventor of
this art of printing, etc. and not by that notorious pretender John Faust, who
stole my art and instruments, and is set up at Mentz, etc. But nothing of this
nature was ever done by Coster or his posterity; which is a plain indication
that this whole story is, what Salmuth and other learned writers affirm it to
be, a mere old wife's fable without foundation or even probability. How the
devisers and publishers of it can maintain it with so much positiveness and
vehemence, with such calumnies, invectives and ill language, against persons of
incomparable learning, who could not give into such an absurd and legendary
account, is not my business to enquire. I shall only observe, that their charge
upon a man of such conspicuous merit as John Faust recoils with double force
and shame upon themselves; for it proves them guilty of a crime more flagrant
than what they accuse him of, in endeavoring to deprive him not only of the
glory of that invention, in order to fix it upon an imaginary countryman of
theirs; but even of what is most valuable in the world, his reputation, upon
the bare testimony and tradition of three old citizens, whose memory is as
justly questionable, as their and Junius's impartiality, in a case wherein the
honor of their city and fellow-citizens is concerned; and what is still a
greater aggravation of their unjust calumny, to make use of Faust's noble
discovery to publish and perpetuate his shame, whose honor and memory ought
rather to have been celebrated by it: little did that good man think, that his
art would ever be put to so vile a use against himself.

IN the mean time, I must not omit to remark, that of all the writers, whom we
have quoted for Mentz, and of many more collected by the diligent Malinkrot in
his History of Printing, there is not one native of that city. Munster indeed
was born near it, but educated at a greater distance; and Serrarius, though he
lived sometime there, was born in Lorain; yet if such an objection had been
just against ten or twelve of 'em, there remains enough to fix the laurel on
Faust's head. But with respect to the old evidences of Harlem, we only know
what Junius is pleased to tell us of them, that they were persons who served
several considerable offices in the city. However Malinkrot makes a very shrewd
remark upon one of: them, viz. Cornelius the Printer, who in a sally of passion
wished Faust had been then alive, that he might have executed him with his own
hands; and was at that time, as Junius relates, above eighty years old: now as
this theft is pretended to have been committed anno 1441, and it appears from
an edition of Tully's offices that Faust was living anno 1466; it is plain that
in this space of 25 years Cornelius might have had an opportunity of gratifying
his revenge upon him if he had thought fit. This circumstance therefore, which
was contrived to add weight to the story, serves only to burlesque and
overthrow it.

I fear the reader is more weary of this argument than I could wish; since
there are two or three new allegations out of those who followed Junius, which
though of small weight, I would willingly examine before I dismiss this chapter;
though it were only to show what shifts they are driven to, who undertake to
support the credit of Junius's legend; and to let the world judge whether such
arguments are not more likely to overthrow than maintain this cause. I shall
here propose 'em with the utmost brevity.

BOXHORN, in his Theatrum Hollandiae, triumphs upon the evidence of two eminent
writers, whom he has violently wrested to speak in defense of his claim. One is
the author of the Cologn Chronicle; the other Mariangelus Accursius, a learned
man, who flourished in Italy about the beginning of the sixteenth century. The
former writes to this purpose Chronic. Coloniens. Quamvis autem, ut
praemittitur, Moguntiae ars haec inventa fuerit, eo modo quo nunc temporis
communiter usurpatur; prima tamen ejus praefiguratio, seu simulacrum ex Donatis
Hollandiae reperta and desumpta fuit, qui ibi ante id tempus excusi fuerunt; e
quo illis principium artis depromptum est: at posterior haec inventio priore,
quoad artificium and subtilitatem, long praestantior fuit.

N. B. Theauthor wrote this chronicle in High Dutch, but I could never procure
the original, and have been obliged to make use of Malinkret's translation of
it.


, that "although the Art of Printing had been found out at Mentz, in the manner
we now have it, yet the first hints or pattern was taken from the Donatus of
Holland, which had been printed there; that the aforesaid art took its origin
from them, though the latter invention is much superior in contrivance and
ingenuity." It Is to be observed by the bye, that this author wrote in the year
1499, almost 50 years after the discovery, and had these particulars from Ulric
Zel an old bookseller then living at Cologn. The next testimony is a passage
written by Accursius upon the first leaf of a Donatus printed at Mentz by John
Faust, as follows Joannes Faust civis Moguntinus, avus maternus Joannis
Schoeffer, primus excogitavit imprimendi artem typis aereis, quos deinde
plumbeos invenit; multaque ad poliendam artem addidit ejus filius Schoeffer:
impressus est autem hic Donatus and Consessionalia primo omnium anno 1450,
admonitus certe fuit ex Donato Hollandiae prius impresso in tabula incisa.
Theatr. Holland. p. 138.
. " John Faust citizen of Mentz, grandfather by mother's side of John
Shepherd, was the first that devised this Art of Printing with brass types,
which he afterward changed for leaden ones: his son Peter Schoeffer added many
other improvements to the art: this Donatus and the Confessionalia were first
printed in the year 1450. He certainly took the hint from the Donatus printed
before in Holland upon wooden planks." What this Donatus and other books of
that sort were, and whether really done in wood or otherwise, with some other
particularities relating to them, shall be considered in a distinct chapter:
our present enquiry is how far they make for the cause of the Dutch writers.

We will suppose that Ulric Zel was a man of as good a memory as those
mentioned by Junius; and that the second passage quoted was actually written by
Accursius, which is far from being certain: let us now examine what both these
writers do, and what they do not, affirm. They affirm, 1. that this method of
printing by fusile types was found out at Mentz by John Faust, and improved by
his son-in-law Peter Schoeffer: 2. that they printed some books in the year
1450: 3. that there was a Donatus printed before that time upon wooden planks
in Holland: and 4. that from the hint, or, as the chronicler terms it, the
model or pattern [vorbildung] of those wooden planks, Faust began the new way
of printing by fusile types; though this last article seems only a conjecture of
theirs.

THEY do not affirm, 1. that the old method of printing on wood was the
foundation of the new one: 2. that this Donatus was printed at Harlem rather
than at any other place, or by Coster than any other person: though if they had
asserted this, it ought to be examined how they got that intelligence; seeing
it was not known in Holland ann. 1575. in which year Junius died, that any such
book had been printed there; for that author, who was indefatigable in
collecting whatever favored his cause, would never have failed to mention it;
and Jos. Scaliger, though he since declared himself for Harlem, formerly
attributed this rude invention to the city of Dort: 3. they don't affirm that
this Donatus was printed before the Catholicon of Mentz, wherein lies the main
point; for though they say it was done before Faust had perfected his invention,
yet it does not follow that it was before he had begun to print with wooden
planks. Nothing therefore can be gathered from these authors, even with respect
to this invention in wood, that favors Coster or Harlem more than Faust or
Mentz.

I have already observed that some of the Dutch writers are for dividing the
glory between those two corrivals, and particularly Peter Berchius: in this he
is followed by no less an author than Boxhorn, so often mentioned for his zeal
in this dispute. He finding the impossibility of defending all the assertions
of Junius, is willing to come to a composition. His words are these: Sed non
difficile est hanc tam gravem ac tam nobilem controversiam, and quae clarissima
nostri aevi ingenia exercuit, componere, nempe, si vel id, quod res est,
concedainus, typos quidem ligneos a Laurentio Harlemensi primum fuisse
inventos, typo vero stanneos, aereos, and plumbeos ad horum exemplar efformatos
esse a Joanne Fausto cive Moguntino. Boxhorn Theat. Holland.
"It will be no difficulty to reconcile this great and weighty controversy,
which has exercised the greatest wits of the age, if we will, as indeed we
ought, yield the honor of the old wooden invention to Coster of Harlem, and
that of metal types to John Faust citizen of Mentz." But this accommodation is
attended with this disadvantage, that it will set the Dutch writers at variance
not only with one another, but also with themselves; whereas it is much better
in my opinion, to continue in war with the whole world, than to bring a
domestic one into their own bowels. A consequence still worse is inevitable;
for what will become of the pompous story of Faust's robbery? And of those
creditable evidences mentioned by Junius? Would not they with the utmost
vehemence protest against such a partition treaty? And old Cornelius the false
accuser, deserve the most sanguinary treatment to be retaliated on him from
some angry Moguntine? Will not the drinking cups, those noble relics of
Coster's metal types, run the risque of being turned into vessels of dishonor?
And all the inscriptions in his praise, his statues, and even his house at
Harlem, be liable to some such dismal fate. -- If we should yield them this
invention of wooden planks, so eagerly contended for; or agree with the more
moderate of their writers that Faust and Coster, though at so great a distance,
happened upon it together; or grant to Boxhorn, that Harlem was the mother, and
Mentz the nurse of these two discoveries; and that the one is but an
improvement of the other: yet Coster would not have deserved half of the
incense bestowed on him; nor Faust the least part of the calumnies which he has
suffered. In vain were such shifts and forgeries used to deprive him of so
small and inconsiderable share of his glory; whilst the far greatest part of
it, which could not be touched, was more than sufficient to make him outshine
and even eclipse his rival, for whose sake he was so ungratefully treated. Had
not he been blessed with a genius vastly superior to that of his supposed
competitor, or contented himself without aiming at a more useful and
expeditious method than the first; the common wealth of letters had received as
little advantage from his discovery, as his own name and memory from those
Dutch writers, were they the only persons to transmit them to posterity.
However if their partiality, and adherence to Junius, have influenced them so
far as to make such returns for those improvements, which they are obliged to
acknowledge that he made; common justice will oblige me to acquaint the reader,
that other writers of that country, of equal learning, and a more generous
nature, have been so far from joining with them, that they have ascribed the
invention to Faust alone. I have before quoted an encomium of the great Erasmus
upon him and his art, and shall close this chapter with another out of the
learned Opmer of Amsterdam, who died about the year 1595, i. e. 20 years after
Junius, and has left us the following testimony in his posthumous book of
Chronography: Etenim hoc anno Moguntiae a Joanne Fausto ars imprimendi exerceri
coepta est, fuerat is avus Joan is Shoefferi chalcographi nostrae aetatis, vir
dignus ut celebretur. --

Quid? quod sub mundi vesperam, instante supremo jam die, inter caliginosas
impiorum atque discordiarum feralium procellas rarae pietatis, summaeque
doctrinae non pauci instar micantium syderum emicasse cernuntur; ut crederes
orbem a graviore morbo convaluisse, atque amissas eloquentiae artiumque vires
sensim recollegisse; opitulante disciplinis art illa, qua plumbeis literarum
characteribus ingeniose fusis, atque scribendi ratione optime compositis,
atramentoque madefactis convenienter ac praelo compressis, diversarum linguarum
libri numeroso quasi partu in quamplurima exemplaria in lucem producuntur:
Typographiae arti nomen dedere, ac per Joannem Faustum anno 1440 excogitatam in
lucem produxisse certissime constat. Mirum tanti artificii repertorem, and
divinarum humanarumque disciplinarum generosum administrum a Germanicarum rerum
scriptore indigno plane ornari elogio: fuit certe vir ille immortalis memoriae
dignissimus, and acutissimis ingeniis annumerandus. Opmer. op. posth, p. 703.
edit. Colon.


-- "This year 1440 the art of printing began to be exercised at Mentz by John
Faust, who was the grandfather of John Schoeffer (a printer of this age,) and
worthy the highest encomiums." In another place (in the beginning of the 4th
book) there is the following elegant panegyric upon the art and inventor: --
"that at the decline of the world, when the last day seemed to approach, so
many men of accomplished learning and singular piety should break forth, like
bright stars, with unusual luster through the tempestuous clouds of deadly
discord; so that you would have thought the world had been recovered from a
long disease, and gradually reassumed its lost strength, the arts and sciences:
this was effected by the assistance of that art, which from metal characters of
letters ingeniously cast, disposed in the order in which we write, spread over
with a convenient quantity of ink, and put under the press, has ushered into
the world, books in all languages, and multiplied their copies like a numerous
offspring, and has obtained the name of Typography. This art of Printing was
most certainly invented and brought to light by John Faust in the year 1440. It
is amazing that the author of so important a discovery, and so generous a
promoter of divine and human learning, should be unworthily traduced by a
writer of the German affairs: surely such a person deserves eternal
remembrance, and a place amongst men of the brightest genius." -- Who this
German writer was our author no where tells us; but it seems as if his
unnatural usage of his own countryman had taken off Opmer's wonder at the like
treatment from the Dutch writers. If it should be asked what converts these
last have made among other nations, I can only answer, that I know of none.

THE generality of writers have esteemed Junius's story unworthy of either
credit or confutation; and if any of the moderns seem neuter or doubtful in
this case, it is more owing to a peculiar affectation of modesty, than either
to any design of complimenting the Dutch, or fear of being mistaken in so
evident a matter.

CHAP. VI. An Enquiry into the first Books printed on Blocks of Wood, viz. the
Donatus, Speculum, etc.
AS the reader may reasonably think, there is something exceilent in these
Books, either for beauty of impression, learning, correctness, etc. from the
great noise which they have made among the writers of this controversy; I must
begin with acquainting him that their whole merit consists only in their being
looked upon by them as the very first essays of the art of printing, even
before the invention of fusile types. This is so far from admitting of any
controversy, however some of them may have been misled into a contrary opinion,
that their being printed only on one side of the paper, and afterward glew'd
together, on the blank side, from which they were called paginae conglutinatae,
is a very pregnant proof of their being done after the first method, viz. upon
wooden blocks; tho'we shall not only corroborate the fact by many other
undeniable arguments in the sequel of this chapter, but even lead the reader
into so plain a method of judging of those works, from those printed by fusile
types, that he will not have the least room left to doubt of it.

As for the Donatus, so strenuously insisted upon, by Bertius and others, in
favor of Harlem, it is a question whether there be one copy of it extant,
seeing it is not to be met with in any of those curious libraries I have either
seen or heard of, nor could ever be procured by any of our searchers into these
ancient monuments, though they have spared neither pains nor cost to have it
sought for far and near: to which let me add, that no author I am acquainted
with, has pretended to have seen it, if we except Angel Rocha, who in his
Bibliotheca Vaticana, printed at Rome in the year 1591, 4to. page 411, tells
us, that Aldus Manutius, junr. showed him a grammar of Donatus printed on
vellum, upon one of the first white leaves of which Mariangelus Accursius, a
learned author living in Italy about the year 1500 had wrote, as he supposed,
with his own hand, the following words in latin, "that this Donatus, and
another book entitled Consessionalia were the first printed books, and that
John Faust citizen of Mentz, and first inventor of the Art of Printing, had
printed them ann. 1450," as has been said in the last chapter.

FROM this account of Accursius it is plain: first, that this Donatus bore
neither date nor name of place or printer, otherwise he need not to have been
at the trouble of guessing at them. Secondly, That Donatus is the name of the
author, not of the book; and that it was only a grammar for boys, for so Rocha
calls it in the place before quoted; to which we may add, that in the last list
which the first Printers at Rome gave of their works to the Pope, they call it
Donatus pro pueris; so that it could not be such a trifling thing as some
authors have thought it, who only call it a Primer. The third thing I would
observe from this passage is, that John Faust, who is here called the first
inventor of printing, is affirmed to have printed it at Mentz: but what has
puzzled the world is, what the same author adds at the end of the passage, viz.
that Faust did certainly take the hint from the Donatus in Holland, first
printed on Blocks of wood; which for that very reason, those authors who have
followed him, have thought fit to make 10 years older, and have supposed them
printed about the year 1440. I might indeed have omitted this passage, seeing
Accursius seems to hint that this book of his was printed by fusile types; but
as it was the only one that has been seen by any author, and confirms some of
our former assertions, I thought it would not be amiss to insert it, especially
considering that it was not impossible for Accursius to be mistaken in his
judgment, of its being printed after the new method of separate types, as many
other learned men have been in the like case. The merit of this quotation has
been examined in the last chapter, and it is plain that all the authors that
have mentioned the date of this book, such as Beughen, Boxhorn, Bertius, and
others have taken it upon trust, as well as what they affirm of its being done
upon wooden blocks, since none of them pretend either to have seen it, or to
have taken it from any author that had: and if we should admit what Accursius
affirms, that those supposed dutch ones were older than this he wrote upon, it
will make it still plainer that they had neither date, printer, nor place's
name; since this, which is supposed ten years younger, is without any of them.
The same may be said of the other books I am now going to give an account of,
viz. the Speculum, Ars moriendi, etc. which are in the Earl of Pembroke's
curious collection, none of which, though they seem to be improvements of one
another, has the least mention of time, place, or printer.

However, as to their being engraven upon wooden blocks, and consequently being
the first essays, or as some antiquaries call them, the first Maculatures of
the art, I am fully convinced, both by the ink with which they are printed,
viz. the common writing ink, and by some undoubted trials I have made of them.
I shall therefore lay down the following rules to distinguish between books
printed on blocks of wood and separate metal types.

First, Let an m, w, or any other remarkable letter, be curiously examined both
as to its length, breadth and shape, and compare it with the same letter in
another word, if they vary either in similitude or size, you may be assured
they are not metal types, since the most curious letter-cutter, writing-master,
or engraver, cannot make any two letters so alike, but a nice observer will
distinguish one from the other: on the contrary, in separate metal types each
letter being cast in the same matrice, it is impossible there should be the
least difference either in shape or size.

Secondly, Another way is by choosing any word, the longer the better, take the
length of it with the points of the compass, and compare it with the same word
in another place, and if you find them both of the same length, you may depend
upon their being printed with separate metal types; for as each letter is cast
in the same mould, it is impossible that their length should vary: but in
writing and engraving there will be a visible difference in the same word in
various places.

Thirdly, Measure the length of a page; tell the number of lines in a full one,
and take the white spaces between each line, and by comparing them to any other
full page in the book, if they are printed with metal types there can be no
variation in any of these respects: whereas, if they were done in wood it would
be as impossible for them to agree in any one instance, as it would be to
engrave or write any two pages wherein there should be no visible variation in
some one or more of the forementioned particulars. It was by these methods that
I distinguished, in the sive books in the Earl of Pembroke's Library, what was
done on wood, and what by separate metal types.

MELCHIOR ADAMUS, and after him the learned Malinkrot and some others, tell us
of separate wooden types cut with a knife, which were used by the first
Printers, before the discovery of casting them into metal; but besides that
this seems inconsistent with the most authentic testimonies we have quoted
hitherto concerning this invention: whoever considers the vast time and trouble
it would require to cut such a quantity of them as is necessary to print any
moderate work, the great difficulty of making them stand exactly upright and
even in line and body, how liable they would be to split, break, warp, shrink
and swell with continual wetting and the weight of the press, with many more
such like inconveniences and difficulties, will easily judge, not only of the
absurdity of this notion, but also of the impossibility of any of those old
books being printed by any such types; since it is obvious to every eye, that
no one single work could have come perfect out of their hands for the reasons
abovementioned.

BEFORE I dismiss this point, I must not omit acquainting the Reader with a
mistake into which Chevillier has been unwarily drawn, even when he took the
surest method of coming at the truth, concerning one of these books in
question, viz. the Speculum Salutis, he tells us, page 281 and 282 of his
Origin of Printing, that having one of them in his own possession, and having
met with another in the library of the Celestin Monks at Paris, he had the
curiosity to have them examined by a Printer, a Founder, and an Engraver, who
judged them to be printed with separatemetal-types; so that those who have read
his book, have thought it a sufficient ground to alter their opinion of their
being done on wooden blocks. But this mistake of Chevillier's proceeded from
his not examining the whole book, because as I shall show anon, there were many
leaves supplied afterward by separate metal types, one of which he had the
misfortune to light upon, otherwise they must have manifestly seen the
difference

I come now to give the reader an account of the other five books, viz. Ars
Moriendi, the History of the Apocalypse, the History of the Bible, the Speculum
Salutis, and the Spiegel or Speculum translated into Low Dutch. That these
however are not all that was done upon wooden planks, is plain, because
Trithemius tells us of the Catholicon, first printed upon wood, Scaliger speaks
of a Psalter of the same stamp, which his grandmother had, and other
antiquaries mention several others not worth inserting here, all which are
either perished, or are as yet undiscovered: however I cannot omit the
Speculum, and some others seen by Saubert in the Nuremberg library, of which he
was keeper; and mentioned by him in the catalogue of that library, called in
latin Bibliotheca Norica, which books were printed in High Dutch, and may
justly be supposed some of Faustus's first Tentamina or essays from ann. 1440
to 1450: but as that author has only given us the names, without any further
account of them; I shall pass them by, and return to the five abovementioned;
which are no where to be met with together, but in that noble Collection of the
Right Hon. the Earl of Pembroke: and as no one besides my self has described
them all, I hope the reader will not be displeased, if I give him a more
particular account of them, than any but a Printer could possibly have done:
They are all five printed on a very small Folio.

I. ARS MORIENDI; or, SPECULUM MORIENTIUM. IT is a moral treatise upon the
subject of dying well, with wooden cuts suited to the taste of the Romish
church; a sick man is figured lying in his bed with angels and devils attending
him, the one to tempt, the other to strengthen him; to which end the designer
has made labels from their mouths, to express the intention of each: the
designs of this first book are somewhat better drawn than those of the rest;
for in that age, as well as ours, there were good and bad painters or
designers, but the press-work is the worst of the five: this induces me to
think this piece to be the oldest, and its wanting the several improvements
which we find in the others, does not a little confirm me in my conjecture: for
first, it is printed with common writing ink without any gum, which is plain
from its spreading it self, and soaking into the paper, so that in many places
it is scarce legible; and the ink is grown withal so pale by length of time,
that it does but just show it self at the best: secondly, it seems to have
received several degrees of improvement as the work went on, and is better
printed, and with better ink, the nearer it draws to the end: the third
circumstance that proves its priority to the rest, is, that it has neither the
capitals A, B, C, etc. (which are now called Signatures) at the bottom of the
first pages of each sheet, nor any direction word at the end of each page;
which is a guide to the book-binder how to place the sheets, this improvement
we find in the two next books.

II. The HISTORY of the APOCALYPSE. THIS book, which I venture to give the
second rank to, has the advantage of being printed with better ink than the
former, which makes it much more legible; it appears to have some gum dissolved
with the ink, which was one of the first improvements that was made to the
common sort of ink; it has likewise the signatures at the top of each page of
the sheet: This piece contains the history of St. John the Evangelist in forty
six pages, each having some figures ill cut, representing some part of that
saint's life; the cuts are interspersed with short sentences, arguments and
explications, in Monkish latin prose; likewise cut in wood after an indifferent
manner; the paper has the mark of the heiffer's LABEL and horns, which is
allowed to be the mark in the paper Faust used.

III. The HISTORY of the BIBLE. THIS contains only histories out of the Old and
New Testament, promiscuously blended together with wooden cutts better
performed, though worse drawn, than any of the two foregoing; it has likewise the
arguments and explanations of each cut, and the paper seems to be the same with
that of the Apocalypse; it has also the improvements of ink and signatures
These were in all probability the first SIGNATURES, the 4th and 5th here have
them not, nor the books with Faust's name. And though the Terence printed at
Milan 1470 has them, yet Spira and Jonson printed afterward without; nor have
they used them in France in 1468, yet in the same year they were used at Oxford.
.

IV. The SPECULUM HUMANAE SALVATIONIS. IT is commonly called Speculum Salutis;
or, the Mirror of our Salvation; and is a comparative history of the old and
new testament it is written in Monkish latin verse rhim'd. This is by far the
most perfect of the two I have seen, that which Dr. Mead showed me wanted many
leaves, but this only two: it consists of fifty six pages, and each page has
two columns of verses, which are so well cut, that were it not for some
differences in the magnitude and shape of the same letters, one might easily be
induced to think them printed with metal types; and I believe this is the
reason, that made some authors suppose them to be done with separate wooden
types. I have already taken notice of the improbability of that notion.

V. De SPIEGHEL. THIS is only a translation of the Speculum Salutis into
Flemish: it was upon this book that Dr. Junius and the other dutch writers, who
have followed him, lay so great a stress; and upon whose antiquity, preferable
to all others, they ground their claim to the invention of printing in favor
of Coster. However it is very plain that the Latin one is prior to this, and
that this is only a translation of that, because the wooden cuts are the same
in both, the latin explanations at the bottom are left untranslated, and the
cuts are printed with the same pale gum'd writing ink as in the Latin one,
rather brown than black; whereas the body of this work is composed with
separate metal types, and printed with an ink as remarkable for its blackness
as any sort since made use of: it has also in several places the same mark in
the paper, viz. the heiffer's LABEL and horns, acknowledged by Mons. Naude to
be the mark in Faust's paper. In the Latin Speculum a great many pages are
supplied with the same separate metal types, press-work and ink as the body of
this whole Flemish one; and has all the appearances sufficient to convince any
one, of its being done at the same time, and by the same hand; one of which
supplied pages of the latin Speculum, Chevillier happened to pitch upon, when
he showed it to the Printer, Founder and Engraver before mentioned. There is
one circumstance worth noting, which is, that the Speculum salutis, though cut on
wood, each page consists of two distinct pieces, the LABEL piece is the draught
or representation of the history, the lower piece is the history itself in two
columns, and if I may venture to account for this motled work, it must be by
supposing, that after they had cut the design, they might print several proof
sheets, as is usual now, to see if it needed any amendment; which proof sheets
of the draughts only, together with a complete book of the latin Speculum,
might afterward fall into the hands of some dutch Printer, who got it
translated into low dutch and printed it with separte metal types upon the same
proof sheets under the designs which were before printed at the LABEL of the
page; and this will evidently appear from the manifest difference of the ink,
as before mentioned.

THERE remain still two points to be examined with relation to the Donatus; 1.
whether it be the first book printed with wooden planks; 2. whether it was done
by L. Coster at Harlem. To the first there is only the testimonies of Ulric Zel
citizen of Cologn, who relates what was done almost fifty years ago, and of
Mar. Accursius, who wrote in Italy what he heard was done at, a still, greater
distance from him. To these, who could not possibly be acquainted with every
circumstance of this discovery, we may reasonably oppose the authority of
Trithemius; for he learned what he tells us, not from report and uncertain
tradition, but from the mouth of Peter Schoeffer, who related nothing but what
he was an eyewitness of, or rather particularly interested in. Now Trithemius
ascribes the invention of wooden blocks to J. Faust; and asserts that the
Catholicon was the first book (of any consequence) printed in that manner; and
that his next step was the more ingenious invention of separate metal types.

LET the world judge whether his testimony be not far preferable to that of the
two former. Scriverius indeed, and after him Mr. Beughen, affirm the Donatus to
have been printed anno 1440; but give no reason for their fixing on that year
rather than any other; and it is manifest from what they say before, that they
only proceed upon a supposition, that this method being discovered about that
time; this book (which is perhaps the least considerable of those which were
printed then) might be one of the first essays of it. However let the
Catholicon, the Donatus or any other, be the first book printed in Europe with
wooden planks, yet there is no ground of boasting it to be the first in the
world; since the Chinese practiced that way of Printing at least 300 years
before either Faust or Coster were born.

THE next consideration is, where and by whom it was printed. The Dutch attempt
two ways of proving it was done by Coster at Harlem: the first is that of
Junius, who pretends that it was one of the first trials of Coster's metal
types; but this has been so fully confuted, that they have been obliged to
recur to another shift; which is, that Coster invented the engraven planks, and
with these printed the Donatus and Speculum Salutis; and that from this Faust
took the hint of inventing metal types, an improvement of the former method
Alibi enim ars, alibi ornamenta artis inventa; illa inter Hollandos, haec inter
Germaniae Moguntinos. -- Harlemum Tipographiae velut matrem, Mogunt am autem
nutricem fuisse and alumnam; ibi superatum quicquid in novae rei exordiis
impeditum, hic additam majorem arti speciem and facilitatem. Boxhorn de Art.
Typogr invent. p 38, 39.
: As the latter part of this assertion has received a sufficient answer in the
second chapter and elsewhere, so I need not insist long upon a confutation of
the former part, i. e. the books themselves; since they carry no evident
characteristick, nor are affirmed with certainty by any author to have been
done in Holland. No doubt the Latin Speculum is the original, and the Dutch
only a translation; since as I observed before, the latin arguments under the
figures are left untranslated. The learned Saubert likewise tells us in his
History of the Norimbergh library, that he has seen several books there
printed in high dutch after this manner, one of which is the Speculum Quae
ligno incisa sunt, huc non refero, v. g. libellum fabularum and similitudinum,
qualis est D. Hartlhorni libellus Germanicas, itemque Speculum Mortentium,
Speculum Salutis, and id genus alia, Saubert. Histor. Biblioth. Norimberg. p.
116.
. Who can therefore determine which is the most ancient, or where they were
printed? If the Dutch one could be done no where but in Holland, because it is
in low dutch; by parity of reason the high dutch must have been printed in
Germany; and as to the Latin, it will remain still undetermined, whether it was
done in the one or the other, and nothing will be certain concerning it, except
that it must have been printed before the translations. From the whole of what
has been said, it is apparent, that all the proofs which the Dutch bring either
from facts or authentic writers, confute, rather than support, their
pretensions: and I hope by this time the reputation of Faust is sufficiently
cleared from the two fold wrong done it by those, who endeavor to deprive him
of his due honor, and asperse him with the vilest accusations of treachery and
theft: and that the reader not only esteems him acquitted of both, but is
satisfied that neither Coster nor Harlem have the least share in this discovery.

BEFORE I conclude this chapter, I cannot omit a conjecture of the ingenious
Mr. Mattaire, which will be a considerable confirmation of what has been said
before. He tells us De loco and opifice incertiora adhuc sunt omnia. Si pro
M^guntia pronuncietur, non multum haerendum erit de opificibus, tribus scilicet
antea celebratis; aut tempore quod anno 1457, (quo primum, juxta receptam
hactenus a plerisque opinionem, integrae Typographiae opus per Johannem Fust
and Petrum Schoeffer elaboratum prodiit fuerit forte vetustius; opus enim minus
perfectum oportet perfectiori praeivisse, sin autem cui Argentina plus placeat,
aut (quam cur duarum malim, postea aperiam) Harlemum; Guttenbergus, quem quidam
Argentinam migrasse, potior vero (de qua deinceps disseram, authoritas Harlemi
consedisse affirmat, haec primae suae artis molitus est rudimenta; non qui em
ante annum 1455, quo accidisse fertur inter ipsum Faustumque dissidium (quae
ipsi fuit migrandi causa) neque forsan multo post 1457 quo perfectior
innotuerat imprimendi ratio. Annal. Typ^graph. p. 17.
, that he is inclined to think the books beforementioned were printed at
Harlem, rather than at Mentz or Strasburgh, because though Guttenbergh removed at
first to the latter, soon after the sentence pronounced against him by the
judges of Mentz; yet it appears from several authors even of our own nation,
that he either suspecting his safety there, and a farther prosecution from
Faust for the money adjudg'd to him by the decree and deed mentioned in a
former chapter, or upon some other reason, came afterward to Harlem: in this
city he is supposed by our author to have taught the art to Coster, and
practiced it with him about the year 1459. If this be admitted, which has all
the air of probability to recommend it, Coster will be left entirely destitute
of his former glory. The reader will find Mr. Mattaire's proofs for what he
advances concerning Guttenbergh's printing at Harlem, in his book before
quoted Ibid a page 26, ad 30.

Quae ex Lambethano MS. descripsit, de eo rum veritati cur dubitemus non video:
ex iis itaque pauca mecum colliget lector alibi forsan non ediscenda.

1. Johannes Guttenbergus, quem, exorta inter ipsum and Faustum contentione,
Argentinam migrasse scribit Henricus Salmuth, Harl^mum inde aliquando profectus
est, ibique primus artem Typographicam a se inventam ^n onstravit, and ipse
anno 1459 exercuit: quod si admittatur, contra Laurentium Costerum, cui
inventionis palma a Belgis tribuitur, manifest faciet, etc. ib. p. 31.


; which I refer to, rather than to those old and scarce authors, from whom he
has extracted them. I shall close this controversy of Harlem with the words of
Malinkrot: Non hercle Harlemicae silvae spatiis, non Batavicus
deambulationibus, non Hollandico otio tam laboriosae artisanxium and difficilem
partum debemus; sed Mogu^tinus potius sudoribus Rhenanae industriae and
difficilibus nixibus, Germa^i^ae assiduitatis indefessae operationi, continuae
multorum annorum instantiae llum acceptum fe^^e tenemur. Typograph. cap. 8.
page 69.
"'It Is not the spacious woods of Harlem, nor the fine walks of Holland, nor the
supineness of its inhabitants that could produce an art so difficult and
laborious; but it is to the strenuous endeavors of the city of Mentz, and the
assiduous and indefatigable industry of the Rhenish nation for many years
together, that we are indebted for it."

CHAP. VII. The Pretensions of Strasburgh confuted.
IN the two former chapters, the falsity of the charge against John Faust has
been so fully demonstrated, that one would have reasonably expected the ill
success of this accusation, and the many learned advocates that appeared in his
defense, might have been sufficient to deter the most sanguine of mortals from
a second attempt upon so great a man. Nevertheless the reader must have
patience to hear him arraigned at another bar for the like crimes, committed
about the same time, though upon another person, and at another place distant
several hundred miles from the former.

FOUR years after the publication of Boxhorn's Dissertatio de Typographiae
inventione and inventoribus, printed at Leyden 1640; there started up another,
who in a small treatise entitled, Brevis de loco, tempore and authore
Typographiae excursus, pretended to prove that Faust stole the art of Printing
from John Mentel at Strasburgh. It Is true, this author was ashamed to set his
name to it; but neither that, nor the meanness of his performance hindered the
diligent Malinkrot, who was then writing his treatise de ortu and progressu
artis Typographicae against Junius and his followers, from confuting it.
Hereupon James Mentel doctor of physic at Paris, a man of learning, and great
grandson of Mentel, the first Strasburg Printer of that name, published a book
called Paraenesis de vera Typographiae ^^igine at Paris anno 1650; wherein he
undertook to make good the charge, which the anonymous author had laid against
Faust, and challenged the glory of the invention in favor of his ancestor.
Though no particular answer to this book has been published, yet there is not one
writer upon this subject, that I know of, that has not taken occasion to
confute, or at least to say something to discountenance it. I should therefore
esteem my self, wanting to this art and its inventor, should I omit giving a
short account of this controversy, and expose the vanity of such an attempt;
especially because it may be thought, that Dr. Mentel would not have troubled
the world with it so soon after the other, unless he had had something more
weighty to allege in favor of Strasburgh, than the Dutch had for Harlem.

I hope to propose the arguments on both sides so fairly, that the reader will
easily judge of the pretensions and merit of this new competitor; and with such
brevity, that he will not be tired with it, by referring still to the
quotations in the margin without interruption to the story.

THE first evidence alleged by Dr. Mentel, is an old Strasburgh chronicle, of
equal authority with the Harlem tradition, to this purpose Anno millesimo
quadringentesimo quadragesimo als zum drittenmahl, etc quae Latin sic sonant:
cum e tribu Vietorum tertius in consulem esset electus Dominus Nicholous
Schantliti, and praetura urbana fungeretur Walterus Spiegel, etc. eximia illa
and mire utilis Typographia Strasburgs inventa est, ab incomparabili viro
Johanne Meant l^o habitante in foro Fronhoff, in aedibus vero Viengarten, hoc
est lustri, vulgo nuncupatis: quod divinissimum opus non celavit unum ex
famulis suis, sibi dexteritate ingenii atque acumine notum, Johannem Geasfleich
vocatum, and illum Mogunty^e s^m, ut abs illo in ea re juvaretur: Sed male
feriatus is servus, ubi quadamtenus industriae istius fuisset conscius,
nequissime cum hero se gessit. ^am cum Johanne Gu^embergio, populare suo,
pinguis census homine, ac vitae sort aurifice, se socians; qui jam de art
quidpiam subodorabatur (ut mer^^oria cujus opera fabrica^dis ad id instrume^tis
usus antea fuiss^t Mentilius) secreta quae a patrono fuerat expiscatus,
detexit. Ac sic utrique cum nova and illustria per ipsam nomina comparandi spes
fo^et; nec tamen impune id Argentorati, ubi esset inventor possent consequi,
illac egredi apud se constituerunt, ac Moguntiam profecti suut. Mentel p. 6, 7.
: "that anno 1440 Nich. Schantlitt being consul, etc. the excellent and truly
useful art of Printing was invented at Strasburgh by the incomparable John
Mentel, who dwelt in the Fronhoff market, and at the house commonly called
Viergarten (brothel-house;) which divine invention he communicated to a servant
of his of great ingenuity and dexterity, by name John Gensfleich, a native of
Mentz, that he might be assisting to him in the business. But this treacherous
fellow had no sooner learned the mystery, but he served his master a base
trick, by associating himself with his counrryman J. Guttenberg, a wealthy
silver-smith, who began to smell out something of the art (having been employed
by Mentel to make some necessary tools;) and discovering to him the secret,
which he had been entrusted with by his master. These two hoping to make
themselves famous by this art, but being fearful of divulging it at Strasburgh
where the inventor lived, resolved to remove thence, and settle at Mentz."

WITH respect to this chronicle and the writer of it, we only know what our
author tells us in his translation inserted at the bottom of the page, for the
chronicle is written in high dutch. As it wants therefore some better authority
for its support, Dr. Mentel brings, as a confirmation of it, the testimonies of
the writers quoted in our third chapter, who make mention of Guttenberg's
carrying the art from Strasburgh to Mentz, where he perfected it by the
assistance of John Faust alias Gensfleich; whose words are not therefore
necessary to be repeated here. In the next place he alleges an inscription,
which with Mentel's coat of arms was put at the beginning of Otho Brunsfield's
Onomasticon printed at Strasburgh by John Schott anno 1543, importing Insigne
Schottorum familiae ab Frederico Romanorum III imperatore Jeanni Mentelin primo
Typographiae inventori, ac suis concessum anno 1466. p. 104.
, that these arms of Schott's family had been given to John Mentelin, first
inventor of the art of Printing, and to his posterity by the Emperor Frederic
III. anno 1466. After this he gives us a latin epigram written by Erhard
Windsberg and inscribed to the three famous Germans, who set up the first
Printing-press at Paris. In the first verse of this he has thought fit to
change the word Alemannia (Germany) for these of tu Argentina (thou Strasburgh)
as more proper for his purpose.

THE book, at the end of which are these verses, is the Epistles of Crates the
Cynick, printed by Martin Crantz and his two partners beforementioned anno
1470, not at Strasburgh, as our author would fain insinuate to his readers, but
at Paris; where it is still extant in the library of the Sorbon, and was seen
among others by Chevillier, who has occasionally confuted Mentel's supposition,
and exposed his unfair quotation of the epigram, page 31. of his History of
Printing; as we shall show in its proper place.

THIS is all that I can find in Mentel's book, which has the appearance of
argument: the rest consists chiefly in digressions, and quotations in praise of
the art, and of the German nation; which are entirely foreign to this
controversy. In short our author shows himself more desirous of appearing
zealous for his ancestor's honor, than solicitous what credit his work will
merit among the learned: I shall give an instance or two of this, and proceed
to the confutation of his main arguments.

IN page 31, he gives us a piece of a comedy written by the famous Swedish poet
Nicodemus Frischlin; but is pleased to overlook the lines quoted by us before
at p. 19, in which he affirms, John Faust citizen of Mentz to have been the
inventor of the art; though they are at a very small distance from the passage
quoted by him; what is still more remarkable is, that Mentel affirms that our
Swedish poet dedicated this dramatic piece to the senate of Strasburgh; which
he would scarce have done, had he dreamt any thing of that city's claiming the
glory of this invention against his Hero John Faust, or heard any thing of the
charge of theft alleged against him by the Strasburgers. The other instance of
his unfairness is no less considerable at p. 67; where having supposed that the
Rationale Durandi was not printed 'till after the falling out of Faust and
Guttenbergh, viz. ann. 1461, to evade the force of the real date 1459, he says
with a very serious air, that he had credible information from men of great
learning, both Printers and others, that it was wrong printed, and that the
figure I, which is put before, should have been after the X, that instead of
MCCCCLIX, it should have been MCCCCLXI: whereas Mr. Mattaire assures us Vide
quaeso Mentelii in opinione falsa obstinati, ipsiusque hominum ornatissimorum
hallucinationem manifestam; annus enim illius libri exprimitur non numeralibus
litteris, sed disertis verbis. Millesime quadringentesimo quinquage^imo nono.
Annal. Typograph. p. 11. anno^. col 1.
, that the year is not printed with numeral letters, but in words at length,
one thousand four hundred fifty nine; I can hardly suppose Dr. Mentel could be
mistaken for want of an opportunity of consulting the book itself, seeing it is
to be so easily met with in several ^ibraries of Paris, which stand always open
to the learned and curious; and I don't find he has been wanting in ransacking
them to find out any thing to his purpose: though should even this supposition
about the date be allowed, it would not therefore follow, that no books were
printed before the year 1460 with Faust's and Schoeffer's names, exclusive of
Guttenbergh's, as Dr. Mentel attempts to persuade his readers; for the
Psalmorum codex printed ann. 1457 mentions only the names of the two former;
and the latter was never printed in any book that could yet be produced. What
is said will suffice, I hope, to give an idea of this author's sincerity, whose
three principal authorities I shall now examine.

FIRST, as to the Strasburgh chronicle, we may reasonably be excused for not
laying the same stress upon it, that our author does; since the obscurity of
the writer, a suspicion of his partiality for his country's honourand a
difficulty of believing a person in his own cause in opposition to a great
number of more credible witnesses, are obstacles almost invincible. I am
therefore inclined to think, that the bare opposing of the chronicle of Cologne
and Trithemius, who assert that the art was first brought from Mentz to
Strasburgh, will be a sufficient confutation of it, though there were no other
authorities for the one, nor arguments against the other. However we have an
unexceptionable witness to produce against this chronicle, viz. the learned
Wimpheling, who was not only an eminent citizen of Strasburgh, and almost
contemporary with the discovery of the art, but is likewise quoted by Dr.
Mentel, though his testimony be diametrically opposite to his purpose: the first
part of the passage is set down at length in page 15, wherein he attributes the
whole invention to John Guttenbergh; and tells us that he did not perfect it
'till he had been sometime at Mentz; whilst John Mentel undertaking the same
business, printed a great many volumes very neat and correct, and grew
exceeding rich in a short time Interea Joannes Mentel id opisicii genus
incoeptans, multa volumina castigate and polite imprimendo factus est brevi
opulentissimus. Wimphel loco ^^tat^.
. This is all that Wimpheling says of Mentel; nor has any author, except that
of this Strasburg chronicle, mentioned or supposed him to be the inventor, but
only one of the first that practiced that art at Strasburgh: and if the reader
will recollect what most of the writers, quoted in the third chapter of this
book, have said concerning Guttenbergh's leaving Mentz and returning to
Strasburg, where some of them affirm him to have taught Mentel the art; we
shall not wonder that Wimpheling makes him the first inventor of it, seeing he
practiced it there sometime before it was known that Faust had done the like at
Mentz; and was consequently the first Printer, that Wimpheling might know of:
nor is it reasonable to suppose that Guttenbergh could have been weak enough to
say any thing of what had passed at Mentz between Faust and himself, it being
so little to his credit.

MENTEL's next authority is taken from the coat of arms given to the family by
the Emperor Frederick III; for which there is no other testimony but the first
leaf of the Onomasticon. However supposing it to be authentic, may we not with
the greatest reason oppose to it the patent or privilege granted by the Emperor
Maximilian to John Schoeffer, in consideration of his being the grandson of
John Faust the first inventor of the art of Printing? this privilege being of
much later date than the other, may be reasonably enough supposed a
retract^tion of the former, which might have been surreptitiously obtained;
especially considering that Faust has the concurrent testimonies of writers and
incontestable facts, but Mentel only brings an old chronicle and the most
precarious grounds to support his pretensions. However the authentickness of
this grant is not only much questioned by the generality of writers, but has
one material objection against it, which is, that the person to whom it was
given, never made any mention or show of it in all the books printed by him at
Strasburgh, which, according to Wimpheling's account, were very numerous. It
seems to me surprising, that if he had really obtained such a noble testimony
of his being the first inventor of Printing, and had been so treacherously
robbed both of the secret and the glory of it by a faithless servant, he had
not made use of his Imperial Majesty's authority (whose subject he was as well
as Faust,) to confirm the honor of the invention upon himself, and the shame
of the theft upon the other. But on the contrary, there is not one book to be
met with, (though we may reasonably think Dr. Mentel was not negligent in such a
search,) that was printed by John Mentel before the year 1473, and even this
was without any mention of the place where it was printed; as appears from the
Speculum morale of Vincentius in folio, which is the oldest book known to bear
his name: whereas Faust and his son-in-law put their names to their impressions
almost sixteen years before that time, as is plain from the Psalmorum Codex
printed ann. 1457. What is still more wonderful, is, that John Mentel never
placed this coat of arms in any of his books as we can find; for the oldest
edition that has it, is the Geographical work of Ptolemy printed by his nieces
son MDXX, that is, 70 years after the invention, 64 years after the grant, and
63 after Faust had begun to print in his own name, even by Mentel's own
confession.

I come now to consider the epigram, and Dr. Mentel's wild inferences from it,
(which he grounds upon a supposition, that the epistles, at the end of which it
is printed, were done at Strasburgh,) from which he would conclude, that from
this city, not only the three first Printers of Paris, to whom they are
inscribed, but also the most celebrated ones of Europe came. His words are
these Ut ita consentaneum sit assevevare, ab ArGentorato velut a ca pite hoc
artificium primo fluxisse atquedimanasse. Hinc ad came suosque magnam partem
Tipographos primores illos quorum meminit Wimphelingus Erhards Windsberg
cujusdam epigramma, quod habetur in calce Epistolarum Cratetis, ubi ubi-vis
gentium (nam locus non ponitur, quanquam putem Strasburg^^ at certe novellis,
and artis infantiam plane redolentibus literarum characteribus impressarum,
etc. p. 15.
: "So truly may it be affirmed, that this art at first flowed from Strasburgh,
as from its fountainhead, whence it dispersed it self abroad: to that city
therefore, and to the greatest part of her first Printers mentioned by
Wimpheling, is that epigram of Erhard Windsbergh directed, which is at the end
of Crates's Epistles; wheresoever these are printed, (for there is no place
named, though I should rather think at Strasburgh,) they being done with some of
the first types, whose rudeness plainly shows the infancy of the art." All this
is said without any foundation, and would scarce have deserved to be inserted
here, but that it afforded me an opportunity of showing the reverse from the
testimony of Chevillier, who examined and compared the the edition of Crates's
Epistles with the first impressions of these three Printers of Paris, which are
given under the first list, and found them exactly alike: they are all done
upon the same paper, with the same types, ink, etc. and demonstrate the infancy
of the art. He adds farther, that there is a greater probability that these
three partners came from Mentz than from Strasburgh, though there is no record
left of the particular place, but of Germany in general; because he finds a
great conformity between their characters and impressions, and those of Peter
Schoeffer; thus he tells us p. 51 of his History of Printing, that the Speculum
of Zamora printed by them at Paris ann. 1475, bears a very great likeness with
St. Jerome's Epistles printed at Mentz 1470; their Rationale Durandi of 1475
with Scheoffer's Speculum Harpianum X Praeceptorum; their edition of Utinus's
lenten Sermons of 1477, with the Scrutinium Scripturarum Pauli Burgensis
printed at Mentz 1478; from which the author reasonably concludes, that it is
more likely they came from the city of Mentz than from that of Strasburgh. I
shall now subjoin at the bottom of the page the epigram, both as it is printed
in the genuine edition of the Epistles, and as Mentel has altered it Erhardi
Windsbergh epigramma ad Germanos librarios egregios, Michaelem, Martinum and
Uldaricum.

Genuine Edition.

Plura licet summae dederis, Alemannia, laudi,

MENTEL.
Plura licet summae dederis, tu Argentina, laudi,
At reor hoc majus te genuisse nihil;
Quod prope divinam summa ex industria fingis
Scribendi hanc artem, multiplicans studia.
Felices igitur, Michael Maremeque semper
Vivite, and Ulrice, ho^ queis opus imprimitur;
Erhardum vestro and non dedignemini amore,
Cui fido semper pectore clausi eritis.

: I need not, I believe, point out to the reader the material difference
between Alemannia and tu Argentina; the latter of which, were it authentic,
would undoubtedly determine the dispute on the side of Strasburgh: but as the
former is exactly according to the edition preserved in the Sorbon library,
ever since it was printed; it is plain that author of the epigram, who was
probably a countryman and intimate acquaintance of the three Printers, and
corrected their editions, adding sometimes a copy of verses in their praise,
did not design to particularise any city, but to give the honor of the art to
the German nation in general. It is likewise probable enough, that they might
not come all three from one and the same city, but perhaps each of them from a
distinct one; in which case the poet must have been forced, either to name them
all, or disobliged one or two of them, or spoil a good epigram; and therefore
rather chose to compliment them under the name of Germans without regard to the
place of their birth.

THOUGH I have now done with Dr. Mentel, yet before I close this controversy it
will not be improper to observe that there are two cities more of Germany,
which have laid claim to this invention, viz. Ausburgh and Russenburgh in
Alsace. The first of these owes its original to a passage misunderstood in the
supplement to Polydore Vergil De rerum inventoribus, attributed by Irenicus to
Gilbert Cognatus, and printed ann. 1604 in 16o, it runs thus: "The art of
Printing is reported to have been discovered by the industry of Peter Schoeffer
of Ausburgh, or invented by some of his relations, and cultivated by him." It Is
plain here, that the author does not say that the art was invented at Ausburgh,
but that the inventor was a native of the place; in which he was certainly
mistaken, seeing Schoeffer, who best knew the place of his own birth, declares
himself in all his inscriptions a native of Gernsheim, a small town upon the
Rhine, a little below Worms. Besides we have no books extant, which are printed
before the year 1471 at Ausburgh, when John Schuster gave an edition of Paul
Orosius's Chronography in folio. The other town, viz. Russenburgh is likewise
said by the same Irenicus to have been esteemed by some writers, the inventress
of the art of Printing; and that it received its name from the noise of the
many Printing-presses at work in it: but this name seems to be more ancient
than that art; and no book printed there has been ever produced, nor any author
of antiquity mentioned it; so that this was only a mistake in Cognatus, if he
was the writer of the book beforementioned. I hope, that by this time enough
has been said, to satisfy the reader, that all which has been urged in favor
of Harlem, Strasburgh, or these two last cities, is unworthy to come into
competition with these noble testimonies and facts we have alleged on the side
of Mentz. I shall therefore with the greatest pleasure dismiss this rough and
tedious path of controversy, and resume the thread of our history.

CHAP. VIII. The Time of the Discovery of Printing.
THE difficulty of fixing the exact time of the discovery arises from these two
reasons: 1. Because;e the inventors made many fruitless trials, and a great
number of maculatures, before they could bring the art to any tolerable degree
of perfection: 2. Because the vast expenses of such a discovery obliged them to
keep it secret as long as possible, or at least 'till they had reimburs'd
themselves in some measure, by finishing the latin bible, which though a great
and expensive work, was most likely to compensate their pains and cost when
finished. This is the foundation of the disagreement between writers upon the
subject; which may however be easily reconciled by attending to the different
epocha's, from which they date the discovery. Some of them, as Wimpheling,
Palmerus, Althamerus, etc. date it from the infancy of the invention of wooden
blocks, and assign the year 1440. Others, as the author of the chronicle of
Cologn, Trithemius, Aventine, and many more, from the invention of fusile types
anno. 1450. Andrew Thevet, Angel Rocha, etc. fix the discovery of the former
method in 1442; whilst others place the time of the second invention in 1453 or
1454, among whom are Apianus and P. Langius. Lastly, Philip Bergomensis and
Peter Ramus assign the year 1458 for the perfection of it. To accommodate this
discrepancy among all these authors, it will be sufficient to say with relation
to the first, that they take their date from the time in which the invention of
wooden blocks was perfected, rather than from its infancy: with respect to the
last, that they thought a ten years interval much too short for the transition
from the infancy of the former to the perfection of the latter method, and
therefore allowed a few years more than their predecessors had done. As for
those who fix the latter invention in 1458, they were such as esteemed the
first printed book to have been the Catholicon printed ann. 1460, or perhaps
the second impression of the bible ann. 1462, or Tully's offices an. 1466, as
Zwinger and others supposed; and allowed some years more for the invention and
perfection of the art. Now it is plain that before the Psalmorum Codex, as we
have hinted, there is not any book known to have been printed with an
imprimatur at the end; and it is equally certain, that the learned knew nothing
of this last book 'till the year 1669, in which Peter Lambeck published the
second part of his catalogue of the imperial library, where this noble monument
is preserved; which is the reason that it is omitted in all the lists of the
first printed books. It Is not strange therefore that these writers, for want of
dates and facts, should be obliged to guess, as well as they could, at the time
of the discovery. However we find that the chronicler of Cologn, Serrarius,
Sebast. Munster, and others after them, well enough reconcile this diversity of
opinions, by assigning the year 1440 for the former invention, and 1450 for the
latter. To these if we add the authority of Trithemius, who certainly had the
best information in this matter, from Peter Schoeffer a principal person in the
invention, it will be evident, that about the year 1440 they began to apply
themselves to cutting or engraving upon wooden blocks, after the Chinese
manner, and printed some books with them; but that after the year 1450 they
found out a more excellent way, for these are Trithemius's words in the famous
passage quoted in chap. 3 Post haec inventis successerunt subtiliora,
inveneruntque modum fundendi formas omnium Latini alphabeti literarum, etc.
, viz. of casting separate metal types: this method they might have been
devising and trying before that time, i. e. during some part of the first ten
years; though they continued still printing after the old way, 'till they had
quite perfected the new one; either to bring in a continual supply of money
necessary, or perhaps to keep the world from prying into the new discovery
wherein they were engaged.

I have said nothing hitherto of the dutch writers, who to make the time of
this invention agree with Junius's story of Faust's pretended theft, have put
it back, some above ten, others twenty years: how little credit they merit in
this particular is already shown; and the reader will be still more convinced
of it, when he sees what shifts they are reduced to, for want of authorities to
oppose to the vast number of writers quoted on Faust's side, not one of whom
ever thought of fixing this remarkable epoch beyond the year 1440.

THEIR first authority is the inscription set over Laurence Coster's door by
one of the citizens of Harlem, which is mentioned by all the dutch writers, and
says that he found out this art ann. 1430: but this is of too recent a date to
be of any weight.

SCRIVERIUS in his apology against Naude makes the discovery two years older,
and gives us a Chronographic verse hIC fago cXsC VI. ptas La VreatI CVsplde for
Mas.

Scriver. Apolog. pro patr. contra Neudeum.


, whose numerical letters make up the date of MCCCCXXVIII, Boxhorn carries it
still farther back, viz. to the year 1420.

BUT as the two former dates were affirmed without any foundation, this author
has endeavored to confirm his own with something, that might bear the
appearance of authority; and to reconcile it with the other two, by affirming
that Coster began to lay the foundation of this art ann. 1420, though he did not
perfect it 'till ten years after. The author, upon whose testimony he would
have us believe it, is one Joseph Karro, a Jewish Rabbi, who in a book entitled
Shulkan Aruch or Mensa instructa, extracted by him out of another Jewish book
called Arbugh Thurim, i. e. quatuor ordines, tells us of an old chronicle
printed at Venice A. M. 5188, which answers to our year MCCCCXXVIII. This book
of Rabbi Joseph he owns that he could never meet with; yet he infers from what
is said there, that there could be no printing at Venice at that time, unless
Harlem had it some years before. I shall content my self with giving Boxhorn's
words in the margin Circa annum 1420 prima nobilissimae artis Typographicae
fundamenta a Laurentio Costero Harlemi poni coepta. Quod in annum hujus saeculi
vigesimum, non tricesimum, aut quadragesimum, ut fit vulgo, hanc artem
periclitatam velim, suadet Rabbi Josephus, qui in chronico suo exemplar omnium
vetustissimum Venetiis excusum refert anno Judaico 5188, Christi anno
MCCCCXXVIII. Josephum istum diu quaesitum videre non licuit: Chronicon haud
dubie illud est quod Mensa instructa inscribitur; liber est ex Arba Turim
excerptus per Rabbi Joseph Carro, and in formam thesium and conclusionum
redactus; adjectae sunt novellae glossae and observationes de jure, ritibus and
consuet^dine horum temporum per Mosem Iserles: tertium impressus Cracoviae anno
Christi 1594, indicante in Bibliotheca Rabbinica rerum and scriptorum
orientalium peritissimo Johanne Buxtorfio. Locum hunc certe velim accuratius
aspiciant, qui habent.
; especially since neither his Rabbi nor himself have gained any credit in this
particular; as it would indeed be wonderful, if a Jew should be believed before
the concurrent testimonies of all the learned men in Europe. If he wrote what
Boxhorn quotes out of him, he either was prodigiously mistaken, or affirmed it
(as is too common with his nation) contrary to his knowledge: though if we should
deny that he ever wrote thus, I cannot see with what reason Boxhorn could resent
it; since he neither saw the book himself, nor gives the author's name from
whom he took it. However leaving him and the rest of the Dutch writers to
search for more authentic proofs than what they have hitherto alleged, let us
return to our own, which if we dare rely upon, as we have the greatest reason
to do, it will be plain, that this art was first attempted about the year 1440,
and about ten years after happily perfected by John Faust and Peter Schoeffer
in the city of Mentz; that though the former imperfect method was known in China
some hundred years before we had it, yet this latter, the only one which
deserves the name of printing, was neither known nor practiced 'till those two
persons had communicated it to some of their servants, by whom it was divulged
and dispersed over Europe and even beyond it. This will appear more evident in
the next and subsequent chapters.

CHAP. IX. Of the first books printed by Faust and Schoeffer.
THERE has been frequent occasion of mentioning the Catholicon, as the first
trial of the art of Printing, according to Trithemius's testimony; but as it is
our design to speak of those only, which are done with separate metal types,
and bear some certain date or mark of the Printer; I shall suspend the account
of it, 'till I come to treat of its second impression by the same Faust and
Schoeffer ann. 1460.

'T is certain that if only that book, which bears the oldest date, is to be
esteemed the first printed; the book of psalms so often mentioned will bid the
fairest for the first rank. Nevertheless I can see no reason to depart so far
from the testimonies of Trithemius and the Chronicle of Cologn, as not to allow
the preference to the Latin Bible, which, as they tell us, was the first book,
to which the pious authors of this art thought fit to consecrate their labors.
In this opinion they have been followed by many learned and judicious writers
both ancient and modern; particularly Malincrot, Chevillier, de la Caille, Paul
Pater and Watson. I shall therefore select the strongest of their reasons, add
a few remarks of my own upon them, and leave the decision to the reader.

FIRST with respect to Trithemius's testimony; which, I think, is
unexceptionable, seeing he affirms nothing but what he had from Peter
Schoeffer's mouth: He plainly enough intimates, that the Bible was their first
work, when he says that the art was found out by degrees: that after they had
finished the discovery in speculation, and came to put it in practice, they
were involved in many difficulties: that A primo inventionis suae, etc.
impressari namque b^^^^am. Trithem. loco su^ra citato.
soon after or from the beginning of this invention, when they went about
printing the Bible, before they had finished the third quaternion (or quire of
four sheets,) the charges amounted already to four thousand florins, a
prodigious sum in those days. If we duly consider these words, we cannot but
conclude the Bible to have been the first book they engaged in. Our author
indeed mentions not the year in which it was printed; but this might proceed
from forgetfulness or want of information. However since such a work could not
be finished in a short time, when the art was in its infancy, the hands but few
and unacquainted with the several branches of composition, imposition,
correction, distribution, etc. we may suppose the invention to have been
perfected in speculation about the year 1450, and yet to have required some
time before it could be put in practice, by reason of the difficulties arising
in it; so that it will be reasonable to allow a year or two more, before the
impression of the bible could be completed. This may in all probability be the
reason why Trithemius, who is always very exact in his chronicles, and mentions
the year of any fact, when he is sure of it, rather chooses to make use of a
more general expression in this case, viz. his temporibus about this time, when
he speaks of the year 1450: if we recollect that he expresses himself in the
same words in his first Chronicle, we shall be obliged either to allow a larger
scope to them; or else suppose that the Catholicon, which was done in wood, and
the Bible printed with metal types, were finished at the same time, which would
be absurd.

THE Manuscript Cologn Chronicle tells us, that it was printed in the Jubilee
year 1450, in a large character, such as is used in the impressions of Missals
or Mass books, which answers to our Double Pica. This Chronicle was written in
high dutch ann. 1499; the author of which acquaints us, that he had the
particulars of this invention from Ulric Zel, an old bookseller then living at
Cologn. As the original is not so well understood here, I shall subjoin at the
bottom of the page, the whole passage in latin, as I find it translated by
Malinkrot Ars primum inventa in Germaniae urbe Moguntina ad Rhenum circa annum
1440; and ab eo donec scriberetur 14^0, inventioni ejus corumque quae ad illam
pertinent, opera impensa fuit; eoque anno, qui Jubilaeus fuit, coeptum fuit
primim libros imprimere; primusque qui excuderetur liber Liblta fuere Latina,
impressaque ea sunt scriptura grandiori, quali hodie Mssilia imprimi solent. --
initium and progressum memorati artisicii ex honorabilis magistri Ulric Zel
Hanoviensis narrantis ore cognovi, qui etiam nunc hoc anno 14^9 Coloniae
Typographum agit. V. d. Malinkrot de art Typog. p. 37.
: the words are to this purpose, "that the art of Printing was found out at
Mentz -- ann. 1440: that from that time to 1450 they were employed in
perfecting it: that they were began to print books in the Jubilee year: and that
the first that was printed was the Latin Bible, in a large character, etc."
Here Ulric Zel's words are to be taken in a lax sense; for he is far from
saying that any thing in this kind, much less the bible, was finished in the
year 1450; but only that they began then to set about printing it: how long it
was before they completed it, or what date it bore, is what he neither does,
nor perhaps could so well inform us of. However, though we cannot be certain
either from him, or Trithemius, when this noble work was perfected; yet it is
manifest from their restimony, that, except some maculatures and small trials,
the Bible was the first considerable piece printed by Faust.

I am not ignorant that Mr. Mattaire in his Annals has declared himself of the
contrary opinion; but as he has not confuted any of the abovementioned
testimonies, though he must have read them in the authors before quoted, nor
given any reason for his departing from them; I have given preference to the
judgment of so many learned writers confirmed by two such considerable
testimonies, to his single opinion. I apprehend but two tolerable objections
against this; the first is, that not one of these bibles is known to be extant:
The second is, that Faust cannot probably be supposed to have begun with so
large and expensive a volume, when a smaller would have been more proper for an
essay, and brought him a more speedy gain. To the first I answer, 1. That this
bible being so full of abbreviations, etc. in imitation of the old way of
writing, and difficult to be read, might undergo the same fate with many other
books both MS. and others, to be thrown by and destroyed, when the fairer and
more legible impressions came in vogue: 2. The learned Saubert in his Oration
de Bibliotheca Reipublicae Noribergensis tells us, that he had seen no less
than eight copies of them in the Norican library, without date, colophon, or
any other mark of their being printed by Faust. As I have not been able to
procure Saubert's book, I must content my self with giving the reader the
passage out of Paul Pater, in which this is mentioned: it is as follows, Biblia
Latina, quorum translatio Divo Hieronymo vulgo tribuitur, circa 1450 and
sequentem Moguntiae in membrana impressa, quorum Faustus exemplar nummis
uncialibus seu thaleris septingentis quinquaginta Parisus venum dederat, ut
supra ex Abbate Spanhemensi narravimus, inter primordia merito numerari
Cornelius Beughen memorat (Iocunab. Tyopgraph. Amsterd. ann. 1688 edui)
similiter Henricus Salmuth alium Bibliorum codicem ibidem lucem vidisse
denarrat, cui haec in fine verba erant apposita: Praesens rati^^^lis Divinorum
codex consummatus est per Johannem Faust civem Mogunt. and Petrum Gernsheim.
etc. ann. 1459, etc. Sed errare hac part Salmuthum, quod rationale illud
sacrum scripturam esse putet, cum tantum breve aliquod Guillelmi Duranti
scriptum sit, quod se quoque possidere Bern. a Malinkrot refert. Ne ue tamen
prorsus negaverim Biblis Latina hoc ipso anno vulgata typis denuo fuisse,
quandoquidem Job. Saubertus fatetur se in bibliotheca Norica octo exempla ria
vidisse, ac subscriptionis Fustmianae notis caruisse haud dubie ob causam paulo
ante a nobis adductam. P Pater de German. Mirac. Lipsiae ann. 1710. page 75.
"The Latin Bible, commonly supposed to have been translated by St. Jerome,
printed at Mentz upon vellum about 1450 or the following year, a copy of which
Faustus sold at Paris for 750 crowns, as we related out of Trithemius, is
justly reckoned among the first beginnings of this art by Corn. Beughen (in his
Incunab. Typograph. Amsterd. ann. 1688.) Henry Salmuth likewise mentions
another Bible published ann. 1459, at the end of which are these words; This
present Rationale, etc. was finished at Mentz by John Faust, etc. but Salmuth
is doubtless mistaken in taking this book for the Bible, of which it was only a
short explanation. A copy of this Bern. Malinkrot tells us that he had by him.
I would not however be too positive that there was not a Latin Bible printed in
the same year, seeing John Saubert owns that he had seen eight copies of it in
the Norican library, without Faustus's colophon, undoubtedly for the reason
beforementioned, (viz. in order to sell 'em for Manuscripts.)" From this
passage it appears, that there are eight bibles without Faust's mark preserved
in that library, and seen by Saubert; though both he and P. Pater took them for
the second impression, in which they are certainly mistaken: 1. Because this
was printed ann. 1462, and not ann. 1459: 2. Because it is so far from having
been printed without a colophon, that it has one of the fullest and plainest
that Faust ever used at the end of any of his books: the reader will see it,
when we come to the edition itself. But 3. it is not impossible but that there
may be still more of these copies in some other libraries, as yet undiscovered.
The only intelligence which we had concerning these eight, is owing to Saubert;
neither would these gentlemen have believed that there had been a Psalmorum
Codex printed at Mentz ann. 1457, though assured of it by Trithemius and Zel, had
not Peter Lambeck the Emperor's library keeper 28 years ago told us, that he
met with it in that famous library. I have been likewise assured from the mouth
of a gentleman of credit, that a friend of his had seen one abroad with the
date of 1457, and farther that 'twas his opinion 'twould be brought to England.
How many authors have had a notion that Tully's Offices was the first printed
book? yet time has produced no less than four printed before it, exclusive of
the bible now in question; and may yet discover more concerning this.

I come now to the second objection so much insisted upon by some; viz. that
it is improbable Faust would begin his first essays with a volume so large and
expensive, when a smaller would have answered his purpose much better, and
brought an immediate gain. My reply is, 1. That the great expense at first
consisted in purchasing such a quantity of materials as the business required,
and not in printing of the first book, which was inconsiderable compared with
that; consequently a smaller volume would have been too slender a reimbursement
for such great sums expended: Besides we have shown that they took up money of
Guttenbergh for buying of parchment, etc. and were not so straightened as before.
2. As Faust designed to sell as many of his first printed books as he could for
manuscripts, in order to make up the cost which he had been at; it is obvious
that he must pitch upon some considerable and valuable book, before his art was
discovered, and where could he fix upon one more adapted to his purpose than
this? I will not insist upon the piety of the persons so conspicuous in all
their inscriptions, (though our age may call it superstition,) which might have a
great share in determining their choice. I shall only add, that as it was by no
means advisable for him to sell any of his first essays, left they should
betray his invention; so it was most prudent to make them upon the first leaves
of the Bible, which if they succeeded, would in time make him ample amends; and
if they did not, the loss was no greater than if they had been tried upon a
Donatus or a Primer. Besides none of our authors have affirmed that he began to
print the bible before he had perfected the art both in theory and practice;
and made a sufficient number of maculatures and other trials, which it was the
most prudent way to burn as soon as printed off. I shall leave this discourse
of the first bible to the reader's choice, either to close in with, or dissent
from us in allowing it the first rank; and proceed now to the remainder of our
proposed list. It will be necessary however to acquaint him, although we have
given the preference to that sacred book upon the testimonies of so many
ancient and modern writers, though it bears no date, yet in the following list I
am about to give him of these first impressions of Faust, we chiefly inquire
after such as carry either date or some other certain mark of the year in which
they were printed: for as to those that do not, I shall speak of them
afterward, and show that those authors who thought to have found out their
date, have proved to have been in an error; which will be a sufficient reason
for us not to depend upon any others of the like nature.

NEXT to the Bible we find five several impressions, which have certainly been
made between the years 1457 and 1466. The first of these, which as we hinted,
is omitted in all the lists of the first books that have been printed before
Lambeck's catalogue of the Vienna library, is the Psalmorum Codex printed at
Mentz upon Vellum anno 1457; concerning this, what has been said already will
suffice, the colophon of it is in the fourth chapter, p. 29.

THE second is the Rationale Divinorum Officiorum, written by William Durand,
printed at Mentz upon Vellum two Years after the Psalter, viz. anno 1459 by
John Faust and Peter de Gernsheim or Schoeffer; Malinkrot, who knew nothing of
the Psalter, reckons it the first printed Book next to the Bible; and tells us
that he purchased one of them, which had formerly belonged to a Monastery of
Franciscan Monks, destroyed by the civil Wars, the inscription of which is very
near the same with that of the Psalter. This Rationale is likewise in the Earl
of Pembroke's Library, where I saw it; it is beautifully printed in Folio, upon
Vellum, and is a singular Beauty as to Press-work.

THE Supposition of Malinkrot and others that this was the first printed Book,
was the reason that Father L'Abbe a learned Jesuit began his List of printed
Books from the Years of its date, viz. 1459 to 1500. and the author of the
Supplement to Bellarmin's Ecclesiastical Writers makes this remark upon it,
That Anno 1459, John Faustus having discovered the art of Printing, first
printed the Book of Guill. Durand de Officiis Ecclesiasticis in the city of
Mentz. These authors were certainly in the right, seeing no book was then known
of an older date: but since the second part of Trithemius's Chronicle, and the
second volume of the Imperial-library have been published, we must look some
years back for the first impression, and give that rank to a more noble work.

THE Third is the Catholicon, a Latin vocabulary, printed at Mentz anno 1460.
the second time; for the first impression was done upon wood. This Book is
likewise in the Earl of Pembroke's library, where I saw it, it is in a large
folio, and beautifully printed. We have given the inscription of it in the
fourth chap. p. 30, in which though the printer's name is not expressed, yet it
was done by Faust and Schoeffer, both from the similitude of its character,
paper, etc. with that of their other works, and because there were at that time
no other printers either at Mentz or any where else. This Catholicon is a kind
of Grammar, compiled by John of Genoa a Dominican Friar anno 1286. It is
divided into four parts, the last of which contains a dictionary of Latin words
digested alphabetically. There have been several editions of it in folio, as
Chevillier tells us, who saw two of them; one, very old and without date; the
other printed at Paris anno 1506. by Jodocus Badius. Another impression of it
is done at Lions by Antony Du Ry anno 1520, and augmented by Peter Gille.
Furetiere therefore was led into a palpable error, when he affirmed after Dr.
Mentel and Father Jacob a Carmelite, that the first printed books known in
Europe were Durandus de Ritibus Ecclesiae printed anno 1461, a bible printed
anno 1462, St. Austin de Civitate Dei, and Tully's Offices; seeing here are no
less than four printed books before the oldest of them; besides this book de
Ritibus Ecclesiae was not written by William Durand, but by John Stephen
Durant, who was first president of the parliament of Toulouse, and is therefore
a different book from the Durand's Rationale we are now speaking of, and of a
much later date.

THE fourth is the second edition of the Latin Bible printed anno 1462. in
folio with the following inscription at the end Presens hoc opus finitum ac
completum and ad eusebiam Dei industria in civitate Moguntina per Johannem Fust
civem and retrum Shoefer de Gernsheim clericum Dioecesis ejusdem est
consummatum anno incarnationis Dominicae MCCCCLX. I in vigilil Assumptionis
gloriosae virginis Mariae.
. "This present work was finished and perfected for the service of God in the
city of Mentz by John Fust citizen, and Peter Schoeffer de Gernsheim clerk of
the same diocese, it was completed in the year of our Lord 's incarnation
MCCCCLXII on the eve of the assumption of the glorious virgin Mary." I have
seen one in the library of Dr. Mead, and another at the late Mr. Wooodman's
bookseller, in Vellum, and Chevillier saw two more at Paris in two volumes. Of
this bible Walchius Walchius decas fabularum generis humani printed at
Strasburgh 1609 in 4to. page 181
relates a story, which ought to be mentioned here, as far as respects the
common opinion. Faust went to Paris with some copies of it finely illuminated,
where he sold one of them for 750 crowns, and another for 500; till at length
he reduced his price to 50 and 40 crowns. The great quantity which he sold, and
the exact likeness of every copy, made it suspicious that they were done by a
more easy and expeditious way than that of writing; whereupon the buyers
thinking themselves imposed upon, began a prosecution which obliged him to fly
the country, and return to Mentz. Thus far Walchius, who says nothing of
Faust's being accused of magic, as some others affirm. What relates to the
person of Faust will be best considered in the next chapter. As to the bible
itself, it is my opinion, that the reason why the generality of authors have
thought this second edition to have been that which he sold for MS. is, that
they scarce knew of any other book printed before it Mr. Le Gallois in his
treatise of the finest libraries page 16^. tells us that there was nothing
printed before this bible of 1462, which Faust brought to Paris. [quoiqui, en
soit il est certain qu' on ne voit rien a'imprime avaunt c^tte Bible que Faust
apporta luy meme a Paris] Father de St. Raomuld affirms likewise in his Thesaur
Chronolog. page 324. that we have nothing printed before the year 1462: and the
great Naude, who in his addition to the history of Lewis XI. says that he had
seen about 15000 old books in 20 or 30 of the most celebrated libraries in and
about the city of Paris, and has writ a treatise ex professo upon this
subject, in the afore-mentioned book, chap 7. page 268. expresses himself thus;
"but we have no book printed before 1462; and page ^89 he says that we must
needs suppose them (the first printers) to have made an infinite number of
proofs and maculatures, before they could justify, and get all their implements
fitted together; after which they began at length to compose, not Tully's
Offices, etc. but the great bible in fol^o, which was finished anno 146^, Vide
Chevillier page 17.
: but for my own part I cannot suppose that Faust would offer a book to sale
for a written one, which had such an inscription, as must infallibly discover
the cheat. It Is urged, that he might print a certain number of them without
this, and after the discovery, reprint the last sheet with this colophon at the
end: but this is improbable upon two accounts; first, he had already printed
three books with inscriptions, viz. the Psalter, the Rationale, and the
Catholicon; all which import particularly that they were not done with pen and
ink or any writing tool, but by a fine new invented art of casting Letters, and
printing with them. Now since some of these must of necessity have been known
in France long before this year; it was impossible to have deceived them by any
but the first impression, unless we did suppose that he kept the three former
unsold and unseen; which would be most absurd to imagine. But secondly it is
plain that his design in selling them for MSS. was to reimburse himself for the
vast charges which he had been at in devising this invention, preparing all the
necessary materials, making essays, etc. Such expenses must have reduced him
above twelve years before this to the necessity of a recruit, seeing he had
perfected the new invention, and began to print with it on or soon after the
year 1450. as has been fully proved; nor can we in any probability suppose that
he should work on for twelve whole years successively and print three editions,
two of which were very large, without vending them; especially since he is
reported by most authors to have enriched himself exceedingly by this time, and
consequently wanted no such strategem? If I could have obtained with all my
endeavors any certain information of the year in which he went to Paris, it
would have determined the dispute. However, if I may be allowed a conjecture,
since we find by the unanimous consent of writers that the art was perfected in
the year 1450, and no books printed in his name till anno 1457 as yet known:
Faust might most probably spend these seven years in Printing, illuminating and
selling his first Bible; after which, his new art being discovered, he thought
it in vain to keep it secret longer; and therefore in his next book gave the
world an account of his method, as we find in the Psalmorum Codex and those
that followed it. What confirms my conjecture is, that Guttenburgh, who was
prosecuted by Faust for the moiety of the money expended, and gave a deed
bearing date 1455 for the payment, pursuant to the judge's determination,
instead of complying with it, escaped to Strasburgh, and left his partner in
the lurch, this we may reasonably suppose, reduced Faust to such streights, as
obliged him to go to Paris with what books he had, in order to sell them to the
best advantage. These reasons induce me to think that it was the first, and not
the second bible, which Faust sold at such extraordinary rates: The reader is
at his liberty to judge as he pleases in this matter.

THE fifth is the Tully's Offices printed at Mentz ann. 1465; though some
editions have a later date by one, and others by two years, all of which are
printed at Mentz, with the same inscription in every respect, as we shall show
immediately. The Right Honorable the Earl of Oxford showed me this book; it is
a small 4to, and very beautifully printed, and well preserved. Sir Thomas
Bodley had this in his library, which he presented to the university of Oxford,
where it is still kept. Dr. James published a catalogue of all Sir Thomas's
books entitled Catalogus Bibliothecae Bodleianae in 4to anno 1605, in the 197
page of which book we find this Tully's Offices with the following inscription,
Ejusdem liber de Officiis, etc. an. 1465. About 70 years after this, Dr. Thomas
Hyde published his catalogue of all the books in the university library,
printed at Oxford in fol. ann. 1674, in which he gives the date of the book
page 162; which is the same with the former, and confirmed by Antony Wood's
history of that university, printed likewise ann. 1674, page 228 Immo anno
Domini 1465 ut fert aliud exemplar in Bodleiana [bibliotheca.]
. Mr. Beughen mentions the same date in his list of the first editions Moguntia
in 4to ann. 1465, quae postmodum sunt recusa ibidem, an. 1467 in 4to, and Romae
1468, etc. Incunab. Typograph. 46.
, and tells us, that it was reprinted at Mentz two years after, viz. ann. 1467,
and at Rome 1468. Father 1'Abbe Nov. Biblioth. MSS. lib. septim. page 353.
speaks of one which he saw in the French king's library dated 1466, and
Chevillier saw another in the library of the Mazarin-college, with these words
in red letters Praesens M. Tulli clarissimum opus Joan. Fust Moguntinus civis,
non atramento, plumali canna neque aerea, sed art quadam perpulchra, manu
Petri de Gernsheim, pueri mei feliciter effeci. Finitum an. MCCCCLXVI, quarta
die mensis sebruarii. Chevil. p. 18.
This present noble work Tully's Offices was done by John Fust citizen of Mentz
not with pen and ink, etc. but by a new art, etc. by the hands of my boy Peter
de Gernsheim ann. MCCCCLXVI on the fourth of February. Several eminent writers,
as I have already hinted, have esteemed this the first printed book; among whom
is Peter Ramus or de la Ramee, Royal professor of Mathematics in the
university of Paris, who had this edition in his library, and affirmed it to be
the first work produced by the art of Printing Cum primum Typographiae exemplum
Moguntiae editum sit anno 1466 -- ut constat ex Ciceronis Officiis, quae primum
omnium librorum typis aeneis impressa sunt: Exemplar Officiorum istorum habeo
in membrana impressorum. P. Ramus Schol. Mathem. lib. 2.
in this he has been followed by our countryman Anth. Wood in the book before
quoted; by Pasquier in his Recherches de la France, lib. 4. chapter 4; and by
several others. It Is very probable that the edition of 1465 and 1466 may be the
same, the last sheet only reprinted; which may be easily known by comparing
them together; and it were to be wished, that some of the Curioso's of Oxford
would take that trouble, since they are both there, as appears from Ant. Wood's
list.

AFTER the finishing of this book, Faust is supposed to have died, or lost his
sight (as some report,) or at least to have grown so rich, that he left the
business wholly to his son-in-law Peter Schoeffer, who then instructed his son
John in that art. We find no more books printed in Faust's name, all the rest
being in Peter Schoeffer's, some of whose inscriptions are given in the fourth
chapter.

I have dwelt somewhat longer upon these noble relics of our first printers,
because I am sensible of the great value, which the curious and learned have
for them.

I come now to those of other, but fictitious dates, which it will not be
improper to say something of, in order to prevent the reader from being
deceived or puzzled by them.

AMONG all the apocryphal editions that are to be met within any library,
exclusive of those which are supposed to have been printed with wooden blocks,
and discoursed of already in a distinct chapter, that which bears the oldest
date is the Book of Sermons de Sanctis by Leonard de Utino. John Godfrey
Olearius, Lutheran minister of St. Mary's church at Hall in Saxony, says it is
still preserved in the library of that church, and dated 1446, though there be no
mention of the place where it was printed: the reader will find his account of
it quoted in the margin Leonardus de Utino, ordin. praedic. -- Ejus sermonum de
Sanctis liber sub ipsa Typographicae artis incunabula anno 1446 impressus,
absque tamen loci mentione, habetur in bibliotheca templi Mariani nostri Hall.
Confer. Dn. parentis Halygraph. Appendice T. t. t. 1. B. Sermones ejusdem
Quadragesimales and Dominicales ann. 1479 prodierunt. Abac. patrolog. p. 291.
, in his book de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, published under the title of
Abacus Patrologicus in 8vo at Jena 1673, in which he quotes the testimony of
his father Godfrey Olearius, who wrote the history of Hall, printed at Leipsick
in 4to. ann. 1667. Chevillier observes very justly, that Olearius has
mentioned neither the size nor printer of this ancient book; and that all who
have since spoken of it, rely upon his testimony: he thinks therefore that it
ought to have been more nicely enquired into, since if the date be true, it
entirely overturns the received opinion that this art was not perfected 'till
the year 1450: the reasons of his suspecting it is, because Utinus lived in
Italy ann. 1445, according to Possevinus, and can hardly be supposed to have
had such credit in Germany, as that his sermons should be printed after a new
method scarce known to above five or six persons: he is therefore of opinion,
that the book is a manuscript, or that Olearius has guessed at the date, or
which is most likely, that this is the date of the compiling, not of the
printing of it.

MR. Mattaire has taken the pains to solve the greatest part of these doubts,
and given the following account of it Jam dabo tibi, lector, quod in votis
habuit Cheviliierus; unde editio tantae vetustatis specie venerabilis
testimonio novo certior fiat and notior. Vir quidam literarum peritus -- dum
Aquisgrani peregrinabatur ibi in Regularium coenobio vidit librum supra
memoratum, in fol. ex quo descripsit haec, quae in libri ipsius fine
adjiciuntur.

Expliciunt sermo^es aurei de Sanctis per totum annum, quos compilavit mgr.
Leonardus de
Utino sacre Theology doctor, ordinis fratrum predicator. ad instanciam and
complacentiam
magnifice civitatis Utine^sis ac nobilium virorum ejusdem MCCCCXLVI in vigilia
beatissimi
patris nostri Dominici ofessoris, ad laudem and gl'am.
Dei omnipotentis and totius curie triumphantis.
Libri ipsius character impolitus and rudis; abbreviaturisque frequentibus adeo
refertus, ut ejus lectio nequaquam sit, quam illorum Moguntiae annis 1459 and
1460 excusorum facilior. Annal. Typogr. p. 25.


; "That a very curious and learned gentleman of his acquaintance met with a
copy of it at Aix la Chapelle in a monastery of regular monks, out of which he
transcribed the following colophon printed at the end of it, in English thus;
Thus end the golden sermons upon the Saints throughout the whole year, compiled
by Master Leonard de Utino, doctor of divinity, of the order of the friars
Preachers, at the instance and entreaty of the magnificent city of Utino, and
the noble citizens thereof MCCCCXL VI, on the eve of our blessed father
Dominick confessor, to the praise and glory of almighty God, and of the whole
triumphant court." Mr. Mattaire adds, that the characters of it are very rude
and ill shaped and so full of abbreviations, that they are as difficult to
read, as those printed at Mentz ann. 1459 and 1460.

THIS makes it abundantly plain, that though the book carries the abovementioned
date, yet it bears testimony that the compiling and not the printing of it, is
there intended; so that not only the difficulty disappears, but Chevillier's
conjecture is manifestly supported: And Mr. Mattaire seems entirely of this
opinion, and besides instances in a book or two which he has, whose dates as
he assures us, were those of their being compiled; though the obscurity of their
inscription, might possibly lead an unwary reader to take it for that of its
impression: and indeed it is an unreasonable supposition, that Printing could
have been brought to such a degree of perfection at that time, against the
general testimony of writers: besides neither the abbreviations, nor the
rudeness of the character, can be a sufficient index of their antiquity,
seeing, as he observes, they continued in use among some eminent Printers even
beyond the year 1500. In the next place I shall mention some editions, whose
dates are certainly proved to be wrong. The first is the Regula Pastoris of
Pope Gregory; a copy of which is in the French king's library, with this
inscription supposed to be written at the end; Tentamentum Fausti, an essay of
John Faust ann. 1459: now it is plain from what has been said before that Faust
was so far from making any essays at that time, that he had already printed
several perfect editions, Mr. Mattaire gives us this account of it p. 22. that
he met with a book in 4to in the king's library at Paris, without the name of
either place or Printer, only with this title, Liber Regulae pastoralis
Gregorii papae ad Johannem episcopum Ravenensem: at the beginning of which
Gabriel Naude had written two verses to the reader with his own hand,
intimating that book to have been certainly printed by Faust at Mentz, because
the mark of the paper which is the head and horns of an heifer, is an
infallible criterium of Faust's books. And an advertisement in which he
confirms his assertion, from the rudeness of the types, the want of diphthongs,
and some other circumstances that favor the infancy of the art; and concludes,
that Faust would not put his name, etc. to it, 'till his frequent essays had
emboldened him to make himself public, as he did afterward in the Durand's
Rationale of 1459, Catholicon, etc.

MR. Mattaire does indeed prove plainly enough, that the rudeness of the types,
and want of dates, names, etc. continued some considerable time after the
discovery of the art, and consequently that that could be no certain mark of
its being one of Faust's first essays: however as nothing certain can be
affirmed concerning this book, we shall dwell no longer upon it. I have seen
Aeneas Sylvius's letters printed by Koelhoff of Lubeck, which is certainly
antedated, for this reason, several dates in the letters being ten years older
than the date of the book itself. There is another of his books in fol. in the
library of the Sorbon, with a false date at the end of these words, Flores de
diversis sermonibus and epistolis B. Bernardi per me Joan. Koelhoff de Lubeck
coloniensem civem impressi an. MCCCC, feliciter finiunt: for it is plain the art
was not so much as thought of at that time, nor perfected 'till 50 years after:
but what demonstrates the falseness of the date is, that this John Koelhoff was
scarce born then, since he printed the works of N. Gerson in 4 vol. in fol. at
Cologn ann. 1483, which are of the same make and character as the Flores
abovementioned, as Chevillier p. 10 and 11 observes, who therefore thinks that
the following numbers LXXXII were omitted at the end of MCCCC. The same author
mentions two or three editions more of the same nature, the last of which is
the Manipulus Curatorum of Guy Mout Rocher with the following uncommon date at
the end Completus Parisiis anno Domini millesimo CCCC vicesimo tertio, amen.
Chevil. p. 11.
Printed at Paris in the year one thousand CCCC and twenty three, amen: it is
plain that the art was not brought to Paris 'till the year 1470, as shall be
shown in its place; so that the last C must have been taken up by the balls, or
lost some other way. Upon the whole it may be esteemed a general rule that all
dates before the year 1450 are false; and this is corroborated with the
suffrage of all learned writers upon this subject. In the mean time as it is
not reasonable to imagine, that Faust and Schoeffer could be altogether idle
from the year 1452, in which they are supposed to have finished their first
Bible, to 1457, in which they published the Psalter, (unless we can suppose
that Faust's lawsuit with Guttenbergh, and his journey and stay in France,
could take him up five whole years, and that his ingenious son did not venture
upon any work by himself;) if time and industry should, as we may reasonably
hope it may, discover any more of those old and valuable monuments of the
infancy of the art; provided such impressions bear either a certain date or
mark of their being done at Mentz, and by our Protodaedali before the
dispersion of their servants, or even after that time; I doubt not but the
learned will allow them a proper rank in the lists, which shall be published
hereafter.

CHAP. X. Remarkable Occurrences between the year 1450, and the Divulgation of
the Art.
THOUGH I proposed to avoid all unnecessary repetitions, yet this chapter being
designed as a short recapitulation of the history of the first twelve years,
the thread of which has been unavoidably interrupted by controversy; and to
introduce some material occurrences, which could not properly be inserted in
any other chapter, or such as may have escaped the readers memory; I find the
impossibility of joining these notable events together, without interspersing
them with most of those already touched upon: and this has rendered an apology
before hand highly necessary.

I begin with the year 1450, in which it is agreed by most authors, that the art
was perfected in theory and practice, the inventors having prepared their tools
and materials, and made a great number of essays; thinking they might with
safety attempt some considerable volume: Their next care was to carry on the
business without danger of being discovered: to this end they admitted as few
servants as possible into any part of the secret, and such only upon whose
sidelity they might depend, engaging them to the greatest secrecy by an oath.
This being done they allotted to them their several provinces; but concealed
every branch of Letterfounding and composing. If my authority be required,
since all our accounts relating to these beginnings are so obscure and
imperfect; I answer, that this may reasonably be inferred from a remarkable
passage out of the learned Hen. Pantaleon, a physician of Basil, part of which
I have already quoted in a former chapter, as far as it related to Faust and
Schoeffer's being the authors of this art; the remainder of it is as follows
Erat enim ars illa primo abscondita and pauculis manifestata; litteras enim in
sacculis clausis secum in Officinae ferebant, ac dum abeunt, auferebant; donec
temporis successu ars aucta atque plurimum illustrata fuit. Do illustribus
German. part. 2. page 397.
: "This art was at the first kept very secret and communicated to but very few;
for they (Faust and Schoeffer) tied up the types in bags, which they brought
into the work-room, and took away when they went out, 'till at length in
process of time the business increasing caused the Art to be divulged." All the
authors quoted by us agree with Pantaleon about their keeping the Art with all
imaginable secrecy, but scarce any have informed us of this circumstance, of
their carrying their types with them to and out of the work-room; which would
have been a vain precaution, had they entrusted any but themselves in the
compositor's part. However it is evident that the whole secret did not consist
therein; the cutting the Punches, sinking them into the Matrices, making the
Moulds and casting the Letters, might be still a secret to any one that had
been entrusted so far as to go through all the branches of the business of
Printing; and he must have been a person of a surprising genius who could have
found out the mystery of Letter-founding by barely seeing the letters,
therefore the keeping that part to themselves was making it a greater secret
than all the oaths they could bind them with.

THE next remarkable occurrence is that of their admitting John Guttenbergh a
wealthy goldsmith into partnership with them, as it is related by the last
named author, by Salmuth, and others quoted in the third chapter. This
gentleman finding his neighbor Faust engaged in a new and advantageous
invention, which he wanted money to carry on, and attracted by a prospect of
gain, offered his purse and assistance upon good terms to Faust; who gladly
accepted the proposal. But Guttenbergh pursuing his own private rather than the
common interest, and having attained some insight into the art, began to object
that Faust had converted some of the money to his own uses, and refused the
payment of his dividend of the charges; 'till Faust had obtained a decree,
which obliged him to pay his moiety of what the plaintiff should swear had been
expended upon the common fund: this he evaded by giving a bond payable some
time after, and escaping to Strasburgh his native city, before it was due. But
he first took care to learn as much of the art, as he could, to furnish himself
with Printing-tools, and to draw off some of Faust's servants with him. At
Strasburgh he communicated to John Mentel or Mentelin the secret, and his
design of setting up a Printing House there: however neither he nor his workmen
were so thoroughly instructed in the business, but they were obliged to demur a
considerable time before they could perfect every thing for the work, and to
make many trials in order to attain the right method; which is evident from
this, that there is no book extant with Mentel's name 'till the year 1473, and
not at all with Guttenbergh's; for it is scarce probable, that if they had
printed any considerable volumes before that time, they should all have
perished without being so much as taken notice of by any author, and especially
by their learned townsman Wimpheling: whilst there remain so many of Faust's in
the writings and in the hands of the learned and curious. During this time
Faust finding himself imposed upon by Guttenbergh, and disappointed of the
money expected, and wanting either will o^ power to sue him in that city where
he fled, formed a strategem to raise himself a fresh supply, which succeeded
according to his wish; for he went to Paris with some of his finest vellum
bibles; one of which was sold to the king for 750 crowns, and is still to be
seen in the royal library at Paris, a masterpiece in that kind: another was
bought by the Archbishop of Paris for 300 crowns: but as people were unwilling
to give so exorbitant a price, he offered some of the last for 50 crowns and
less, in hopes to have disposed of them all before he was discovered. It is not
indeed to be supposed, that they were all equal in the ornamental part; yet the
beauty of the work, the elegancy of the flower-pieces, initial letters, etc.
the variety of the finest colors intermixed with gold and silver, with which
they were exquisitely variegated, made the purchasers fond of showing them to
their acquaintance; as every one thought the whole world could not produce such
another. It Is reported that the Archbishop thinking his bible worth his
majesty's seeing, carried it to him; who viewed it with surprise, and in return
showed his own: upon a stricter examination and comparing 'em together, they
found that the ornaments were not exactly the same; but as to the other part
supposed to be written, they observed such a conformity in the number of pages,
lines, words, and even the letters, as soon convinced them that they were done
by some other method than transcribing: besides two such bibles were the work
of a man's lifetime to transcribe; and upon enquiry he was found to have sold
a much greater number. Hereupon orders was given to apprehend Faustus, and
prosecute him as a Conjurer: I should have been apt to think this charge too
absurd to gain belief, except among the vulgar; and that it was only connived
at, in hopes it would terrify him to a discovery of his art, were it not for a
passage which I have met with in Mr. Maichel's history of the Paris libraries,
wherein he mentions a strange problem published by Father Bouhours, a learned
Jesuit -- Whether it be possible that ^ German should be a wit? Mr. Maichel
justly takes the part of his countrymen, and proves them much wiser for the
invention of Printing, than those stupid Paris doctors, who rather believed it
an effect of Magic, than of human wit or invention. De la Caille relates that
he fled to Mentz, and suspecting his safety there, departed to Strasburgh,
where he taught John Mentel or Mentelin his Art: but there is not the least
probability for this assertion, since he could not be safer at one place than
at another; and with respect to Mentel, it is much more probable tha^ he
learned the invention from Guttenbergh, than from Faust who perhaps was never
at Strasburgh, unless he passed through it in his journey to and from France.

HOWEVER, the parliament of Paris thought fit to make an arrest in favor of
him, and to discharge him from all further prosecution, in consideration of his
noble invention; and as I am credibly informed, a salary was paid by that crown
to Faust's descendants for many years after, as a reward for his sufferings and
merit: this was the end and success of that expedition, and proved at length
very advantageous to him; and made some amends for the melancholy hours of his
confinement, and the terrors of an approaching death.

FAUST discharged thus with honor and a large supply of money, returned to
Mentz, where being informed that his quondam partner Guttenbergh was
endeavoring, with the assistance of Mentel, to set up a printing house at
Strasburgh, and to challenge to himself the whole glory of the invention; he
began to consider, that it was not only in vain, but even dangerous to conceal
himself and his art any longer from the world; and it is probable, resolved at
last to make both as public as possibly he could in all the editions, which
came from his press, 'till at least, ann. 1466 or 1467, in which he is supposed
to have reprinted the last leaf of Tully's Offices, the last book known to be
printed by him. During the interval between 1457, and the taking of Mentz ann.
1462, Faust meeting with prodigious encouragement, was obliged to increase the
number of his workmen, and open more of the art to them, than he had done 'till
then. Some of these having attained a sufficient insight into the mystery, were
induced to go somewhere else, and set up for themselves; to which they were
encouraged, both by the example of those who went away with Guttenbergh, and
probably by invitations from other places, which were desirous of having the
Art brought to them. Pantaleon tells us, that some of those who signalized
themselves the first in Italy, were of that number; and indeed if we consider
how soon they began to print in that kingdom, especially Rome, Venice, etc. and
make a just allowance for preparing the great apparatus of a Printing House,
with their first essays, before they came to work off those volumes, which are
of the oldest date, some of them pretty large; we cannot but think that they
left Mentz long before it was taken. Faust however had a sufficient number of
servants left to finish his last editions, which are mentioned before; after
this we hear no more of him 'till the year 1471, wherein Peter Schoeffer and
one Henlif a bookseller gave a book to a monastery, in order to obtain the
prayers of it for Faust's soul: by which it was apparent he was dead before
that time, or perhaps before 1470, because Schoeffer in that year printed St.
Jerome's Epistles in his own name, without any mention of his master Faust.

HERE therefore I am obliged to conclude the history of that illustrious man,
though I should have been vastly more satisfied in communicating other
particulars of his life and death, could I have found 'em in the writers of
those times. But Germany is not the only ungrateful country that has neglected
such as have best deserved of her; for the following books will furnish us with
instances of this in other parts of the world. I shall only observe, that as it
is the property of false desert to be solicitous for panegyricks and monumental
records, whilst true and intrinsic merit is silent, and equally contemns both;
so whilst the Dutch bestow the highest encomiums upon a suppositious and
imaginary inventor: the Germans have been so regardless of a true and real one,
as to leave it entirely to his own works to transmit his praises to posterity.
If Faust had died before the sacking of Mentz, we might have had grounds to
suppose, that some monument had been erected to his memory by his
fellow-citizens, and destroyed by the conqueror; but as he survived those times
at least six or seven years, and carried on and improved the Art during that
interval, it is impossible to entertain so favorable an opinion of the
Moguntines. However his books and the art which he left us, will more
effectually and universally proclaim and perpetuate his name and memory, than
any monumental inscriptions, etc. and endear both to the learned and curious,
as long as the Art or the world itself shall endure.

THERE is one occurrence worthy to be mentioned, which I omitted in this
chapter, not so much out of forgetfulness or neglect, since it is an instance
of Faust's gratitude and generosity, as because it is not easy to fix the time
of it, nor so likely to have happened within the compass of these ten years, as
of some of the former, viz. between 1440 and 1450. That is, his giving his only
daughter in marriage to his servant Peter Schoeffer, admitting him into
partnership, and procuring him the freedom of the city of Mentz, as a reward
for his services, and the improvements which he made to the Art; such as the
invention of punches, matrices, metal-types; and, as some report, Printer's
ink: if these discoveries are owing to him, Faust made him as ample amends as
he could possibly. I wish Schoeffer had been so grateful to his generous
master, as to have transmitted to us a fuller account of his life and
character, than what we enjoy; or if he performed this, that time had not
deprived us of so valuable a monument; the want of which obliges me, much
against my will, to bring this chapter and history to a conclusion, and rest
satisfied with what we have.

CHAP. XI. The Conclusion with an Account of the ancient Method of Printing.
I AM now come to the close of the first book of this history, which I have
endeavored to enrich with collections from dead and living authors, and every
thing valuable that I could procure upon this subject, from many of the most
curious libraries. The next book will open a large and pleasant scene. In the
mean time I cannot conclude this better, than by giving a short summary of the
whole, and digesting it into distinct periods, that the reader may, as it were
at one view, see the whole progress of the Art, and fix it more easily in his
memory; and by closing it with an account of the old way of printing used
during the time of Faust, his son-in-law, etc.

1. THIS Art was devised a considerable time before any thing done that way
appeared.

2. IT IS not improbable that the first hints of engraving upon woodenblocks
might come from the Chinese, who practiced it above 300 years before it was
thought of in Europe.

3. THE attempts to imitate it began about the year 1440, and not before.

4. THE new and more perfect method of Printing with fusile-types did not
succeed it 'till 10 years after, viz. 1450.

5. THIS new invention was discovered by John Faust in the city of Mentz; in
the perfecting of which Peter Schoeffer assisted him very much, and was amply
rewarded by his master.

JOHN GUTTENBERGH had no other share or merit in this discovery, than by
promoting it with supplies of money from time to time, and that not from a
principle of a public spirit, but for his own interest, which made him drop
both the Art and Artist when he found it less gainful than he expected.

6. THIS invention was kept with all imaginable secrecy by these three parties,
'till Guttenbergh, upon a difference between them, took some of their servants
with him to Strasburgh, where he began to practice it, and to teach it to John
Mentel: The person in whose favor the Strasburgh pretensions were afterward
started.

7. THIS contention not happening 'till the year 1455, they had already printed
the latin bible, and perhaps privately disposed of some number of the copies,
seeing their dispute was about stating their accounts, and balancing the
charges and profits of the business.

8. WHETHER their first separate types were of wood, or lead, or any other
metal; they ventured to print their first essays but on one side of the page,
'till they had found out a better ink than the common sort which they then used.

9. IT is probable from this circumstance, that their first improvement upon
common ink, to prevent its spreading, was only by charging it with a
proportionable quantity of some watery gum; such as gum arabic, mastick, etc.
which though it remedied that defect, would not suffer the paper to be printed
but upon one side: but either Schoeffer or his master having found out the way
of making it with oil, they then printed on both sides.

10. THEY did not begin to put their names and inscriptions at the end of their
books, as we can yet find, 'till the year 1457: this they continued to do 'till
Faust either dyed or left off the business.

11. GUTTENBERGH's name was never joined with theirs, nor put to of the books
which he printed after he abandoned Faust.

12. SOME others of Faust's servants forsook him before the taking of Mentz,
and settled some at Cologn, others in Italy.

13. THE greatest dispersion of them was, when that noble city was taken and
plundered by Archbishop Adolph, ann. 1462; so that the Art became universally
known throughout Europe.

THERE remains now only to give the reader an idea of the first way of
Printing, and of what is most peculiar to it; which, though a subject well known
by the curious, may not be unacceptable to several persons, to whose hands this
work may chance to fall.

1. WITH respect to their forms, they were generally either large or small
folio's, or at least quarto's: the lesser sizes were not in use.

2. THE leaves were without running-title, direction-word, number of pages, or
divisions into paragraphs.

3. THE character itself was a rude old Gothic mixed with Secretary, cast on
purpose to imitate the handwriting of those times; the words were printed so
close to one another, that it was difficult and tedious even to those who were
used to MSS. and to this method; and often lead the inattentive reader into
mistakes.

4. THEIR orthography was various and often arbitrary; and as for the
diphthongs ae and oe, they were not at all careful about them.

5. THEY had very frequent abbreviations, which in time grew so numerous and
difficult to be understood, that there was a necessity of writing a book to
teach the manner of reading them.

6. THEIR periods were distinguished by no other points than the double and
single one, i. e. the colon and full stop; just after the same manner as the
reading psalms, in our Common prayer-books are pointed; all other punctuations
being of much later invention.

7. THEY used no great letters to begin a sentence or proper name of men or
places.

8. THEY left blanks for the places of titles, initial letters, and other
ornaments, in order to have them supplied by the illuminators, whose ingenious
art, though in vogue before and at that time, yet did not long survive the
masterly improvements made by the printers in this branch of their Art. Those
ornaments were exquisitely fine, and curiously variegated with the most
beautiful colors, and even with gold and silver; the margins likewise were
frequently charged with variety of figures of saints, birds, beasts, monsters,
flowers etc. which had sometimes relation to the contents of the page, though
mostly none at all: these embellishments were very costly; but for those that
could not afford a round price, there were others done after a more ordinary
manner and at much cheaper rates.

9. THE names of the printer, place, etc. were either wholly neglected or put
at the end of the book, not without some pious ejaculation or doxology.

10. THE date was likewise omitted or involved in some crampt circumstantial
period, or else printed either at full length, or by numerical letters, and
sometimes partly one and partly the other, thus; one thousand CCCC and sixty,
etc. but all of them at the end of the book.

11. THERE was no variety of characters, no intermixture of Roman and Italick;
which were of later invention; but their pages were continued in a Gothic
letter of the same size throughout.

12. THEIR Rubricks which were very frequent and added no small beauty to the
pages, were sometimes done by the same hands as the initial letters.

13. WHENEVER they met with any Greek, they either left a blank for it, to be
afterward filled up by writing if the passage was long; or if short,
consisting only of three or four words, they got it cut on wood, though after
such a rude and ill-shap'd manner, that it required some pause to be read.

14. THE quotations of the places out of which they were taken, were very often
neglected both in Manuscripts and printed books, which caused the curious no
small trouble to find them out.

15. THEY had seldom dedicatory or prefatory epistles; and when they began
afterward to retail them in their impressions, they generally placed 'em at
the end of the work; a piece of justice as much neglected, as wanting in our
age.

16. THEY collected no table of contents, no index nor summary, (which are
indubitably a great help to the reader,) nor any errata's at the end; for what
faults were in their editions were rather owing to the manuscripts which they
printed after, than to the carelessness of the Printer.

17. THEY printed but few copies at once, for 200 or 300 were then esteemed a
large impression; though upon the encouragements received from the learned, they
increased their numbers in proportion.

18. LASTLY, If I may be allowed this article, they were not solicitous to
obtain privileges and patents for the sole printing of any particular volume,
though toward the later end of Faust's time several of his servants set up
Printing-houses, and were ambitious to excel their master: How soon after those
privileges began, appears from that granted by the Emperor to John Schoeffer,
Faust's grandson ann. 1519, for the sole printing T. Livius, and to prohibit
any other to reprint those books which had come from his press: and as this had
been granted upon the account of his being the grandson of the first inventor
of the Art; so several Popes and Princes gave like patents to their first
Printers as a mark of their favor.

I shall here mention something concerning their way of Book-binding, an
account of which we find in Scaliger Scaligeriana, Hag. edit. in 8vo. p. 173.
, who tells us, that his grandmother had a printed Psalter, the cover of which
was two inches thick; in the inside was a kind of cupboard, wherein was a small
silver crucifix, and behind it the name of Berenica Codronia de la Scala. This
book seems to have been printed with wood, but probably bound like the rest.

AS to the prices of their books, I cannot find any thing particular except
what I have before quoted out of Campanus's dedication to the Pope; from which
it may be inferred, that in his time at Rome they were sold for about one fifth
part of what the MSS. had done. To this I shall add an instance of the gift
bequeathed by P. Schoeffer, and Conrad Henlif of the same profession, to a
library of monks, which will enable us to guess at the great rate they still
were sold for. La Caille relates it out of the annals of the abbey of St. Victor
at Paris, and it is as follows Anniversarium honorabilium virorum Petri
Schoeffer and Conr^di He^lf, ac Joan. Fust, civium de Moguntia, impressorum,
necnon uxorum, filiorum, parentum, amicorum and benefactorum; qui Petrus and
Conradus dederunt nobis Epistolas beati Hieronymi impressas in Pergameno,
excepta tamen summa duodecim scutorum auri quam praefati impressores receperunt
per manus Domini Joannis Abbatis hujus ecclesiae, ^ kalend. November. ann. 1471.
De la Caille, page 14.
; "The anniversary (office for the souls), of the honorable Peter Schoeffer,
Conr. Henlif and John Faust citizens and Printers in the city of Mentz, as also
for the souls of their wives, parents, children, friends and benefactors; which
said P. Schoeffer and C. Henlif have given us the book of St. Jerome's Epistles
printed upon vellum (in two vol. fol. ann. 1470,) excepting nevertheless the
sum of twelve golden crowns, which the aforesaid Printers received from our
Lord John Abbot of this church Oct. 29, 1471."

HENCE it is plain that the twelve crowns (which in those days were more than
equivalent to as many pounds now) were but part of the price or value of the
said book; and that the other part, whatever proportion it bore to this, was
remitted to them in consideration of this anniversary office, to which there
used to be no price fixed, though the least for it was generally five or six
crowns.

I conclude this chapter with an observation of Mons. de la Monoye concerning
the phrase of Libri editi, which I hope the curious will be pleased with: he
tells us, that this phrase was used before the invention of Printing, and
signified only books published and dispersed abroad in some considerable
number, in opposition to those that were writ fair to be set up in libraries,
which were called Libri scripti. This observation he proves from a passage out
of Philelphus, who speaking of his ten books of latin odes, expresses himself
as follows; Carminum libri editi quinque, versuum quinque millibus; nam alteri
quinque qui tantundem versus complectentur, partim scripti sunt non editi,
partim ne scripti quidem, i. e. five books of the latin odes are already
published, containing 5000 verses; the other five, which will contain the same
number, are partly written not published, and partly still unwritten: he
observes further, that the first five books of odes were not sent to the press
'till the year 1497, when they were printed in 4to. at Brescia: besides the
same Philelphus tells his reader in one of his epistles written ann. 1453, that
he designed to publish all the ten books in that year, Libros december hoc anno
edere institui, which could not be understood of Printing, seeing though the art
was perfected about this time, yet it was still kept secret 'till four years
after, when Faust put his first colophon to the Psalter. Whether this
observation be as certain as it is curious, I shall leave to the judgment of my
readers.

CHAP. XI. An Account of the first printed Bibles before the year 1501.
AS those authors who have wrote any thing fully upon the subject of P^inting,
have given their readers an account of the first Bi^^es, (...) have been
printed, from the discovery of the Art to the year 15^^ or even beyond: I
thought our English readers would not be displeased to have a short abstract
given them of those ancient and valuable monuments of the art; and I cannot but
think it will be more acceptable to have them all in one view, than dispersed,
as they would be, were I to give them under their respective Printers, who
lived at a vast distance of time and place from one another; especially
considering that some famous cities, and even universities, as that of Louvain,
have not printed so much as one single Bible in all the interval between the
year 1450 and 1500, and even beyond; whereas others, for instance, that of
Nurembergh has produced at least 13 in that time: I shall place them according
to the years in which they were printed, and add such farther particulars
concerning them, as I have been able to meet with in those authors, who have
given us an account of them; and such as my own observations have enabled me to
collect from those noble libraries I have formerly mentioned.

BY this the reader will be sufficiently appris'd, that I intend to speak only
of those which bear any certain date; but as for those, which are either
printed without date, or with a disputed one, I shall just say so much of them,
as will let him see how little they are to be relied on, and what reasons I
have to pass them by: I have, I think, already ventured to give the reader a
rule how to judge of such works, viz. if their dates are before the year 1450,
they must be supposed to have been wrong printed, either designedly, or by
mistake: the reader will find proofs sufficient of the former in our next book,
and the later is too well known to require any: however in this later respect I
shall give him an instance or two of it, because it will be a kind of a key to
rectify any other that may hereafter fall in his way.

WE meet with an account of a German Bible, still kept in the library of the
city of Ausburgh, affirmed by Hottinger, who saw it there, to have been printed
with fusile types ann. 1448, but with this caveat however, ni fallor, if I am
not mistaken, as writing at some distance of time and place: other authors have
given it that of 1449, but as either of them preceded the time of the
invention, Malinkrot tells us, that Martin Zeiler thought it 'twas only a
manuscript version made ann. 1449: but Mr. Beugben does not scruple to tell us
in the preliminary discourse to his Incunabula Typographiae, that they only
misplaced the two last figures of the date, and printed 1449 instead of 1494.
Chevillier mentions two more out of Lipenius, whose dates are demonstrably
false, the one is a Bible printed at Paris ann. 1443, and the other at Lions
ann. 1446: whereas it is certain, that Printing was not brought to Paris 'till
twenty seven years after the date of the first, viz. ann. 1470, nor to Lions
'till six or seven years after that: the same may be said of another printed at
Basil, and affirmed, by two booksellers of Geneva in the catalogue of their
books, to bear date 1459, since it is plain that that city did not receive the
Art 'till about 1475: if the reader therefore will take this rule with him, to
examine the time in which the Art was brought to any place, which he will find
in the following Book, he will easily rectify any wrong date that may come in
his way, and as for those, which do not mention the place or Printer's name, he
may safely rank them amongst the apocryphal ones, and them which have no date
at all, but as the former have been taken notice of by all our annalists, I
shall be obliged so far as I am able to ascertain their respective dates, as we
go along.

1. BEFORE I come to speak of those, which bear a certain and indisputable
date, I must not omit the first printed by Faust and Schoeffer about 1450 or
soon after, and mentioned by Trithemius, the Colognian Chronicle, and some
other authors, as the first considerable work printed with fusile types by
those two Protodaedali. I have already given the reasons of its being printed
without date or colophon, which would have betrayed the discovery of their new
Art, and prevented Faust's selling it for MS: but this however ought by no
means to hinder us from giving it the first rank, seeing the fact is so
undeniably attested. It is pity they have been long ago, either destroyed, or
buried in some private libraries, where the most diligent searches have not as
yet been able to find them out: perhaps its being printed so like MS, may be
one reason why they are still looked upon as such by the owners, if any such
there be; for which reason I am still willing to hope, that time may discover
and bring some of them to light, and that what has been said in this history,
and by authors of a much higher character, will spur up some curious persons to
make a more diligent search after so valuable a monument; 'till when, no
farther account can be expected of it than what we have already given.

2. THE next is that, which I have ventured, after other authors, to call the
second impression of the Bible, printed at Mentz by the same worthy inventors
ann. 1462, and which is consequently the most ancient we know extant in any
library; we have already given some account of it in a former chapter p. 31,
and of the colophon printed at the end of it, which we need not therefore
repeat here: as there are several copies of it here in London where I have seen
them, and elsewhere in England, we need not go to any foreign authors for an
account of it: it is printed in fol. as indeed all their other works were. For
though I have followed Peter Lambeck's notion of the Psalters being printed in
4to, because its size may be very much like that of a quarto, yet if I may here
venture to give my judgment of a book I have not seen, I think I have
sufficient grounds to believe that the first Printers had their paper made of
all sizes; and that the five books printed on Blocks of Wood, already mentioned
to be in the Earl of Pembroke's library, would appear to any one like quarto's,
were it not that the signatures show the contrary.

THE next impression we meet with, is one which Mr. Mattaire gives us upon the
authority of a learned friend of his, who desires to have his name concealed,
and the want of whose date is supplied by a colophon of three latin verses
importing, that it was printed in the third year of Lewis XI. reign, i. e. ann.
1464 by the three German partners, who brought the Art to Paris, though there be
no mention made of the place where it was printed, vid. Annal. Typogr. p. 41,
and 60. I am persuaded that Mr. Mattaire's friend was mistaken in the first
verse, and I should not have given it a rank here, nor even mentioned it, were
it not to prevent the reader's being puzzled with this account of it under the
year 1464; or his supposing me guilty of an omission: but as Chevillier gives
us the same colophon printed at the end of the first Paris Bible by the same
three partners, with this variation however from the former; that in the first
verse, instead of Semi lustrum, it has tribus lustris, that is instead of the
third, it imports the thirteenth year of that king's reign: we may easily
suppose, that it was the first Paris Bible of 1475, and that this unknown
gentleman might possibly be mistaken: however the book being in Queen's-college
library, in Cambridge it may be easily consulted.

3. The next impression therefore to that of Mentz 1462, is that of Ausburgh,
[in latin Augusta Vindelicorum] printed by John Bemler ann. 1466 in latin fol.
It is mentioned by Martin Crusius, Melchior Adamus, and after them by
Malinkrot; Chevillier seems indeed to think their testimony insufficient to
ascertain so old a date, but I cannot see any reason for it, seeing it is four
years more recent than the taking of the city of Mentz, and the dispersion of
Faust's servants; besides the city of Ausburgh was so near Mentz, and so
considerable withal, that it is no way improbable, but some one of them might
go and settle there even sooner than the year 1466.

4. The latin Bible fol. printed at Reutlingen [Reutlingae] a small town in
Germany in the duchy of Wirtembergh ann. 1469, mentioned by Hallevordius,
Father le Long, De la Caille, Chevillier and others; but more particularly by
John Saubert in his catalogue of the Norican or Nurembergh library, where he
saw it: the Printer of it was John de Averbach, we have nothing else extant of
him at least with his name.

5. The latin Bible fol. printed about 1471 Mar. 15. at Rome by Conrard
Sweynbeym and Arnold Pannariz [or Pararaiz as I have seen it printed in one of
their books] who were the first Printers that settled in that city: it has a
preface, and at the end four latin distichs in praise of those two Germans, and
a small work or history of Aristeas, and is translated by Matthias Palmerius:
the Printers tell Pope Sextus IV, in the lists which they gave him of their
works, that they had printed 575 copies of it: concerning this Bible Spondaeus
gives us the following account, we have, says he, the Bible printed at Rome in
two very large volumes [ingentibus voluminibus] ann. 1471 in the house of the
Maximis by two Germans named Conrard Sweynheym and Arnold Pannartz.

6. The Italian Bible translated by Nicholaus Malherbis (in Italian Malermi) a
Venetian abbot of the order of the Calmaldules, printed at Venice ann. 1471
Calend. Aug. in fol. by Vindelin de Spire, who with his brother John, was the
first who brought the Art of Printing unto that city. Chevillier tells us, he
has seen it in the library of the Mazarine-college at Paris in two volumes, and
that though the imprimatur does not mention the Printer, yet it is easy to guess
at him by the Italian verses, which Squazafica has put to that edition.

7. Mr. Mattaire mentions another fol. Italian Bible printed in the same year
1571, of Malhermi's translation, without Printer or places name. Father le Long
is the author he has taken it from.

8. The latin Bible reprinted at Mentz by Peter Schoeffer ann. 1472, on the eve
of St. Matthias the apostle fol. the learned Walton (editor of our English
edition of the Polyglot) thought this the first impression of the Bible, and
seemed doubtful of what some authors had affirmed, that they had seen some more
ancient editions that that; how much he was mistaken the reader may judge by
the foregoing ones: this Bible has a colophon at the end, not unlike those used
by his master and himself, in the former edition and some other of their works.

9. Mr. Mattaire (after Father le Long,) mentions a latin impression ann. 1473
without Printer or places name. Annal. Typogr. p. 100.

10. The latin Bible fol. printed at Paris by Ulric Gering, Martin Crantz, and
Michael Friburger, the first who set up a press in that city. This Bible, which
Chevillier has seen in the library of the Celestin monks, and has given us the
colophon of; importing its being printed in the 13th year of Lewis XI. reign,
i. e. ann. 1475, is the same which we suppose Mr. Mattaire's friend did inform
him to have been printed in the 3d year of that monarch, i. e. ann. 1464: we
need not therefore repeat here, what we said just before under that head; Mr.
Mattaire however places this under the year 1476.

11. The latin Bible printed at Nuremberg in the same year 1475 in fol. by
Anthony Koburger or Coburger first Printer of that city; in which library J.
Saubert tells us, they have a copy still extant, we have another in the public
library at Oxford.

12. Another latin Bible without Printer or places name, printed also ann.
1475. fol. Mattaire p. 110.

13. The Bible in Italian printed by James de Rubeis, alias des Rouges, at
Pignerol in Piedmont, ann. 1475, fol. idem.

14. -- in latin quarto, printed at Placentia by John de Ferratis Cremonese
ann. 1475.

15. -- in low dutch, fol. at Cologn ann. 1475, without Printer's name, idem.

16. -- in latin printed in fol. ann. 1476 at Venice, by Nicholas Jenson in
Gothic character, a copy of which is still to be seen in the library of the
Celestin monks at Paris.

17. -- printed at Venice by Francis Hailbrun and Nicholas de Frankford
partners, ann. 1476 fol. Chevillier seems doubtful, whether this and the last
are not the same edition under different partners names; but Mr. Mattaire and
father Orlandi give them as two different editions.

18. The Bible in latin with canons and concordances fol. printed at Nurembergh
by Anthony Koburger ann. 1476. Orlandi is the first author that has mentioned
it: but does not tell us where he saw it or how he came by the knowledge of it.

19. -- ead. printed at Naples, ann. 1476, fol. by Matthias Moravus de
Olomuntz; the colophon of which has some lines in commendation of the Printer.

20. -- ead. printed at Nurembergh by Anthony Koburger ann. 1477, fol. it has
the arguments and references like that printed by the same Printer ann. 1476.

21. -- ead. fol. printed by Bernard Richel citizen of Basil, ann. 1477,
without places name.

22. -- in Italian by Malhermi fol. printed at Venice by Anthony de Bononia,
ann. 1477.

23. -- ead. printed at Venice by Gabriel de Piero, a native of Treviso, ann.
1477, fol.

24. -- in high dutch, fol. by Anthony Sorgius at Ausburgh, 1477.

25. -- ead. 1477, without Printers name.

26. -- in low dutch, fol. at Delph 1477.

27. -- ead. in quarto, 1477.

28. -- in latin with Gothic character, fol. at Venice by Leonard Wild for
Francis de Hailbrun and Nicholas de Franckford, 1478.

29. -- ead. in Gothic, fol. by Theodoric de Reynsberg and Reynald de
Novimagio, fol. 1478.

30. -- ead. with the arguments and references of Menardus Monachus, fol.
printed at Nurembergh by Anthony Coburger, 1478.

31. -- ead. in Gothic fol. at Venice by Nic. Jenson, 1479.

32. -- ead. with arguments and concordance fol. by Anthony Coburger at
Nurembergh, 1479.

33. -- ead. fol. at Lions by Perrin de Lathomi de Lotharingis, 1479.

34. -- ead. fol. without Printer's name at Cologn 1479.

35. -- in low dutch, fol. at Goude in Holland by Gerard Leeu, 1479.

36. The Bible in latin with the apostils of Nic. de Lyra, fol. by John de
Cologn and John Manthen, 1480; the place is not mentioned, but these two
printed at Venice from 1471 to 1481, if not beyond. Orland.

37. -- ead. quarto at Venice for Octavian Scot, 1480. by Francis Halibrun.

38. -- in High Dutch at Ausburgh, 2 vol. fol. by Ant. Sergius citizen of it,
1480.

39. -- in Latin fol. by Anthony Coburger, at Nuremberg 1480.

40. -- ead. with summaries and references fol. by John Zeiner of Reutlingen at
Ulms, 1480.

41. -- ead. with apostils of N. de Lyra 7 vol. fol. Cologn, 1480 without
printers name.

42. -- ead. with Gothic character, by Leonard Wild of Ratisbon, fol. at Venice
1481.

43. -- ead. with postills of N. de Lyra by John de Cologn, Nic. Jenson, and
partners fol. 1481; no place named, but they printed at Venice.

44. -- ead. in fol. by Conrard Lentorius at Nurembergh, 1481.

45. -- in Italian, by Malermi fol. printed at Venice for Octavian Scot, 1481.

46. -- in latin quarto at Venice by Francis Renner de Hailbrun, 1482.

47. -- ead. by Reynhard of Strasburg, and Nichol. Philipi de Gernsheym fol. at
Strasburg [Argentoratum] 1482.

48. -- by Ant. Coburger at Nuremberg, 1483.

49. -- in quarto by Francis Renner de Hailbrun at Venice, 1483.

50. -- in fol. by John, sirnam'd the Great, Herbort, German at Venice, 1483.

51. -- in high dutch by Ant. Coburger at Nuremberg, 1483.

52. -- ead. in fol. at Ausburg 1483 without printers name.

53. -- in latin fol. by John Zainer de Reutlingen. Ausburg 1484.

54. -- ead. by Ant. Coburger fol. at Nuremberg, 1484.

55. -- ead. in quarto by John, sirnam'd the Great, Herboxt of Selgenstat at
Venice, 1484.

56. The Bible in Latin fol. at Nuremberg without Printer's name 1484.

57. -- in Italian fol. at Venice by Andrea de Pattasichis de Catharo, 1484.

58. -- in high Dutch at Lubeck by Stephen Arnold, 1484.

59. -- ead. at Stratzburg no printers name, 1485.

60. -- in Latin at Antwerp fol. by Nicholas Kester, 1487.

61. -- ead. in quarto Venice 1487, without Printer's name.

62. -- ead. in fol. Basil, 1487, id.

63. -- ead. in fol. with Lyra's apostils, 5 vol. fol. no Printer's name but
known to be printed by Ant. Coburger, Nuremberg, 1487.

64. -- in French fol. by Antony Verard, Paris, 1487.

65. -- in high Dutch fol. Ausburg 1487. no Printer's name.

66. -- in Hebrew with points, fol. by Abraham Ben Rabb. Hhajim at Soncino,
1488.

67. -- in Latin, fol. at Venice for Octavian Scot, 1489.

68. -- ead. in Gothic character, fol. revised by Stephen Parisetti and printed
by James Malieti, no place's name, 1490.

69. -- in high Dutch, 4to, Ausburgh, 1490, no Printer's name.

70. -- ead. 4to, at Nurembergh, 1490; no Printer's name, but supposed to be
printed by A. Coburger.

71. -- in Latin, fol. at Venice by Simon de Gara, 1491.

72. -- ead. at Basil, 4to, 1491; no Printer's name.

73. -- ead. at Venice, 4to, 1491, id.

74. -- ead. at Basil by John Froben, 8vo, in a small letter, 1491.

75. -- ead. with Lyra's apostils, 4 vol. fol. Stratzburg, 1492.

76. -- ead. cum glossa ordinaria vol. 6. fol. Nurembergh by Anthony Coburger,
1493.

77. -- in high Dutch by Stephen Arndes, fol. at Lubeck, 1493.

78. -- ead. Gothic character, 4to, at Venice, by Fr. Renner de Hailbrun, 1494.

79. -- in Italian, folio, by John Rosso, 1494; Venice.

80. -- in Latin 4to, at Venice by Simon Bevilaqua citizen of Pavia, 1494.

81. -- in Hebrew, 8vo, by Gerson Ben Moses of Soncino at Brixia, 1494

82. The Bible in Hebrew, 4to and 8vo, at Pisauro, 1494; without Printer's name.

83. -- in Latin by Matthew Hus German, fol. 1494; no place's name, but we find
him printing at Lions three years before this.

84. -- in high Dutch 4to, at Ausburg, 1494; no Printer's name.

85. -- in Latin with Ord. Gloss. and Lyra's apostils, fol. by Paganino de
Paganinis, 1495.

86. -- ead. Gothic character, by John Froben de Hamelburgh, 8vo Basil 1495.

87. -- ead. 4to, by Jacob and Angelus Brittans at Brescia, 1496.

88. -- ead. with Ord. Gloss. and de Lyra's apostils, 6 vol. fol. at Nuremberg,
1496; by Ant. Coburger.

89. -- ead. corrected by Angelus de Monte Ulmi 8vo, printed by Jerome de
Paganinis at Venice, 1497.

90. -- ead. in Gothic character with summaries, etc. by Franc. Fradin and John
Pivard 4to, 1497; no place's name.

91. -- ead. fol. at Cologn 1497; without Printer's name.

92. -- ead. at Strasburgh, ditto.

93. -- ead. with Lyra's apostils 6 vol. fol. Basil 1498; no Printer's name.

94. -- ead. by Simon Bevilaqua 4to, Venice 1498.

95. -- ead. 4to, by John Pivard 1500; no places name.

96. -- ead. by Simon Vostre, fol. Paris 1500.

97. -- ead. fol. at Nuremberg 1500; no Printer's name.

98. -- ead. by John Froben, Basil 1500.

99. -- ead. 8vo, Lions 1500.

I have purposedly omitted some less considerable ones, which are either
without Printer or places name, or both; because such were only the wretched
performances of a few, who made it their business to reprint the editions of
some of the most famous Printers of Europe, whether of the Bible, or of any
other considerable work; and to vend them underhand for the right ones: this
was an abuse which began very early to be complained of; for no sooner had a
Froben, Badius, Aldus or any other great Printer published a work, which had
cost him infinite pains to correct, as well as great sums of money to purchase
the best manuscripts, but they pyrated them in such a shameful and incorrect
manner, that they could afford to sell them for less than half the price. And
as there wanted not sordid persons to encourage this vile practice, and to
prefer those maimed performances to the more correct ones, if they could but
save money by them; it often proved that the sale of a valuable edition was
hindered, to the great loss and discouragement of the Printer, whilst the bad
ones went off with ease: this occasioned them to complain of the abuse, in
their prefaces to their works, and to appeal to the learned against such
practices; some of whom (in particular Erasmus) did not fail to write very
sharply against those enemies to learning, who were at length come up to such a
degree of impudence, as to counterfeit the names, marks and rebus's of the
famous Printers, of which we shall have occasion to give an account hereafter.
In the mean time, all their complaints and efforts proving ineffectual toward
the suppressing such pyracies; they were forced to have recourse to the higher
powers, and to employ the assistance of their learned patrons, to obtain them
patents and privileges for the sole printing of those works, upon which they
had bestowed so much pains and cost: but this more properly belongs to the next
book to which I am now hastening.

BOOK II. The History of the Dispersion, Progress and Improvements of PRINTING,
from 1462 to 1520.
The INTRODUCTION.
HITHERTO we have seen the Art of Printing kept with the utmost secrecy by its
inventors, and confined to the city of Mentz, till the fatal year of its being
taken plundered and deprived of all its former rights and franchises, as we
have hinted already: which occasioned the dispersion of the greatest part of
Faust's servants whom we must suppose by that time to have been very numerous:
these seeing the deplorable condition to which that noble city was reduced, and
the difficulty of carrying on the business any longer with that freedom and
encouragement they had till then enjoyed; and being perhaps inclined enough of
themselves to leave their masters, to go settle in some of the most famous
cities of Europe, where they were sure to gain, not only wealth and honor, but
the friendship of the learned, immediately dispersed themselves and settled,
some in the neighboring cities of Cologn and Ausburgh, others went to Rome,
Venice, Paris, etc. where they soon met with all the encouragement they could
wish: this happened, as we have hinted in the former book in the year 1462. So
that Faust and Schoeffer, had happily concealed the art from the rest of the
world, at least the space of twelve years from the time of its being perfected:
we must, however, except one of his servants viz. Nic. Jenson, who if the date
of his first book be true and genuine, must have given his master the slip
before that fatal period, since we find this book finished at Venice an. 1461
with great advantage and improvement; we shall have occasion to enquire further
into this man and his work, in the sequel of this book: however, if we except
this one single work, we don't find any footsteps of the infant art, being
carried out of its nurse's arms duing those twelve years.

BUT now we must consider it in a different view, dispersing it self over
diverse nations, patronized by Popes and Kings, and esteemed a divine blessing
to mankind. It seems now to have left the city of Mentz, where it yet shines
there brighter than ever; and at the same instant discovers it self at Rome,
Venice, Oxford and Paris; and in a space shorter than can be imagined, becomes
conspicuous over all Europe.

As there is so great a number and variety of events and remarkable
occurrences, which happened in several cities of Europe, at the same time, or
immediately after one another, with respect to the first printers who settled
there, the improvements made by them, and the encouragement they received; it
will be absolutely impossible to dispose them in such an order, as may give the
reader at once a full view of them all, without interrupting the series, either
with respect to time or place. Thus, for instance, while we show the
transactions at Rome, during the two or three first years, Venice, Paris,
Oxford, Cologn, Milan, etc. will open new scenes to our view, attracting our
eyes toward them, and oblige us to break the thread of one to begin with that
of another; which continual diversions would rather confound than instruct the
reader, and render the history confused and tedious. Our best annalists and
historians being sensible of this, have followed a better method. Father
Orlandi in particular, the latest that has wrote upon this subject, has taken
that of De la Caille; who proceeds with every city by it self, from the time it
is supposed to have received the art, to the end of the century, according to
their fairest claim to priority in point of time; and then goes on with the
next in order. This method I have chose, and given under the head of each city
the names, character and merit, of each printer that has wrought there, from
the time of its receiving the art to the end of the year 1500; and pointed out
the excellencies of those who have been eminent in this art, either by the
beauty of their types, the elegance and correctness of their works, the number
of their editions, or any improvements which they made. By this means, I hope
the reader will clearly see the early progress of printing in every place; if
not at one view, yet at least in such an order as more easily to form an idea,
not only of the printers and cities wherein they resided, but likewise of the
most considerable patrons for wealth, learning, etc. of that time, to whose
character and merit, I have not failed to do justice throughout this whole work.

I proposed at first to have closed this history with the fifteenth century;
but when I came to consider that the most eminent printers, to whom we owe many
important improvements of this art, such as Aldus at Venice, Amerbach and
Froben at Basil, Badius at Lions and Paris, with many others, did not begin to
appear upon this stage, till almost the close of it: and that their merit was
not discovered till the beginning of the next; I thought it an unpardonable
injustice to them and my readers, to curtail their history by too scrupulously
adhering to my proposed epoch; and therefore have chosen to continue this
history twenty years longer, i. e. to 1520; and sometimes made an excursion
beyond that time, when ever any of those excellent masters have outlived it.
This has afforded me another agreeable opportunity, viz. of mentioning some
others who did not enter the province of printing till after the fifteenth
century.

ANOTHER motive which induced me to continue this history 20 years longer, was,
that I found all the improvements that had been made to the art, were made by
that time i. e. by the year 1520 at least; the foundation of them was so far
laid before that year, that whatever has been done since, either with relation
to the beauty of letter, elegancy of impression, variety of types, printing in
different languages, especially in the eastern ones, in different columns,
correctness and the like, all these and many more, had already been carried on
to such a perfection before this time, that it admitted but of small
improvements to be made to it afterward. I have therefore thought it a much
better period to close this history with, than that of 1500 where Orlandi
concludes his; this has given me an opportunity of mentioning not only the
improvements themselves, but likewise those glorious printers to whom we owe
them. However, as it would swell this book too much to insert the names of all
the printers, that appeared within those 20 years, they being too numerous, and
a great many of them, deserving rather to be remembered with shame than honor:
I have resolved to speak only of those who signalized themselves, either for
some improvements they made to the art, the beauty and correctness of their
editions, or any other merit they have been conspicuous for: it is for that
reason I have chosen to speak of them in a chapter by it self, after I have
closed the 15th century, to which I shall also add in another chapter, an
account of the abuses which crept into the art from its promulgation to 1520,
that there may be nothing wanting to make this history as complete and
instructing as possible.

IT will be necessary to acquaint the reader that though we have followed the
method of the best annalists, in settling the priority of every city, according
to the date of the oldest extant work, that was printed there, which is
certainly the surest way and least liable to mistakes; yet it is more than
probable that they might receive the art much sooner: seeing some time must
reasonably be allowed for setting up a printing house, and furnishing it with
the necessary apparatus, which in the infancy of the art was more difficult to
procure, for want of proper workmen acquainted with all the branches of such a
tedious work, for which less than a year or two could scarce suffice: and
because we are not absolutely sure that those editions, which we give for their
first, were really so: Mr. Mattaire, who has taken such pains to search the
best libraries of London, Oxford, Paris, etc. for those old monuments, that he
thought he had exhausted that subject, has nevertheless post dated the claim
and rank of several cities by some years; if Orlandi may be credited, who
afterward rectified them by the discovery of some older editions; and who can
tell what time may produce, that may wholly invert our present order: thus for
instance some of the historians quoted in the last book, tell us that
Strasburgh, Cologn, Francford, etc. received the art before any others; yet as
we have none of their works extant, but such as were printed some years after,
we have been obliged to give them a lower rank, and place them after Rome,
Paris, Venice, etc. The reader may easily remember that Guttenbergh left Mentz,
and settled at Strasburgh some years before the taking of the former, i. e.
before ann. 1462; and that he taught John Mentel the Art in the latter: yet we
meet with no edition done there of older date than 1471, viz. the Decretum
Gratiani printed by Henry Egestein. Though Cologn received some of Faust's
fugitive servants soon after his rupture with Guttenbergh, yet the oldest
edition there, as yet known, is the works of Pope Leo I, printed 1470. What
became of those impressions before that time, is scarce worth our enquiring,
since the best of those which have been since published, are far inferior to
those done in Italy, France, etc. in beauty of character, elegancy of
composition, correctness and choice of MSS to print after; while themselves
proved indolent enough to neglect those improvements even after they had been
made in other countries.

HOWEVER it is probable they might have sufficient business in printing small
books of devotion, lives of saints, and legends; which, according to the taste
of those times, and of that nation in particular, were eagerly bought up and
thumb'd over, 'till scarce a leaf was left; while the men of learning and
politeness were more curious in laying up such only as were a credit not only
to the author and Printer, but to the Art it self. But however that be, I hope
what I have said will sufficiently convince the reader, how cautious we should
be in fixing the epocha's, and consequently the rank and claims of every city,
in this respect; since we know not but the next diligent searcher may find
matter enough to give this order a new turn.

I have shown in the close of the last book to what a degree of perfection the
Art of Printing was advanced even before the year 1467, and given there some
account of that noble edition of Nich. Jenson, which is supposed to be done
ann. 1461, with the encomium which Mr. Mattaire, to whom we are beholden for
the first account of it, about eight years ago, gives to that masterpiece of
the Art, since which I saw it at the Earl of Pembroke's. What seems strange in
that Printer, is, that from the time of this date 1461 to 1471, not one of his
impressions is to be met with; so that neither their beauty, nor the esteem
which they merited among the curious, have been able to preserve them, unless
they are still latent in some libraries, 'till some accident brings them to
light, as happened to the Decor Puellarum. It Is unreasonable to suppose that a
man, who could, in so short a time improve the Art, to a degree equal to the
best Printers of the next age, and published so many excellent volumes from
1470 to 1480, should have continued idle for nine or ten years.

FOR this reason many learned persons are of opinion that the date of the book
is wrong printed, and that one of the X's was either carelessly or wilfully
omitted, or taken up by the balls: but Mr. Mattaire will by no means allow this
supposition, and gives his reasons against it. But though I am partly of his
opinion, yet there are two reasons that induce me to differ from father
Orlandi, in allowing the preference to Venice before these last mentioned
cities: the first is that this impression of the Decor Puellarum, does not
mention the place where it was done, and therefore might as well have been
printed in any other place as at Venice; our annalists give no other reason for
its being done there rather than any where else, but that Jenson is found, ten
years after the date of it, flourishing in that city for the space of another
ten years; but how to fill the chasm of the first ten is what they are at a
great loss, as we shall see by and by. My second reason is that had this book
been really printed at Venice, ann. 1461, it would have been absurd for the two
Spires, who did not settle th^^e till about ann. 1468, to ^^ve taken upon them
in their first colophon^ the title of the first persons who taught the city of
Venice the art of printing, or if they had, I doubt not but Jenson would have
taken care to have confuted such an assumption in some of his own works, which
he never did: allowing therefore the date of this work to be genuine, yet it
would be too presumptive to build the claim of that city upon a book, which for
ought appears was not printed there.

I have ven ur'd to say so much concerning this impression, in this
introduction, because of its being dated one year before the time our second
book begins; so that it could not so properly be brought into the book itself,
without antedating of it by that one year for the sake of one impression.
Before Mr Mattaire gave us an account of it in his Annal. Typogr. most authors
gave the city of Rome the preference, to that of Venice by at least 4 or 5
years; and with respect to the latter the two Spires were allowed to have been
the first Printers there, according to the verses that are at the end of their
first works: this impression therefore, does at most prove Jenson to have began
to print some where, before those two brothers were settled at Venice. What
discoveries may be made hereafter, which may perhaps invert the present order,
is what I am not concerned about at present: my business is to settle it now
according to the best light I have been able to get. I hope the reader will
excuse me, if the respect which I bear to those noble cities, who gave the
first encouragement to this infant Art, has made me somewhat prolix, and what
he may perhaps call over curious in settling this point of precedence; for
since it may be so easily settled and adjusted from authentic records, it would
have been an unpardonable omission in me to have neglected it; seeing every one
of those cities do still value themselves upon their rank, and have taken all
possible pains to find out all the old monuments that would both support and
advance their respective claims.

I know that some annalists, in order to fill up the chasm of nine years, have
supposed that Jenson went from Venice to Paris, where he taught the Art of
Printing, and set up some presses, and instructed several, who became eminent
Printers. But this is improbable on many accounts; 1. Because there are none of
his works done at Paris; 2. Because his character is much finer than any used
in France by the first Printers there; 3. Because he would have met with such
encouragement there, especially considering it was his native country, that
there had been no occasion to return to Venice; lastly, because, if he had
taught so many skilful workmen in the Art, of which himself was then by far the
greatest master, it would have been unnecessary to send for the three partners
out of Germany, who did not however come to that city 'till about the year
1469, that is, six or seven years after his supposed coming thither. To this we
may add, that upon this supposition the Art must have been brought to Paris,
several years sooner than the most authentic records, and the best writers
allow, which seems as improbable; as it is difficult to assign a place where
Jenson printed this work. From all which, allowing the date of the Decor
Puellarum, as no place is mentioned where it was printed, we are obliged for
the reasons before mentioned to give the preference to Rome.

CHAP. I. The City of Mentz, Monastery of Subiaco, and the City of Ausburgh.
. 1. Faust and Schoeffer continue to print at Mentz, after the Dispersion of
most of their Servants, and the taking of that City.
IF those cities which gave the earliest invitations and encouragements to the
Art of Printing, do so justly merit to be recorded in their respective ranks,
that of Mentz certainly deserves to be placed at the head of them, upon two
accounts; 1. because it was the mother and inventress of it; and 2. because it
still continued to promote and cherish it, after it had been reduced to a
foreign yoke. In the first book we considered her in the former view, whilst
she was the only one in the world, that engrossed both the Art and Artists to
herself: but the conqueror's sword was the occasion of its being dispersed
through the most eminent cities of Europe: 'till this time the best of Faust's
servants being tied by an oath of secrecy, and perhaps by some more powerful
engagement, had not dared to forsake their master; and if some few had ventured
to break through their engagements, yet were they still so imperfectly
acquainted with the Art, that they never performed any work that could abide
the test of time, if we except N. Jenson's: but now as the city was deprived of
its freedom and privileges, it abolished the difference between master and
servant, citizen and foreigner; they began to look upon themselves as free from
all former ties, and at liberty to accept of the invitations which they
received from England, Italy, France, etc. so that in the space of very few
years, there was scarce a metropolis or considerable city, where there was not
one or more Printing-houses set up: several monasteries likewise began to
entertain those fugitives very early, as we shall show anon; and wherever any
of those workmen chanced to settle themselves, they did not fail of meeting
with all the assistance and encouragement, which the most eminent men either
for power or learning could give them. However as they cannot be supposed to
have been all men of equal capacity and industry, so we need not wonder if they
did not signalize themselves every where alike; but whilst one sort of them did
in a short space improve the Art to a very considerable degree, others of a
more sluggish nature, contented themselves with going on in their old way, and
some of them even from bad to worse.

WE need not doubt but that Faust and Schoeffer, during this sad interval, were
as much courted by other nations to leave Mentz, and betake themselves to a
place of greater tranquillity, and in a more flourishing state: but their love
to their native city, which had favored them so much in its prosperity,
prevailed upon them to continue there, and to carry on their business, as
before. This is apparent from the list of their works, given in the first book;
and the edition of the great Bible which they printed in this very year, with
that of Tully's Offices three years after, gives ground to suppose, that the
merit of this invention procured them some particular regard and privilege from
Archbishop Adolph, as soon as it became known to him; which might induce them
to go on with the business, as they had done formerly: however if they printed
nothing between the year 1462 and 1465, (as we don't as yet find that they did)
we may reasonably suppose, that the confusion in which the city then was, might
obstruct it for that time, since we don't find such a length of time between
any of their other works: the truth is, we have very few or no particulars
concerning them, except what we have given in the first book, wherein I
endeavored as well as I could to trace Faust's history to the end of his life.
All that we can add concerning Peter Schoeffer, is, that he continued printing
several considerable volumes 'till the year 1479, which he then subscribed with
his own name, and to some of which (toward the latter end of his life) he
added his coat of arms, which might in all probability have been given to him
either by the Archbishop or some crowned head: accordingly we find these words
added to his colophons, Suis consignando scutis, that they were marked with his
own arms. He left a son John Schoeffer, who became likewise an excellent
Printer at Mentz; but he must in all likelihood have been very young when his
father died, seeing we find nothing printed by him 'till ann. 1503, when he
acquainted his readers in the colophons to his first impressions, that he was
the son of Peter Schoeffer and grandson to J. Faust, etc. the first inventors
of the Art; and that himself was an excellent master of it, and an eminent
citizen (primarius civis) of the metropolis of Mentz, but as this is beyond my
proposed epoch, I shall say no more of him.

I don't find any other Printer in the city of Mentz, during Peter Schoeffer's
life: about 1480, we meet with one single work of no great consequence done
there by one Erhard Rewick, and between the year 1470 and 1500, there are about
fifteen impressions printed there without any Printer's name; and therefore are
supposed to have been done by some of Faust's servants, who dared not put their
names to them, whilst Schoeffer and his son lived.

THOUGH I do not design to swell the following book with a list of the works done
in every city, it having been done by the indefatigable Mr. Mattaire and father
Orlandi, but only to give my readers an account of the most eminent Printers,
that have signalized themselves in any of them, with the names and dates of the
less considerable ones; yet I hope the reader will forgive me, if my respect
for P. Schoeffer, whose works are so much valued by the curious, as well for
their antiquity, as for their elegance, correctness, and those ornaments, which
he still caused the illuminators to bestow on them to the last, induces me to
subjoin a list of them; they are as follows, with their colophons.

1. The edition of Tho. Aquinas's Secunda secundae, printed in fol. ann. 1467,
with an inscription at the end to this purpose Hoc opus praeclarum Secunda
secundae alma in Urbe Moguntina inclitae nationis Germanicae, quam Dei
clementia alti ingenii lumine donoque gratuito caeteris terrarum nationibus
praeferre illustrareque dignatus est, artificiola quadam adinventione
imprimendi seu characterizandi absque ulla calami exaratione sic effigiatum,
and ad eusebiam Dei industria est consummatum per Petrum Schoiffer de
Gernsheim. Anno Domini M CCCC LX VII. Die sexto mensis Martii.
; "This noble work entitled Secunda secundae was finished in the famous city of
Mentz in Germany (which nation the divine goodness has vouchsafed to signalize
with superior gifts to all other nations of the earth,) by a new invented Art
of Printing, etc. without the help of any writing instrument, etc. for the
service of God, by Peter Schoiffer de Gernsheim, ann. Dom. 1467, on the sixth
day of March." In this he has altered one letter of his surname, viz. the
first e into an i, in the next he changed the i into a y, according to Mr.
Mattaire's list; who likewise justly censures his latin syntax in writing Dei
clementia dignatus est; though this hinders not his being a correct Printer, as
well as tolerable good clerk for those times.

2. THE next is the Institutiones Juris Imper. Justinian. cum Glossa, in fol.
ann. 1468. The colophon is much to the same purpose with the former, in which
he is very liberal of his incense to Mentz and the whole German nation. It is
superfluous to give a translation of it; but the original may be seen in the
margin Praesens Institutionum praeclarum opus alma in urbe Moguntina inclitae
nationis Germanica; quam Dei clementia tam alti ingenii lumine donoque gratuito
caeteris orbis nationibus praeferre illustrareque dignatus est; non atramento
omni, non plumali canna neque aerea, sed artificiosa quadam ad inventione
imprimendi seu characterizandi sic effigiatum, and ad eusebiam Dei industry
est consummatum per Petrum Schoyffer de Gernsheim, anno Dominicae Incarnationis
MCCCCLXVIII. 24 die Mensis Maii.
; though Schoeffer's inscriptions in the following impressions are somewhat
shorter, yet we shall likewise take the liberty of abridging them to avoid
repetition.

3. ST Jerome's Epistles with an introduction in 2 vol. fol. printed upon vellum
ann. 1470. In this he styles himself that famous person Peter Schoiffer
Epistolare beati Ieronymi cum introductorio per virum famatum in hac Art
Petrum Schoiffer, etc. At the end of the introdution are these two verses
addressed to the Saint;

Nunc memoris memor esto tui, Ieronyme, sancte,
Ne pereat, Christo veniam pro crimine dante.
At the end of the book are the six verses quoted before at page 33, which
begin thus;

Jam decet ut nostris concordent, etc.


, the colophon of it has been given in another place; and this is the book,
part of the price of which, as we said before, was remitted by him to the monks
of St Victor, in order to procure their prayers for Faust and himself. Cardinal
Brissonet, abbot of St Germain in the fields near Paris, gave another copy of
it to the library of that monastery; and a third was presented by Arthur de
Montauban archbishop of Bourdeaux to the library of the Celestins at Paris, of
which order he had been formerly. These are all still extant in the libraries
abovementioned.

4. VALERII MAXIMI dictorum factorumque memorabilium libri X. in fol. ann.
1471, in the noble city of Mentz upon the Rhine by Peter Schoeffer de
Gernsheim, master of the Art of Printing In nobili urbe Moguntina Rheni -- per
Petrum Schoeffer de Gernsheim artis impressoriae magistrum, viii Call. Jul.
.

5. THE Latin bible reprinted ann. 1472 by Peter Schoeffer with the same
colophon as the former Bible of 1462. It was finished on the eve of St. Matthew
the apostle.

6. THE Corpus Canonicum without the Printer's name, ann. 1472, fol.

THE Catholicon reprinted ann. 1472 with the same colophon as the former; and
finished on St. Matthew's eve. These three last being finished about the same
time, show that Schoeffer had already more than one press at work.

7. ST. Austin's book De civitate Dei in fol. with the commentaries of Thomas
de Valois and Nicholas Thevet, printed ann. 1473, at the end whereof are the
following words in latin, Igitur Aurelii Augustini, civitatis orthodoxae
sideris prae^^gidi, de civitate Dei opus praeclarissimum, binis sacrae paginae
professoribus eximiis id commentantibus, rubri^is tabulaque discretum, celsa in
urbe Moguntin^ partium Alemanniae, non calami per phrasim, characterum autem
apicibus artificiose elementatum, ad laudem T^initatis individuae, civitatis
Dei praesidio, operose est consummatum per Petrum Schoiffer de Gernsheim die V
mensis September MCCCCLXXIII.
viz. "This most excellent work of the city of God written by Aurelius
Augustine, the bright star of the orthodox city, with the commentaries of two
learned professors of divinity, distinguished with rubricks and a table of
contents, was with great labor finished in the famous city of Mentz in
Germany, not with a writing instrument, but by an artificial disposition of the
figures of letters, to the glory of the undivided trinity, and by the aid of
the city of God, by Peter Schoiffer de Gernsheim, on the fifth day of
September, 1473."

HENRICI HARP or Harpian. Ord. Min. Fr. Speculum aureum december praeceptorum Dei,
by Peter Schoiffer, etc. in fol. The colophon is almost the same with that of
the Secunda of Tho. Aquinas. It was finished on the fourth of the ides of
September ann. 1474.

9. S. BERNARDI Clarevallensis Abbatis sermones, fol. ann. 1475 In nobili urbe
Moguntini Petrus Scheysser de Gernsheim suis consignando scutis consummavit,
die xiv p^st. MCCCCLXXV.
. Here Schoeffer began to put his mark, rebus, or coat of arms to his
impressions.

10. JUSTINIANI Institutiones cum notis Accursii, fol. ann. 1476, Schoeffer
dedicated this work to Pope Sixtus IV, to the Emperor Frederic, and to the
Archbishop of Mentz Sanctiss. in Christo P. ac Dom. D. Sixto Pap. IV.
invictissimo Dom. D. Frederico Roman. Imperat. semper August generoso Dom.
Diethero de Bemburg electo and confirmato Moguntino in nobili urbe Moguntia
Rheni impressoriae artis inventrice elimatriceque prima, praesens Institutionum
opus praeclarum Pet. Schoeffer de Gernshiem suis consignan^o scutis,
omnipotente favente Deo, consummavit. 10 kal. Jun. MCCCCLXXVI.
.

11. DECISIONES Rotae Romanae, in fol. ann. 1477. The original of the colophon
may be seen in the margin Gravi labor, maximisque impensis, Romanam post
impressionem, opus iterum emendatum antiquarum novarumque decisionum suis cum
additionibus Dominorum de Rota, in civitate Moguntia artis impressoriae
inventrice and elimatrice prima, Petrus Schoiffer de Gernsheim suis consignando
scutis a te magistra feliciter finivit, pride. Non Jan. MCCCCLXXVII.
.

12. JOHAN. de Turre-cremata ord. praedic. Card. exposition of the psalms, in
fol. by Peter Schoiffer at Mentz, 1478.

13. PAUL. de S. Maria Bishop of Burgos's Scrutinium scripturarum, fol. ann.
1478. This work is inscribed to the same Archbishop of Mentz R in Christo Pat.
D D. Diethero Archipraesule Moguntino, in nobili civitate Moguntia domicilio
Minervae firmissimo, Petrus Schoeffer de Gernsheim art magistra suis
consignando scutis feliciter finivit, ad VII Idus Januarius. MCCCCLXXVIII.
.

14. THE book of Decretals in fol. at Mentz by P. Schoiffer, 1479.

THIS is the last book that is known to have been printed by him, who is
therefore supposed to have died about this time.

WE have now done with the city of Mentz; whose fame in this respect seems to
have been entirely confined to Faust's family, and that no further than to his
grandson John Schoeffer; seeing nothing considerable was ever printed there by
any other person, except the travels of Bernard Bredembach Dean of Mentz, into
the Holy Land ann. 1486, by one Erhard Rewick a native of Utrecht, whom we have
just mentioned. It Is now time to come to those places, which showed the
earliest specimens of this Art; and to give the best account we have of them.

. 2. The MONASTERY of SUBIACO.
THE next place, that we know of, which signalized it self in the Art of
Printing, is the monastery of Subiaco, in latin Monasterum Sublacense, in the
territories of Campania, in the kingdom of Naples, and subject to the Pope; the
monks of which are of the Benedictin order, and very rich, having the lordship
of no less than fourteen castles. Here the Art was introduced so soon, that in
the year 1465, there was published an edition of Lactantius's Institutions in
fol. so correct and elegant, and in such a beautiful Roman character, that
nothing seems wanting but the name of the Printer. What is still more
surprising is, that Lactantius's quotations from the Greek authors are printed
in a very neat Greek letter, and extremely like that which the first Printers
of Rome, Conrard Sweynheym and Arnold Pannartz, became noted for. This induced
father Orlandi to think it was one of the first essays, which those two Germans
made in that convent, before they went to Rome; but this can by no means be
allowed, because though the character be like theirs, yet it appears by the eight
first impressions, which they printed at Rome; that they had no Greek alphabet
'till four or five years after the date of this impression, as we shall see in
the next chapter: the following colophon is at the end of it.

In the year of our Lord MCCCCLXV, and the second year of the pontificate of
Pope Paul II. in the XIII indiction, and on the last day but one of the month
of October, in the venerable monastery of Subiaco. THIS scarce and curious
edition is mentioned by Montfaucon in his Diarium Italicum p. 255, and seq. who
has given it an earlier date, viz. 1461; but the mistake arises from the last
figure's being imperfectly printed. We know nothing of any other impression,
which came from that Monastery's press.

. 3. The CITY of AUSBURGH.
THE next is the city of Ausburgh [in latin Augusta,] one of the most opulent
of the imperial cities in Germany; in which the learned John Bemler set up a
Printing-press, about the year 1466. The only two books, that are known to be
printed by him, are the Latin Bible in fol. with this inscription -- ^er Joh.
Bemler, Augustae Vindelic. ann. 1466; and his translation of Joh. Nach 's summa
praecipuorum capitum fidei christianae, out of Latin into high Dutch, printed
ann. 1472. Whether he printed any books during that six years interval, or was
employed wholly in translating this last work, is difficult to determine, as
well as whether he published any thing after 1472. However there were five
other eminent persons in that city, who, though they did not begin so soon as he,
yet printed diverse learned works; most of them, being either citizens or
natives of Ausburgh, might in all probability learn the Art from him.

As we have little or nothing particular concerning them except their
impressions, we shall content our selves with giving their names, character,
and the time in which they printed, as far as we can discover it by their known
works.

AFTER the above named John Bemler came.

2. JOHN SHUSLER citizen of Ausburgh, a very good Printer, but whose works
reach only from ann. 1471 to 1472.

3. GONTER ZAINER de Reutlingen, who printed from ann. 1471 to 1484, we have
but eight of his impressions.

4. ANT. SORGIUS citizen of Ausburgh from 1477 to 1487, we have but four of his
editions.

5. ERHARD RALDOLT of Ausburgh, who after having printed some works at Venice,
with his partner Bernard Pictor, 'till the year 1485 or beyond, returned to his
own native city, and there set up a press about or before the year 1488, and
continued printing 'till 1490, if not beyond: however he was a very diligent
Printer for those times, seeing he printed in that short space seven books in
latin.

6. THE last we find in this city, is John Schensperger, who printed a
chronical work in Latin, with cutts fol. ann. 1497; but whether any besides
that, is not as yet known.

WE find likewise two or three Dutch books printed here without Printer's name,
and of no great consequence.

CHAP. II. 1. The first Printers at Rome; their Patrons and Correctors; Books
printed by them, etc. their Petition to the Pope. 2. The City of Tours, 1467.
3. The Town of Reutlingen, 1469.
SOON after Ausburgh had received the Art of Printing, it was brought to Rome
by two Germans, Conrard Sweynheim and Arnold Pannarts; who set up a
printing house there anno 1466, the second year of the pontificate of Paul II.
under the patronage of John Andreas Bishop of Aleria, who was the Popes
library keeper, justly famed for his learning and generosity. These printers
assisted with that prelates purse, did immediately prepare an elegant, round,
Roman character, and a sufficient quantity of the finest paper; they invented
likewise such variety of spaces, as kept a beautiful distance between the
words, and made their impressions appear with the greatest neatness and
exactness. Their margins were broad, and not only added a grace to the pages,
but rendered them likewise convenient for the writing of notes, etc. and their
ink was so excellent, that it still looks as fresh as if newly printed. In
short, they were persons who valued their credit, and the honor of pleasing
their patron more than riches; and spared neither cost nor labor, in order to
make their impressions as beautiful and correct, as possible; which any one
that has seen them, will own with pleasure.

I doubt not but the great acquaintance amongst the learned, which their noble
patron's friendship procured them, might be a great means of their improving
the art to such a degree; seeing such persons were best able to discover the
faults and inconveniences of the first printed books, which these Germans might
more easily rectify when they became acquainted with them. These two partners
settled themselves in the house of Peter and Francis de Maximis, brothers and
Roman knights; where the Bishop of Aleria not only furnished them with the most
valuable manuscripts, out of the Vatican and other libraties, but also prepared
them himself, corrected their proofs, and prefixed prefaces and dedications to
their works, in order to recommend them the more to the learned world. This
laborious task was followed by him with such application, that he scarce
allowed himself time to sleep. What a value this great Bishop had both for the
art and these two great masters of it, appears from his dedication to Pope Paul
II. prefixed to the edition of St. Jerome's Epistles, which I shall now give the
English reader a translation of. "It was, says he, in your days, that among
many other divine favors this blessing was bestowed on the Christian world,
that every poor scholar can purchase for himself a library for a small sum, --
that those volumes, which heretofore could scarce be bought for an hundred
crowns, may now be procured for less than twenty, very well printed, and free
from those faults with which manuscripts used to abound. -- for such is the art
of our printers and letter-makers, that no ancient or modern discovery is
comparable to it. Surely the German nation deserves our highest esteem, for the
invention of the most useful arts. The wish of the noble and divine Cardinal
Cusa, is now -- in your time accomplished, who earnestly desired that this
sacred art, which then seemed rising in Germany, might be brought to Rome. Your
Pontificate, (glorious in every respect,) will be as immortal as learning it
self. In which this art was brought and laid at your Holiness's feet. -- It is
my chief aim in this epistle to let posterity know, that the art of printing
and type-making was brought to Rome under Paul II. This blessing was certainly
conferred on us by our heavenly Shepherd, that a book is now purchased for less
than a binding formerly. Receive then, great, generous and glorious Pontif, the
first volume of St. Jerome, graciously, -- and take the excellent masters of
this art, Conrard Sweynheym and Arnold Pannarts, Germans, under your
protection, etc."

THUS were these two printers caressed and encouraged by most of the men of
letters and fortune at Rome, and even by the Pope himself, who frequently
visited their Printing House, and examined with admiration every branch of this
new art; which seemed designed to recover learning, and restore that city to
its ancient luster. This excited them to approve themselves worthy of all that
esteem, which was showed them, by publishing a vast number of elegant
impressions, some of which were so large that they could not be done without
great labor and charges, as will be evident from the list of their works, which
they presented to the Pope, of which we shall give an account in its proper
place.

WHAT their first impression was, whether Cicero's Familiar Epistles, or St.
Austin's book de Civitate Dei, is what authors can by no means agree about;
that the former was printed at Rome ann. 1467, with a latin epigram, at the end
of which their names are at full length; and on the following year, a new
edition of St. Austin's book Anno igitur eodem 1468, opus Augustini de Civitate
Dei eruditissimum; Epistolas Hieronymi disertissimas, cum luminibus orationis
tum viribus argumentorum instructas vulgaverunt. -- Anno superiore Tullianas
dederant Epistolas, hoc dant Hieronymianas, etc. Annal. Typograph. p. 44.
is plain beyond contradiction: the dispute therefore seems to be about an
edition of it, older by a year; in which the Printer, without either naming
himself, or the place in which it was done, contents himself with this colophon
in latin, MCCCCLXVII, in the third year of Pope Paul II, etc. from which last
words, and the likeness of the character with the Lactantius printed at
Subiaco, and their first impressions at Rome; they venture to affirm it to have
been printed by them, without deciding whether at Rome or any where else.
Orlandi, the last writer upon the subject, speaks of it as follows, p. 67 Egli
e ancora certissimo che il primo Libro, il quale usci dalle stamp di Roma, e
sempre stato creduto dagli autori il Sant. Agostino de c^vitate Deo. il quale
se been non addita il luogo, ove stampato, ne il nome degl' Impressori, tutta
volta e di carettere tondo Romano, stampato nel anno terzo di papa Paolo II, e
nel millesimo. 1467, come si leg in detto libro. Orleand. origin. della
Stamp. page 67.
. "It is certain that the first work, that came out of their press has been
universally believed by authors to be St. Austin's book de civitate Dei; and
though it mentions neither the name of the place or of the Printer, yet being
printed in a round Roman character, and in the third year of Paul II. ann.
1467, as may be seen at the end of the said book;" it cannot but have been done
by them; but I think I have two material objections against it: the first is,
that if they had printed it at Rome, they would not have omitted it in their
list to the Pope; and if at Subiaco or any where else, I cannot see how they
could print the Cicero at Rome in the same year. Secondly, though the likeness of
the character seems to carry some proof, and inclined him to believe the
edition of Subiaco to have been also done by them; yet it is evident by what we
hinted in the introduction, that they were so far from being furnished with a
Greek alphabet, that their first works have all the greek done upon wood in a
very inelegant manner; and that whenever the quotation was above three or four
words, they left a blank space to be filled afterward with the pen; whereas
this of Lactantius has all the greek quotations printed in a beautiful cast
letter: and therefore though we may allow this edition and that disputed one of
St. Austin's, to have been done by the same hand, yet it is plain it could not
be done by those two Germans. If we can believe them, they will tell us, that
they began their first trial with a less considerable work, viz. Donatus's
grammar, of which they printed only 300 copies: this is plain, both by their
putting it at the head of their list, and by their prefacing it with the words
-- unde imprimendi initium sumpsimus, after which they went on with Concerning
these two editions the letter on which they were printed, gave names to two
sizes of Printing-letter; viz. from Cicero's Epistles, that sized Letter has
been called Cicero ever since in Italy, France, and Germany, and answers to our
Pica; Holland alone calls it Medi^an: the other is from St. Austin's book,
which is called Augustine in several parts of Europe, but with us English; but
this I shall treat of more largely in the second volume.
Cicero's Epistles, and the rest of their works without mentioning any edition
of St. Austin's before the year 1468: the epigram which we mentioned before, to
be at the end of both these editions is as follows,

Hoc Conradus opus Sweynheim ordine miro
Arnoldusque simul Pannartz una oede colendi
Gente Theotonica Romae expediere sodales
In domo Petri de Maximis.
I have already hinted their method of managing the Greek quotations, which
they followed in the first volumes they printed, that is 'till the middle of
the year 1469: perhaps were they forced to it for want of workmen to cut the
Greek alphabet; but at length, notwithstanding the neglect of that tongue might
have excused them from the labor and expense of procuring setts of punches and
matrices for Printing in that language, and the difficulty of finding workmen
fit for such a task, they surmounted every obstacle of this nature, and formed
a complete Greek alphabet, which they used in the edition of Aulus Gellius.
Concerning this edition the Bishop of Aleria speaks thus; "However, this proved
a very arduous task at first; -- for a great part of the Latin was corrupted
through the negligence of the transcribers; and a much greater part of the Greek
depraved, maimed, and mutilated. Even that, which remained entire, was scarce
understood by Latin scholars, by reason of their ignorance in Greek. Some
attempts have been made by persons skilled in both tongues, to restore this
jewel to its former luster; but they, either discouraged by the difficulty, or
diverted by other affairs, desisted from the undertaking." Thus writes that
learned prelate, who by the assistance of Theodore Gaza, a man of great
abilities and universal learning, performed this admirable work, rectified the
Latin text, and rendered the Greek intelligible. This edition was printed ann.
1469 in a fine character, with the arguments to each book done in red by the
illuminators. The quotations, which are long and more frequent, than in any
other author, are printed in a fair Greek character, considering this kind of
printing was but in its infancy; and what is extremely remarkable, they were so
correctly printed, that, as we are assured by Mr. Mattaire, in two whole pages,
which contained seventy six lines of a considerable length, there were but
fourteen faults of impression. The place, mentioned by that author, may be seen
in page 46 of his Annals Typogr* where he has set down those places, which
were wrong printed, in order to convince the world, by the smallness of their
number, of the accuracy and diligence of those two Printers.

HE tells us likewise that their Greek character was somewhat large, round and
even, without accents, ligatures, abbreviations, or any thing that might
perplex the reader, except only that sometimes two or more words were joined
together without any space between them; and that the periods had either no
full stop, or one in the wrong place; so that a person, not used to MSS. was
doubtful where the sense ended. To this edition was prefixed a dedicatory
Epistle of the Bishop of Aleria to the Pope, wherein he acknowledges the
kindness of his Holiness and the Cardinal of Ostia, in supplying him with money
in his greatest exigencies; and promises to proceed with the utmost industry in
furnishing the learned world with new productions from the press. At the end of
the book is a copy of verses, supposed to be written by the same prelate, in
praise of that edition, which are elegant for those times, the reader may find
them at length in Mr. Mattaire's Annals p. 47. I shall only give a latin
octastich, which was printed at the end of several of their impressions, in
commendation of the printers; wherein the poet apologizes for the harshness of
their German names, offensive without doubt to an Italian ear. They are
inserted particularly in the first edition of St. Jerome's Epistles, and the
great work of Nich. de Lyra entitled Glossa ordinaria in universam Bibliam, 5
vol. fol. and in several others. The reader will find them in the margin
Aspicis illustres, lector, quicunque libellos,
Si cupis artificum nomina nosse, lege.
Alpera ridebis cognomina Teutona forsan:
Mitiger ars Musis inscia verba virum.
Conradus Sweynheim, Arnoldus, Pannartzque magistri.
Romae impresserunt talia multa simul,
Petrus cum fratre Francisco Maximus, ambo
Huic operiaptatam contribuere domum.

. Thus they continued printing without intermission mission for seven years,
whilst their patron procured 'em all possible assistance, and overlooked their
impressions. This is manifest from the editions of Tully, St. Jerome, Livy,
Lucan, the works of St. Leo, Ovid, Nicholas de Lyra, and especially of Pliny,
with many more; in which the Bishop acquaints the world with the pains, taken
by himself and his constant assistant Theod. Gaza, in correcting the originals,
and presiding over the editions -- Juvit mirifice vir summae eruditionis ac
sapientiae Theodorus meus Gaza, atque ita quidem, ut absque illo nec, pene
dixerim, mundus hoc munus fuerit impleturus. Epist. Dedic. ad Pap Paul. II.
prefixed to Pliny.
. For this reason Dr. Mentel, mentioned in our first book, affirms him to have
been corrector of Sweynheim's press, and Campanus Bishop of Teramo, who was
Ulric Han's patron, to have performed the same office in his Joannes Andreas
praesul Aleriensis, qui in ipsorum libraria taberna (...) esse non dedignatus
est; ut nec Campanus in Uldaric. Mentel. de vera Typograph. origin. p. 11.
. This is likewise asserted by Naude in his supplement to the history of Lewis
XI Rome fut une des premieres ou la press roula par le moyen d'un Uldaricus
Gallus, qui dona sujet a l'eveque Jo. Campanus, lequel se rendit correcteur de
son imprimere de composer cette epigramme a sa louange, que raporte Faernus.
Addit. ad Hist. Lud. XI, p. 297.
, and diverse other writers. But it is questionable whether those excellent
persons can properly be called correctors, or rather do not deserve the title
of authors or editors.

HOWEVER, there is an eminent passage in this Epistle of the Bishop's before
Pliny's works, which as it demonstrates his care and diligence in his province,
ought not to be omitted. "It was, says he Irenaeus Lugdunensis episcopus; item
Justinus ex philosopho martyr; item cum divo Hieronymo Eusebius Caesariensis
seram posteritatem adjurarunt, ut eorum descripturi opera conserrent diligenter
exemplaria, solerti studio emendarent: idem ego tum in caeteris libris, tum
maxim in Plinto ut fiat, vehementer obsecro, obtestor, atque adjuro, ne ad
priora menda and tenebras inextricabiles tanti sudoris opus relabatur.
, the earnest request of Ireneus Bp. of Lions; and of Justin, who of a
philosopher became a martyr, and likewise of St. Jerome and Eusebius of Cesarea,
to the latest posterity, that those, who were to transcribe their works, would
diligently compare the copies of them, and carefully correct them: the same
request I make now, both with respect to other books, and in particular to
Pliny, lest that work, which cost so much labor and study, (for he spent above
nine whole years in it) should again sink into its former errors and
inextricable darkness."

HITHER TO we have seen the flourishing state of this press, which in the space
of six or seven years at most, viz. from ann. 1467 to 1472, obliged the world
with no less than twelve thousand four hundred and seventy five volumes, in
eight and twenty editions, some of them very large, and all beautiful and
correct; so that if their vast labors and cost had met with suitable success,
they must have raised a prodigious estate. But, whatever be the cause, it is
certain that the greatest part of this library remained still in their hands
for want of buyers; which reduced them to the most necessitous circumstances.
Father Orlandi endeavors to account for this ill-success, by supposing that
their impressions, being in Roman character, were disliked in those days,
because the learned had been so accustomed to the old Gothic, as not to
approve of this new, though preferable one. This conjecture seems the more
probable upon two accounts; 1. Because several eminent printers were obliged to
comply with the taste of the age, and use the old character, resembling that of
MSS. 2. Most of the first Printers of Paris, Venice, Rome, etc. who began with
the Roman, were forced by degrees to resume the old Gothic, which continued
till almost the middle of the next century, and proved the ruin of many
valuable impressions in diverse parts of Europe. However that be, our two
Germans under these pressing exigencies had recourse to their great patron, who
immediately drew up a petition in their names and behalf to Pope Xystus IV,
subjoined to the fifth volume of Nich. de Lyra's Gloss. and presented on the
20th of March 1472. In this he represents their great merit and misery in the
most pathetick terms imaginable; gives a catalogue of all the volumes printed
by them, the greatest part of which was still unsold; prays his Holiness to
consider their deplorable case; and declares their readiness to deliver up the
unsold books either to him, or to whomsoever he should command, for their
present subsistence. The Bishop, to show that he was sensibly touched with
their misfortune, prefaceth the petition in his own name, and requests the Pope
to hear the just complaint of his worthy and industrious Printers; and
afterward exposes their circumstances in their own words. As this curious
piece has never yet, that I know of, been translated into English; I presume
the reader will be pleased to see it, with the promised list of their works,
both which they printed with the works N. de Lyra; Chevillier tells us he saw
it at the beginning of Tome 5. of that great work. It is as follows,

" JO. AND. ad XYST. IV.

-- Ut digneris misericorditer occurrere, servuli tuae sanctitatis Conradus
Swyenheim and Arnoldus Panna^^^ impressores nostri ac utilissimae hujus
fictoriae artis primi in Ital^^ opifices implorant. -- Vox impressorum sub
tanto chartarum fasce laborantium, and, nisi tualiberalitas opituletur,
deficientium ista est. -- Nos de Germanis primi, tanti commodi artem in Romanam
curiam tuam multo sudore and impensa decessoris tui tempestate deveximus. Nos
opifices librarios caeteros, ut idem auderent, nostro exemplo incitavimus --
Indicem si perlegeris impressorum a nobis operum, miraberis -- vel chartas huic
librorum copiae potuisse vel lineamenta sufficere -- Impressi sunt nostro
studio libri, qui in subjectis suo ordine tibi recensebuntur.

1. Donatus pro puerulis, ut inde principium dicendi sumamus, unde imprimendi
initium sumpsimus, without date. CCC. 2. Lactantii Firm. Institutionum
divinarum lib. vii. Anno 1468 DCC XXV. 3. M. Tull. Cicer. Epistolae familiares
1467 DL. 4. M. T. Cicer. Epistolae ad Atticum 1470 CC LXXV. 5. Roderic episcop
Zamorensis Speculum vitae humanae 1468 CCC. 6. D. August. de civitate Dei 1468
DCCC XXV. 7. D. Hieronymi epistolae, vol. II 1468 M C. 8. M. T. Cicero de
oratore cum caeteris, without date D L. 9. M. T. Cicer. pars libelli de
philosophia 1471 D L. 10. L. Apuleius Platonicus cum Alcinoo 1469 CC LXXV. 11.
Auli Gellii noctium Atticarum lib. 1469 CC LXXV. 12. C. Caesaris Commentaria
1469 CC LXXV. 13. Divi Platonis defensio, without date CCC. 14. P. Virgil.
Maron opera omnia, without date D L. 15. T. Livius Patavinus cum Epitome
decadum, without date CC LXXV. 16. Strabonis Geographia, without date CC LXXV.
17. M. Annaeus Lucanus 1466 CC LXXV. 18. C. Plinii Veronens. Nature. histor 1470
CC C. 19. C. Suetonius Tranquillus de xii Caesar. 1470 CC LXXV. 20. Div. Leonis
Pap. sermones 1470 CCLXXV. 21. M. Fab Quintilian. Institution. Oratoriar. 1470
CC LXXV. 22. D. Thom. Aquin. Continuum catenae aureae, without date D L. 23. D.
Cypriani Epistolae 1471 CC LXXV. 24. Biblia cum Opusculo Aristeae 1471 D L. 25.
Silius Italicus cum Calphurnio and Hesiodo 1471 CC LXXV. 26. M. T. Orationes
cum invectivis in Verrem, etc. 1471 CC LXXV. 27. P. Ovid. Nason. opera omnia, 2
vol. 1471 D L 28. Nichol. de Lyra. Glossa in tot. Bibl. 5 vol.1471 1472 M C.


JO. ANDR. to XYSTUS IV.
-- Your Holiness's humble petitioners Conrard Sweynheim and Arnold Pannartz,
our printers and the first artificers, who practiced this most useful invention
in Italy, implore your assistance. -- This is the voice of those printers, who
labor under such a load of printed volumes, that they must sink under it,
unless timely relieved by you. -- We were the first of the Germans, who
introduced this excellent art, with vast labor and cost, into your
territories, in the time of your predecessor; and encouraged, by our example,
other printers to do the same. If you peruse the catalogue of the works printed
by us, you will admire how and where we could procure a sufficient quantity of
paper, or even rags, for such a number of volumes. -- The books, done by us,
are subjoined in the following order."

THE list of those books consisting entirely of Latin, I have put them with the
original of the petition in the margin, and have added the date of the year
wherein each was printed, as far as it could be procured, there being none in
the catalogue. The order of time is not observed, but only the number of copies
of each. We may likewise infer what book were then most esteemed, not upon the
account of their authors, but of their usefulness, by the proportionate number
printed of them. The petition thus proceeds.

"THE total of these volumes amounts to twelve thousand four hundred seventy
five, a prodigious heap, and intolerable to us, your Holiness's printers, by
reason of those unsold. -- We are no longer able to bear the great expense of
housekeeping for want of buyers; of which there cannot be a more flagrant
proof, than that our house, otherwise spacious enough, is full of Quire-books,
but void of every necessary of life: -- we are ready, if your goodness shall
judge it Horum omnium voluminum summa -- efficit codices duodecies mill
^uadringentos septuaginta quinque; acervum quidem ingentem, and nobis
impressoribus tuis qua part restat, intolerabilem -- ingens sumptus ad victum
necessarius, cessantib^s emptoribus ferri amplius a nobis nequit; and ementes
non esse nullum est gravius testimonium, quam quod domus nostra satis magna
plena est quinternionum, inanis rerum necessariarum -- parati sumus pro
clementiae tuae arbitrio de nostra merce i. e. de impressis quinternionibus
nostris tibi tot tradere, quot volue^is, and quibus volueris. -- Tua
incredibilis mansuetudo subveniat nobis de aliquo officio, unde possimus nos
and nostros alere. Impensa est facta in solius Nicolai de Lyra a nobis
voluminibus tanta, ut amplius nihil nobis supersit ad vivendum. Si venderemus
opera nostra, non solum a pietate tua nihil peteremus, sed ultro in praesentium
temporum articulo, in quo te plurimum egere non nescimus, ipsi nostra
offerremus; faciemusque quo^iens tuo adjumento fortuna nobiscum usa esse
videbitur front sereniore Interea, Pater Sancte, adjuvent nos miserationes
tuae, quia pauperes facti sumus nimis -- xx Mart^^^s CCCCLXXII, Pontificatus
tui Clementissimi anno primo.
meet, to deliver up as much of our wares, i. e. print^d sheets, as you please,
to your self, or to whom you shall order. -- We therefore beseech your great
Clemency to bestow some place upon us, whereby we may be enabled to maintain
our selves and families. The impression of Nicol. de Lyra's works has proved
so chargeable, that we have nothing left to live upon. Could we sell our books,
we should be so far from desiring any thing at your hands, that on the contrary
we should willingly contribute of our own to you, whose exigencies at this
juncture we are well acquainted with; and this shall readily be performed,
whenever fortune, by your assistance, shall smile upon us. In the mean time,
let your Holiness pity and help us, whose necessity is so exceeding great. --
March xx, ann. MCCCCLXXII, and in the first year of your most gracious
pontificate."

THUS were these indigent persons obliged to expose their misery to the world;
with what success, I cannot learn: though it is evident from their printing a
considerable time after, as shall be shown, that some method must have been
taken to extricate them from those wretched circumstances. Sweynheim indeed
published nothing after the year 1473, and for that reason is supposed by some
to have died about that time; yet his partner Pannartz continued printing till
ann. 1476, in a smaller character than what was used by him in company with the
former. It will not perhaps be amiss to remark that the word quinternio in the
petition, translated by us Quire-books, signifies a quire of five sheets so
imposed, that they are put into one another by the book-binder, and the first
sheet contains the first and last of the 10 leaves, the second the 2d and 9th,
etc. this method obliged 'em to compose twenty whole pages of matter, before
they worked it off at press; and required a prodigious quantity of letter to
every Font. All the editions of these two partners as yet known, from their
first settlement at Rome, ann. 1467 to 1473 in which Sweynheim is thought to
have died, are 40 in number, all folio's and in latin; some of them pretty
considerable, such were their Bible of 1471 mentioned in the former book in two
large volumes, and Nicol. de Lyra in five larger ones; the works of Pope Leo
sirnam'd the Great, etc. As for those which Pannartz printed afterward by
himself, we have not been able to discover above six, all latin folio's, but
none so considerable as the three last named: he began to use the Registrum
Chartarum (which is the signatures placed at the end of the book thus, A B C D,
etc. and so on for as many sheets as the book contains) in his edition of
Herodotus translated by Laurent. Valla, and printed ann. 1475; his latter works
are done in a very elegant character; the last of which is the Quaestiones de
Veritate of Thom-Aquinas. It must be observed that many of these editions are
printed without date, and sometimes without their names, but most of them have
one or the other of the Epigrams mentioned before viz. Hoc Conradus opus etc.
or Aspicis illustres, etc. but oftener the latter.

THESE are all the particulars I could meet with concerning these two Printers.
The next in rank is,

ULDRIC HAN ann. MCCCCLXVIII.

ULDRIC HAN is commonly called in Latin, Gallus, in Italian Gallo, and in
French Coq, which signifies a Cock; for every writer upon this subject, has
thought fit to translate his name into that language in which he wrote. This
Printer came and set up a Printing-press at Rome within a very short space
after Sweynheim and Pannartz. He was a person so accomplished in his art, that
several nations have claimed him, and in particular the Germans and French.
These latter grounded their pretenses upon the following authority. Anthony
Campanus bishop of Terumo, the most distinguished poet and orator of his time,
performed the same office to him, which the bishop of Aleria did to the two
Germans, viz. of preparing and correcting his copies, revising his editions,
and writing epistles and commendatory verses upon them. He observing that Han
had latiniz'd his name, and subscribed one or two of his impressions Uldaricus
Gallus, particularly the edition of the universal history of Rodoricus Santius
a Spaniard, whom Pope Paul II made governor of the castle of St Angelo and
bishop of Palentino, took occasion to mistake his name wilfully, (for he could
not possibly be ignorant of his being a German,) and to represent him as a
Frenchman, not so much out of respect to that nation above the Germans, as for
the sake of a pun in his epigram, which you will find in the margin Anser
Ta^p^i custos Jovis unde quo ^n^is
Constreperes, (...) decidit* (...).
Uldricus Gallus: ne quem poscantur in usum.
^^ocui^ pennis nil opus esse tuis.

. The witticism consists chiefly in this, that the Gauls or French being
discovered by the noise of the geese one night in their attempt to surprise the
Roman Capitol, a countryman of theirs had found out a way to be revenged of
them, by teaching the world an art of writing without the help of their quills.
These verses are annexed to an edition of T. Livy by U. Han without date, and
quoted by several authors.

MICH. FERNUS in his life of that Bishop tells us, that he learned this epigram
of a Turk, whom he met with in a journey to the Pope's territories; and who
gave him account of his conversion to the christian religion, and his early
love of eloquence, which induced him to leave Turkey and come to Rome, to see
the famous Paul II. and Campanus, whose works he had carefully collected; and
amongst other things recited this epigram. However, it is evident that he was a
German by his adding the name of his country to that of Gallus in several of
his editions. Thus, in that of Cicero de Oratore, ann. 1468. he calls himself
Ulricum Gallum de Wiena; in St Austin de civitate Dei ann. 1474, Ulricum Gallum
Almanum; in some others Ulricum Gallum de Bienna and de Ingolstat. Wimpheling
undertook to prove him a German against Fernus, who in his life of Campanus
changed Gallus into Gallicus to make him an absolute Frenchman, and ascribed
this mistake to his having translated his name into latin; which, as Hermolaus
Barbarus asserts, ought never to be done. But in this he did no more than what
was frequent among the Germans and others, who to soften the harshness of their
sirnames, either altered or latiniz'd them; so Fust changed his into Faustus,
Schoeffer into Opilio, Leichtenstein into Levi lapis, des Rouges into de
Rubeis, and the learned Stephens into Stephanus; which custom still prevails in
foreign parts: and the famous Mons. le Clerc of Amsterdam, styles himself Joan.
Clericus in all his latin works. To return to Ulric IIan.

THE time of his first coming to Rome is not easily determined. Some affirm
that he was settled there before Sweynheim and Pannartz, as Wimpheling, Mons.
Naude, and Dr. Mentel; but this seems improbable upon two accounts. 1. Because
we have no edition of his so ancient as those of the two last named; 2. Because
the Bp. of Aleria, who was the editor of all the first impressions of these,
determines in their favor; and his testimony is of much greater weight in this
case, than that of those writers. He attributes the honor to Sweynheim, etc.
of having founded the first Printing House at Rome, and brought the Art from
Germany, in the preceding Popes reign, and by their example encouraged others
to do the like; as he speaks in the petition to Xystus IV, above quoted. Now
Xystus's predecessor was Paul II, who was advanced to that dignity in August
1464; and in his days they came to Rome. If Campanus, the patron of Ulric, had
known of his settling there before them, he would certainly have contradicted
the Bp. of Aleria, and maintained the priority to the man, who, under his
protection, proved so indefatigable in his business, that himself was engaged
night and day in revising his works Cum Uldricus quidam Gall^^^^ qui formas in
urbein literarias nuper intulisset, illum interquiescere assiduis emen
ationibus non permitteret, remque literariam ex magnis dissicultatibus
inopiaque ad ingentem ubertatem gloriosissimo illo and divino opificio
evocaret, etc. Fern. in Vita Campani.
. The merit of this Printer appears from his fine impressions, and the choice
that his patron made of him to publish those works, which he had procured and
corrected with the utmost application, as well as from the praises, which he
gives him in his prefatory epistles and verses. We find by the list of his
books, that he frequently neglected the date of the impression and his own
name. The former defect is supplied, as far as possible, from some material
circumstances, either in the epistles affixed to them, or elsewhere in the
book; and the latter by a diligent comparing of one edition with another; for
there is some peculiar difference between the characters of the first Printers,
by which a nice observer may judge of the author.

THUS Mr. Mattaire remarks that the types of Con. Sweynheim and Arn. Pannartz,
were easily known by their having a long s at the end of words, the i without a
point, and no diphthongs: those of Nic. Jenson were much more round and neat,
with the diphthongs, ae and oe; whereas Jo. Spires made use of e for ae, and
Ulric Han uses a single e instead of a diphthong.

ABOUT 1473, Han took Simon Nicolai de Luca into partnership with him till the
end of the year 1474, after which he printed by himself till 1476. There was
also a brother of his, called Lupus Han, whose name stands alone in some of
those impressions, which are nevertheless allowed to be Ulric's by reason of
the likeness of the character etc. and added to the list of his works by the
two latest annalists, Mr. Maittaire and Father Orlandi. He affected to put at
the end of some of his editions, the colophon of John Faust and Peter
Schoeffer. Non atramento, plumali calamo, etc. i. e. that it was not done with
pen, ink, or any other writing instrument, etc.

ANN. 1473 he began to print a register in two columns at the end of his
Virgil: all his other editions, as yet known, are 21 in number, the first of
which is Cicero de Oratore in 3 books ann. 1468, the last Til^ Livy in Italian
1476: this last is in three volumes fol. the 2d of which has an error in its
date, where they have printed 1460 instead of 1476. This work has not indeed
his name, but those who have seen it make no doubt but it was printed by him.

THE two Germans had reason to tell the Pope in their petition, that their
example had encouraged many more Printers to come and settle at Rome, seeing we
find no less than thirteen, who practiced the same Art there between 1470 and
1490, besides the brother of Uldric Han, and his partner Simon de Luca; and
eight or nine of whom were actually settled there within a few years after the
two former; but as we have nothing left particularly concerning them, except
their names and their works, we shall just mention them as they came in course
of time.

4. GEORGE LAVFR de Herbipoli 1470 alias Wortsburg, he wrought in the Monastery
of St. Eusebius at Rome, as we find by an epigram of eight verses in latin
rhyme written, as is supposed, by his corrector Celestine Pulverinus; and
printed at the end of his edition of Tractatus de Institutione simplicium
Confessorum, ann. 1472; he had a partner some space of the time, viz. Leonard
Pelugi; we have but five editions of his; the first is that of St. Chrysostom's
homilies, translated into latin by Fr. Aretine, sol. ann. 1470; the last is
Durandi Speculum, ann. 1479; he had another corrector named Pomponius.

5. ADAM ROT 1471, he used likewise Faust's colophon, and in the first of the
two editions we have of him, styles himself Clericus Metens. Dioces. his last
edi^ion is dated 1474.

6. JOHN PHILIP de Lignamine 1472, he was a native of Messina and a Sicilian
knight, and intimate with Pope Sixtus IV, to whom he inscribed a book of his
writing, De unoquoque Cibo and Potu utili homini and nocivo, and eorum primis
qualitalibus. Malinkrot mentions him page 84 upon the authority of Simler,
which last affirms him to have printed the following works at Rome, viz.
Quintilian, Suetonius, the works of St. Leo, Lactantius, St. Ambrose, Tully's
Offices, Laur. Valla's Elegantiae, and Horatii opuscula: but we find none of
these editions in the list of his works, but only four less considerable ones,
the three first in Italian, and the last, Eusebius's history translated into
Latin by Rufinus, and printed ann. 1476.

7. STEPHEN PLANCK of Padua 1472, we have eight editions of his, the last of
which is dated 1497.

8. GEORGE SACHEL de Reichenhalt, 1474; his last edition of three is dated 1477.

9. JOHN REYNARD de Eningen, 1475; we have but one edition of his printed at
Rome, ann. 1475, 14 years after which, we find him printing at Strasburgh.

10. JOHN de Nicolao Haneymar de Openheim, 1475,

11. JOHN SCHUSENER de Bopardia,1475,

we have but two editions of theirs, both dated 1475.

12. JOHN TIBULL de Amidanis Cremonese, 1475; the two editions we have of his
bear the same date.

13. EUCHARIUS SILBER OF WIRTZBURGH, 1475.

THIS Silber, alias Franck, a German and native of Wirtzburgh, signalized
himself at Rome by the fineness of his letter, which were of the Venetian sort.
He set up his Printing House in Campo di Fiore; and not only translated his
name Silber [Silver] into latin, but likewise into greek; so that some of his
editions are subscribed Achirion and Argyrion, others Argenteus, added to that
of Franck. The works we have of his are twenty one in number, from ann. 1475 to
1500: however he continued printing there many years after, but either the
greatest part of these last have been lost, or else he printed but little,
since we meet only with two editions of his from 1500 to 1509, in Mr.
Mattaire's annals.

HIS correctors were Michael Fern sirnam'd Archipoeta, Bartholomeus Salicetus,
and Ludovicus Regii; the first of whom collected with prodigious industry all
bishop Campanus's works, which he caused to be printed in two different places
within six months of each other, viz. at Venice and Rome, in the order in which
he had digested them. These impressions were printed so incorrectly, that he
was obliged to insert an Errata in Silber's edition; wherein he expresses a
vast deal of indignation, that a work, in which he had labored so much, should
yet be published so full of faults; and gives it the following title, Vis ex
stulto demens, idemque ex demente insanus fieri? Libros Romae primus imprime,
Corruptorum recognitio. After this he proceeds to the Errata, with an
acknowledgement of his own errors, and endeavors to clear the Printers of
others. He shows the care which he had taken to render the edition correct; but
that his efforts were frustrated by the carelessness of the Printers, who,
being tired with a days labor, correct their proofs imperfectly, and
frequently neglect or omit the author's corrections.

IN the sequel of this history we shall have occasion to mention some Errata's
of a much greater length than the foregoing, which Fern complains so loudly of,
though this contained four large pages in fol. The two last Printers in this city
before 1500 are:

14. SIMON de Nicolo of Luca 1478, who had been sometime partner to the famed
Uldric Han, and of whom we have but one edition. And,

15. PETER de Turre, ann. 1490, in which year he printed Ptolemy's Cosmography
in a large folio with maps and cutts, and in a beautiful character, [Orland. p.
79.] which is all that we have of his. We find about twenty more editions
without Printer's names; however the reader will easily see by this list of
Printers, and the scarcity of their works, that the Art began to dwindle very
much before the close of the century; and if he consults Mr. Mattaire upon the
next, he will find it still much thinner of both; but whether for want of
encouragement, or what other cause, is not my business to enquire.

. 2. The City of Tours, 1467.
TOURS is an Archiepiscopal city of France; in which we meet with but one book
printed. This, 'tho done in an old Gothic character, (which was not as yet
used in any place but Mentz) is so elegant, that it may be esteemed a
masterpiece of that kind. It Is to be regretted, that the Printer of such an
excellent work should be unknown. The impression was done in the Archbishop's
palace; but if the reader upon that account, shall expect it to be a piece of
devotion, he will be vastly mistaken; for it is not unusual with ecclesiastics
of the most elevated stations in that church, to have a greater relish for
gallantry than religion. The book is the loves of Camillus and Emilia; to which
is subjoined another upon the same subject, translated from Boccacio by Aretin,
and is inscribed as follows.

FRANCISCI FLORII Florentini de Amore Camilli and Aemiliae liber, expletus est
Turonis, editus in domo Guillelmi Archiepiscopi Turonensis, anno millesimo
quadringentesimo sexagesimo septimo, pridie calendas Januarii, 4to. De duobus
Amantibus Libellus in latinum, ex Boccacio, transfiguratus per Leonardum
Aretinum. This book is joined to the former, and printed in the same character
and form.

THE following book was printed in the same city a long time after* viz. La vie
and miracles de monseigneur St. Martin translatee de Latin en Francois:
imprimee par Mathieu Lateron, fol. 7me de May, Tours. 1496.

N. B. Though we design to treat in a distinct book of the introduction and
progress of Printing in England; yet it is not amiss to remark here, that
Oxford comes next in course to the city of Tours, according to our premised
criterion of the oldest editions; for the most ancient impression printed in
that university, is St. Jerome's exposition of the apostles creed 4to, bearing
date ann. 1468, a copy of which is now in the Earl of Pembroke's library.

. 3. The Town of Reutlingen, 1469.
THIS town of Reutlingen, and the city of Venice are next; the former of which
being nearer to Mentz, may so far be allowed the first rank: It is a small town
in the duchy of Wirtembergh, in which John de Averbach set up a Printing House
ann. 1466, and published the two following editions;

1. BIBLIA Latina, fol. per Johannem de Averbach, 1469.

2. ALVARI Pelagii Hispani ordin. min. summa de planctu ecclesiae Christianae,
Reutlingae. 1474.

THIS is a very scarce book, and has not the Printer's name, but is
nevertheless supposed to have been printed by Averbach: It is in fol. and the
next edition of it was printed at Ulm ann. 1473. This John Averbach must not be
confounded with the learned J. Amerbach of Basil, of whom we shall speak in its
proper place.

CHAP. III. The City of Venice, 1469; the Names, Character, etc. of the
Printers who flourished in this City from ann. 1469, to Aldus Manutius's Time,
1494
AS the city of Venice has excelled all others, not only in the number of
workmen and editions, but likewise in the goodness and excellency of them, I
shall be forced to divide it into two chapters; in the first of which I shall
speak of those Printers who flourished from its first settlement there by John
and Vindelin de Spira, to the time of the great Aldus Manutius, whose merit
alone will very well deserve to be spoken of in a chapter by it self, though
there were no others to bear him company in it.

WITH respect to those first Printers, 'twill be superfluous to repeat here
what I have said, in the introduction of this book, concerning Nich. Jenson,
and the reasons for suspending my judgment concerning his edition of 1461, and
allowing the priority to the foregoing cities before that of Venice. There will
be further occasion of speaking of that Printer, when we shall come to
thoseother works of his, printed between the years 1470 and 1480. In the mean
time I beg leave to remind the reader of the remark upon this head, which we
just hinted in the introduction, viz. that the verses at the end of the first
impression by John and Windelin of Spire ann. 1469, evidently prove them to
have been the first who brought the Art to that city. The reader will find them
in the margin Primus in Adriaca formis impressit aenis
Urbe libros Spira genitus de stirpe Johannes.
In reliquis sit quanta, vides, spes, lector, habenda,
Quam labor hic primus calami superaverit artem. MCCCCLXVIIII.

. Mr. Mattaire who has a particular regard for his countryman Jenson, and
first discovered to the world the edition in dispute, very justly intimates,
that there was such an emulation among the first Printers, that they made no
scruple of claiming the priority from each other, right or wrong; either by
false dates, as we hinted before, or by pompous verses annexed to their works;
from which he infers a probability that these two brothers might do so: whereas
Jenson, in his opinion was too modest, to have been guilty of such a piece of
arrogance. For my part I cannot see any necessity of accusing either side of
such a fault, seeing they never charged each other with it; besides Jenson in
all probability printed his book somewhere else, and therefore might indeed be
too modest when he came to Venice, to challenge the priority from them as to
that place in particular. However, as to the point of modesty, I own I am at a
loss to what side to give it, seeing all the first impressions, both of Jenson
and of the two brothers, are backed with epigrams equally magnificent, and I
don't see where there would have been the least immodesty in either to have
ascertained a just claim, against an unjust assuming rival. Let me add, that
(if there was any wilful mistake on either side, which I think there was not)
it is more probable Jenson should have committed it, than the two brothers;
because he might easily, if there was occasion, excuse it by making his date
pass for an error of impression; whereas the two Germans published themselves,
in words at length and in the plainest terms, the first Printers at Venice, and
so left no room for evasion. I shall therefore begin with them, who were not
inferior to Jenson himself.

JOHN and VINDELINE of SPIRE, 1469. THEY were natives of Germany, but whether
of the city of Spire, whose name they bear, or whether that was only their
surname, I cannot determine; for though some of the epigrams annexed to their
books seem to imply the former, yet it is difficult to affirm certainly that it
was not a poetical license, which, in this case, might have been more excusable
than that of Campanus upon Ulric Han, mentioned in the preceding chapter.
However, it is plain that many of the German Printers had no other sirnames than
those of the places wherein they were born.

THESE two brothers soon surpassed all their predecessors in the beauty and
neatness of their characters, and the elegance of their impressions, which to
this time render them admired and esteemed by the curious, above all other
ancient editions. Venice by this gained so much reputation for the fineness of
her types, that some eminent Printers at Rome and elsewhere either furnished
themselves with setts of them, or endeavored to imitate them, acquainting
their readers in their next impressions, that they were printed characteribus
Venetianis, with Venetian types. Chevillier indeed thinks this to have been an
imposition upon the world; nor can it be denied but that some of them pretended
this, in order to recommend their own wretched performances. But this
demonstrates the superior merit of that city, and the laudable emulation of her
Printers, not only to excel those of other places, but even one another. And
indeed these two brothers with John de Cologn and N. Jenson, seem to have
brought the Art to its utmost perfection, because none of the most famous
Printers which succeeded till our time, such as Vascosan, the Stephens's, etc.
have surpassed them in this respect; as well as because this, like other arts,
seemed obnoxious to a certain fatality and decline, when carried to a
particular height, as it happened in the space of six or seven years after
their first settlement at Venice. What I mean is, that they should so
unaccountably suffer themselves to be carried away by the degenerate taste of
that age, and change their beautiful Roman character, for the old, obsolete and
disagreeable Gothic, which they began to print with about the year 1477.

THE Spires had the two following learned men for their correctors, viz.
Christopher Berardus of Pisauro, and George Alexandrinus; John, the elder
brother, is reported to be the first who put the direction-word at the end of
the page, and that upon good grounds, since no book, to our knowledge, before
his Tacitus, has it; the singular use of which is too obvious to want
explanation. He lived no longer than to the year 1470, and was succeeded in the
whole business by Windelin, who managed it with great applause by himself 'till
1472, in which year he took John de Cologn into partnership with him. We find
but one book, viz. Plautus, printed by them jointly; so that it is probable
each of them returned soon after to his separate press. This Windelin was so
highly esteemed as a Printer even by his own countrymen, (a thing very
uncommon!) that he was twice invited into Germany by some eminent counselors
at law of that nation, to print there the following considerable volumes, viz.
1. Bartholi commentarium juridicum, which he performed ann. 1471, without the
name of the place, adding only two verses inserted in the margin Hos Windelinus
clara virtute magister Transcripsit; celeri formula pressa pede. Mait^aire
Annal. Typogr p. 94, sub not. (b)
; and 2. The commentaries upon the five books of Decretals of Nic. Tudeschi of
Sicily, sirnam'd Abbas Panormitanus, ann. 1474 Vita Orlandi page 19.
; he printed likewise in Germany, about the same time, the first edition of the
Tractatus Tractatuum sive Oceanus Juris 15 vol. fol. But as he had engaged
himself, presently after his brother's death, not to leave Venice, (as appears
by the verses at the end of St. Austin de civitate Dei, ann. 1470 Qui docuit
Venetos exscribi posse Johannes
Mense fere trino centena volumina Plini,
Et totidem magni Ciceronis Spira libellos;
Coeperat Aureli, subita sed morte peremptus
Non potuit coeptum Venetis finite volumen.
Vindelinus adest ejusdem frater, and art
Non minor: Adriacaque morabitur urbe.

begun, but not finished by his brother,) he returned thither, and continued
printing with prodigious honor till the year 1477, wherein he began to fall in
with the Gothic character beforementioned. In this he was followed by all the
rest, and even by the celebrated Nic. Jenson, though this last still preserved
the beauty and neatness of his forms, which the others very much degenerated
from. About this time Windelin probably died, because we meet with no
impression of his that bears a date later than 1477. Such was the esteem the
learned had of this excellent Printer, that of twenty eight impressions we have
extant of his, above twenty of them have a latin epigram at the end in praise
of him; some of which are of a considerable length, and most of them by
different hands. The first edition is that of Cicero's Epistolae familiares,
ann. 1469; the last we know of with a date, is Dante's Poems, ann. 1477; some
of his editions are without date.

3. NICHOLAS JENSON, JANSON or GENSON, 1470. NICH. JENSON is allowed by the
generality of writers to have been a Frenchman; and as he was one of the first
of that nation, who was eminent in this Art, all his countrymen have been more
than ordinarily lavish of their praises on him; so that whoever reads some of
their encomiums, would be apt to think him the only Printer of merit in that
age, and that there had never been any edition worth their consideration, 'till
it came out of his press; and this they did, even before they so much as dreamt
of that early masterpiece of his, the Decor Puellarum: we need not therefore
wonder at Mr. Mattaire, if we find him so highly pleased at the discovery of
this singular work; for it must be owned, that unless we will dispute the date
of it, the highest encomiums must fall short of his merit; since it will
plainly follow, that he was not only the earliest by some years, who improved
the Art, but likewise who brought it to its greatest perfection, with respect
to the fineness of his Roman characters, and elegancy of composition. Whereas
were the supposition of those, who think it antedated by ten years, to be
allowed, it will be manifest that there had already been several eminent
Printers at Rome, Venice, and elsewhere before him, who introduced that noble
and elegant character; and that though his should be allowed to be somewhat finer
than those of his predecessors, yet would his merit be inferior to theirs, and
his improvement upon them be but small in comparison of that, which they made
upon the old Moguntine types. However that be, I acknowledge with the greatest
freedom and sincerity, that he was an excellent master of the Art, and his
impressions as beautiful, and, for the last ten years space, wherein he
followed the business, as numerous as any of his contemporaries. Polydore
Vergil highly commends him for having so wonderfully improved the Art of
Printing, and Sabellicus owns, that he and his partner John de Cologn, excelled
all the Printers of their time, in the richness and elegancy of their
impressions Sed omnium maxim opibus and eleganti literarum forma multum
caeteros antecelluerunt Nicholates Jenson and Johannes Coloniensis: Sabellic.
Enead. 10. l 6.
. The learned Omnibonus Leonicenus, who prepared copies for him, and corrected
some of his editions, has, in an epistle to the bishop of Belluno, left us an
excellent character of him, prefixed to his Quintilian anno 1471 Accedebant
justae preces magistri Nicolai Jenson Gallici, alterius, ut vere dicam,
Daedali, qui librariae artis mirabilis inventor, non ut scribantur calamo
libri, sed vesuti gemma imprimantur, ac prope sigillo, primus omnium ingeniose
monstravit: ut huic viro, qui de re literaria tam been meruit, nemo sit qui non
favere debeat. Idcirco non difficulter impetravit, ut non solum hoc opus, verum
etiam utramque Ciceronis artem corrigerem.
. wherein he extols his types, and mentions him as a second Daedalus, and as
one to whom the greatest share of this invention was due.

THE learned therefore are very justly surpised, that so excellent a master
and so great an ornament to the Art of Printing should be the first who brought
the Gothic character to Venice, in which he printed his bibles, divinity, and
law books. This method was followed by all his brethren, both in that city, and
in several others of Europe; though it must be owned that he far surpassed the
rest even in that respect, and showed a more exact taste and judgment; for his
Gothic types had all the beauty and elegancy, which they were capable of, and
may be still read with pleasure and admiration.

I don't find that he had any other corrector besides Omnibon. Leonicenus
abovementioned, if we except Franciscus Colutia Verzinensis, who in his
dedication prefixed to the work of Palladius de Agricultura, of which he was
the editor, tells Jenson to whom he dedicates it, that it was at his desire
that he had undertaken to correct that work. By this it seems as if Jenson was
the first printer who had any of his impressions dedicated to himself. Most of
his works, like those of the two German brothers, have a latin epigram at the
end in praise of him; but, what is remarkable, not one of them speaks of him as
the first Venetian Printer, which circumstance alone would be sufficient to
justify us for postponing him to them. We meet with four of his editions
printed in one year, viz. 1470, which shows him to have been a very diligent
workman. And in the space of ten years, we have thirty-nine of them, still
extant; exclusive of the Decor Puellarum, besides those which may have been
lost, or are still undiscovered. The first edition printed by him in Gothic
character, is St Austin's book de Civitate Dei, anno 1475. the two last of his
works are dated 1481.

4. CHRISTOPHER WALDARFER of RATISBON, 1470. CONCERNING this Printer we know
little, except that we have four of his editions still extant corrected by
Ludovicus Carbo or Carbone: the third of which viz. Servius Comment. on Virgil
fol. anno 1471, has an epigram of four latin distichs in his praise, by which
we may guess that he printed a great many more works than these four,
especially Classicks. The last of them, viz. Pliny's Epistles, has neither the
name of the Printer nor place; but by a dedication prefixed to it by the said
Carbo to Borso duke of Modena, one may conclude it to have been done by
Waldarfer. He removed from Venice soon after, and set up a Printing House at
Milan, where we shall find him, when we come to that place.

5, 6. JOHN de COLOGN, and JOHN MANTHEN de GERETZEN. 1471. THESE two Germans
came and settled at Venice, soon after the two Spires, and were equal to any of
their contemporaries, in the beauty of their Roman types, the fineness of their
paper, and elegance and correctness of their works. But they likewise gave into
the Gothic way of printing; and it is observable that Venice and Lions have
produced more of those impressions, than almost all Italy and France together.
Whether these Printers were more modest than their brethren, is uncertain; but,
however, in the list of their editions, we meet with none of those pompous
epigrams and panegyricks upon themselves, so frequently used at that time. They
took Nic. Jenson into partnership with them, toward the later part of their
printing. John de Cologn is affirmed by some to have invented the Registrum
Chartarum about anno 1475; but it is obvious to the reader, from the catalogue
of Uldric Han's works at Rome, that the latter used it at least two years
before him.

THERE is one thing remarkable in one of their colophons, at the end of their
editions of Valerius Maximus, fol. anno. 1474; and which, for that reason, I
have subjoined in the margin Venetiis impressoribus expositus fuit per Joh. de
Cologn. Agrippin. ac Joh. Manthen de Gherretsteim, MCCCCLXXIV, qui una
fideliter viventes, eosdem impressores ad hoc duxerunt.
: that they were rather booksellers than Printers: because they acquaint the
readers in it, that they had given this work to be printed by men hired for
that purpose. We shall meet with many more in the sequel of this history, who
followed their example.

HOWEVER it must be owned, that all the works that came out of their press, or
were printed for them, are an honor to them: the last list of their editions
according to father Orlandi amounts to 28, from ann. 1471 to 1481.

As we know little or nothing concerning the following ones, besides their
names and their works; we shall just mention them in their rank, according to
the date of the works we have of them.

7. ANTONY BOLOGNESE, or Antonio de Bartolomeo, de Bolonia, 1472. we have five
editions of his from 1472, to 1486.

8. LEONARD ACHATES of Basil, 1472. 1 edition.

9. GABRIEL de Pietro of Treviso, 1473. 6 edit. to 1478.

10. FRANCIS de Hailbrun 1473. 3 edit. to 1475.

11. NICOL. de Francford 1473. 3 edit. to 1475.

12. BARTOLOMEW CREMONESE, 1473. 3 edit. to 1475.

13. JAMES des Rouges 1474.

THIS was his true name, he being a Frenchman, though in his latin editions he
writes himself Jacobus Rubeus or de Rubeis; and in his Italian ones di Rossi
and Rossi: He was justly esteemed one of the best Printers in his time. It Is
affirmed by some that he assisted Nic. Jenson in improving his Roman
characters; but this is improbable, because it does not appear, that he came to
Venice 'till two or three years, at least, after the other had published some
of his fine editions. However, the beauty of his letter, and the fineness of
his impressions are incomparable; particularly the two histories of Florence in
Italian, one written by Leonard de Arezo, and the other by Poggius, are
accounted masterpieces in that kind. At length he left Venice, and settled at
Pignerol in Piedmont, where he printed an Italian Bible, the satyrs of Juvenal,
and some other work, which we shall speak of in its proper place. There is one
thing more to enhance his merit, which is, that he complied not with the
degenerate taste of those times, in introducing the Gothic characters into his
Printing House; his impressions from anno 1474 to 1476, are ten in number.

14. CHRISTOPHER ARNOLD: we have but two editions of his from 1474 to 1478.

15. ANDREAS JACOBI of Cathara; 5 editions from 1476 to 1482.

16. MARC. de Conti and 1 edit. 1476.

17. GERARD ALEXANDER 1 edit. 1476.

18. BERNARD PICTOR 5 edit. from 1476 to 1477.

19. ERHARD RALDOLT of Ausburg, 5 edit. from 1476 to 1477.

20. GERARD de Flandria, 1 edit. 1477.

21. JAMES LUNES E de Fivizano, 2 edit. 1477.

22. PHILIP PETRI or de Petro, Venetian, 13 edit. from 1477 to 1482.

23. GUERIN the young, 1 edit. 1477.

24. ANDREAS de Patasichis 8 edit. from 1478 to 1488.

25. BONINO de Boninis8 edit. from 1478 to 1488.

26. MARTIN SARACEN, 3 edit. from 1478 to 1488.

27. LEONARD WILD de Ratisbon, 3 edit. from 1478 to 1481.

28. FRANC. RENNER de Hailbrun, 5 edit. from 1478 to 1494.

29. THEODORIC de Reynsberg 2 edit. 1478,

30. REYNALD de Novimagio2 edit. 1478,

31. GEORGE WALCH German, 1 edit. 1479.

32. NICHOLAS GERARDENGO, 2 edit. from 1479 to 1480.

REYNALD de Novimagio by himself, 7 edit. from 1479 to 1494.

ERHARD RALDOLT by himself, 13 edit. from 1480 to 1485, after this he went to
his own city Ausburgh, and set up his press there, as we have said under that
head.

33. PETER PIASII 11 edit. from 1480 to 1495.

34. BARTHOL. BLAVII 11 edit. from 1480 to 1495.

35. ANDREA TORRESANI de Azola 11 edit. from 1480 to 1495.

36. JOHN LUCILIUS SANTRITER 3 edit. 1480 to 1489

37. FRANCIS THEODORE3 edit. 1480 to 1489

38. OCTAVIAN SCOT was a nobleman of the city of Mons, who set up some presses
at Venice at his own charge, and printed a great number of curious editions,
all which are marked with O. S. M. his chief corrector was Maurice de Hibernia,
or of Ireland, a Franciscan monk, who was afterward made bishop of Triamo: all
the editions we have of Octavian Scot are 39, from ann. 1480 to 1498.

THE chief workmen he employed to print for him are the three following.

39. CHRISTOPHER PENSI,

40. BENNET LOCATELLUS,

41. BARTHOLOMEW ZANI.

THE last of these did likewise print for himself, and we have 15 editions of
his printed with his own name, from 1487 to 1500.

42. JOHN de Forlivio and these two printed 26 edit. from 1481 to 1500.

43. GREGORY de Gregoriis 26 edit. from 1481 to 1500.

44. LUCAS de Dominico, Venetian, 5. edit. from 1481 to 1482.

45. BAPTISTA de Tortis, 18 edit. from 1481 to 1498.

46. THOMAS of Alexandria and partners, 6 edit. from 1481 to 1486.

47. ANTONY dalla Strada Cremonese, 10 edit. from 1481 to 1488.

48. MATTHEW CAPCASA of Parma, 10 edit. from 1481 to 1495.

49. ANTONY PAP 1 edit. 1482.

50. BERNARDIN MORENI de Lecho 1 edit. 1482.

51. PETER LOSLEIN German, he was both partner and corrector to Bernard Pictor
and Erhard Raldolt at Venice, we have two editions printed with his name both
1483.

52. BERNARDIN BENATIO, or de Benateis, 12 edit. from 1483 to 1498.

53. PETER MAUFER a Frenchman 1 edit. 1483.

54. NICHOL. de Contengo of Ferrara1 edit. 1483.

MAUFER was a very good Printer, but moved often from place to place; he began
first to work at Padua, then went to Verona, and afterward came to Venice:
where we find but one single edition done by him.

55. HERMAN LITCHENSTEIN in latin Levilapis; this was another unsettled
workman, he wrought at Vincenza, Treviso, and now at Venice; where we have 5
edit. of his, from 1483 to 1494.

56. ANDREA BONETTI de Pavia, 3 edit. from 1484 to 1486.

57. PEREGRIN PASQUALI 12 edit. from 1484 to 1494

58. DIONIS BERTOCH, or de Bertochis of Bolonin 12 edit. from 1484 to 1494

59. PAGANINUS de Paganinis, 7 edit. from 1485 to 1498.

60. BERNARD STAGNINO de Trino, 5 edit. from 1485 to 1498.

61. ANTONY RACTIBOVIUS, 1 edit. 1485.

62. ALEXANDER CRETENSIS, he was a native of Crete, the only work we have of
him, is a Greek Psalter 4to ann. 1486, with a latin colophon, in which he
styles himself, Filius sapientissimi and celeberrimi Domini Georgii Presbyteri.

63. WILLIAM de Trino sirnam'd Anima mia, 5 edit. from 1486 to 1491.

64. BERNARD RIZZI de Novara, 10 edit. from 1486 to 1492, it is to be observed,
that his five first, i. e. from 1486 to 1489, are subscribed only Bernard de
Novara, and the five last Bern. Rizzi de Novara, which has made some authors
question whether they were not two different Printers: his corrector was
Dominic Canali.

65. LEONICUS CRETENSIS, of him we have only Homer's Batrachomuomachia, or
battle of the frogs and mice in greek, cum graecis scholiis 4to, ann. 1486.

66. PETER CREMONESE sirnam'd Veronese, 2 edit. from 1486 to 1490.

67. JOHN ROUGES alias Rubeus, Rossi, 9 edit. from 1486 to 1499.

68. JOHN HAMMAN de Landoja 4 edit. from 1487 to 1500.

69. JOHN EMERICH de Udenhem4 edit. from 1487 to 1500.

70. HANIBAL de Parma, 1 edit. 1487.

71. THEODOR. RAGAZONI alias de Ragazonibus, 6 edit. from 1488 to 1500.

72. BERNARDINE de Choris Cremonese, 9 edit. from 1488 to 1492.

73. GEORGE ARRIVABENUS of Mantua, 4 edit. from 1488 to 1492.

74. CHRISTOPHER de Pensis de Mandello, 11 edit. from 1489 to 1500.

75. BERNARDINE de Renatis, 1 edit. 1490.

76. JAMES PAGANINI of Brescia, 1 edit. 1490.

77. PHILIP PINCIUS de Caneto, this was a very diligent as well as excellent
Printer: he continued printing 'till after the year 1510 with great applause:
his corrector was the learned Bennet Brugnoli, a man very well versed in the
greek and latin tongues; his works from 1490 to 1500 are 24 in number.

78. THOMAS de Blancis of Alexandria, 1 edit. 1491.

79. SIMON de Gara, only a latin bible, 1491.

80. LAZARUS de Siviliano, 2 edit. from 1491 to 1492.

81. MANFRED. de Montferrat, 2 edit. from 1491 to 1492.

82. MAXIMUS de Butricis of Pavia, 1 edit. 1491.

83. FRANCIS GERARDENGO of Pavia, 1 edit. 1492.

84. JOHN de Cereto de Tridino sirnam'd Tacuino, 23 edit. from 1492 to 1500.

85. BARTHOL. VENETUS de Ragazzonibus, 1 edit. 1492.

86. SIMON BEVILAQUA citizen of Pavia, 21 edit. from 1492 to 1500; he wrought
also at Pavia, as we shall see when we come to that city.

87. JOHN PETER de Querengis, 5 edit. from 1492 to 1498.

88. DAMIAN de Milan, 2 edit. from 1493 to 1494.

89. MARTIN de Rovado de Lazaronibus, 1 edit. 1493.

90. JEROME de Paganinis, 2 edit. 1493 to 1497.

91. JOHN RAGAZZO 1 edit. 1494.

92. JOHN MARIA 1 edit. 1494.

93. PERRIN LATHOMI, 1 edit. 1494, besides a Bible he printed at Lions, 1479.

94. BERNARDINE VITATIS of Venice, 14 edit. from 1494 to 1500.

CHAP. IV. Aldus Pius Manutius Romanus a Venetian Printer, and the Inventor of
Italick Letters; his Life, Character and Greek Editions, with an Account of the
other Printers at Venice, till the Year 1500.
ALDUS MANUTIUS, the most eminent Printer of the fifteenth century, was born
anno 1445, when Printing was yet in its intancy; who as he grew up, became such
an admirer of this new Art, that though his education, learning and genius might
have justly excited him to greater employments, yet he chose to devote his
whole time and study to the cultivating and improving all the branches of it.
This design he performed with such indefatigable application and vast cha^ges,
that his whole ambition seemed to be confined to this province and the
advancement of learning Omnem enim vitam decrevimus ad hominum utilitatem
consumere -- nam etsi quietam ac tranquillam agere vitam possumus, negotiosam
tamen eligimus and plenam laboribus. Ald. p^afat. ^d Lascar. Creten.
. After he had received the rudiments of Grammar, under Gaspar of Verona, he
applied himself to the Greek and Latin tongues under the great Baptista Guarini
of Verona; and in a short time made such a progress in these languages, as not
only to surpass his fellow students, but even to rival his master himself. Thus
he continued furnishing his mind with every part of literature, in order to fit
himself for that business, of which he was afterward to become the ornament.
The war breaking out in Italy, and the city of Ferrara being besieged, he
removed from thence to Mirandula, where he became acquainted with the great
Picus of that name, a prince of the brightest genius that age had produced, and
one of the greatest l^vers of learning, and of learned men, who not only
received him with open arms, but procured him the acquaintance of many learned
men, by whose conversation and correspondence, Aldus received no small
advantage toward the acquiring that great knowledge of the Greek and Latin
Tongues, which he became afterward so famous for. In the 45th year of his age,
anno 1490, he began to prepare the necessary apparatus of a Printinghouse,
wherein he spent four years, and consequently did not begin Printing till about
anno 1494. During this interval he observed with regret to what degree the
abbreviations, used by all the former Printers every where, were multiplied; so
that they became unintelligible, without some key to direct the reader, an
instance of which is given in the margin This curious example of the
abbreviations, used in those times, is extracted from Okam's logic, folio
verso, leaf 121, as follows;

Si hic e fall s m quoth ^d simplr a e pducibile a deo g a e and s lr hic a n e g a
a e pducibile a deo etc. which words printed at full length, will run thus;
Sicut hic est fallacia secundum quid ad simpliciter, A est producibile a deo.
Ergo A est, and sim liter hic. A non est, ergo non est producibile a deo. Vide
Chevil p. 110.

These abbreviations were grown in time so numerous and universal, that books
were obliged to be published to teach the method of reading and understanding
them.


. Upon this, he considered a method to remedy this inconvenience, and set them
quite aside in his editions. But because the printing the words at length would
enlarge the volumes a fourth part, (for there was scarce one word in five that
was not abridg'd) and increase the price; he resolved likewise to remedy that.
To which end he invented the Italick character, called from him Aldine, or
Cursivus and Cancellarius, from its resemblance to handwriting; which by-its
figure and closeness, gained as much upon the round Roman, as the abbreviations
did, and reduced the volume to near an exact bulk, thereby rendering them
absolutely useless. This is the main, though not the sole advantage, which he
proposed by this new character; for the world has since found its extraordinary
usefulness in many other respects; which being obvious to every person, I shall
not particularise here, but mention only the agreeableness of a mixture of
Roman and Italick. However, it must be owned, that Aldus made too great use of
the latter, in printing whole volumes in that character, which is known to tire
the eyes much more than the Roman. Upon this account several emineat Printers
afterward rejected it in their quotations, when they were of any considerable
length, and substituted Double comma's or Guillemets at one end of the lines,
to distinguish the citations from the body of the book: which Guillemets were
so called from their Inventor, a French Printer of that name.

To return to Aldus; ^s soon as he had persected this new character, which must
necessarily cost him prodigious sums of money, he obtained a privilege from
three several Popes, for the sole use of them during the s^^^e of fifteen
years; and these pontifs give him great encomiums upon the account of this
invention. The first of these was granted him by Alexander VI, and is dated
Sept. 17 1502, with the following preface Quoniam dilectus filius noster Aldus
Manucius Romanus ad communem doctorum utilitatem, novisexcogitatis characterum
formis, assiduam operam libris emendandis imprimendisque impendit, magnosque in
ea re labores sumptus que facit, vereturque ne insurgente invidia
aemulationeque excitata, aliqui, sumpto de ejus characteribus exemplo, ad
eandem formam libros imprimant, deque alterius invento novum sibi lucrum
quaerant; ideo nobis fecit humiliter supplicari, etc.
. "For as much as our beloved son Aldus Manucius Romanus has, for the common
benefit of the learned, invented a new set of characters, and been at vast
pains and charges in correcting and printing of books, -- and is afraid lest
some through envy or emulation should get patterns of his characters and print
with them, thereby reaping the benefit of another man's invention; he has
therefore humbly besought us, etc."

HE obtained the like privilege from Pope Julius II, within four months after
the first, viz. Jan. 27 1503, which begins thus; "For as much as thou -- have
been at the pains to print with such diligence and elegancy, within these few
years, and for the common benefit of all the learned, many greek and latin
volumes, corrected and revised with the utmost care and diligence, in those new
characters, which are vulgarly known by the name of Cursivi and Cancellarii,
and are so beautiful as to seem written by hand, etc." Cum tu -- Graecorum and
Latinorum auctorum volumina summa cura and diligentia castigata, a paucis
annis, ad communem omnium litteratorum utilitatem, characteribus, quos vulgus
Cursives seu a^ cellarios appellas, imprimi tam diligenter and pulchre
curaveris, ut calamo conscripta esse videantur, etc.


HIS successor Leo X, likewise granted him a brief to the same purpose within
ten months after, expressly prohibiting any person to print in or imitate that
character during the space of fifteen years Ne per spatium quindecim annorum
iis characteribus, quos ipse invenit vel edidit primus, imprimere -- neve
characteres, quos Cursivos seu Cancellarios appellant, imitari praesumant, etc.
.

IT IS apparent from the tenor of these briefs, that this Italick character was
not the only particular, wherein Aldus signalized himself; for the number and
correctness of his editions, with the beauty of his characters, gained him the
esteem and admiration of the learned; nor need I tell the reader how highly all
his works have been valued ever since, as well as those of his son Paulus
Manucius, of his son-in-law Andreas Azolanus, and his grandson Aldus; which are
of equal merit with his own, and of equal value. His ambition of being esteemed
not only a man of letters, (as he really was,) but also the most correct
Printer of the age, was such, that he spared no cost in procuring the best MSS,
nor labor in revising them; and his care was so great, lest any errors should
escape him either in the M S. or proofs, that, as we are assured by Angel.
Roccha, keeper of the Vatican library, he would not allow himself to print
above two sheets in a week Audivi ab iis qui cum eo versati sunt -- duo ad
summum folia singula quaque hebdomada imprimi solere; cum hodie totidem fere in
singulo quoque praelo quotidie cudantur. Ang. Roc. de bibliotheca Vaticana,
page 412.
. But this must be understood only of such works, as required a more than
ordinary diligence and application; otherwise it were difficult to reconcile
this with what Aldus says in his preface to Euripides ann. 1503 Quandoquidem
mill and amplius boni alicujus auctoris volumina singulo quoque mense
emittimus.
, that he published some good author every month, of which he printed above a
thousand copies; or with what Erasmus says of him in his proverbs Aldus
bibliothecam molitur, cujus non alia septa sunt quam ipsius orbis. Erasm. Chtl.
2. Cent. 1. Prove. 1.
; that he was erecting a library, whose limits would be those of the world it
self. However that be, his accuracy and diligence is unquestionably attested by
all the learned; and he tells Pope Leo X, in his petition beforementioned, that
the height of his ambition was to present the world with authors, corrected
with the utmost exactness; and that nothing was more mortifying to him, than to
see any faults in his impressions, every one of which he would gladly, if
possible, have redeemed at the price of a crown of gold Sic doleo, ut, si
possem, mutarem singula errata nummo aureo.
. What assistance he had from the learned in correcting his books may be
gathered from his preface to the Greek edition of Aristotle's Logic, where he
assures us, that he had some of the ablest critics with him, to assist in the
correction; and in the preface to the physics of that philosopher, he boasts,
that his impressions were more perfect and correct than the very originals from
which they were printed Dicere queo, quicquid meo labor formis excuditur,
ipsis exemplaribus long correctius ac magis perfectum exire ex aedibus nostris.
.

BUT it must be owned that the learned are far from granting him this last
piece of merit, which he challenges; and some of them have objected, that he
either printed them not according to the best manuscripts, or corrected them by
his own conjectures, or followed sometimes too scrupulously those which were
faulty and imperfect. Upon this account Erasmus, though a great friend of his,
complains that Michael Bentius, who printed his proverbs, had followed the
corrupt editions of Aldus in the quotations from Homer and Cicero Nam Michael
Bentius contulit quaedam loca a me citata ex Graeco Homero ab Aldo excuso, item
ex Cicerone Aldino. cum Aldina sint depravatissima. Vita Erasmi, Lugdun. Batav.
in 16o, page 173.
. The same author tells John Betzemius, in a letter sent with a catalogue of
his works, that some of Plutarch's books were printed by Aldus after some very
corrupt manuscript Hoc unum erat incommodi, quod Aldus hoc opus excudit
secundum exemplar multis locis depravatum. Tom. 1. oper. Erasm.
. Yet he excuses him in another letter Officina Veneta dedit nobis Festum
Pompeium egregie depravatum; non insimulo Aldum; solet ille tales operas alicui
Paedagogo committere. Page 148, supradict. edit. Lugdun. Batav.
, and lays the blame upon some Pedagogue, whom Aldus entrusted with the care of
some of the editions of ancient authors. If this be fact, it is very much to be
regretted, that so great a Printer, to whom the republic of learning is in all
other respects so much obliged, should be overseen in a matter of such
importance. And this, in all probability, is the reason why he thus expresses
his dissatisfaction at his own editions, in the petition to the Pope
beforementioned; Sed ego non credulus illis; nullum enim adhuc dedi librum, in
quo mihi ipsi satisfecerim.
that he was so far from regarding the flatteries of some persons, that he had
not as yet published one book, with which he could be satisfied Sed ego non
credulus illis; nullum enim adhuc dedi librum, in quo mihi ipsi satisfecerim.
.

BESIDES this, he carries his complaints still further, and inveighs loudly
against two sorts of men, who alone are capable of depriving the learned world
of the benefit of printing, unless some speedy stop be put to their wretched
performances: the first are those, who, notwithstanding their notorious
ignorance and incapacity, presume to print any kind of books: the second are
the half learned editors, who not only venture upon publishing ancient authors,
but likewise write notes and commentaries with their own corrections upon them.
Thus was this great man concerned to see the corruptions already crept into the
Art, through the avarice of some, and ignorance of others; whilst himself found
by sad experience, that all his care, as well as learning, was scarce
sufficient for such a task. As no Printer ever surpassed him in the latter, so
none ever equaled him in the former; for so indefatigable was he in that
laborious province, that he scarce allowed himself time to eat, sleep, or
attend his domestic affairs; and, which is still more, was so regardless of
his health, as to neglect those pleasures and recreations so necessary and
conducive to the preservation of it. The learned Zuinger, in his Theatrum vitae
humanae p. 3713 of the Basil edition 1604, tells us, that his mind was entirely
engaged in the care of his Printing House; that, as soon as he had ordered his
other necessary affairs, he shut himself up in his study, where he employed
himself in revising his greek and latin manuscripts, reading the letters which
he received from the learned out of all parts of the world, and writing answers
to them. To prevent interruption by impertinent visits, he caused the following
inscription to be placed over his closet door Quisquis es, rogat te Aldus etiam
atque etiam, ut siquid est quod a se velis, pe^ paucis agas, deinde actutum
abeas, nisi tanquam Hercules veneris suppositu^us humeros; semper enim erit
quod and tu agas, and quotquot huc a^tulerint pedes.
; Whoever you are, Aldus earnestly entreats you to dispatch your business, as
soon as possible, and then depart; unless you come hither, like another
Hercules, to lend him some friendly assistance; for here will be work
sufficient to employ you, and as many as enter this place. These words were
afterward borrowed by the learned Oporinus, (who from a professor of the greek
tongue in the university of Basil, became one of the most eminent Printers,
either of that city, or even of Europe;) and were set over his study door for
the same intent.

ALDUS is affirmed by many authors to have been the first who printed whole
volumes in greek, particularly the learned Henry Stephens, asserts, both in the
Complaint of the Art of Printing written by him, and in his epitaph upon Aldus,
that he was the first Printer in that language Qui graphicis primus tradidit
illa typis.
; and Gesner tells Paul Manutius Aldus's son, in the 11th book of his Pandects,
that if he is not mistaken, there were no greek books printed before those of
his father, or at least, not with equal beauty and correctness with his
Exemplaria Graeca ante patrem tuum aut nulla, ni ^allor, aut pauca, nec ea
industria typis pu^licata sunt.
. Though this is not strictly true, as we shall immediately show, yet as he was
the greatest Printer in greek, and inventor of a beautiful character, these and
several other authors might easily attribute to him the first rank in this
province. The first greek book was published by him, anno 1494, as appears by
the lists, which the annalists give us of his works, and from what Aldus
himself says, in hi^ preface to Stephanus de urbibus, anno 1502 Eodem anno, quo
vexari bello coepit Italia, difficillimam hanc ego imprimendorum librorum
provinciam accepi.
, that he begun his first greek impressions in the year wherein the war in
Italy commenced, viz. anno 1494, at the time of the expedition of Charles VIII
king of France to seize upon the kingdom of Naples. Some writers, from a
mistaken passage in his preface to Aristotle, anno 1495, wherein he tells his
patron Prince Carpi, that he presents him with the prince of philosophers,
Plato excepted, now first printed and very correct, have thought it to have
been his first greek impression; whereas he published at least three the year
before. However it is plain he had printed no book in any language before anno
1494.

IT appears from what has been said in a former chapter concerning the
Lactantius printed in the monastery of Subiaco, anno 1465, the Gellius at Rome
1469, and others, that several considerable fragments were printed in greek
with no small elegancy and correctness. But besides these there were several
editions in that language printed in diverse cities of Italy some years before;
the principal of which we shall mention.

THE first, as yet known, is the greek grammar of Constantine Lascaris 4to,
revised by Demetrius Cretensis, and printed by Dionysius Palavisinus at Milan,
anno 1476, afterward reprinted at Venice by Leonard of Basil, anno 1488.

THE next is the greek psalter printed at Venice, anno 1486 by Alexander of
Crete 4to, and Homer's Batrachomuomachia, or battle between the frogs and mice
4to, at Venice by Leonic of Crete in the same year. But as these may be
esteemed only preludes or essays in that language, we shall come to a more
considerable edition, viz. that of Homer's works in greek, which B. Neril
caused to be printed at Florence in a large folio, anno 1488 by Demetrius of
Milan, a native of Crete. This excellent work I have seen in the curious
library of the learned Dr. Mead, and I dare affirm that whoever examines the
whiteness and strength of the paper, the fineness of the character, the elegant
disposition of the matter, the exact distance between the lines, the large
margin, and in short, the whole performance with its various ornaments, will
easily own it a masterpiece in that kind. There was likewise a fine edition of
Isocrates printed at Milan in fol. by Henry German and Sebastian ex Pontremulo,
anno 1493, a year before any of Aldus's impressions appeared.

HOWEVER, though he was not the first greek Printer, yet no person ever
signalized himself more in that province than he, nor equaled him in beauty,
correctness and number of editions. Concerning the beauty of his greek
characters, of which he is said to be the inventor, Mr. Mattaire tells us page
237, Annal. Typogr. that those, in which he printed the Psalter, Aesop,
Aristotle, Aristophanes, etc. were somewhat larger, rounder, more beautiful and
elegant, adorned with frequent ligatures, which added no small beauty to his
greek editions, etc. Nor is this is the only particular, for which the learned
world is so much obliged to him; since his designs reached still farther, and
were answered to his great satisfaction before his death, which happened anno
1515. He observed, with no small regret, how much and how long the Greek tongue
had been neglected; in order therefore to revive that noble language, and
accustom the learned by degrees to read nothing but the originals, he resolved
to publish most of his books in Greek only. This succeeded so well, that the
oldest men began to acquaint themselves with it, and as many youths engaged in
the study of that tongue, as of the Latin; which gave him such sensible
pleasure, that he mentions it in several of his prefaces, and particularly in
that prefixed to Aristotle's Logic, wherein he thus expresses himself: Nostris
vero temporibus multos licet videre (...) hoc est, senes in senectute Graece
discere. Nam adolescentulorum ac juvenum Graecis incumbentium jam tantas fere
est numerus, quantus eorum qui Latinis. Propterea Graeci libri vehementer ab
omnibus inquiruntur, quorum quia mira paucitas est, etc.
"In our days we may see many old gentlemen, who follow Cato's example in
learning the Greek tongue. For with respect to the youth, they equally apply
themselves to that, as to the Latin. Upon which account Greek books, of which
there is now a prodigious scarcity, are come into very great request, etc." In
his preface to Stephanus de urbibus he observes with pleasure, Nam non in
Italia solum, sed etiam in Germa a, Calna, Pannonia. Britannia, Hispania. and
ubique fere, ubi Romana lingua legitur, non modo ab adolescentibus,
juvenibusque, sed a senibus quoque summa aviditate studetur literis Graecis.
"That Italy was not the only nation where in the Greek tongue was in vogue;
but that in Germany, France, Hungary, Britain, Spain, and almost every place,
where the Latin was known, not only the young, but even the old studied Greek
with the utmost eagerness and application."

ALL his impressions were not of that nature; for in some of them, printed
before and afterward, as Musaeus, Greek grammar, Proclus's Sphaera, the works
of Philostratus, Eusebius contra Hieroclem, etc. he first gave the whole Greek
text, and then the Latin translation.

SOON after this, he invented a method, entirely new, of printing these Greek
editions with their translations, which I do not find practiced by any Printer
since.

THEY were imposed after such a manner, that the purchaser might have them
bound either with the Greek and Latin separate, or with a leaf of the one, and
a leaf of the other alternately; for instance, the first leaf was Greek, then
followed the first in Latin, then the second Greek leaf, and the second Latin,
and so on to the end; but with this precaution, that the Greek of the first
leaf was only printed upon the second page of it, and the Latin version
opposite to it; the Latin upon the second page of the Latin leaf was the
version of the Greek upon the first page of the third leaf, and all the Greek
upon the second page of this leaf, fell exactly over against the Latin of it in
the first page of the fourth or second Latin leaf. This order being observed
throughout, every other leaf being Greek, and the rest Latin, it was easy
either to bind it in two volumes, the one Greek, and the other Latin; or into
one, with the original first, and version afterward, opposite to each other.

BUT, as we remarked before, this excellent method was never observed, not even
by those, who reprinted such of Aldus's editions, as had been done after this
way; viz. Esop's and Gabriel's fables, Lascaris's grammar, etc. for they
printed the Greek in one page, and the Latin upon the other; which is vastly
more inconvenient than his method; the manner of printing both languages in two
columns not being invented 'till after the year 1550, Vide Chevil. page 238. I
conceive there is no necessity of giving a more particular description of
Aldus's Greek types, because his works are so universally known to the curious;
but whoever desires to know further concerning them, and their superior
excellence to those used before, may consult Mr. Mattaire's Annals, page 237.

ALDUS has been likewise supposed the first, or, at least, one of the first,
who printed in Hebrew. But this is certainly a mistake; for, though he had a font
of Hebrew, yet he made but little use of it; and it is evident, that the jews of
Soncino in the duchy of Milan began to print books in that language about
twelve or fourteen years before Aldus appeared, as shall be shown in its proper
place. Chevillier p. 267 tells us, that he saw nothing of his in this tongue,
but the Hebrew alphabet, which is still preserved in the Sorbon library. We
find however, that he wrote and printed an introduction to the Hebrew tongue;
as appears from ^ book printed by him, ann. 1501, entitled, Aldi Manutii
Grammaticae Latinae linguae rudimenta; de literis Graecis and Diphthongis, etc.
ut and introductio ad Hebraeam linguam, 4to. Indeed Justin Decadius a Grecian
and inhabitant of Venice, who caused the Greek psalter to be printed by Aldus
in 4to, flatters those of his own nation, to whom he dedicates it, with a
promise which that Printer made him, of printing an edition of the bible in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin; but it is not known, that he ever performed it, at
least, with relation to the Hebrew.

BEFORE we close the character of this great man, it will be proper to acquaint
the reader with the reason of his assuming the name Pius after the year 1503;
because even this is another testimony of his merit. He received it from his
patron prince Albertus Pius de Carpi, whose tutor he had formerly been, and
who, on account of his singular desert, adopted him into his family, and
contributed large sums toward defraying the charges of procuring and
correcting manuscripts, preparing three fonts, of Italick, Greek and Hebrew,
characters, entertaining so many learned correctors, and such a number of
workmen, beside the other charges common to every Printing House. His chief
correctors were Peter Alcyonius, Demetrius Chalcondylas, Marcus Musurus, and
Alexander Bondinus.

THE mark of his Printing House, which shall be given, with the rest of the
marks or rebus's of the Printers of the 15th century, at the end of this book,
was a dolphin twined about an anchor, and nibling at it; signifying his close
and indesatigable application to business, which he went through with
deliberation and judgment. Chevillier tells us, that he took it from the
emperor Titus; and that Peter Bembus, who was afterward made a cardinal,
presented him with a silver medal, which had that emperor's head on one side,
and on the reverse, a dolphin twisting himself round an a^^hor. This was
likewise, according to some authors, the device of Augustus the emperor (...)
festina lent^.
, the anchor being designed to signify rest, as lightning or the dolphin were
to denote swiftness. These Titus afterward expressed by the dolphin,
signifying swiftness, and an anchor, designed to stop the course of a ship,
denoting slowness. Aldus himself seems to hint at this signification, when he
tells prince Carpi, in his epistle dedicatory prefixed to Proclus's Sphere,
anno 1499 Sum ipse mihi optimus testis me semper habere comites, ut oportere
aiunt, delphinum and anchoram; nam and dedimus multa cunctando, and damus
assidue.
, that he could testify for himself with the greatest sincerity, that he had
always those two companions with him, which they say are so necessary, viz. the
dolphin and anchor, and published many things with deliberation, and yet
without intermission. His son Paul, who was Printer to the Vatican, his
son-in-law A. de Azola, and his grandson Aldus used the same mark.

SOME vile Printers of Florence, finding the impossibility of equalling Aldus's
editions, resolved to counterfeit them as well as his rebus, and carried on the
cheat for some time, 'till it was discovered by means of a mistake committed by
the engraver, who reversed the dolphin, so that his head was on the left side
of the anchor, whereas in Aldus's mark it was on the right. Whether his
son-in-law Andreas de Azola first perceived this difference, I will not affirm;
but he first gave public notice of it, to prevent the world's being any longer
imposed upon. This passage in the preface to his Livy in 8vo anno 1518, is
given at full length in the margin Extremum est ut admoneamus, Florenti^^s
quosdam impressores, cum viderint diligentiam nostram in castigando and
imp^imendo non posse assequi, ad arts confugisse solitas, hoc est grammaticis
institutionibus Alds in sua officina formatis, notam delphini anchorae involuti
nostram apposuisse; sed ita egerunt, ut quivis mediocriter versatus in libris
impressionis nostrae animadvertat illos imprudenter fecisse. Nam rost^um
delphini in partem sinistram vergit, cum tamen nostrum in dexteram totum
demittatur.
. I am sensible that in this sketch of the history of that Printer, I have
exceeded in many cases my proposed limits; yet, I hope, the worth and character
of the person will sufficiently excuse me for not keeping too scrupulously to
our epoch.

THE works, which we have of him, from 1494 to 1500, are in number, twenty
four; fourteen of which are Greek, and the rest Latin, or Latin and Greek.

THE reader may easily perceive, how short this list comes of the number, which
we might have reasonably expected from so industrious a Printer, within the
space of six or seven years; especially considering, that as himself assures
us, he published an author every month, which amounts to almost four times our
number. Whether the rest are perished, or are still latent in some libraries, I
shall not determine, but am willing to hope the latter, and that time will by
degrees bring them to light.

HOWEVER he still continued printing many years after the close of the century,
and took his father-in-law Andreas de Azola [in Latin Azolanus in partnership
with him. As to the time of his death, or any particulars of it, I have not
been able to discover any thing certain; I shall therefore conclude his history
with a remark or two concerning an edition of his, which I hope will not be
disagreeable to the reader: it is that of Poliphili hypnerotomachia, written by
Franciscus Columna, to prove that all the world is but a dream; wherein he
relates many things worth learning: it has been supposed to be printed at
Treviso, anno 1467, because at the end are the following words; Tarvisii cum
decorissimis Poliae a more lorulis distineretur misellus Poliphilus, MCCCCLXVII
kalendis Maii, i. e. when the unfortunate Poliphilus was in love with the
charming Polia, 1467.

THIS they thought to have been the year, when the book was printed; whereas
Mattaire and Orlandi observe, that the words plainly demonstrate it to be the
year, in which Colonna finished it. Besides, it is evident from the character,
the registers, direction-words, comma's, interrogatory points, and other
particularities, as well from the last leaf, which contains the errata, and
concludes thus, Venetiis mense Decembri MID in aedibus Aldi Manutii
accuratissime, that this edition came out from Aldus's press. However, Orlandi
tells us, that this leaf was designedly torn off, because there is no date of
the year, in which it was printed; but Mr. Mattaire gives us an account of
these errata page 255, which bore this title, Gli errori del libro fatti
stampando, liquali corrige cosi: then follows the errata containing fifty nine
full lines, a greater number than Aldus ever put at the end of his works. After
the errata are the Latin words abovementioned, Venetiis, etc. It Is plain from
this, that 1467 was the year, in which the author finished it at Treviso, and
the date of the edition, 1499. With respect to the author's name, Orlandi
deduceth it from the initial letters of each chapter, which being joined
together form these words, Poliam frater Franciscus Columna peramavit. Orland.
page 57, 58.

THE remainder of the Venetian Printers to ann. 1500 are as follows.

96. ANTONY MORETUS of Brescia 1 edit. 1495.

97. JEROME de Alexandria

98. ANTONY ZANCHI or de Zanchis, 1 edit. 1497.

99. OTINUS della Luna of Pavia, 3 edit. from 1497 to 1499.

100. JOHN ALVYSIUS de Varesio Milanese, 1 edit. 1498.

101. BARTHOL. JUSTINOPOLITANUS,

102. GABRIEL de Brisighella,

103. JOHN BISSOLI

104. BENEDICT MANGI of Carpi,

WE have but two editions of these four partners, viz. Phalaris Epistles 4to
1498, and Aesop's life and fables 4to 1500, both in Greek: the former of these
editions has a privilege from the senate of Venice, for their sole printing of
it during the space of ten years; and an epistle of Bartholomew Justinopolitan
to Contarenus a senator of Venice, wherein he complains of the great abuses,
which were crept into the Art of Printing; and the disadvantages thence arising
to the common wealth of learning, through the ignorance and negligence of
Printers, which increased every day among them: he seems therefore rather to
have been an editor than a Printer, and to have hired the other three to print
in partnership with him.

105. ANTONY de Guzzago of Brescia, 1 edit. 1498.

106. SEBASTIAN MANILIUS a Roman and partners, 1 edit. 1499.

107. JOHN BAPT. SESSA of Milan, 2 edit. 1499.

108. ZACHARIAH CALIERGI of Crete; he was a very eminent Printer of Greek: we
have two editions of his, both of 1499, viz. Simplicius Comment. upon
Aristotle's Cathegorics fol. and Etymologicum magnum, fol. in Greek, the last
of these printed at the desire of a Constantinopolitan lady: he removed to
Rome, and printed there till ann. 1523 if not beyond; and the Lexicon Varini
was printed by him in that year.

109. LUCANTONIUS de Giunta or Zunta of Florence, 1500.

ALL the Printers of this name [de Giunta or Zunta] have been persons of the
most distinguished merit for their performances at Rome, Florence, Lions and
Venice; their common rebus or mark was the flower-de-luce, and sometimes the
eagle. The first of that name is this Lucantonius Giunta, a man of noble
extract, who employed John de Spira to print for him at Venice.

WHETHER this Spira was a son or grandson of one of the two brothers, who first
brought the Art to this city, is uncertain. However, the Giunta's signalized
themselves in that Art, 'till the middle of the sixteenth century. The
following edition is the only one, we know of, printed by him before the close
of this century, viz. Regulae sancti Benedicti, sancti Basilii, sanct.
Augustini and Francisci; collectae atque ordinatae per D. J. Franc. Brixianum
monachum congregationis S. Justinae ordinis S. Benedicti de observantia, 4to,
cura and impensis nobilis viri Luc. Antonii de Giunta Florentini, art and
solerti ingenio magistri Johannis de Spira, idibus April. Venetiis. Some of the
impressions of Matthew Capcasa at Venice, 1482, are said in the colophon to be
printed at the desire of Lucant. Zunta.

109, NICHOLAS BLASTI, one Greek edition dated 1500.

110. ALBERTINE VERCELLENSIS, 1 edit. dated 1500.

THESE are all the Printers hitherto known to have wrought at Venice, from the
time of its receiving the Art, to the year 1500, but there were many more, who,
as was hinted before, made a trade of reprinting some of the best editions in a
slovenly incorrect manner, and to undersell the good ones; for which reason,
they did not dare to set their names to them. Father Orlandi gives us a list of
90 of them done at Venice during that interval, the greatest part of which, I
am apt to suspect, are of that sorry kind.

CHAP. V. Of the three first Printers at Paris, and their Successors; the
Encouragement which they met with; some Account of the Books printed by them;
with other Particulars. A second Printing House set up in the Louvre by King
Lewis XI. rest of the Paris Printers.
WHOEVER desires a complete account of the first settlement, progress and
improvement of the Art of Printing, in the city and university of Paris, the
metropolis of France, will find that subject copiously treated of by De la
Caille in his Origin de l'imprimerie printed anno 1689, and more particularly
by Chevillier in his Origin de l'Imprimerie printed at Paris, anno 1694.

THESE two authors have chiefly confined their history to that kingdom; and, as
they had all possible opportunities of searching the records and libraries of
that university, have been enabled to acquaint the world with a vast many
particularities relating as well to the Art, a^ to the most eminent Printers
there. But since an induction of them would swell this work to too great a
bulk, I shall select the most curious and material parts, and refer the reader
for the rest to the authors before mentioned. Sufficient reasons, I hope, are
already given, against the opinion of those, who, contrary to all the most
incontestable records, assert that Nich. Jenson first brought printing to
Paris. This particular is further confirmed by the two last mentioned French
historians, whose account of that matter is as follows.

SOME time before the year 1470, William Fichet and John Heynlim de Lapide or
Lapidanus, two famous doctors of the university of Paris, and of the college of
Sorbon, observing the progress of printing in several cities of Europe, began
to use their utmost efforts in order to introduce it not only into that city,
but even into their college, where they might give it all necessary help and
encouragement. They were both persons of great reputation for their learning
and public spirit. The former was a Savoyard by birth, and a great restorer of
the long neglected art of rhetoric, and all polite literature. The latter was
a German, and had been rector of the university, and prior of the college of
Sorbon, to which last dignity, he was chosen again about this time. As there
were then but few, if any, except Germans, eminent in printing, Lapidanus
undertook to bring some of the most skillful thither. This could not but seem
easily attainable by him, who had such a numerous acquaintance amongst the
learned in Germany, and is supposed, upon good grounds, to have been of the
same diocese, if not the same city with Uldric Gering, a native of Constance.
The latter being influenced by the kind invitations of a person of such esteem,
who promised him the college of Sorbon for his abode, and his assistance in
procuring and preparing manuscripts, and revising his editions; and allured by
the hopes of considerable gain in so rich a city, wherein the Art was yet
unpracticed, brought two other countrymen with him, viz. Martin Crantz and
Michael Friburger or de Columbaria or Colmar in Alsace, to Paris; where he set
up presses in the hall of Sorbon, and in the year 1470 published the first
book, that ever was printed in any city of France, except that of Tours
mentioned in a former chapter. Father Orlandi tells us, that Lewis XI gave
Fitchet and Lapidanus orders to send for some of the best Printers to Paris, at
his own charge; and that by this means the three German partners were induced
to settle there. Chevillier takes no notice of this, but attributes the honor
wholly to the Sorbonists. However, it is certain that this king was a great
encourager of learning; as appears by the magnificent library which he formed
at his palace in Paris; whither he brought not only all the books, which his
predecessors, and in particular Charles V sirnam'd the wise, and Charles VI had
collected and set up at Fountainbleau, but likewise all that he could purchase
at any rate, together with a great number of editions printed at Mentz by Faust
and Schoeffer; and what manuscripts he could not purchase, he ordered to be
curiously transcribed, and to be set up there. A remarkable instance of this,
mentioned by the French writers, is as follows.

THE king understanding that the college of physicians at Paris had in their
library the works of Rhasis a physician, translated out of Arabic into Latin,
sent to borrow it, in order to have it transcribed; but the college
representing it as against their constitutions to lend any of their books
without a sufficient pledge; his majesty was contented to obtain the use of it,
by depositing a large quantity of his own plate. Whether therefore the king or
the two doctors brought the first Printers to Paris, it is beyond doubt, that he
gave them sufficient encouragement, and access to the library at the Louvre,
with liberty to print from any of those volumes, in the choice of which, it is
probable, they were directed by their two patrons.

As the Art was then in its infancy at Paris, their first editions were in a
large round Roman character but greatly inferior in beauty to that of their
contemporaries in Italy; their paper was smooth and strong, though less white;
their impressions were maimed and imperfect, with letters and words half
printed, and finished with a pencil; the inscription and title of some
epistles, and the large initial letters of books and chapters were done with
the hand, for which a blank was left in the page; they had no capitals, nor
regular spaces, but were full of abbreviations; in short, there was nothing to
recommend them except the newness, and the beauty of the ink. They used few
rubricks, and those only upon vellum; some of their books begin at the folio
verso, or even page; and all of them are without titles, number of pages,
signatures or directionwords; they used no signatures 'till the year 1476, and
then placed them not at the bottom, but at the top of the pages; they added
neither date, nor names of Printer and place; all which are only to be gathered
from the prefaces, or epigrams at the end, or some other circumstances, as will
appear from the list of their works, especially of those printed in the three
first years 1470, 1471, and 1472. It is certainly very surprising, that neither
Gering nor his two learned patrons, who must infallibly have seen some of the
Italian editions, especially those of Rome and Venice, which had all these
necessary ornaments, should not make them sensible of their deficiencies in all
those respects. However, so few were the elegant Printers in those days, that
the learned men of Paris, who esteemed the Art of more consequence than these
embellishments, failed not to acknowledge their obligation to the Sorbon
doctors, for the services they had done to the university in settling the
Printers there, upon whom they were equally liberal of their encomiums. Enough
of these may be seen in Chevillier page 41, and seq. I shall only cite in the
margin an epigram printed at the end of Gaspar Pergamensis's epistles, which
was their first impression, and had prefixed to it a letter of thanks to those
great men, upon their bringing the Art to that city.

THE epigram Ut sol lumen, sic doctrinam fundis in orbem,
Musarum nutrix regia, Parisius.
Hinc prope divinam tu, quam Germania novit,
Artem scribendi, suscipe promerita.
Primos ecce libros, quos haec iudustria finxit
Francorum in terris, aedibus atque tuis.
Michael, Uldaricus, Martinusque magistri
Hos impresserunt, ac facient alios.

is addressed to the city of Paris, and sufficiently shows not only that this
edition was the first fruits of the Art both in that city and kingdom, against
those who ascribe that honor to Jenson; but likewise that the Parisians
congratulated themselves for their success in introducing it thither, since it
gave the university an absolute authority over all Printers and booksellers, in
the seven following particulars, mentioned by Chevillier page 327, viz.

1. THAT all the Printers and booksellers of Paris, after the first settlement
of printing there, have still continued in their former state, that is, been
esteemed as agents and servants to that university. 2. THAT they are obliged to
take the oaths to the rector of it. 3. THAT they are not allowed to follow that
business 'till the university has judged them qualified for it. 4. THAT the
university exercises their jurisdiction over them by summoning them to appear,
etc. by fining, punishing and deposing them for any misdemeanor. 5. THAT the
edicts and ordinances of the king empower that body to visit and search all
Printing-houses, warehouses for books, and booksellers shops, etc. 6. THAT the
university set a price upon their books, which was affixed to their catalogues,
and placed in some conspicuous part of their shops, lest any person might be
imposed on by them. This part of their province they exerted, long before the
Art of Printing was discovered, over all transcribers, illuminators,
booksellers, etc. 7. LASTLY, that the booksellers, etc. should sell no books of
religion, etc. 'till they had been examined and approved by the university, or,
at least, by the faculty of doctors of divinity.
WE shall show in the third book of this history, that the university of Oxsord
had the same authority over the Printers and booksellers of that city.

TO return to our three Printers, they continued printing but three years at
the house of the Sorbon; after which one of their patrons, Fichet being invited
to Rome by Pope Sixtus IV, and the other intending soon after to return to
Germany, they removed to St. James's-street, at the sign of the Golden Sun.
Upon this they immediately rejected all their old punches, matrices and
letters, and furnished themselves with some entirely new, and printed several
considerable volumes 'till the year 1477; at which time Crantz and Friburger
either returned into Germany, or, at least, left off printing, for there is no
edition with their names after that year; but Gering printed in his own name
many years longer, as shall be shown in its place In the mean time, it will be
proper to give the reader an account of this new set of characters, which they
made use of in their new house.

IT IS to be observed, that they were of three or four sorts, all different from
each other, and from those used at the house of the Sorbon, and cast in new
matrices. One sort is vastly inferior to their former, and resembles the
handwriting of that time, but such as was done (stannea manu, as Aldus
expresses it) with a heavy hand.

IT is not, however, altogether Gothic, but rather like that which Schoeffer
used at Mentz. Another sort was not unlike this in shape, but of a much larger
face. The third was a Roman much more round and fine than the two former; but
the fourth sort, not used by Gering 'till after the year 1478, that is, after
his partners had left him, is a very beautiful, large Roman, which (if we may
believe Chevillier, who saw and compared them) is in no case inferior to that
of the Spira's, Jenson, or any other of the famous Venetian and French
Printers, either before or since. Thus Gering attained to a degree of
perfection equal with any of his brethren; but was at last obliged to comply
with the custom, and print several books in Gothic, such as Virgil and some
others, besides those for the use of churches. The editions printed at this
house, and in these new characters, are still defective with respect to their
dates or Printers names, some wanting the one, some the other, and some both,
as appears by the list of his works given us by the forementioned author, anno
1480. Gering took into partnership with him for some time, William Maynyal; and
in the year 1483 removed from St. James's-street, and took a lease, during
life, of a house belonging to the college of Sorbon, where he set up his old
sign of the Golden-sun. As he was now become very rich, and had contracted an
intimate friendship with the Sorbon collegians, he made them some considerable
donatives both in books and money; upon which account they chose him fellow of
that college, and assigned him chambers and commons in it: and as he was not
engaged in matrimony, he took the more pleasure in conversing with them,
communicating his designs, and using their advice about the books which he was
to print, and their assistance in correcting them; in return for which he
presented them with copies of all his editions. It was no small advantage to
that college (which was called at first by the founder Robert Sorbon, Societas
pauperum magistrorum Parisiis in theologica facultate studentium) to have so
generous a friend and benefactor admitted into it; who requited them for this
honor with vast legacies, left by him in his will to this college, and that of
Montague in the same city. For by his success in printing 'till anno 1510, in
which he died, he had amassed a prodigious quantity of wealth, all which he
bequeathed to those two colleges. What he endowed the Sorbon in particular
with, was sufficient to maintain eight fellows, to be added to those on the old
foundation, and two lectures every day, one in the morning for the Old, and
another in the afternoon for the New Testament; besides several other donatives
to those of the house whom he had a particular esteem for.

Now considering, that he was the first Printer of that city and kingdom; that
he was invited thither by the college of Sorbon; that he had been so great a
master of his art, and so liberal to that poor society in his lifetime, and
after his death; the reader may perhaps expect to hear of some monument erected
by them to his memory: but it is plain from what Chevillier, a fellow of that
college, tells us, that they did not so much as set a gravestone over him, to
let the world know where that great man was buried; so that our last mentioned
author, after a vast deal of pains, could not gain the least certainty about
it. However, to do them justice, they ordered an anniversary-mass to be said on
the 23d of August, on which he died. Who his correctors were, is difficult to
determine; but it is probable he made use of any of the collegians, whom he
pleased. He had some other partners besides Maynyal beforementioned, and
instructed several Printers, who signalized themselves both during his life and
after he died. There were likewise diverse other Printing-houses set up at Paris
soon after his, of which we shall speak, when we have given some further
account of his works; Chevillier in his list of them divides them into three
classes, viz. those which he printed with his two partners in the college from
1470 to 1473; next those printed at the Golden Sun in St. James's-street 'till
anno 1483; and lastly, those which he printed from that time 'till his death,
either by himself or with his other partners. Of the first class there are
eleven editions still extant all printed in the same character, some of the
first of which have epistles affixed and inscribed by Fichet above-named, to
several princes and prelates, and are dated 1470 and 1471; one of which, to
cardinal Bessarion, has the following, Aedibus Sorbonae scriptum, impressumque
uno anno and septuagesimo quadringentesimo supra millesimum: those of the
second class are 23 in number: and sixteen of the third class, exclusive of
those, which he printed after the year 1500: all which the reader will find
either in Chevillier or Mr. Mattaire. Gering's last work is dated 1508, which
shows that he left off printing two years before he dyed: for his death did not
happen 'till anno 1510, Aug. 23. The next Printing House, to that of the three
Germans last spoken of, was set up by,

4. PETER CAESARIS and 5. JOHN STOL, 1473.
THESE two Printers were likewise natives of Germany, but had already studied
sometime in the university of Paris, where the former had attained to the
degree of master of arts: these two became acquainted with their countryman
Gering, and informed him of their design of setting up a Printing House,
begging his assistance and instructions therein, which he readily granted: and
thus was the second Press set up at Paris by these two learned persons, who
became soon after, no less famous, for their industry and application, than
they had been for their learning. They pitched upon one of the houses,
belonging to the college of Sorbon, to print in, which Chevillier tells us, was
in St. James's-street at the sign of the Soldier and Swan: their character was
short of the beauty of Uldric Gering, though far from being of the Gothic kind;
this may be one reason why a great many of their works are lost: they were
likewise guilty of neglecting to affix either their names or dates to their
works: so that the former is only to be gathered from the likeness of the
character to their other works, that are printed in their names, and the latter
is either supplied by some circumstance, or wholly guessed at.

THEIR first work is supposed to be the Speculum Zamorae, which though printed
without date, yet is known to have come out anno 1473 by the epigram at the
end: one of their finest impressions is that of Ocham's decalogue, which
Naudeus thought to have been done by Gering, but Chevillier who has compared
them with other of their works, assures them to have been printed by them: we
have but ten editions of theirs from 1473 to 1500: but they continued printing
beyond that time especially Caesaris. The next Paris Printer was,

6. PETER CARON, of whom we have but one edition dated 1474.

7. PASQUIER BON-HOMME 1475, he printed the chronicle of France, and that of St
Dennis in three volumes fol. a scarce book, and the only one we have left of
him, it is dated 1475.

8. ANTHONY VERARD, 1480.
HE was one of the most considerable Printers and booksellers of his time, and
very eminent for the curiosity and number of his ditions. The greatest part of
his books consist in romances and the like, printed in a Gothic character, but
so elegant as to please the eve extremely. Many of them are printed upon fine
vellum; La Caille tells us, that there are above an hundred volumes of his
romances printed curiously on vellum, embellished with exquisite miniatures or
small cutts, painted in water colors, in imitation of the manuscripts which he
printed after, all which are to be seen in the French king's library. However,
though he engaged most in romantic pieces, yet he likewise published several
learned volumes, all in French, with equal care and beauty, in the same Gothic
letter.

HE kept his Printing House and shop upon the bridge of Notre Dame at the sign
of St. John the Evangelist. Sometimes he subscribes his books only with the
first letters of his name, A. V. His mark is enclosed with four French verses
in a pious strain: the reader will find them in the margin Pour proyoquer ta
grand misericorde A tout pecheur fair Grace and Pardon Antoine Verard
humblement te record Tout ce qu'il a, il fient de toy pardon.
. Whatever is become of the great number of his editions, some of which were
printed by the French king Charles VIII's order, I can find no more in
Orlandi's list than 32, from 1480 to 1500.

THE rest of the Paris Printers are as follows,

9. NICHOLAS de Philippis

and 10. MARK REYNHARD de Strasburgh,

WHERE they printed in partnership before they came to Paris: we have but one
edition of theirs dated 1482.

11. ANTONY CAYLLAUT we have 4 edit. of theirs from 1483 to 1492.

and 12. LEWIS MARTINEAU, we have 4 edit. of theirs from 1483 to 1492.

13. GUIDO MERCANT, 10 edit. from 1483 to 1499.

14. GEORGE MITTLH or Mittelh, 2 edit. from 1484 to 1489.

15. DENNIS JANNOT, 1 edit. 1484.

16. ROBINET MACE, 1 edit. 1486.

17. JOHN BONHOME, who was also a bookseller, 3 edit. from 1486 to 1489.

18. PETER LEVET, 5 edit. from 1487 to 1497.

19. JOHN CARCHAGNI, 1 edit. 1489.

20. PETER ROUGE the king's Printer, 3 edit. from 1487 to 1488.

21. JOHN DUPRE, 1 edit. 1488: he went to Lions soon after.

22. PHILIP PIGOUCHET, 3 edit. from 1489 to 1500.

23. WOLFGANG HOPYL German 4 edit. from 1489 to 1498.

and 24. JOHN HIGMAN, 4 edit. from 1489 to 1498.

THE former of these became afterward partner of the great Henry Stephens.

25. MICHAELLE NOIR, 1 edit. 1489.

26. DURANT GERLIER, 1 edit. 1489.

27. JAMES MAILET, 1 edit. 1491.

28. GEORGE WOLF of Baden and partners, 7 edit. from 1491 to 1499.

HIS partners, who printed afterward by themselves shall be mentioned in their
place.

29. WILLIAM CARON, 1 edit. 1492.

30. JOHN BELIN with John Dupre abovementioned, 1 edit. 1492.

31. GILLET COUSTEAU 2 edit. from 1492 to 1494.

and 32. JOHN MENARD, 2 edit. from 1492 to 1494.

33. JOHN LAMBERT 2 edit. 1493 to 1494.

and 34. CLAUDE JAMMAR, 2 edit. 1493 to 1494.

35. JOHN PHILIPPI de Cruczennach, German, one of George Wolph's partners: we
have 3 edit. of his from 1494 to 1495.

36. PETER POUILLAC, 4 edit. from 1495 to 1498.

37. STEPHEN JANNOT 4 edit. from 1495 to 1498.

and 38. JOHN TREPEREL, 4 edit. from 1495 to 1498.

39. JOHN BOUYER 1 edit. 1496.

and 40. WILLIAM BOUCHER, 1 edit. 1496.

41. ANDR. BOCARD one of the best Printers of his time: De la Caille affirms
him to have printed a great number of books, both for himself and other
booksellers: and among others, the Figurae Biblicae of Anth. de Rampengol: his
mark was the arms of France, and those of the university, and of the city of
Paris with four French verses, which you will find in the margin Honneur an
Roy, and a la Court,
Salut a l*ite,
Don't notre bien proceed and sourt
Dieu guard de Paris la cite.

: we have however but 4 edit. of his, 3 dated 1497, and the last 1498.

42. ANTONY NIDEL or de Nydel a citizen of Paris, and master of arts: we have
but one impression of his dated 1497.

43. JOHN POITEVIN, we have but 1 edit. of each of these dated 1498.

JOHN HIGMAN, we have but 1 edit. of each of these dated 1498.

44. JOHN RICHARD, we have but 1 edit. of each of these dated 1498.

45. JO. PETIT, Parisian, 1498.
JOHN PETIT was a native of Paris, and rather a bookseller than a Printer: he
is justly esteemed one of the most eminent and industrious ones of his time. He
kept the greatest number of the best workmen of any of his contemporaries, with
no less than fifteen presses continually at work at his own charges, whilst
himself was engaged in the business of his shop, at the silver Lion, and
procuring the most skillful correctors to revise his works. He gained a
prodigious reputation by the beauty and correctness of his impressions, which,
though printed in a Gothic character, are much esteemed by the curious. He began
to print anno 1498, though some copies of editions by several former Printers
have likewise his name, as Mr. Mattaire informs us, yet all have not; he
continued printing 'till anno 1532, and many of his impressions are as scarce
as they are curious. The learned Henry Stephens, father of so many great
Printers of that name, was so well satisfied of his merit, that he was glad to
have him for his partner with Wolfgang Hopyl mentioned above, who was a Printer
of much older date: Petit became so famous, both for the beauty and
correctness, as well as the number of his editions, that he was afterward
sworn Printer and bookseller to the university of Paris, and chosen syndic or
master of that company; among those Printers which he employed, was the famous
Jodocus Badius, who printed several considerable editions for him. In the title
page of his books, he used the words Petit a Petit [by little and little]
alluding to his own name, which he also used for his motto. The books which we
find printed in his name from 1498 to 1500, are only three, the first of which
is much valued by students in law, viz.

MODUS legendi abbreviaturus in utroque jure, 8vo, per Jo. Petit, Parisiis,
1498. For as we hinted before, abbreviations were become so frequent and
intricate in most sciences, but especially that of the law, that such a help as
this was become absolutely necessary.

46. JOHN DRYART, we have but one impression of each of these dated 1498

47. SIMON COLIN, we have but one impression of each of these dated 1498

48. GODFREY MARNEF, we have but one impression of each of these dated 1498

49. MICHEL TOLOSA, 1 edit. 1499.

50. ALEXANDER ALIATE, 1 edit. of each 1500.

51. THIELMAN KERVER, 1 edit. of each 1500.

WE find also in Orlandi's list about 44 editions without Printers names.

BEFORE I dismiss this chapter, I cannot omit observing, that Paris has been a
noble patroness of the Art of Printing. It Is true, Venice is justly famed upon
this account; yet it ought to be remembered, that most of her celebrated
Printers were of the French nation, and signalized themselves as much in this
Art, as any other nation; and that Paris excelled all other cities of that
kingdom in this respect. The encouragements which their kings, and the learned
of that and other countries, have given the Art, and the care of the university
over the Printers, have contributed extremely to the great improvements made
therein. Besides this, the French have shown an extraordinary genius and skill
in the cutting of their punches for all languages; they have been very curious
about their paper, and more particularly in adorning their editions with cutts,
head and tail pieces, initial letters, rubricks and other embellishments of
that nature. This I mention not so much with respect to the 15th century, as to
the following. No city has produced a greater number of the finest bibles than
Paris. Their large, royal and polyglot bibles are justly esteemed masterpieces
of that kind; their editions of general and provincial councils, of canon and
civil-law, the works of the fathers, chronological and historical books, and,
in short, in every art and science, are very numerous, rich, and valuable; and
many of them contain seven, eight, and ten large volumes, and some twenty,
thirty, and even thirty seven, as the acts of the council printed by the famous
Anthony Vitre at the Louvre. The women likewise were very eminent in this
province; and particularly, Charlotte Guillard, the widow of Berthold Rembolt,
Ulric Gering's partner, who for the space of 50 years kept several presses, and
printed a great number of large and correct editions both in Latin and Greek,
her best editions were published after she became a widow the second time, viz.
the bible, the fathers; in particular, the works of St. Gregory in two volumes
were printed so accurately, that the errata contained but three faults. Her
fame at last increased so, that the learned Lewis Lippoman, bishop of Verona,
made choice of her to print his Catena SS. patrum in Genesim, which he finished
in Portugal. This edition she performed so much to his satisfaction, that when
he assisted at the council of Trent, he came on purpose to Paris to return her
thanks, and prevailed upon her to print likewise his second volume, viz. Catena
in Exodum, which she performed with equal beauty and correctness. These with
many other particulars relating to that admirable woman, may be seen in Chevil.
p. 48, and seq.

As Paris has always abounded in excellent Printers, and furnished most other
cities of Europe with some of them; so, on the other hand, it must be owned,
that it has produced several equally bad, who have published many wretched
editions; and it is probable they might have still increased, had not the
university checked their growth. For as it has such power over all Printers and
booksellers, as to refuse admitting those into the business, who are not
sufficiently qualified, and to turn them out of it, or suspend or fine them for
any misdemeanors, as was hinted before; it can more easily restrain them, than
where such checks are wanting. However those, whose merit recommends them,
enjoy all the encouragement they can reasonably desire, both from their princes
and the university. They are endowed with privileges, exemptions, and
immunities beyond any other city; and have had frequent opportunities of
raising themselves to great dignities, of acquiring large estates, and in
short, every thing suitable to their merit.

CHAP. V. The Settlement and Progress of Printing in the Cities of Cologn,
Milan 1470, Strasburgh, Bolognia and Treviso 1471, the Names, Dates, and other
Particulars of their Printers.
Article I. COLOGN. 1470.
THE city of Cologn, (which is one of the most opulent Hans-towns in the
empire, and an archiepiscopal see, pleasantly situated upon the Rhine,) by its
nearness to Mentz, must necessarily have receiv^d the Art of Printing very
early. We have taken notice, in the first book of this history, that some of
Faust's servants left him even before the taking of that city, and settled at
Cologn; and the author of the Chronicle of that name mentions it as the first
city, which received the art after Mentz. It Is unquestionable that if her first
impressions had been preserved, we must have given it the precedence to almost
all the cities hitherto mentioned; but whether the first printers of it
neglected to add their own, and the cities name at the end of their editions,
(a fault too common in those days) or whether their works were too
inconsiderable to be preserved; it is certain that there is no book, as yet
known, printed there with an authentic date, before this year 1470; which is
the reason why, according to our proposed method, we can allow it no higher
rank. We have indeed, in the introduction to this second book, taken notice of
one of the most eminent printers in this city, viz. John Koelhoff, who
antedated some of his impressions; but, I hope, the reader is fully satisfied
from the reasons which we have given there, that he began not to work so early,
since one of his dates is even much older than either himself or the Art of
Printing. Cologn did not abound with great Printers during the first 30 years,
viz. till 1500; though in process of time it became very famous in that art, as
well by those who lived in it, as those that dispersed themselves into many
cities of Europe. It is called Colonia Agrippina in Latin from the empress
Agrippina, Nero's mother: the following are all the Printers we know of 'till
the end of the 15th century.

1. CONRARD WINTERS de Hombergh, a citizen of Cologn, of whom we have but one
edition dated 1470. 2. PETER de Olpe, 2 edit. both 1471. 3. ARNOLD TERBORN or
Terburn, 2 edit. from 1473 to 1477. 4. JOHN KOELHOFF de Lubeck, 9 edit. from
1474 to 1494: besides the two following ones, which though printed with his name,
have a date manifestly false.
1. FLORES de diversis sermonibus and epistolis B. Bernardi per me Joan.
Koelhoff de Lubeck Coloniensem civem impressi anno MCCCC, feliciter finiunt.
The reader may see by the time in which he printed, that either the last C must
have been taken up by the balls, or omitted by the compositor; and that it was
done anno 1500, or that some other figures are wanting to the date: but it
appears to me to be done by design rather than mistake.

2. SILVII Senensis Epistolae, at the end; Pii secundi pontificis maximi, cui
ante summum episcopatum primum quidem imperiali secretario, mox episcopo,
deinde etiam cardinali Senensi, Enee Silvii nomen erat, familiares epistole
date ad amicos in quadruplici vise ejus statu finiunt, per me Joannem Koelhoff
de Lubeck coloniae incolam, anno incarnationis MCCCCLVIII.

WE have already observed, that there are some letters in this book, which are
of a later date by several years than that of the book; so that it must
necessarily be false.

5. HENRY QUENTEL an excellent Printer, though omitted by the last annalist
father Orlandi, continued printing long after the year 1500* and had a son
Peter Quentel and a grandson John Quentel, who likewise distinguished
themselves for the goodness and correctness of their editions: we have but 4
edit. of his from 1480 to 1500.

6. JOHN GULDENSCHAYFF, 4 edit. from 1484 to 1487.

MR. Mattaire mentions likewise some bibles, and a few other books printed here
without Printers names.

Article II. MILAN, 1470.
MILAN [in latin Mediolanum] is one of the four chief cities of Italy, situate
near the rivers Adda and Tesino, and said to have been built by the Trojans
after their expulsion by Bellover king of the Gauls. This city, after a variety
of chances and wars, was almost ruined by Frederic Barbarossa; but now
flourishes under the emperor of Germany. It received the Art of Printing very
early, and had many excellent artificers from the beginning, whose works are
equally valuable with those of any other cities We cannot positively affirm any
thing concerning the time, in which this Art was brought hither, nor who were
the men that set it up. The first both in time as well as excellency was.

1. ANTHONY ZAROT, 1470.

HE was a native of the city of Parma, though of Cretensian parents, as appears
by some of his colophons, and gained a great reputation for 30 years, in which
he continued printing, by his elegant and correct impressions in a beautiful
Roman character, which are sufficiently known among the learned. He was obliged
indeed to comply with the custom in printing some editions in old Gothic; yet
even th^se have all the elegancy and beauty they can admit of. He is esteemed
the inventor of signatures, or alphabetical letters at the bottom of every
sheet, which at first he placed under the last line of the page, where they
ought to be: But afterward he put them, upon what account is hard to guess, at
the end of the last line, so as to make them serve, as it were, for the last
word in the page. This appears by his edition of John Simoneta de gestis
Francisci Sfortiae ducis Mediol. anno 1486. This whim of his was not followed
by any Printer, nor by himself long; for he soon returned to the first method.
His main province was printing of classicks, which he executed with
extraordinary diligence and accuracy. He is said to be the first that printed
missals or mass-books for the use of the clergy, who were hitherto used to MS
ones. That which he printed anno 1478, had the four Latin verses in red
letters, which you will find in the margin Antoni patria Parmensis gente Zarote,
Primus Missales imprimit at Libros.
Nemo repertorem nimium se jact^t; in Art,
Addere plus tantum quam pepe^^sse valet*

. His chief corrector was the famous Peter Justin Philelphus, a person of
learning and great application, especially in correcting the faulty editions
which Zarot was obliged to procure from Rome or other places. His next
corrector was the learned P. Steph* Dulcinio, prebend of Scala, who tells the
marquess of Palavicino, to whom he dedicates the second edition of Manilius,
anno 1499 that he had corrected that author in above three hundred places, and
cleared it from the barbarisms, and other faults of the transcribers, as far as
it was possible to be done in a very corrupt copy. Zarot continued printing
till the year 1500, from which time we hear no more of him.

WE have twenty six of his impressions still extant, many of which have either
an epigram or a colophon in his commendation. Some are without Printer or
places name, and even without date; the last of which must be guessed at, the
former are easily known by the particular beauty of his character, and because
he printed no where but at Milan.

2. PHILIP de Lavagna Milanese, 13 editions, from 1474 to 1480. The last of
which, viz. Eusebii Chronicon in Latin, is without date, and has a Latin
epigram of six lines written in his commendation by Boninus Mambritius.

3. CHRISTOPHER VALDARFER de Ratisbon, an excellent artist* who printed at
Venice from 1470 to 1471, then came to Milan, where he wrought till anno 1477,
if not beyond. He made use of the same corrector here which he had at Venice,
viz. Ludovicus Carbo or Carbone, a native of Ferrara; we have but four
impressions of his done at Milan from 1474 to 1477.

4. DOMINIC de Vespolate, 4 edit. from 1476 to 1478.

5. DIONYS PARAVICINO, 4 edit. from 1476 to 1478.

THE former also took another partner, viz.

6. JAMES MARLIAN, of these we have 2 edit. 1477, 1478.

7. LUDOVIC Piedmontese.

and 8. ALBERT Piedmontese. Of these two Brothers we have only one edition,
viz. Dante's comedies with comments: The text is printed in an elegant Roman,
and the comments in a fine Gothic character, with the colophon which you will
find in the margin Edente Martino paulo Nidobeato Novariensi DIVA BO. MA cum
dulci nato JO. GZ Ducibus feliciss. Liguriae valida pace regnantibus, operi
egregio manum supremam LUD. and ALB. FR. Pedemontani amico Jove imposuerunt.
Mediolani urbe illustri. Anno Gratiae M. CCCC. LXXVIII. V. ID. F. MP. N. N.
CUM. GU. T. FA. CU.
.

9. LEONARD PACHEL, 1479.

10. ULDRIC SCINZENZETER, 1479.

These two partners were Germans by birth, and printed sometimes together and
sometimes separately, till after the close of the 15th century. The former of
them printed a great many of the classicks, and is reported to have printed a
very considerable number of law books, many of which are not yet come to light.
Their corrector was Benedict. Rhethoricus. The number of their impressions
hitherto discovered from 1479 to 1500, amounts to 36.

11. SIMON MAGNAGUS, 1 edit. 1480.

12. BENIGNUS Bonaso

and 13. JOHN ANTONY Bonaso brothers, 2 edit. 1482, 1488.

14. JAMES de S. Nazaro, 2 edit. 1489, 1494.

15. PHILIP de Montegaliis, 1 edit. 1490.

16. PETER ANTONY de Castillione, 1 edit. 1493.

17. HENRY GERMAN, 1 edit. 1493.

and 18. SEBASTIAN de Pontremoli,

19. WILLIAM SIGNER of Rouen, 2 edit 1496, 1498.

20. JOHN BAPT. ALVISIANUS, 1 edit. 1497.

21. ALEXANDER MINUTIANUS, 1 edit. of all Cicero's works in 4 volumes fol. the
two first anno 1498, the other two 1499.

22. DEMETRIUS CHALCONDYLLA and partners, 1 edit. 1499.

23. AMBROSE CAPONAGUS, 1 edit. 1499.

24. JOHN ANGEL. SCINZENZELER 2 edit. both 1500.

and 25. BARTHOL MINIATOR, 2 edit. both 1500.

26. PETER MARTYR MONTLEGATIUS, 1 edit. 1500.

There are also many editions printed at Milan, from 1471 to 1500 without
Printer's names. Fath. Orlandi tells us, that he has on purpose omitted many
works done at Milan, because his learned friend Dr. Joseph Antonio keeper of
the Ambrosian library in that city, was then (ann 1722) compiling a history
which would shortly appear under the following title, Historia Literaria
Mediolanensis ab an. 1470 ad 1500. qua occasion de Origin and progressu
Typographiae, Libris editis intra illud tempus, ac Viris Illustribus, eo seculo
in eadem Urbe florentibus. By this we may easily guess, that we have as yet but
an imperfect history of that city. We may say the same of almost all the rest,
except those that have met with some learned persons who have taken the pains
of searching the libraries, in order to give a more perfect and full one of
them, such as that of Paris, Nurembergh, etc.

Article III. STRASBURGH.
STRASBURGH, in Latin Argentina and Argentoratum, is an episcopal See, and the
metropolis of Alsatia upon the borders of France, celebrated for the number of
learned men, which it has produced; and the beauty and magnificence of its
churches, towers, buildings, etc. according to the poet's description
Imprimisque altas propius fert inclyta turres.
Argentina Domus doctorum clara vi^orum

.

IT was the native place of John Guttenbergh, to which, after his disagreement
with Faust, he brought the Art of Printing together with some of his
artificers; so that it may be justly esteemed, at least, one of the first
cities, that practiced it after Mentz, though all the monuments of it are so far
lost to us, that we know not any books with a certain date, printed there
before the year 1471.

WE have seen, in the first part of this history, how much this city has been
celebrated by some authors, upon the account of John Guttenbergh, whom they
supposed to have been the inventor of this Art, or at least to have laid the
first foundation of it here, though he was obliged to retire to Mentz in order to
perfect it. But as this, I conceive, has been sufficiently confuted already, it
is unnecessary to repeat it here. I have likewise given the reader an account
of another controverfy in favor of Strasburgh and John Mentel started about
two hundred years after the discovery of this Art, by Dr. Mentel of the
university of Paris, who asserted that his ancestor was the Inventor of
Printing; which discovery he was robbed of by a treacherous servant, whom he
suspects to be our famous John Faust. I hope, I have fully exposed the vanity
of this author's pretenses, and his unfaithfulness in quoting testimonies in
behalf of Mentel; against whom, were there no other evidence, it would be
sufficient to allege, that there is not one book printed in his name before the
year 147^, and that without any mention of the city of Strasburgh.

ALL that is proper to add at present is, that our author, to elude, if
possible, the force of this objection, affirmed that this book, which John
Mentel finished anno 1473, was no less than twenty years a printing, and
contained ten large volumes in fol. so that it must have been begun about 1453,
i. e. four years before Faust had printed any work in his name, but this is a
groundless conjecture.

THIS book is the Speculum Morale of Vincentius Belvacensis, a very voluminous
work; but that it should have taken up 20 years in printing, is only said
without any authority or testimony for it; however we may allow it to have
taken up some considerable time, without lessening the validity of what has
been heretofore affirmed after several eminent authors, viz. that John Faust,
at his return from Paris, where he had been selling his printed bibles for
manuscripts, stayed some time at Strasburgh, where he taught Mentel his Art.
The only difficulty against it is, that if thi^ last had been let into the
secret so soon, there would be some earlier and a greater number of his
productions to be seen. The former is easily answered by the sad experience we
have, of too many of the old monuments of the Art being either lost, or not yet
discovered; and the latter, De la Caille endeavors to account for, who
peremptorily asserts this Mentel to be the same with John Mentelen or Manthen
de Geretzsheim, who went and settled at Venice, and associated himself with the
famous John de Cologne, one of the most eminent and first Printers of that city
about the year 1474, with whom he printed several valuable editions, mentioned
in the chapter of Venice.

IF this assertion be well grounded, it is superfluous to seek for any of his
works at Strasburgh, except the Speculum beforementioned, if even that was
printed there. But as la Caille has not mentioned his authority, I shall not
dare to assert the truth of this too positively. We must not omit taking
notice, that this John Manthen continued printing at Venice, with his partner
aforesaid, 'till the year 1480, as the reader may see by what has been said of
him there; whereas John Mentel is affirmed by the Dr. from the authority of
Gaspar Benegerus to have died at Strasburgh two years before, viz. 1478, in
honor of whom the great bell of that city was ordered to be rung the sunday
following Obiit dominus Johannes Mentel sabatho post conceptionem virginis
Moriae, an o MCCCC LXX IIX; et factus est ^i pulsus cum campana magna Dominica
sequenti. Paraen etc. page 9^.
, which is never done but upon the death of a prince or some very great man. I
shall not take upon me to decide the controversy, but only say, that if the
Speculum aforesaid, be Mentel's first edition at Strasburgh, it will follow,
that he was outstript, at least by two years there, by the famous Henry
Eggelstein, of whom we have only two volumes, both printed anno 1471; the last
of which is perhaps one of the largest that ever was printed, the paper of it
being of an extraordinary size, exceeding even that which is commonly called
Charta magna. It has likewise another remarkable particular, which is, that
the beginning and end of it are printed in red, and is therefore the first
edition done after that manner.

THE Printers therefore of Strasburgh from 1471 to 1500 are as follows,
1. HENRY EGGELSTEIN abovementioned, 2 edit. dated 1471. 2. JOHN MENTEL, 1
edit. viz. Vincentii Speculum morale in ten large volumes, fol. and supposed to
be printed at Strasburgh, though no mention is made of the place where it was
done; it is dated 1473. 3. MARTIN FLACH or Flachen citizen of Basil, 7 edit.
from 1475 to 1500. 4. LEORIUS USNER citizen of Strasburgh, 2 edit. from 1476 to
1477. 5. MARC REYNHARD of Strasburgh 2 edit. from 1480 to 1482. and 6. NICOL.
de Philippis of Gernsheym, 2 edit. from 1480 to 1482. 7. JOHN PRUS, 1 edit.
1487. 8. GEORGE REYNHARD or de Grunynger, 3 edit. from 1489 to 1498: he had
likewise printed at Rome, as we have seen under that head anno 1475.
ORLANDI has likewise given us a list of 84 edit. printed at Strasburgh without
Printers names.

Article IV. BOLOGNA, 1471.
BOLOGNA or Bolonia, in Latin Bononia, an ancient and famous city of Italy, at
the foot of the Alps, upon the river Rhine, in the territories of the pope, was
formerly called Felsina, from Felsinus king of the Thuscans, which signifies a
shield. This name she preserved above nine hundred years, and always was
eminent for the number of learned men and brave warriers which she produced.
This city afterward was called Bojona from Buoi king of the Gauls, and in
process of time Bononia and Bolonia. It is at this day a celebrated university,
endowed with extraordinary privileges from emperors, popes, etc. and such a
concourse of students resort thither, that it is recorded of one of their
doctors and professors, the learned Azzo, that he was obliged to read his
lectures in some public market places, to above ten thousand students. For
these and other reasons, not necessary to be given here, it has been styled
Archigymnasium mundi, and the mother and founder of universities Bononia docet
Matter studiorum,
Petrus ubique Pater, Legumque Matter.

. It Is no wonder therefore that the Art of Printing received such early
encouragement from it, and that it had so many famous workmen, eminent for the
beauty and correctness of their impressions.

IT is likewise observable that it had not the Art brought to it by foreigners,
as other famous cities, Rome, Venice, Paris, etc. but was obliged for it to one
of her own citizens, viz.

1. BALTHAZAR AZZOGUIDI, anno 1471. A person well born and of good education,
who set up his Press in that city, and continued printing, at least, till the
year 1480, after which we hear no more of him. His editions are all in a neat
Roman character, and printed with great accuracy, the first of which, viz.
Ovid's Metamorphoses anno 1471, has the colophon which you will find in the
margin Balthessar Azzoguidi civis Bononiensis honestissimo loco natus, primus
in sua Civitate artis impressoriae Inventor, ad Utilitatem Humani generis
impressit, A. M CCCC LXXI.
. By which it is plain that he was the first who practiced the Art of Printing,
of which he improperly calls himself the inventor in his own city of Bolonia.
We have 12 editions of him from 1471 to 1480. 2. HUGO RUGERIUS of Regio, 6
edit. from 1474 to 1495. and 3. DONINUS BERTOCH of Regio, 6 edit. from 1474 to
1495. 4. DOMINIC de Lapis, 3 edit. 1476 to 1477. 5. JOHN SCRIBER of Ausburgh,
called also JOHN de Annunciata de Augusta, 2 edit. both 1478. 6. HENRY de
Colonia, 5 edit. from 1479 to 1486. 7. JOHN de Noerdlingen 8 edit. from 1480 to
1488. and 8. HENRY de Harlem, 8 edit. from 1480 to 1488. THE last of these did
likewise associate himself first with 9. MATH. CRESCENTINUS, and afterward
with 10. JOHN WALBECK; so that 3 of the 8 editions above-named were printed,
one with the former, and two with the last. 11. BALTHASSAR de Hyruberia, 2
edit. both 1481. 12. DOMINIC de Silvestro de Cini, 1 edit. 1482. 13. PLATO de
BENEDICTIS; or DEI BENEDETTI of Bologna, 1483. This Printer has never been
excelled by any person in the beauty and elegance of his Roman character; and
as his editions are extremely fine and correct, so he has taken care to tell
the world of it in almost every colophon at the end of his books, by adding
some pompous title to his name, such as impressor solertissimus, artis hujus
exactor probatissimus, quam pulcherrimis Characteribus, etc. He is thought to
have either learned the Art at Venice, or furnished himself with his Fonts from
thence. The first is most probable, because we find an edition of Dion.
Chrysostom's Oration de regno, 4to. supposed to have been printed by him at
Venice anno 1483. But F. Orlandi thinks this supposition ill-grounded, and
therefore has mentioned neither him, nor that edition under the article of
Venice, but has put it at the head of those printed by him at Bologna, where
having found a book, printed anno 1481, entitled Baptistae Mantuani Carmelitani
parthenices, he reprinted it with his own name and colophon. All his
impressions as yet known, the two forementioned ones included, amount to
sixteen, the last of them, viz. Vegetius and others de Re Militari is dated
1495. 14. BENEDICT HECTOR, 1478. He was a very good Printer and Bookseller, who
employed many Printers of this city, and kept likewise some presses of his own
a-going, as appears by those impressions we have of him; all which are so
correct and beautiful, that he is justly ranked among the best workmen of his
time, and Ugerius de Pontremulo has honored some of his impressions with
epigrams in praise of him. We have four and twenty of them still extant from
1488 to 1499. 15. BACILIERUS or de Bacilieris, 1489. BASSALERUS or de
Bassaleris, 1489. BAZALERUS or de Bazaleris, 1489. WE have but three editions
of this Printer from 1489 to 1493, in each of which he spells his name
differently. He was an excellent Printer, and a rival of the famous Plato de
Benedictis, whom he endeavored to surpass in beauty of letter, finess and
accuracy of his impressions, which though they do not excel, yet are not at all
inferior to those of his corrival, and he does not fail accordingly to give
himself some of these pompous epithets which we have seen of the other; and it
is observed that some of Plato's impressions were no sooner come out of the
press, but Bacilierus went immediately to work upon them, and published another
edition in a small time after. Such an emulation could not choose but have
proved an honor and service to the Art had it lived till now. 16. JOHN JAMES
FONTANESE, 2 edit. both dated 1492. 17. HECTOR FAELLI Bolognese, 2 edit. from
1492, to 1500. 18. HERCULES NANI, 2 edit. from 1493, to 1494. 19. JUSTINIAN de
Ruberia, 2 edit. from 1495, to 1499. JOHN ANTONY Platonides Benedictorum
Bolognese, 1 edit. 1499. With a small number printed at Bologne without the
Printers names.
Article V. The City of TREVISO.
TREVISO, in Latin Tarvisium, a noble and ancient city of Italy, and the
capital of the province of that name, by reason of its vicinity to Venice,
under whose dominion it is, had the Art of Printing soon introduced. Gerard de
Lisa, a Flemming by birth, and an excellent Printer, was the first that set it
up here. We can only say in general both of him and this city, that the few
editions we have left of theirs are very elegant and in a neat character.

1. GERARD de LIZA or LISIS, or GERARD de FLANDRIA, 1471.

WE have but four editions of him; the two first are dated 1471, the third
1476, and the last 1492, which makes me hope that more of them will still come
to light, these being esteemed very curious, not only for their elegancy, but
likewise for their correctness.

2. HERMAN LICHTHENSTEIN or LEVILAPIS of COLOGN, 1477.

THIS Printer we have spoken of under the chapter of Venice; and we shall again
mention him under the city of Vincenza, where he printed for some time. At
Treviso we have only two editions printed by him, both dated 1477. He died anno
1494, whilst he was printing that voluminous work of Vincentius, entitled,
Speculum Morale.

3. BERNARD de Colonia, 2 edit. 1477, 1478.

4. MICHEL MANZOLI or MANZOLINI, 7 edit. from 1477 to 1480.

5. BARTHOLOMEW de Confoloneriis, 4 edit. from 1478 to 1483.

6. BERNARDIU CELERIUS de Luere, 2 edit. 1480, 1483. after which he went to
Venice, where he associated himself with Bernardin de Novaria as has been
mentioned under that Head.

7. JOHN VERCELLIUS, or Vercellensis, 6 edit. from 1480 to 1494. after which he
went to Venice, where you will find him under that head, from anno 1486 to
1499. In this last place he calls himself John Rubeus Vercellensis.

8. PAUL de Ferrara 2 edit 1481, 1482.

and 9. DIONYS BERTOCH, 2 edit 1481, 1482.

DIONYS BERTOCH 2 edit. 1482, 1485.

and 10. PEREGRINE PASQUALI, 2 edit. 1482, 1485.

THERE is scarce one Printer to be met with in history, who changed oftener his
place of abode, his partners, and even his name, than Dennis Bertoch; who
sometimes calls himself Bertoch Doninus, and sometimes Dionys, sometimes de
Bononia, and at other times de Regio. His first works, viz. for 1482 to 1490,
were printed at Treviso; immediately after which we find him at Venice, where
he stayed till 1492; thence he removed to Regio, and associated himself with
Marc Antony de Baccilieris; and lastly he settled at Modena about the year
1499. We find but two of their impressions under this head, dated 1482 and 1485.

BUT though we have ranked them under the article of Treviso, yet they bear no
name of any place, and may indeed be supposed done by them at Venice, where
they printed about this time; however I have chosen to follow F. Orlandi, who
thinks it more probable that they were done at Treviso.

THERE is an edition printed by Peregrine Pasquali at Scandiano near the city
of Reggio, but with a date impossible to be understood or guessed at;

IT is as follows,

DILIGENTIS ac ingeniosi calchographi Peregrini Pasquali exactissima tum opera,
tum cura haec Candidi ex Apiano historico and sophista traductio, Scandiani
Camillo comite, impressa est. Anno a natali Christi, 15. M CCCC LCXV.

Appendix to the foregoing chapter; Printing set up at Ratisbon, Amberg, and
Colle, 1471.
THESE three cities, though distant from each other, we have joined together at
the end of this chapter, for the sake of the editions printed at each of them
in the same year 1471, which were too few to deserve a distinct article; since
we meet with no impressions at either of them, except the four following; viz.

1. AT Ratisbon an imperial city in Germany upon the Danube; Servii comment. in
Virgilium, fol. without the Printer's name. 1471. Orl. 2. AT Amberg in the
Palatinate, now subject to the elector of Bavaria; Marc. Tull. Cicer. Orationes
omnes, fol. without the Printer's name. 1471. Orl. 3. AT Colle a citadel
situate upon a hill in Tuscany, and subject to the duke of that name; (1.)
OPPIANI Cilix, qui claruit sub imper. Caracalla, halieuticon sive de natura and
venatione piscium libri quinque, 4to. per. Gallum Bonum. 1471. Orl. (2.) JACOBI
de Voragine legenda aurea. ibid. without the Printer's name. Orl. 1471.

CHAP. VII. Printing brought into the Cities of Naples, Florence, and Ferrara,
anno 1471, and to Nurembergh, Verona, Parma, Mantua, Derventer and Padua, anno
1472; a List of the Printers, and their Works, with other particulars, till
1500.
Article. I. The City of NAPLES.
NAPLES, in Latin Neapolis and Parthenope, is the metropolis of the kingdom of
that name, in Italy. It was formerly governed by kings of its own, but
afterward became subject to the crown of Spain, and is now under the emperor
of Germany. This city has been the residence of men of the most distinguished
wit and learning, in ancient and modern ages; as Virgil, who is said to have
writ his Georgicks here; Livy, Horace, Claudian, Petrarck, Bocatellus
Panormitanus, Laurentius Valla, the great restorer of latinity and eloquence;
Perillus, an elegant Italian poet; and many others of conspicuous merit. The
great number of learned men in this city, particularly, when printing became
known and spread itself over Europe, was a sufficient inducement for some of
the best Printers to settle there. But none encouraged the Art and artists
more, than Ferdinand III. king of Naples, whom we had occasion to mention
before, upon the account of the free access, which the learned had to his
person, and their epistolary correspondence with him, and who lived at the time
of the infancy of the Art. As his learning was equal to the esteem he had for
the learned, I doubt not but it was he who procured the famous Sixtus Russinger
a learned and pious priest, who was a native of Strasburgh, to settle in his
capital. This seems more than probable, not only because he was the first who
set up a press at Naples, but from the great marks of esteem which that prince
showed him; insomuch, that having discovered his intention to return to his own
country, he tried all possible means to divert him from it, and even offered
him a noble bishopric, or any other preferment, if that could have fixed him
in his dominions. But this venerable old man, whether out of modesty, or rather
a desire of spending the small remainder of his days in his native city,
refused the king's offer, and returned home laden with the presents of that
generous monarch. Riessinger was not only a Printer, but a clergyman, and
famous for his great learning; yet as he continued but a short time at Naples,
we have few editions of his. Orlandi gives him a contemporary and fellow
citizen, viz. Peter of Strasburgh, who settled there about the same year; but
as I do not find that he printed any thing in company with Riessinger, or that
any of his impressions are left, I shall say no more of him.

WE have but four impressions of Sixtus Russinger, or Riessinger, two dated
anno 1471 and 1472, the other two without date. They are all curious and
correct, and two of them have Latin epigrams at the end in his commendation. We
don't find that he carried on the business after he came again to his native
place.

2. BARTHOLD RING of Strasburgh, 1 edit. 1475.

3. MATTHIAS MORAVUS de Olumuntz, 7 edit. from 1475 to 1499.

THE first of whose impressions, viz. Seneca's works is remarkable for its
wrong date MLXXV for MCCCCLXXV. We find likewise an impression of his done at
Genoa in company with Michael de Monacho, viz. Supplementum Summae quae
pisanella vocatur, fol. Januae 10. Call. Julii millesimo quadringentesimo LII.
quarto, instead of LXX. quarto: his corrector was Junianus Majus a Neapolitan,
and a professor of grammar and rhetoric, who published the following edition,
Justiniani Maii Parthenopei liber de priscorum proprietate verborum, fol. with
this colophon, Impressere Matthias Moravus impressor solertissimus and
venerabilis Monachus Blasius Theologus 1475, which book has been much esteemed
and reprinted in many places.

4. ARNOLD de Bruxella or Brussels, 5 edit. from 1475 to 1477.

5. JOHN ADAM de Polonia, 1 edit. 1478.

6. CONRARD GULDEMUND, 1 edit. 1478.

7. FRANCIS de Dino of Florence, 2 edit. 1480 to 1487. He went afterward to
Florence, where we shall find him under that head.

8. AYOLF de Canthono citizen of Milan, 1 edit. 1492.

THIS piece which is known but by few, is entitled, L' Aquita, and was composed
in Latin by Leonard Aretino, and by him translated into Italian. It consists of
four books, the first treats of the origin of the world, and the offspring of
Jupiter. The second of the departure of Aeneas from Troy, and of the kings of
Italy. The third of the actions and sayings of Julius Caesar. And the fourth of
the descendants of Julius Caesar.

THERE are many others done here without Printer's name.

Article II. The City of FLORENCE.
FLORENCE, the metropolis and seat of the dukes of Tuscany, and a noble
university, was not obliged to foreigners for this Art, since it was brought
within her gates by one of her own citizens Bernard Cennini. We do not find
that he went to any other city in order to learn it, but being a considerable
goldsmiths, and having two sons, viz. Dominic and Peter, who were very
ingenious artificers, and the latter a person of letters, they set themselves
about cutting of punches, sinking of matrices, and, in short, got the whole
apparatus of a Printing House made within their house; insomuch that they were
in a capacity of printing before the year 1471. The first book and only one we
have left, which is the reason why he has been unknown to all our annalists
till F. Orlandi, was Virgil's works with Servius's commentaries, which they
began to print on the 7th of November 1471, and finished October the 5th 1472.
The preface and colophon of this not only giving an account of their ingenuity
and diligence, but containing likewise something remarkable, I shall refer the
original to the margin, and insert it here in English. The book is printed in
the father and his son Dominic's name, and Peter the other son was the reviser
and corrector of it.

1. BERNARD, and 2. DOMINIC CENNINI Citizens of Florence, 1471.

VIRGILII opera omnia cum comm. Servii, and in fine Aeneid. ejusdem Servii de
Natura syllabarum libellus ad Aquilinum, fol. Florentiae. Orl. 1471. In
principio post praefationem ad lectorem; Florentiae VII idus Novembres
MCCCCLXXI.

Bernardus Cenninus auri^ex omnium judicio praestantissimus, and Dominicus ejus
F. egregiae indolis adolescens, expressis ante calibe characteribus, ac deinde
fusis literis volumen hoc primum impresserunt. Petrus Cenninus Bernardi ejusdem
filius quanta potuit cura and diligentia emendavit, ut cernis.

Florentinis ingen^is nil ardui est. Finis.

Bernardus Cenninus aurifex omnium judicio praestantissimus, and Dominicus ejus
F. optimaeindolis adolescens impresserunt. Petrus ejusd. Bernardi F. emendavit;
cum antiquissimis autem multis exemplaribus contulit, imprimisque illi curae
fuit, ne quid alienum Servio ascriberetur; neu quid recideretur, aut deesset,
quod Honorati esse pervetusta exemplaria demonstrarent. Quoniam vero plerosque
juvat manupropria suoque more Graeca interponere, ^aque in antiquis codicibus
perpauca sunt, and accentus quidem difficillimi imprimendo notari possunt,
relinquendum ad id spatia duxit. Sed cum apud homines perfectum nihil sit,
^atis videri cuique debebit, si hi libri (quod vehementer optamus) prae aliis
emendati reperientur.

Absolutum opus nonis Octobris M CCCC LXXII Florentiae. Orl. p. 130, 131.


.

After the preface (which was at the end of the book) are the following words:

" AT Florence VII Ides November. 1471.

BERNARD CENNINUS a most excellent goldsmiths, in the opinion of all men, and
Dominic his son, a youth of an extraordinary genius, having first made their
steel punches, and afterward cast their letters from them, printed this their
first work. Peter Cenninus another son of the said Bernard has used his utmost
care in correcting it, as you see it.

Nothing is too bard for a Florentine genius.

FINIS.

" And after,

The colophon runs thus:

"BERNARD CENNINUS a most excellent goldsmith, etc. as in the last, and Dominic
his son, a youth, etc. printed (this book); Peter the son of the same Bernard
corrected it, having first compared it with the most ancient manuscripts. It
was his first care that nothing should pass under the name of Servius, but what
was truly his, or any thing, that was plain from the most ancient copies to be
his, might be maimed or wanting. But because many persons choose to write the
Greek quotations with their own hands, and there are but few to be met with in
the old copies, and their accents cannot be printed but with great difficulty,
he thought proper to leave blank spaces for them. But as man can produce
nothing absolutely perfect, it will be sufficient for us, if these books be
sound (as we heartily wish) more correct than any other."

THE work was finished on the Nones of October 1427 at Florence.

3. FR. DOMINIC de Pistoria Monks, 1477.

and 4. FR. PETER de Pisa Monks, 1477.

THERE are some Florence editions with this inscription, Apud sanctum Jacobum
de Ripoli, which have given F. Orlandi no small trouble to discover the
Printers, who lived near that place; at length he found that it was a cloister
of Dominican friars, who lived in a little convent upon the plain of Ripoli,
without St. Nicholas's gate at Florence, near which place he found four
editions, the first of which is printed with the abovementioned Monk's name as
follows, Improntata in Firenze al Monasterio di santo Jacopo di Ripoli
del'Ordine del Fratri Predicatori per Mano di dua religiosi Frate Dominico da
Pistoja e Frate Piero da Pisa Firenze 1477. The other three mention only the
name of the place, Impress. apud sanctum Jacobum de Ripoli. The second and
third are dated 1478, the last is without date.

5. NICOLAS ALLEMANUS, or Nicolas de Lorenzo Dallamagna, and Della Magna, 5
edit. from 1477 to 1485.

6. NICOLAS de Brestaw, 2 edit. 1478.

7. ANTONIUS BARTHOLOMAEI Miscomini, 12 edit. from 1481 to 1494.

8. FRANC. de Dino of Florence, 2 edit. 1487, 1490.

THIS Printer worked at Naples about the year 1480 as we have seen before;
after which he removed to Florence, and printed the abovementioned editions,
the first of which wants the place's name, but is reasonably supposed to have
been printed there rather than at Naples, because its character is different
from that used at the latter.

9. ANTONIUS FRANCISCI Venetian, 1 edit. 1487.

10. DEMETRIUS CALCONDILLA MILANESE, a native of Crete, 1488.

HE was a person of admirable skill in the Greek and Latin tongues, and at
first a corrector of the press; but afterward he turned Printer, first at
Florence, and then at Milan, anno 1499, where we have mentioned him under that
article. The only book known to have been printed by him at Florence, is a
beautiful edition of Homer in fol. of which I have seen two copies. It is
printed in a fine Greek character with a large margin and distance between the
lines; and considering that it was the first volume printed in Greek, is a very
curious and valuable piece, and bears the following title.

HOMERI opera omnia cum textu Graeco, Labor and Industria Demetrii
Mediolanenss Cretensis. Sumptibus Bernardi Nerisii and Nerii Tenaidis
Florentinorum, fol. idib. Jan. Florentiae, 1488.

11. FRANCIS BONA CORSI, 9 edit. from 1490 to 1499.

12. BARTHOLOMEW P. Florentine, 2 edit. 1492 1493.

13. LAURENCE FRANCISCI de ALOPA, Venetian, 1494,

THIS was a very ingenious and famous Printer both in the Greek and Latin
tongues. Jo. Andreas Lascaris, a noble Grecian, and one of the most
distinguished critics and poets of that time, designing to revive, as much as
possible, the study of those languages, especially of the Greek, chose this
Laurence for his Printer, and corrected his copies. It Is remarkable that his
editions in the Greek are all printed in fine capitals throughout, the use of
which was till then unknown, if we except four or five to be met with in some
old impressions and manuscripts. Mr. Mattaire has given us a short specimen of
the first of these curious editions, with the preface of Lascaris, in Latin
capitals likewise, interspersed with Greek words; the figures and letters of
which, as well as the number of words in each line, and of the lines in each
page, answer exactly to those of that edition. He has added some remarks upon
them, which the curious reader may find in his Annals Typograph. from p. 267
to 285. We have five editions of his, all in Greek, the first and second are
dated 1494 and 1496, the rest are without date.

14. LAURENCE MORGIANI, 4 edit. from 1495 to 1497.

15. JOHN of Mentz, 4 edit. from 1495 to 1497.

16. SOCIETAS COLUBRI [or the fraternity of the Snake] 1 edit. 1497.

17. PHILIP JUNTA or de Junta, 2 edit. 1497 and 1500 both Greek.

18. GERARD de Harlem, 1 edit. 1498.

19. LEONARD de Arigis de Cesoriaco, 1 edit. 1499, besides many others which
have no Printers names.

Article III. The City of FERRARA, 1471.
FERRARA is an ancient city built in the time of Theodosius II, surrounded
afterward with a strong wall by the Exarch of Ravenna: it was made an
university by the Emperor Ferdinand II, and has always bee^ famous for men of
learning and valor and for ingenious artificers. An. 1598 it past from the
dominion of the Marquesses of Este to that of the Popes of Rome, under which it
has continued ever since: hither the Art of Printing was brought by one of its
own citizens, viz.

1 ANDREAS GALLUS, 1471.

IT appears by the colophon to his first impression, which you will find in the
margin Impressi Andreas hoc opus cui Francia nomen
Trdaidit, at civis Ferrariencis ego, etc.

that he was either a Frenchman or of French extraction, though a citizen of
Ferrara, which last might be bestowed on him upon the account of his being the
first person who set up his press there; the like encouragement having been
given by many other cities to their first Printers: but whether he brought it
thither from some other place, or devised it at home as Cennini did at
Florence, is neither easy, nor very material, to guess: he was a good Printer
and his editions are still esteemed by the curious.

WE have but twelve of them extant from ann. 1471 to 1493.

THE rest of the Printers of Ferrara are as follows,

2. CARNERIUS AUGUSTINUS whose father Bernard Augustinus was a bookseller of
the same city. We have four editions of his from 1474 to 1475 one of which,
viz. Boccacio in Italian is the first poem printed in that language, it has
neither date nor name of Printer or place, but the character shows it to be
Augustines.

3. SEVERUS of Ferrara, 1 edit. 1476.

4. SEVERINUS bookseller of Ferrara, but whether this and the former be the
same, or father and son, is uncertain: we have but one edition of his, viz.
Alberti Trotti de vero and perfecto Clerico 4to 1476, in which he writes
himself per Severinum Bibliopolam Ferrariensem. This edition Orlandi tells us
was afterward reprinted at Lions, ann. 1535, with a Latin preface, importing
that it was about seventy years since Severinus bookseller had published it at
Ferrara, by which it would appear that he had printed it ann. 1465, even before
either that city or even Rome had received the Art: our author therefore
guesses the mistake to be in the word septuagesimus annus, which he thinks was
printed instead of sexagesimus, which last brings it almost to the very time.

5. THE fifth and last Printer was Laurence Rossi or Rubeus, of whom we have 6
editions from 1492 to 1497.

THERE are a few more without Printers names, the last of which is the history
of Pope Joan in Italian 1497.

Article I. The City of NUREMBERGH, 1472.
NUREMBERGH or Norimbergh, in Latin Norimberga, is a free city in Germany upon
the confines of Swabia, Franconia, and Bavaria, situate upon the river Pegnitz.
It was formerly a democratical commonwealth, but upon some domestic sedition,
it reduced itself to an aristocracy, in the reign of the emperor Charles IV,
under the government of twenty four senators chosen out of so many of their
ancientest families; which form of government has been continued ever since.
The city is very rich, large and populous, surrounded with a double wall above
eight miles in circuit, and 180 lofty towers. It was always celebrated for
producing the best artificers in every kind of handicraft, and particularly for
a beautiful metal of their own making, called Nurembergh copper; the
composition of which was kept with all imaginable secrecy within their walls,
every workman being first sworn to it; so that the metal was almost equally
dear with silver; till about the latter end of the last century, one of their
own citizens came over and sold the secret here in England, which has made it
more common, and consequently lessened the price of it. This metal I purposely
choose to mention because it was reckoned very excellent for making of matrices,
being far more ductile than the common copper, and not so apt to break the
punches.

IT will be no easy matter to fix the time when the Art of Printing was brought
to this city. John Andreas Endlers a Printer of Nuremberg, who published a
piece on Printing, in High Dutch, anno 1722, and in it has given us an account
of its progress in that city, acquaints us that he had met with some MS.
annals, which affirm, that the Art was no sooner found out at Mentz, but it was
immediately communicated to Nuremberg, which did therefore receive it about the
year 1444 according to one, or 1440 according to another. It Is true, our author
is so far from being satisfied with their account, that he has even taken the
pains to confute them from more authentic testimonies; however, though I do not
design to enter into a detail of that dispute, yet I could not forbear
mentioning thus much, because it serves to confirm a former observation, viz.
that not only the Printers, but likewise the Cities themselves have taken no
small pains to antedate their respective claims to this Art.

I have already taken notice in the first part of this history, page 22. that
the discovery of the Art of Printing had been attributed by Purbach, and Peter
Ramus to that learned mathematician and astronomer John de Monte regio, or
Regio-Montanus, and mentioned Manilius's astronomy printed by him without date
or places name. Our German author acquaints us upon the authority of Gassendi,
one of the French royal mathematicians, "that Regiomontanus came to Nuremberg
about anno 1471, with a design to set up a Printing House there, in order to
print his own works and those of other learned men, with greater accuracy and
speed, and to improve the Art of Printing in several of its branches; but that
he met with so many obstacles to his design, that he saw himself forced to make
use of foreign Printing-houses, such as they were, till one Bernard Walter
offered to bear the charges of erecting a Printing House for him (as he
likewise did toward many other curious inventions of his) and enabled him to
print Purbac's new theory, Manilius's astronomy, and his own Ephemerides for
the use of the public."

OUR author observes further, that as this account of Gassendi's does quite
overturn Peter Ramus's supposition of Regiomontanus being the inventor of the
art, so it likewise shows him to have contributed much toward the improvement
of it. It likewise proves that there were some Presses in this city before he
came thither, but who they were that set them up, and what works they printed
before that time, is what he has not been able to find out, because they have
no dates or Printer's names.

THE oldest book he could find with a date, is the Commestorium Vitiorum of
Francis de Retza a Dominican Friar; at the end of which are the words which
you will find in the margin Hic Codex egregius Comestorii vitiorum sacre
Theology Professoris eximii Francisci de Retza Ordinis predicatorum finit
feliciter. Nuremberge anno ^ LXX o. Patronarum formarumque Concordia and
proportione impressus.
with this odd date ^ LXX o. which our author seems to take for 1470. This book
was afterward reprinted by Ant. Koburger anno 1476, and afterward anno 1496,
under the following title, Summa quae destructorium vitiorum nominatur, without
Printer's name.

The author mentions another book of the same date, viz. Gerson, chancellor of
Paris, Commentarium super sapientis hebrei cantica, etc. but as neither of
these have the Printer's name, we shall seek somewhere else for the first
Printer of Nuremberg. According therefore to our proposed method of the oldest
edition known, that rank will fall upon.

1. ANTONY KOBURGER.
A person eminent for learning, and the number, elegancy and correctness of his
editions, which gained him the title of the prince of Printers among the
learned of his time. At first indeed his character, though of the Venetian sort,
was somewhat imperfect, and inferior to that of many of his cotemporaries; but
he afterward procured a new set, which has been justly esteemed ever since
as fine as any that have been used either before or after him. He was no less
solicitous in correcting his works; so that though he was alone sufficient for
that task, yet he took the learned Frederic Pistorius for his assistant. He
spared no cost nor pains in procuring the best manuscripts, and always desired
the judgment of the learned before he ventured to print them. The great Jodocus
Badius has made this short but just panegyric upon him, in a letter written to
him anno 1499, and printed at the beginning of the works of Angelus Politianus
anno 1519 Litteratos omnes and colis and foves, pervigilemque curam ad bonos
codices vere terse and sine mendis imprimendos adhibes.
; That he was a great friend and lover of the learned, and indefatigable in
printing the best copies faithfully, neatly and correctly. Mr. Mattaire has
given us an extract of this letter in his Annals Typogr. p. 79. by which the
reader may see what esteem this great man was in, not only among the learned,
but likewise among the best Printers of his time; and it may be said of him,
that he printed more works than any of them, particularly bibles, of which the
reader will find no less than 12 editions still extant, one of which is in 5,
another in 6 volumes in folio, and a third with fine wooden cuts.

HE was no less diligent in printing other works, and we are told by John And.
Endters, "That he kept daily twenty four presses at work, and employed no less
than an hundred journeymen whom he maintained without doors; they had a set
hour to come to work, and to leave off, and he admitted none single into his
house but obliged them to wait at his door till they were altogether, and then
they were admitted in, and entered upon their respective works. HE was likewise
a considerable Bookseller, and kept a spacious printing house at Lions in
France, where he had sundry law books printed for him; besides this, he had his
factors and agents in the most considerable cities in Christendom, and kept
sixteen open shops beside warehouses, and in all of them a considerable stock
of the best books then extant, so that he never was at a loss for any good
editions to supply his customers with."



THUS he continued printing both at Nuremberg and at Lions with great success
and applause, till the year 1501 if not beyond; however we don't find any
edition of his of a more recent date, which makes me believe that he left off
printing about that time. In 1513. James Sachon one of his workmen at Lions,
printed Castellanus's Latin bible for him with this colophon, Lugduni per
Jacobum Sachon expensis Antonii Koburger. The same is likewise dated from
Nurembergh, but is supposed to be the same edition with that of Lions; he died
in this year after having been for some time a member of the chief council of
Nuremberg; all the editions that we have of him, his bibles inclusive, from
1472 to 1500, amounts to but thirty seven, a number too inconsiderable for the
many presses and workmen that he kept, which gives me room to hope that time
will discover a great many more.

2. MR. Mattaire p. 79 tells us of one Adam of Amberg [the metropolis of the
Bavarian palatinate] who flourished ann. 1472, but does not tell us where he
wrought. Our German author says that he had met with a small treatise in 4to.
of a sheet and half, with his name, and the city of Nurembergh at the end; so
that he most probably resided there, but though this work be without date, yet
his edition of Cicero's Orationes printed ann. 1472, though without places name,
may be so far presumed to be done here, as to allow him the next place after
Koburger,

THE rest of the Printers of this city are as follows,

3. FREDERIC CREUSNER, 5 edit. from 1473 to 1479.

4. JOHN SENSENSCHMID of Eger, 1473.

5. HENRY KOLER of Mentz, 1473.

and 6. ANDREW FRISNER de Wunsiedel. 1473.

KOLER was a native of Mentz, and in all likelihood one of Faust's servants who
left that city soon after it was taken, and took sanctuary at Nuremberg.

THE last of these viz. Frisner after having been corrector and assistant to
John Sensenschmid till 1478, set up a Printing House himself, which appears
from many of his books which bear his name, as Printer and editor. He had
studied for some time in the university of Leipsick, with a relation of his,
Erasmus Frisner, a Dominican Friar, who though but twenty seven years of age had
composed several books, the printing of which he committed to his kinsman
Andrew, who printed them some time after at Nurembergh where he dwelt, as
appears by several of his books from 1473 till 1478, after this having taken
his degree of master of arts he removed again to Leipsick, where he was soon
after chosen professor of divinity, and attained even to the honor of Rector
Magnificus of that university, to which place he got all his Printing-tools
conveyed: he went from thence to Rome, where pope Julius II. made him Papae and
sedis apostolicae primarius ordinarius. By his last will which he made at Rome
ann. 1504, he left a noble legacy for the erection of a college at Wonsiedel,
for the education and maintenance of young students of the family of the
Frisner's which they enjoy to this day, he left them also his Historia
Lombardica which he had printed whilst at Leipsick. He likewise bequeathed all
his printing materials to the convent of the dominicans of Leipsick, and
expresses himself thus, Item, I leave my iron chest, presses, instruments and
other utensils and materials for printing, together with twenty florens rhenish
to pray for my soul and for buying the monks a better dinner than they used to
have in the Prior's refectory -- the day when they perform my ^bsequies.

WHAT use the monks made of the Printing-press, etc. I can no where find: we
have but four editions printed by the aforesaid three partners from 1473 to
1487.

7. CONRARD LENTORIUS. We have but one Latin Bible with the apostills of Nich.
de Lyra fol. 1482.

8. GEORGE STUCHS or Flucks de Sultzbach, we have but one missal of his,
adorned with rubricks 1484.

9. GASPAR HOCHFEDER, our German author calls him Hochfelder. 2 edit. 1491 and
1494.

WITH about 60 more without Printers names

MR. ENDTERS mentions some other Printers before 1500, but as he gives us no
account of their works, we shall say no more of them.

BEFORE I leave the city of Nuremberg I cannot but take notice that it is also
famous for being the native place, and constant residence of the great Painter,
Engraver, Mathematician and Printer Albert Durer.

MARK ANTONIO, Raphael's learned engraver, gives him this character, speaking
of his skill in engraving and of his other excellent talents; "That if so
excellent, so exact, and so universal a genius had been cultivated in Tuscany,
instead of Germany, and had formed his study according to the excellent pieces
which he might have seen at Rome, as the rest of our celebrated painters have
done, he would have proved the best in that respect that Italy ever produced,
as he really was the greatest and most accomplished genius that Germany could
ever boast of."

THIS great man was born ann. 1471. His father observing the early marks of his
genius to all the liberal sciences, spared no cost to have it improved by all
possible means (traveling excepted) and by the best masters in Germany. But
though his other talents have been highly celebrated by the learned, yet I never
met with any who took notice of his having been a printer, (no not even his
countryman and fellow-citizen, author of a Piece on the Subject of Printing
etc. in Nuremberg, mentioned in the beginning of this article) though several of
his works are preserved in diverse libraries both public and private. I have
seen some of them very beautiful, nor do I doubt but that his genius for
painting and engraving, led him to the other two branches of cutting upon wood
and Printing, that he might be able to perform the whole work himself, without
the danger of having any part of it spoiled by unskilful hands, and the better
to print the descriptions of his cuts, etc. in a more elegant manner than could
possibly be done in wood. His improvement in the art of engraving or cutting
upon wood, was carried by him to its utmost perfection, as all persons must own
who have seen any of his works.

The part of shadowing which is called cross-hatching, and which has been lost
for many years, and conducted (if not wholly invented) by him with such
extraordinary beauty and truth, joined to the uncommon luster of his ink, has
surpassed all the wood-cutters ever since. His reason for preferring this
method of cutting on wood to that of copper plates; were; 1. The rouling-press,
which is wholly used in the later, was not then so perfect as since; 2. His
most considerable works (of which he was the author, for he scarce printed any
other) being chiefly geometry, perspective, fortification and architecture as
well as history, wooden cutts were much the more eligible method upon several
accounts, especially when cut by such a masterly hand as his. The only
difficulty was to make it subservient to his history-pieces; but that he easily
surmounted by the strength of his genius; and those who have seen any of his
performances even in this kind, will readily own that nothing of that nature
ever equaled them. His usual mark was the initial letters of his name AD
joined together thus Albert Durer's printer's mark but his most effectual way
to prevent counterfeits was by giving his works a degree of beauty never yet
attained to.

WITH respect to his Printing, I have already hinted, that he seldom meddled
with any works but his own, as I can find; but as I have met with none done
before the year 1500, though he probably entered into that province before that
time; I shall not trouble the reader with a list of them, but content my self
with subjoining an account of a few of the most considerable, which I have
seen: They are esteemed by the learned masterpieces of the kind, and preserved
as monuments of the author's merit, being as follow;

1. THE history of the Apocalypse, consisting of a fine set of draughts upon
that subject, all cut upon wood with his own hand, and with the utmost beauty
and truth.

2. The history of the four gospels, done after the same manner, and with the
same beauty. Both these sets are printed with the common press, with
explanations and historical accounts of the designs placed either under them,
or on the other side, or upon a distinct leaf. They are both in fol.

3. His book of proportions, which he did not live to finish, but was printed
by his widow after his death, is likewise esteemed another masterpiece in that
kind. I shall only add, that the singular beauty of his ink, the excellency of
the Press work, and in a word, the exactness of his performances do justly rank
him amongst the greatest genius's of the age. I hope therefore the reader will
excuse this digression in favor of a person to whom the world owes the great
improvements made in the art of cutting upon wood, which has been so
serviceable to the Printers in the ornamental part of their works.

Article V. The City of VERONA.
VERONA, an ancient city in Lombardy, famous for some noble relics of the old
Roman architecture, such as amphitheatres, triumphal arches, etc. which still
retain some part of their former magnificence, is likewise remarkable for
having been the native place of several eminent persons, in particular, of
Cornelius Nepos, Emilius Maurus, Pliny, Vitruvius, Guarini, and others. It
received the Art of Printing very soon, yet made but small advantage of it. We
find very few Printers in it, and we have but a small number of their works
left. The first of them was;

1. JOHN de VERONA.

WHO was a native of Verona, and son to Nicolas a doctor of physic, and the
first who set up a Printing-press in that city, as appears by the colophon of
the only book extant of his, viz. Valturius de re militari liber. fol. per Jo.
Veronens. Veronae Joannes ex Verona oriundus Nicolai ^yrurgiae Medici filius,
Artis impressoriae Magister hunc de Re Militari librum Literis and figuratis
signis in sua Patria primus impressit. M CCCC LXXIII.
. anno 1472.

2. FELIX ANTIQUARIUS we have but 1 edit. of theirs, dated 1476.

and 3. INNOCENT ZILETI we have but 1 edit. of theirs, dated 1476.

4. PETER MAUFER, 1480.

PETER MAUFER, was a Frenchman and an excellent Printer. The first place where
he set up his press was the city of Padua, about 1474, as we shall show in its
proper place. Thence he came to Verona in 1479, and after a short stay there,
went to Venice in 1483, and associated himself with Nicol. Contengo, as
mentioned in the chapter of that city. We have only the following book printed
by him here.

JOSEPHI opera Latin, Ludovico Contrada interpret, fol. per Petrum Maufer
Gallicum, oct. call. Jan. pont. max. Sixto 4. Venetorum duce Joanne Mocenigo, in
inclyta civitate Veronae 1480.

5. BONINO de BONINI de RAGUSIO, 1482.

WHO printed at first in the city of Venice, with Andreas de Paltasichis anno
1478; whence he removed to Verona, and at last to Brescia, where he continued
printing much longer; we have but three of his editions done at Verona, 1482
and 1483.

6. PAUL FRIDENPERGER of Passaw in Germany, 1 edit. 1486. with a small number
without Printer's names.

Article 6. The City of PARMA, 1472.
PARMA is another ancient city in Lombardy, called by the Romans Gallia
Cisalpina, situate in a very pleasant large plain, and so well furnished with
pasture ground, that it is recorded by Martial for the great number of cattle
it bred, Tondet and innumeros Gallica Parma greges. It was once under the
pope's government, and given by Paul III. to his nephews, with the title of
dukes of Parma, under whom it has continued ever since. Though this city received
the Art of Printing so early as the year 1472, yet it had but very few
artificers, and a small number of editions printed there. It may indeed be
reasonably supposed that these being so much inferior to those of Venice, Rome,
Paris, etc. have been mostly destroyed; and the same may be said of many other
cities. However Parma deserves to be remembered, if not for the number and
excellency of her Printers, yet for having given birth to some of the greatest
of that time, who were (perhaps for want of sufficient encouragement here)
obliged to settle in other parts of Italy. Among these were the famous Antony
Zarot, who printed at Milan a great many fine and correct volumes, as we have
shown under that article, Fausto, Vincenzo, and Pellegrino del Bonardi, and
Bartholomew de Parma in Bolognia, and Matthew Capcasa in Venice, Mich. Manzoli
in Treviso, with many more whose name and place of birth, etc. the reader will
find in the article of each of those cities. The first book, we meet with
printed here, is the works of the famous lawyer Baldus; but has no Printer's
name, though it is dated at Parma ann. 1471. However it is probable it was printed
by Stephen Corali, a native of Lions, who is the first in our list, and printed
(or rather might reprint) the same work the year following.

1. STEPHEN CORALI, 5 edit. from 1473 to 1476. 2. AUGUSTINE GENOENSIS (or of
Genoa) 1 edit. 1477. 3. ANDREA PORTILIA, 4 edit. from 1479 to 1481. 4. ANGELO
UGOLETTI de Parma, 4 edit. from 1493 to 1499. AND near twenty more without
Printers names.
Article VII. MANTUA.
MANTUA one of the most ancient cities of Lombardy, situate in the middle of an
island, formed by the river Mincio, had its name and origin from Manto daughter
of Tiresias a Theban augur, she bore a son called Ocnus, who built a city near
the river Po, and from his mother's name called it Mantoa or Mantua. After a
great variety of changes, it is now subject to the house of Austria. It has
given birth to many learned men both ancient and modern, and particularly to
the immortal Virgil. This city cannot boast of any great merit with respect to
the Art of Printing, except that it was brought thither ann. 1472 by some
Germans, who came to settle there; but, as it is probable, for want of
encouragement, were obliged to remove. We find but four of these Printers at
the most, and at a considerable distance of time from each other. Of the two
first we know but one edition; and two of each of the rest, as will appear from
the following list.

1. GEORGE, and 2. PAUL, Germans, 1 edit. 1472.

3. PAUL JOHN de Burschbach, of the diocese of Mentz, who was perhaps the same
with Paul German the latter of the two foregoing, who takes now the name of his
native town instead of that of his nation, 2 edit. 1479, 1481.

4. VINCENT BERTOCH of Reggio, 2 edit. 1493, 1498: and some others which have
no Printers names.

Article VIII. The City of DERVENTER, 1472.
DERVENTER [in Latin Daventria] in lower Germany, near the river Issel upon the
confines of lower Gelderland, near the city of Utrecht began to practice the
Art of Printing ann. 1472. The 1st impression done here, viz. Prudentius
Aurelius Poeta Hispanus his poems, 4to. has no Printer's name, but is dated
Daventriae 1472.

2. RICHARD PAFRADIUS, 1 edit. 1481.

3. JAMES de Breda, 4 edit. from 1490 to 1497, with about twenty more without
Printers names.

Article IX. The City of PADUA, 1472.
PADUA or Padova, in Latin Patavia or Patavium, (so called by Antenor the first
founder of it, in compliment to his companions, who were Paphlagonians, and for
whose sakes he called it by the name of their metropolis) is a rich, ancient
and noble city upon the river Brento, and now under the government of the
Venetian republic, famous for its hot baths and mineral waters, and resorted
to from all parts of Europe. It is one of the last cities we know of that
received this Art in the year 1472. in which though it was not very eminent
either for the number of Printers or impressions, yet it published several
curious editions, which had not as yet appeared in any of the foregoing cities.
The two first Printers were;

1. BARTHOLOMEW de Val de Zochio of Padua, etc.

2. MARTIN de Septem Arboribus,

OF these we have but three editions, 1472, 1473, 1474.

3. PETER MAUFER whom we have already mentioned under the articles of Venice
and Verona: we have four editions of his printed at Padua from 1474 to 1479.

4. LAURENCE CANOZIUS de Lendenaro, 1 edit. 1474.

5. ALBERT de Stendalia, 1 edit. 1475.

6. JOHN HERBERT or Herbort, 3 edit. 1476, 1482; and one without date or places
name.

7. ANTON. de Carcano, 1 edit. 1478.

8. MATTHEW de Cerdonis de Windischegrets, 5 edit. from 1482 to 1487.

9. MOSES de Castello, 1 edit. 1492.

10. JEROME de Duranti, 1 edit. 1493, he wrought also in Pavia with Christopher
de Canibus, ann. 1488.

11. LEWIS or Alois de Como, etc. 1 edit. 1497.

12. BARTHOLOMEW de Trossis, 1 edit. 1497.

With a few more without Printers names.

CHAP. IX. The Cities of 1 Louvain, 2 Ulms, 3 Utrecht, ann. 1473. 4 Turin, 5
Genoa, 6 Brescia, 7 Alost, ann. 1474.
Article I. The City of LOUVAIN.
LOUVAIN, in Latin Lovanium, is a large populous and well fenced city, the
capital of all Brabant, and one of the most frequented universities in Europe,
founded by John duke of Brabant anno 1426. It abounds with magnificent colleges
and other sumptuous edifices, according to that of the poet.

Postea Musarum Sedem, Collegiaque ampla
-- Lovani aspicienda dedit.
IT is likewise famous for the vast number of its students, especially in
divinity; though the reader will scarce forbear wondering what sort of divines
they must have been, when we tell him that they had the Art of Printing near
thirty years, i. e. from 1472 to 1500, and God knows how far beyond, and never
printed one single bible in all that time, at least as I can find in any
annalist; whereas we have observed that a Nuremberg Printer, namely, Ant.
Koburger printed at least a dozen in that time; the truth is, if we judge by
the small number of workmen and of impressions done here, we shall be apt to
think that the Art of Printing met with but small encouragement; since if we
except the first Printer, of whom we shall speak presently, I can find but two
more till the year 1500, after which whoever examines the second volume of Mr.
Mattaire's Annals Typographici, will find them run much thinner of either.

THE first press was set up here by;

1. JOHN de Westphalia of Paderbourn 1473, an eminent Printer invited to
Louvain by some of the heads of that university, where he continued printing
till ano. 1495, if we except 2 editions printed in his name if not by him; the
first in the town of Alost in Flanders not far from that of Louvain anno 1474,
as shall be mentioned at the end of this chapter; and the other, viz. Epistola
de Simonia Vitanda, etc. per rev'. Magist. Engelbertum Cultificis, etc.
Novimagii 9 Julii 1479.

WE have nineteen editions of his from 1473 to 1495 some of which are without
date, place, or Printer's name; but easily known to be his by the character.

2. JOHN VELDENER, 2 edit. of the Fasciculus Temporum, 1474 and 1476.

3. EGIDIUS VENDER HEERSTRATEN, 2 edit, 1486 to 1487. And five or six more
without Printer's name.

Article II. The City of ULMS.
ULMS a considerable city in High Germany, situate near the Danube, between
Ausburg, Constance and Strasburgh, and famous for the finest linen and
cambrick, with which it furnishes most parts of Europe, began to set up the Art
of Printing sometime before the year 1473.

1. JOHN ZEINER de Reutlingen, 1473.

WAS the first who practiced it there. He was a native of Reutlingen a small
city in the duchy of Wirtembergh, which we have mentioned as one of the first
in Germany that received the art, viz. ann. 1469. This Printer was, in all
probability, the son or brother of Gunter Zeiner, who worked at Ausburgh from
ann. 1470, and is mentioned under that article p. 122. We have but nine
editions of his from 1473 to 1484, two of which are the Latin Bible fol. and
one, viz. Alvarius Pelagius de planctu Ecclesiae 1473, 2 vol. fol. in large
paper, is reckoned a very curious as well as scarce edition: he used to
subscribe himself sometimes Jo. Zeiner de Reutlingen or Reutlinga, and
sometimes Jo. Zeiner Ulmensis Oppidi Incolam.

2. LEONARD HOL citizen of Ulm, 1 edit. 1482.

3. JOHN REGER de Kemnat, 5 edit. from 1486 to 1497.

Article III. The City of UTRECHT.
UTRECHT [in Latin Ultra trajectum] a city in Flanders upon the Rhine, and
subject to the emperor of Germany, received the Art of Printing about ann.
1473, if not before; but its productions have been so few and inconsiderable
that no annalist, De la Caille and F. Orlandi excepted, has taken any notice of
them; and even the latter has been able to discover no more than three
editions, little remarkable either for bulk or beauty, for which reason I
suppose they are all three without Printer's name.

Article IV. The City of TURIN.
TURIN [in Latin Taurinum] the capital of Piedmont, and residence of the dukes
of Savoy now kings of Sardinia, is situate upon the river Durio nigh the Po,
near the western Alps. It is a large rich and populous city and university,
strongly fortified, and adorned with magnificent palaces, churches and
edifices. It received the Art of Printing about ann. 1474. The first artists
who set up their presses here were,

1. JOHN FABRI 1475.

and 2. JOHANNINUS de Petro, 1475.

THESE two printed together at first as appears by their first impression, viz.
Breviarium Romanum fol. per Jo. Fabri and Johanninum de Petro: but Fabri
associated himself with Martin Huz a Printer of the city of Lions, with whom he
printed some editions, and some by himself: however he continued still at
Turin, and we have three editions more of his printed there by himself from
1477 to 1487, wherein he subscribes himself Jo-Fabri Lingonensis; as for his
partner we have nothing of him but the breviary abovementioned.

3. NICOLAS de Benedictis 4 edit. from 1492 to 1494.

and 4. JACOPIN SVIGUS 4 edit. from 1492 to 1494.

Article V. The City of GENOA, 1474.
GENOA [in Latin Janua] is a rich populous ancient city, the metropolis of
Liguria, and capital of the republic of Genoa: it is famed for having given
birth to Christopher Columbus the first discoverer of America, and for the
greatness and extent of her maritime trade: we meet with two noted Printers,
who came and set up their presses there, ann. 1474, viz

1. MATTHIAS MORAVUS de Olomuntz 1474.

and 2. MICHEL MONK or de Monacho 1474.

BUT whether that city chose to drive any other trade, rather than that of
books, or whether they found it already furnished from other places, and so met
with but small encouragement; or for whatever other reason, it is certain they
tarried not long there. For Moravus printed but one book in company with Monk,
and the next year removed to Naples, where he continued 'till ann. 1490, as
has been said in the article of that city; and we hear no further of Monk. The
book they printed here is,

Supplementum summae quae Pisanella vocatur, fol. per Matthiam Moravum de
Olomuntz and Michaelem de Monacho socium ejus, x kal. Julii Millesimo
quadringentesimo LIJ. quarto; where (LIJ stands for LXX) 1474.

It is very likely, that the ill success of these two Printers, frightened
others from coming thither, for we don't meet with any that ventured to settle
there after them, 'till a long time after the close of the century.

Article VI. The City of BRESCIA.
BRESCIA, in Latin Brixia, an ancient and noble city in Lombardy, now under the
republic of Venice, gave much greater encouragement to the Art of Printing,
than some of the last named cities. About the year 1474.

1. HENRY of COLOGN, and 2. STATIUS GALLICUS.

CAME and settled here, and printed the following book, the only one yet known
to be printed by them here, viz.

Homeri Iliades per Laurentium Vallensem in Latinum sermonem ^raductae etc.
viii kal. December. per Henr. Coloniensem and Statium Gallicum. Brixiae 1474.

3. BONINUS de BONINIS of RAGUSIO, 1480.

WHOSE first works were printed at Verona, ann. 1473, as has been said. Thence
he removed to Brescia, where he continued printing 'till ann. 1486.

HIS corrector was Marcus Scaramuccinus of Palazzolo: there are 10 editions of
his printed at Brescia from 1480 to 1486.

4. BARTHOLOM. VERSELLENSIS Printer and bookseller, 1 edition 1482.

5. JAMES BRITANNICUS, brothers, of the city of Brescia, 1485.

6. ANGEL BRITANNICUS, brothers, of the city of Brescia, 1485.

THE first of these was some time partner to John de Forlivio at Venice about
the year 1483, as you will find page 149; after which he came to his own city
Brescia, and printed sometimes by himself, and sometimes with his brother
Angelo: his corrector was a Franciscan monk named Angel de Montelmo: we have 11
edit. of the former, from 1485 to 1498: and 2 with both their names, ann. 1496.

7. ARNOLD de Arundis, 1 edit. without date.

8. RABBI GHERSON, 1492.

RABBI GHERSON was the son of R. Moses a jew of Soncino, where Hebrew first
began to be printed: he settled first at Brescia, where he printed the two
following editions in Hebrew, viz.

Mechaberith Rabb. Immanuelis, per Rabbi Gherson, Brixiae, 1492.

Biblia Hebraice, 8vo, per Gersonem F. Mosis Soncinatem, ibid 1494.

CHEVILLIER tells us likewise p. 265, that he printed also at Riminium in
Romania, a Hebrew edition entitled, Col bo without date: after this he removed
his press to Constantinople, where he printed several other Hebrew works 'till
the year 1530, in which he is supposed to have died.

9. BERNARDINE MISENTI de Pavia came first from Cremona, where he had printed
in company with Caesar de Parma, ann. 1492: we have but 2 edit. of his done at
Brescia from 1495 to 1497.

10. FRANCIS LAURINI citizen of Brescia, we have only one edition of his, viz.
Homer's Iliads translated into Latin by Laur. Valla, corrected by Baptista
Farsengus a priest of that city, 1497: it has no place's name, but is supposed
to be done at Brescia.

THERE are about 20 edit. more without Printer's names.

Article VII. The City of ALOST.
ALOST is a small town in Flanders upon the river Tever between Brussels and
Gaunt, in which the following Printers set up their presses, viz.

1. JOHN de Westphalia, 1474.

2. THEODORIC MARTIN of Alost, 1474.

THE former of these, a native of Paderborn, printed in the city of Louvain,
ann. 1473. 'till 1475, as we have shown in that article. We find likewise a
book printed by him at Alost, ann. 1474 in company with Theodoric Martin, a
native of it, as follows;

Liber praedicabilium, 8vo, per Jo. de Westphalia Paderbonensem cum Theodorico
Martini, Maii die sexto in Alosto oppido comitatus Fland. 1474.

THEODORIC MARTIN afterward printed by himself, first at Alost 'till 1490;
then at Antwerp, ann. 1509, and at Louvain, ann. 1516. His mark used to be a
shield hanging upon a vine with T. M. though at other times, he made use of two
anchors with his name Theodoric Martin excudebat. His impressions at Alost are
but three in number, viz. two dated 1487, and the last 1490.

CHAP. X. The Cities of Basil, Placentia, Pignerol, Esling, Vincenza, Lubeck
and Valentia, ann. 1475; Rostock and Bruges, ann. 1476. At Basil, particulars
relating to Amerbach and Froben; the Characters and Names of the other
Printers, and Number of their Impressions, 'till the Year 1500.
Article I. The City of BASIL, 1475.
BASIL, called in Latin Basilea, and by Ptolemy, Augusta Rauricorum, is an
ancient city and university in Switzerland, watered by the two great rivers
Rhine and Brise, which being navigable, increase very much the commerce and
riches of it; so that in spite of all the calamities it has suffered in war, it
is one of the most opulent cities of Germany. The university is likewise very
celebrated for learned men in all sciences, and was founded ann. 1460, and
endowed with privileges equal to any university in Europe, by pope Pius II. In
this city pope Martin V. called a council, ann. 1431; soon after which it
became famous for the improvements, 5 which the Art of Printing, brought
thither in or before the year 1475, received from some of its artificers; who
have been generally the best and most learned Printers in Europe, and published
the most elegant and correct editions of the ancient fathers, and of the Greek
and Latin classicks. Of this number were John Amerbach and John Froben, of whom
we shall give an account in the sequel of this article.

THE first book we meet with printed here, has no Printer's name; nor is it
possible to guess from the character, or any thing else in the edition, who
'twas done by: It is as follows;

Roberti de Licio opus quadragesimale, Basileae 1475.

1. BERNARD RICHEL, 1477.
A citizen of Basil, and an excellent Printer, was the first who put his name
to his editions there; we have but three of them. The first is his Biblia
Latina, fol. per Bernardum Richel civem Basiliae 1477; the other two are dated
1478, 1482.

2. MICHEL WENKLER, 7 edit. from 1477 to 1486.
THE last of his impressions, viz. Gasparini Pergamensis Epistolae, 4to. F.
Orlandi tells us in his list p. 166. that this has neither date nor Printer's
name; but Mr. Mattaire gives us the same edition under the names of Michel
Wenkler and Fred. Biel, with some verses at the end, as you will find in that
author, Annal. Typogr. p. 375, only he or his Printer has mistaken Parmensis
for Pergamensis.

3. NICHOLAS KESLER citizen of Basil, 1486.
OF whom we have a Biblia Sacra printed at Antwerp, ann. 1487, and five other
editions at Basil, from 1486 to 1494: his first edition, viz. Textus
Sententiarum, fol. has the colophon which you will find in the margin, in
imitation of Faust, Schoeffer and others Anno domini millesimo quadringentesimo
octuagesimo sexto, octavo nonas Martii, non atramentali penna cannave, sed
quadam ingeniosa art imprimendi, cunctipotenti aspirante deo, in egregia urbe
Basilionsi Nicolaus K^sl^r selicuter consummavit.
.

HIS last work, viz. Libri deflorationum does not bear Kesler's name; yet it
being printed in the same character with the former, is easily known to be his.
It has at the beginning the image of an old man with a triple face, and these
words over it, Sancta Trinitas.

4. JOHN AMERBACH, 1481.
JOHN AMERBACH, one of the most excellent and learned Printers of his time, was
at first a student at Paris, under the famous Jo. Lapidanus or a Lapide, who,
being rector of that university, invited the three Germans thither. Amerbach
followed his studies 'till he attained to the degree of master of arts, soon
after which he came to Basil, and set up the Art of Printing, for which he
became as famous, as he had been before for his learning.

WHAT countryman he was is not easy to determine. Some French annalists
challenge him for theirs, and Orlandi calls him a Parisian, though perhaps on no
other account, than that he studied so long in that university. His name is
unquestionably German; but neither the colophons of his editions, nor his
epitaph, make any mention of his country; for which reason, we shall not
pretend to affirm any thing upon that head. His first care at his entrance into
the business of Printing was to get a font of the most perfect round Roman,
which however he made no use of in his books of divinity, the prevailing custom
of those days being to print them in old Gothic. His next was to procure some
of the best correctors of that age, of whom, though no person was more capable of
correcting his works than himself, he had a greater number than any of his
contemporaries. Among these were Martin Dodo a prebend, Francis Wyler a learned
Franciscan friar, Conrard Pelican an eminent divine, Beatus Rhenanus and
others. He was so careful and diligent in this province, that he would not let
one sheet pass unrevis'd by himself. Reuchlin gives us this character of him in
the preface to his book De verbo mirifico, that he was a man of an excellent
genius, highly valuable for the neatness and correctness of his works, and well
skilled in several arts and sciences. His former master Jo. Lapidanus assures
us I stud ego non favoris, sed veritatis gratia ausim dicere, quod non legerim
libros hac art effictos, quos tuis emendatiores exactiorique stilo consummatos
probaverim. Vide Chevil. p. 128.
, that he never read any books better or more correctly printed than his. As
Amerbach was a man of singular piety and zeal for religion, which appears from
all his prefaces, that scarce breathe any thing else; so he rather chose to
consecrate his labors to that, than any other branch of learning. This induced
him to print the works of all the ancient fathers, a task hitherto unattempted
by any Printer. He began with an edition of St. Austin, which he finished not
'till the year 1505, in the old Gothic. But as he neither had a good manuscript
to print after, nor sufficient assistance from the learned; we can only say
that it was executed as correctly, as could be expected in those times. What he
had most at heart was to publish St. Jerome's works, which, as he knew was
impossible to be done without a competent skill in the Latin, Greek and Hebrew
tongues, the last of which he was too old and full of business to learn, he
made his three sons, youths of bright parts, divide that province among
themselves; who having studied those languages, were obliged by him, whether he
lived or died, to finish that edition; which they faithfully performed. But as
this task, wherein he was engaged, was too large for one man, he took the
learned John Froben, whom we shall mention hereafter, into partnership, and
printed several valuable and distinct volumes with him. The greatest part of
these particulars we have from Erasmus, in his prefaces to St. Austin and St.
Jerome, which later edition he revised and published anno 1515, with a
dedication to the archbishop of Canterbury. He highly extolls the piety of the
Amerbachs, he praises the father for having taken such care of his sons
education; and the sons for the great progress they made in those tongues, and
for their piety in having so exactly fulfilled their father's desire, in the
impression of a work, which had cost them so much money and pains; he frankly
owns, that as he stood in great need of some assistance for the Hebrew tongue,
so he was chiefly beholden to those three learned brothers for it D Erasm.
praefat. ad S. Hieron. opera. -- Quod idem fecimus in Hebraicis, verum hac sane
in part, quod minus nostro mart poteramus, aliorum suppetiis praestititimus,
praecipue fratrum Amerbachiorum, Brunonis, BasiliII, and Bonifacii quos optimus
pater Joannes Amerbachius velut instaurandis bonis authoribus genitos, trium
linguarum peritia curavit instruendos. Atque hi sane paternum animum and
expectationem vicerunt etiam, nihil antiquius ducentes Hieronymi gloria, and
hac gratia nec impendio parcentes nec valetudini. Matta^re Annal. Typogr. vol.
1. page 142, 143.
. Jodocus Badius another eminent Printer gives their father the following
encomium -- Indefatigabili virum diligentia, and solertissima vitiorum
expungendorum peritia -- cujus viri si omnes similes essemus -- long plures
apud literatos haberemur. Jodoc. Bad, epist. ad Anton. Coburger, ann. 1499.
; that he was a man of indefatigable industry, and consummate skill in
correcting the errors of corrupt copies; and adds, that if all Printers would
but follow his example, they would be in much higher reputation with the
learned, than they were.

HE continued printing 'till the year 1528, and dyed whilst his second
impression of St. Austin was in the press. It will not be amiss to repeat here
a caution, which we have elsewhere given the reader, not to confound this John
Amerbach with John Averbach of Reutlingen, who printed there a Latin bible in
fol. ann. 1469, after which we hear no more of him. La Caille makes them to be
the same person, led undoubtedly into that error by the likeness of their
names; whereas the distance of time between them, viz. from 1469 to 1481, the
different spelling of their names, with other obvious circumstances, might
easily have shown him the mistake. Mr. Mattaire, in the place before quoted,
has collected a great number of extracts out of prefaces, epistles, and other
works of the learned, in praise of him; and it must be owned, that too much
could not be said in a man's commendation, who had spent near 50 years in the
service of religion with such constant zeal and application. I shall refer the
reader to that author for them, and only add the epitaph, which his youngest
son Boniface caused to be set upon his tomb.

EPITAPHIUM.
Joannes Amerbachius hic cubat
Cum Barbara Ortenbergia singul. pudicit. foemina,
Ac Brunone Basilioque, filiis,
Praepropere quidem hinc ereptis.
Sed ante tamen eruditione sua trilingui
Per laboriosiss. Hieronym. operum recognitionem
Quibus nunc Docti ubique gentium fruuntur,
Orbi toto commendata.
Bonifacius Amerbachius
Parentibus and fratribus optimis,
Sed and Marthae Fuschiae
Uxori suae Christianarum virtutum dotibus incomparabili,
Cum Ursula ac Hertexe duabus filiolis.
Hic quiescenti:
Item sibi ipsi liberis suis superstitibus
Faustinae, Basilio, Julianae,
Posterisque in humanae fragilitatis memoriam
F. C.

Parentibus, fratribusque jam olim, uxore vero in ipso aetatis flore cum
filiolis haud ita demum expectandi censorii novissimique diei ergo collocatis.

Anno MDXLII.

WE have but nine editions of his as yet discovered, from 1481 to 1500: the
first of them is Vincentii Bellovacensis opuscula, and the last Fr. Petrarchae
opuscula, 1496.

5. JOHN FROBEN, 1491.
JOHN FROBEN was a native of Hamelburgh in Fraconia, where he studied 'till he
became master of the Latin tongue, and afterward went to the university of
Basil, where he perfected himself in Greek also, and betook himself to the
business of Printing, of which he showed himself so good a master, that John
Amerbach took him as assistant and partner in his laborious and expensive
undertaking of publishing the ancient fathers, as we hinted before. He
acquitted himself so well both in this province and his own particular one,
that he acquired as great a reputation and esteem among the learned, as his
contemporary and partner; to whom Germany is obliged for bringing thither the
neat round Roman character, hitherto scarcely known there, and improving it to
the last degree of perfection. No person was ever more curious in the choice of
the works, which he sent to the press, than he; who had this excellent quality
among many others, that he would never print any bad books, such as the sordid
avarice of other Printers had overstock'd the world with; but always chose the
best authors, and best manuscripts of them, sparing neither cost in purchasing
them, nor pains in correcting and fitting them for the press; in which, though he
was a man of singular learning, yet he always preferred the advice and judgment
of the learned of his time, to his own. Among these were Mark Heyland, Erasmus,
Wolfgang Musculus, Jo. Oecolampadius, Wolfgang, Lachner and others, all persons
of the highest rank in the commonwealth of learning; for which reasons his
impressions have ever been, and will continue in the highest esteem with all
the learned. He was likewise particularly ambitious to have his works correct;
and the abovementioned learned men assisted him very much in that province;
especially Oecolampadius, who tells us OEcolampadius in his epistle at the end
of Erasmus's edition of the New Testament in Greek with a new Latin version,
printed by Froben, ann. 1516, and dedicated to Pope Leo X -- admirabile
spectaculum mihi erat, imo spectandum miraculum, dictantem recognoscentemque
quantum tria praela exciperent, videre, ac nihilo secius interim Graeca
Latinaque exemplaria, eaque varia and vetustissima, consulentem, Graecos
Latinosque interpretes conferentem priscos ac recentiores primae simul ac
infimae classis scriptores per pendentem -- nimi rum Erasmicum imitati
exemplum, qui and ipse hic, caeteris rebus omissis bonam temporis partem in hoc
collocavit negotium.
, that he could not sufficiently wonder that Erasmus, who alone kept three
presses continually at work, who read and compared the Greek and Latin
m^nuscripts, and consulted the writings of all the ancients and moderns, etc.
could yet find time enough to correct the proofs of his works; and adds, that
his example had not a little encouraged him to take the laborious task of a
corrector upon him. However, neither Froben's nor his corrector's diligence
could prevent that edition, just now quoted in the margin, from having an
errata of a page and half, though Erasmus gave the finishing hand to every proof.

THIS learned author, in one of his letters to Bilibaldus Parcheimerus, who was
then at the emperor's court, complains highly of a great injustice done to many
good Printers in general, and to Froben particularly, which was, that he had no
sooner published a good edition with great cost and labor, but it was
immediately reprinted by others, and sold so much cheaper, that he could never
reimburse himself half his charges. This reduced him to the necessity of
obtaining from the emperor, etc. a privilege for the sole selling them for the
space of two or more years, according to the value of the work; there being no
other effectual way of preventing such an abuse: the letter is dated from
Basil, Jan. 28. 1522: the reader will find it in Vita Erasmi, Leyden edit. 1642
in 16o, page 226, what relates to our subject, he will find in the margin
Plerique insidiantur Homini, propemo. dum conju^ati ut illum perdant Ubi quid
novi operis prodit, quod putent fore vendibile, mox unus atque alter suffuratus
ex ipsius officina exemplar, excudit ac venditar minimo; interim Froben^us
immensam pecuniam impendit in castigatores, frequenter and in exemplaria, huic
iniquitati facile succurretur, si fiat imperatorium edictum, ne quis lil rum
primum a Frobnio e^cusum, aut cui sit aiiquid ab auctore additum, excudat intra
biennium. Tempus longum non est officina Frobentana vel ob hoc favore digna est
quod nihil ex ea prodit ineptum aut seditiosum.
.

WE have had occasion to mention some cheats of even a worse nature with
respect to the Venetian editions, which were counterfeited with the Printer's
mark, and sold for the right ones, though incorrect and imperfect to the last
degree.

TO return to Froben; he is reported to have hanged his proofs in public
sight, with a promise of a reward for every error, that should be discovered in
them by any person. In his short preface to Celius Rhodiginus printed ann.
1517, he inveighs loudly against those pests of learning, those Printers, who
regarded not the correction of their works, but had gain only in their view;
and advises the learned against buying such bad books, for the sake of their
cheapness, assuring them that they purchased nothing but plague and vexation,
and that such wretched works could not but be dearly bought, how cheap soever
they were sold; whereas he that bought a correct copy, always bought it cheap,
how much soever he gave for it -- Parvo emit, quisquis librum emendatum etiam
magno emit; magno emit, quisquis cod^cem mendosum etiam minimo emit. ibid.
.

JO. FROBEN printed few volumes before the year 1500, and the number of those
which are extant, is still smaller. One of them was his concordance of the
bible in fol. ann.. 1495; concerning which we meet with some particulars, not
unworthy the reader's knowledge, though a digression from our subject.

FIRST it was so exactly printed, that there was not one error in all the
numerical figures, which in a work of that nature are at least one third part
of the matter; and is therefore very surprising. Froben added a second part to
it, which contained all the indeclinable particles, that are to be met with in
the bible. This work was begun at Constantinople by Jo. de Raguza, a Parisian
divine of the Dominican order, ambassador from the council of Baden to the
emperor Jo. Paleologus about the year 1436; yet he did little to it himself,
but left it to his three chaplains, one of whom was a Scotchman named Walter
Sonaw, who finished it in almost three years. After this it was reduced into an
alphabetical order, by the directions of that council, by John de Segovia or
Secubia, archdeacon of Cujedo, and doctor of divinity. What gave birth to this
second part of the concordance was no less remarkable, John de Raguza
beforementioned, coming to Constantinople, found the divines there engaged in a
very warm dispute concerning the procession of the Holy Ghost, i. e. whether
from the Son as well as from the Father; and that the controversy seemed
chiefly to be about the particles ex and per, i. e. whether it should be ex
filio or per filium. He was likewise informed, that the Sultan and all the
Mahometans having heard, that Paleologus designed a journey into christendom,
in order to reconcile this difference between the Greek and Latin churches, had
rallied the christians with no small scorn, whom two such seemingly
insignificant particles had divided to such a degree. This ambassador failed
not to acquaint the council with it, who immediately ordered John de Segovia to
be ready to answer all the difficulties, which the Greeks should propose at
their arrival at Basil. In the mean time the Hussites and John Huss of Bohemia,
who were already at Basil, and insisted upon a communion in both kinds from the
words of our Savior, Unless you eat, etc. and unless you drink, etc. which
their opposers said signified no more than, unless you eat or drink, from which
they concluded that either the one or the other was sufficient to fulfill the
command; these I say made it still more necessary to have a concordance, that
should explain the meaning of those particles ex and per, nisi and et, and in
how many different senses they were used in scripture. This induced John de
Segovia to write the second part of the concordance relating to indeclinable
words, with a prolegomenon or preface, in which he has given us this account
of the occasion of it. The learned Sebastian Brant, author of the Navis
stultifera, caused it to be printed by Froben, ann. 1495, and somewhat above
twenty years after the same, Froben reprinted it with an elegant Latin dialogue
between a bookseller and the buyer, relating to the value of good books,
instead of a preface to that edition. The reader may see it at length in
Chevillier, p. 130.

FROBEN had two sons Jerome and John, who succeeded their father, and published
a great number of volumes with good reputation after his death, which happened
ann. 1527. Erasmus tells us that what he had most at heart was to give the
world a correct edition of St. Austin's works, and that he desired to live no
longer than to see it finished Ut inter familiares subinde dicere solitus fit,
se non optare longius vitae spatium, quam quod absolvendo sufficeret Augustino.
Erasm. epist. ad Ammonium. Tom. 3. oper. p. 759.
. However he was deprived of that pleasure, for J. And-Endters tells us though he
kept seven presses continually at work upon that edition, yet not above two
volumes of it were printed before he died, to the great loss and grief of all
the learned world: the following epitaph, written by his friend Erasmus, was
afterward set upon his tomb.

Epitaphium JOANNIS FROBENII. per Desiderium Erasmum Rot.
Arida Joannis tegit hic lapis ossa Frobeni,
Orb vivet toto nescia fama mori.
Moribus hanc niveis meruit studiisque juvandis;
Quae nunc maesta jacent orba parente suo.
Rettulit, ornavit veterum monumenta sophorum
Art, manu, curis, aere, favore, fide.
Huic vitam in caelis date, numina justa, perennem;
Per nos in terris fama perennis erit.
THIS epitaph was afterward printed, according to la Caille, in Henry
Stephen's Artis Typographicae Querimonia; Erasmus wrote another of four verses
in Greek, which the Reader may see in Matt. Annal. Typog. v. 2. p. 36.

ERASMUS was not contented with writing the abovementioned epitaphs in his late
friend's praise, but he made likewise a kind of funeral oration or rather
elogium upon him, in a letter to John Emsted a learned Carthusian; the reader
may see it at full length in the abovementioned Annals, vol. 2. page 36, and
seq

AND indeed it was no more than he owed him, since Froben had long before given
him a pleasure, which few men beside him had ever tasted, which was to see his
own elegy before his death; the occasion of it was as follows. Before these two
were become intimate, Froben had heard that Erasmus was dead, and wrote much
such another funeral oration upon him, which he prefixed to an edition of that
great man's proverbs, which he published Ann. 1513: Erasmus could not but be
highly pleased to see himself praised in so extraordinary and sincere a manner,
being well assured that such encomiums could not proceed from flattery or self
interest; for Erasmus being supposed dead, Froben could have nothing to hope
from him; and had any but a man of Froben's integrity and honor committed such
a mistake, one might be apt to suspect it had been wilfully done, in hopes of
procuring some valuable pieces from that learned author: but whoever is
acquainted with that Printer's character, will undoubtedly believe him
incapable of such mean arts. I think therefore it will not be amiss to close
the history of this great Printer with some conspicuous parts of his character,
which we have not yet touched upon, and which will easily acquit him of any
suspicion; which is, that he was a man of the most disinterested and generous
disposition. Erasmus in his letter to Emsted abovementioned does even tell us,
that he was so to a fault, and that he had often reproved him for it, but in
vain, for his natural candor was proof against all admonitions of that kind:
neither did his munificence to men of learning and merit show itself only in
the largeness of his presents to them, but in the manner of bestowing them;
never, says that author, did he seem better pleased than when he had, either by
entreaties or by some cunning device, prevailed upon them to accept of some
favor from him. The grief he showed in his countenance at their denial was
such, that they found it more difficult to refuse a favor from him, than to
obtain one from another person; and when by chance, continues he, I have bought
me some cloth for a gown, he has privately sent, and paid for it unknown to
me. As his house was open to all learned men, so none had a heartier welcome
than Erasmus, who used it as his home all the time he continued at Basil, and
it is probable that he might have continued longer there, had he not observed
something in his family, which he could not forbear grieving at. Froben was
under petticoat-government, which made his affairs go somewhat wrong, wherefore
he expresses himself thus to him in a letter dated from Louvain; Fama tibi
parta est, ea poterit tibi magno emolumento esse, si curam de tuo adhibueris;
sed mihi non placet domi tuae regnum istud Muliebre, etc. But Froben was of too
easy and patient a temper, to give himself any trouble about it: we have a
remarkable instance of this in the last year of his life, when being seized
with such a violent pain in his right heel, that some physicians were for
cutting off his foot, he had no sooner received some easement in it, than he
went on horseback to Frankfort about some business; and though advised by his
friends to stir seldomer abroad, to go warmer in clothes, and to spare himself
as much as possible, he refused to hearken to them, and took such care to
conceal his bad state of health, and the anguish of his pain, that he went
still about his business; 'till being seized with a fainting fit, he dropped down
and broke his skull against the pavement; after which he continued two days,
without any sense or motion, and expired ann. 1528. I hope the name and
character of the person will excuse my account of these particularities,
especially since the great Erasmus has thought them worth recording in a much
ampler manner: he left two sons Jerome and John, who became excellent Printers,
and signalized themselves by their editions of the Greek and Latin fathers; he
had likewise some daughters, one of whom named Justina he married to Nicolas
l'Evesque or Episcopius, an eminent Printer of Basil.

HIS usual mark or rebus was a dove sitting on the top of a staff, with two
basilisks twined about it, to which he sometimes added the initial letters of
both his names IO. FRO. and sometimes the fourth verse of the 125th psalm in
Hebrew, the sixteenth verse of St. Matthew's 10th chapter in Greek, and these
words in Latin, Prudens Simplicitas Amorque recti, in three distinct lines. All
the works we have extant of his from 1491 to 1500 are only four, viz. a Latin
bible, 8vo, in a small character dated 1491. Another in the old Gothic, 8vo,
1495; his concordance of the bible mentioned before, fol. anno 1495; and the
Speculum december Prae^^ptorum of Henry Harp.

I CAN find but one more Printer after him, viz.

JOHN BERGMAN de OLPE, 1497.
OF whom we have only two editions of Sebastian Brant's Navis stultise^a, dated
1497 and 1498. the last of which is adorned with wooden cutts.

BESIDES these F. Orlandi has given us a list of above 60 Basil editions
without Printers names.

Article II. The Cities of Esling, Placentia and Pignerol.
THESE three cities being inconsiderable with respect to their Productions in
the Art of Printing, except the earliness of their receiving it, I have joined
them into one short article.

. ESLING is a small city in the duchy of Wirtembergh in Germany. It received
Printing either about or before the year 1475; though we can meet but with the
two following editions printed there by

CONRARD FYNER, 1475. viz.
1. PETRI Nigri Germani ord. praed. qui claruit anno 1475, tractatus de
Judaeorum perfidia, per Conradum Fyner Eslingae 1475.

2. EJUSDEM tractatus de conditionibus very Messiae contra Judaeos, Germanice,
by the same, ibid. Orl. 1477.

. PLACENTIA a noble ancient city upon the river Po in Italy, in which we find
only one edition printed by

JO. PETER de Ferratis of Cremona, 1475. viz.
BIBLIA Latina, 4to, per Jo. Petri de Ferratis Cremonensem Placentiae, 1475.

. PIGNEROL [in Latin Pignarolium] is a well fortified city in Piedmont, at the
foot of the Alps, under the dominion of the present king of Sardinia. Here the
famous French Printer

JAMES des ROUGES or de RUBEIS,
Set up his Press, after he had printed at Venice from 1473 to 1477 with vast
applause. The first book, which we find printed by him, is a Latin bible dated
1475; in which all our annalists have followed father se Long: but it is
doubtful whether he was not mistaken in the year, seeing des Rouges was still
printing at Venice, anno 1477, and that we find no more impressions of his done
at Pignerol, 'till anno 1479.

HOWEVER as it is not easy to determine whether father le Long was in an error,
or the bible antedated, or whether this Printer kept two Presses at the same
time, one at Venice, and another at Pignerol; I have followed the order of the
annalists, and ventured to place this edition and city under that year.

WE have but four editions of his printed at Pignerol, that of the bible of
1475 included, two of which are dated 1479, and the last 1480.

Article III. The City of VINCENTIA, 1475.
VINCENTIA is a large ancient city and university in Italy, now under the
republic of Venice, which received the Art of Printing anno 1475, and obliged
the world with a greater number of editions than many cities of Italy, and
other parts of Europe, which we have seen hitherto.

1. HERMAN LEVILAPIS or LICHTENSTEIN, 1475.
WAS one of the first that brought it hither. He was a native of Cologn, and a
very good, but unsettled Printer. We have already seen him at Venice and
Treviso. At Vincentia he printed some editions in partnership with Nicholas
Petri of Harlem, alias Peter de Harlem.

WE have twelve of them extant, in some of which he calls himself Herman
Levilapis, in others de Levilapide or Lichtenstein, in others Herman
Lichtenstein de Colonia; one remarkable edition of his, viz.

PAULI Orosii Hispani historiarum libri vii ad Aurelium Augustinum de maximis
calamitatibus ab orb condito usque ad sua tempora, fol. is without date,
Printers or place's name.

THIS edition was corrected by Aeneas Vulpes, and printed at Vincentia by
Herman Lichtenstein, as appears by the epigram quoted in the margin Ut ipse
titulus margin in primo docet,
Orosio nomen mihi est.
Librariorum qui^quid error is fuit,
E^emit A^^^^^ mihi:
Meque imprimendum tradidit non alteri,
Hermanae quam soli tu^i;
Hermanus, nomen hujus artis and decus,
Tuaeque laus Coloniae
Quod s^situm orbis, sicque ad nostra tempora
Ab orbis ipsa origin;
Quisque tumultus, bellaque and caedes velit,
Cladesque nosse: me legate.

; after which it was reprinted in the same place, but in a larger character, by
Leonard de Basilea with the same verses, except changing the word Herman for
that of Leonard, and Colonia for Basilea. It was reprinted likewise in several
other places, only the 5, 6, 7 and 8th verses were omitted.

2. JOHN RHENISH or John de Reno, five editions from 1475 to 1481.

3. JOHN de Vienna, 1 edit. 1476.

4. STEPHEN KOBLINGER, 1 edit. 1479.

5. HENRY, bookseller of Vincentia, 3 edit. from 1480 to 1486.

6. LEONARD de Basilea or of Basil, Printer to the university of Vincentia, 5
edit. from 1482 to 1491.

7. JAMES DUSENSIS, 1 edit. 1482.

8. HENRY de S Urso, 5 edit. from 1486 to 1499.

9. SIMON BEVILAQUA [Drink water] citizen of Pavia, 2 edit. both 1489.

HE went afterward to Venice, where he printed a much greater number of
editions, from 1492 to 1500, as has been said under that head.

HERE are likewise a small number without Printer's names.

Article IV. The Cities of LUBECK and VALENTIA.
. THE city of Lubeck is one of the Hans-towns in Germany, between the provinces
of Saxony and Alsatia upon the Baltic sea. It is very eminent for its trade,
port, fortifications, riches, and number of inhabitants.

HITHER the Art of Printing was brought anno 1475, yet appears to have met with
but little encouragement from its trading inhabitants, for we find only four
Printers in this city from 1471 to 1502, and they were so far from settling
here any time, that their bad success had obliged them to quit the place, for
we have but five editions extant of them all; their names are as follows.

1. LUCAS BRANDIS de Schafz, 2 edit. from 1475 to 1477. 2. STEPHEN ARNOLD, 1
edit. 1484. 3. STEPHEN ARNDES, 1 edit. 1493. 4. BARTHOL. GOTHAN, 1 edit. 1494.
I SHALL only add that the first work of Lucas Brandis, viz. Epitomae
Historiarum has the pompous Latin inscription, which you will find in the
margin -- Imperiali in urbe Lubecana, art impressoria, speciali gratia divina,
animatum ob salutem fidelium inventa, epitoma istud in parts vi. juxta mundi
aetates divisum, prius alibi non repertum, quod placuit Rudimentum Novitiorum
intitulari, dei adjutorio, qui supernas res ac subterraneas feliciter,
suaviter, tranquilleque dispensat, per magistrum Lucam Brandis de Schafz
feliciter est excusum atque finitum; ut pauperes solvere libros non valentes,
unum tantum haberent hoc enchiridium loco multorum semper ad manum librorum.
, and which has led some authors into an absurd notion that the Art of Printing
was found out at Lubeck.

. VALENTIA, 1475.
THERE are so many cities and towns of this name in France, Italy and Spain,
that it cannot possibly be determined in which of them the two following books,
which are all that we find under that name, have been printed; there being
nothing in the titles or any other part to ascertain it, and even the Printer's
names are wanting.

1. SALUSTIUS, 4to. Valentiae, 1475. 2. XIMENIUS (Franciscus) de vita
Christiana in vi parts distincta, ibid, 1484.
Article V. ROSTOCH and BRUGES, 1475; and DELPH, 1477.
. ROSTOCH is an imperial free city in Germany, upon the Baltic sea. Here was
founded an university about the year 1490, fourteen years before which, we meet
with the following book, the only one as yet known, printed there by some
regular priests, as the colophon informs us.

LACTANTII FIRMIANI de divinis institutionibus, fol. per fratres presbyteros
and clericos congregationis Domus viridis horti ad sanctum Michaelem in oppido
Rostochiensi partium inferioris Sclaviae, prout facultas and industria tulit,
emendate satis and accurate consummat. millesimo quadringentesimo septuagesimo
sexto, quinto Idus Aprilis: Rostochii, 1476.

. BRUGES in Flanders had a Printer settled there anno 1476, named

1. COLARD MANSION,
OF whom we have three editions from 1476 to 1486.

ORLANDI gives us another Printer of this city, viz. John de Rey, who printed
Centon Epistolas dell' Bachiller, 4to, 1499. Mr Maittaire and la Caille date
this edition from Burgos in Spain, and they seem to be in the right, because
the book is written in Spanish, and the Printer's name shows him to be of that
nation.

. DELPH is a fine city in Holland, near the Hague and Rotterdam. We meet with
seven editions printed there, all without any Printer's name; the first of
which, viz. the Dutch bible is dated anno 1477. The rest are dated as follows;
two 1480, two 1487, one 1491, the last 1497.

CHAP. XI. The Cities of 1. Spire, 2. Lions, anno 1477. 3. Geneva, Brussels,
Coscence and Pavia, anno 1478. 4. Goude, Zivol, anno 1479; and Caen, Ceulen,
Cenzano and Quilemburgh, anno 1480. 5. Lignitz, Husselet, Regio Mont royal and
Wartzburgh, anno 1481. 6. Pisa, Aquila, Erford and Langres, anno 1482: And 7.
Gaunt and Memining, anno 1483.
Article I. The City of SPIRE, 1477.
SPIRE is an ancient city in higher Germany, situate upon the Rhine, between
Mentz and Strasburgh. It is now called in Latin Spira, but formerly was called
Novimagium and Nemetes.

THOUGH this city does not seem to have cultivated the Art of Printing within her
walls, so much as other cities of Germany, yet it ought to be remembered for
having given birth to some eminent Printers, who went and settled in other
parts of Europe, and in particular the two famous brothers, who first set up
their presses at Venice, viz. John and Windelin of Spire, of whom we have given
an account in the third chapter of this second part. Here we find the first
beginnings of the Art about the year 1477, when

1. PETER DRACH of SPIRE.
PRINTED the Summa of Archiep. Antoninus, which is the first book we know of
printed by him; as he is likewise the only Printer, who put his name to any
impressions done in this city. His editions are but four in number, from 1477
to 1487; besides which we find about ten more printed here without the names of
the Printers.

IT will not be improper to observe here, that our latest annalists place the
city of Westminster under this year; the oldest edition as yet discovered by
them being Socrates's Sayings printed by Caxton, anno 1477; however the reader
will find by the third book of this history, that there is a more ancient one
by three years, viz. The Game of Chess, which is dated anno 1474, now in the
possession of my worthy friend the curious Mr Granger of the East India House:
and it is plain from the account of the Art's being brought into England, that
they began to print in the abbey of Westminster much sooner than that year.

Article II. The City of LIONS.
LIONS, a rich and populous city in France, upon the rivers Rhone and Arare, is
called in Latin, Lugdunum, and is allowed to be one of the most ancient cities
in Europe; so that some French writers have not scrupled to fix the date of its
foundation within 600 or 700 years after the flood, which may more easily be
believed than disproved. It has been always eminent for men of learning in all
arts and sciences, which were particularly cultivated there, but more
especially after the Art of Printing was introduced; which received such
encouragement there, that it has continued in a flourishing condition ever
since. Some annalists have asserted that it is the first city in France which
set up a Printing-press; but if we would judge of this controversy by the dates
of the oldest impressions, we shall find that the city of Tours, and next that
of Paris had the Art several years before, as has been already shown. However,
if Lions has not the preference of Rome, Paris, Venice, etc. either for the
antiquity or beauty of its productions; it must be acknowledged that it has
gained it by the quantity of large impressions, than which no city in Europe
has furnished the learned with a greater number. It is still a great emporium
or market for books in all languages and sciences; and as it has encouraged
some of the best artists to settle there, and publish beautiful and correct
editions, so it has induced many a wretched one to choose it as a proper place
to print and vend a much greater quantity of bad and counterfeit ones; but this
has happened in most famous cities of Europe. Lions has likewise been
celebrated, if not for introducing, at least for encouraging, the Gothic
character, and published more volumes of that sort, in proportion to those that
were done in fine Roman, than any other city; and what is more remarkable of
the Printers of this city, they were vastly more fond of that inelegant
character than of the Roman, especially for bibles, divinity, law and physic
books.

THE reader will be justly surpised to hear what encomiums they gave it, and
how proud they were of their performances in that kind. I have subjoined in the
margin three or four scraps of their colophons, to show what a piece of merit
the Printers of the 15th and above half of the 16th century made of their works
printed in this character, not only at Lions, but likewise at Venice, Paris,
Rome, etc. Sublimi literarum effigy, etc.
John de Cologne at Venice used to phrase it thus, Done in sublimely fine
characters, etc. another Charactere jucundissimo M. Joan: Herbort Alemani,
cujus vis et ingenium facile supereminet omnes.
values himself upon the beauty and excellence of his character; a third Opus
pulchro literarum charactere politissimum, etc.
calls it the most elegant character; and a fourth Certante minio purpurae
rubedine, Superante cervas nigredine sepia -- politioribus characterum typis,
etc.
the most polite of all characters: so that if a person did not see what Types
they meant, he would be apt to judge it any other than the Gothic. The famous
Badius, sirnam'd Ascensius, who had printed in this city of Lions from 1495 to
1500, is reported to have gone afterward to Paris, with a design to stop, as
much as possible, the current vogue of this old Gothic; but in vain, for he
was obliged to continue it himself till almost the very later end of his days;
and besides it still remained in great use long after that, insomuch that
Atensis complains Lynceis u^u^tur oculis and Herculeo labor, ^i quando
ethni^orum aliquis aut nugax poeta, ^u^ verbosus orator est imprimendus; sacris
quosvis typos quamvis trito^ and consusaneos adhibent. Praesat. ad Gregor.
that Printers were extremely curious, and spared no cost to give elegant
impressions of the heathen poets, orators, etc. whereas any battered old
Gothic Types were thought good enough for those of Divinity. In the close of
this second book we shall mention some of the Printers, to whom the world is
obliged for the total disuse of that inelegant character. To return to Lions;
the first Printer we find there, is,

1. BARTHOLOMEW BUYER, 1477.
Of whom we have only the two following impressions: the first, viz. the new
Testament in French is without date, and has been supposed by de la Caille, to
have been printed about 1500. but F. Le Long more justly supposes it, both by
the rudeness of the character, and its likeness to that of the next edition of
Buyer, which is dated 1477 to have been printed about this time.

2. MARTIN HUSZ two edit. from 1478, to 1485.

and 3. JOS. FABER two edit. from 1478, to 1485.

4. PERRINE LATHOMI, 1 edit. 1479.

He printed likewise at Venice with some others, about 1494.

5. WILLIAM le ROY, 2 edit. from 1483, to 1488.

6. JANON CARCAIGNI, 2 edit. from 1488, to 1495.

7. MICHELET TOPIE de Piemont 2 edit. from 1488. to 1490.

and 8. JAMES HEREMBERCLE, alias HEREMBERCH, German,

9. JOHN CLEIN, German, 1 edit. 1489.

10. MATTHIAS HUSM, German, 1 edit. 1489.

11. JOHN DU PRE, 2 edit. from 1489, to 1493.

He printed likewise at Paris and Abbeville.

12. PETER MARESHAL, 1 edit. 1490.

13. JOHN DE LA FONTAINE of Lions, 1 edit. 1490.

14. JOHN TRECHSEL German, 8 edit. from 1490 to 1497. Whose corrector was the
famous Jodocus Badius, of whom we shall speak hereafter; some of whose learned
works, comments and annotations he printed anno 1492 and seq. as Silvae
Morales, cum interpretatione Badii ex Virgil. Horat. Pers. Juvenal. Ennio,
Bapt. Mantuan. Sulpit. Caton. with some others which we shall speak of anon. I
must not omit mentioning, that all Trechsel's works are highly valuable and
correct.

15. ENGOLHARD SCHULTIS, German, 1 edit. 1491.

16. MATTHIAS HUTS, 1 edit. 1491.

17. ANT. LABILLON 2 edit. both 1491.

and 18. MARTIN SARACENI, 2 edit. both 1491.

19. JODOCUS BADIUS, sirnam'd ASCENSIUS, 1495.
Badius was born in the castle of Ase, in the territories of Brussels, and
called Ascensius from it. He spent his younger years in study at Brussels,
Gaunt, and last of all in the university of Ferrara, under the great Bapt.
Guarini, where he became master of the Greek and Latin tongues, and very famous
for his learning and parts. He removed afterward to the city of Lions, where
he publicly taught those two languages, and became corrector to Jo. Trechsel's
press, as has been said before. He published several works, some of which were
his own, as Silvae morales contra vitia. fol. 1492. Epigrammatum lib. 1.
Navicula Stultarum mulierum; the Life of Thomas a Kempis prefixed to his works,
and some others. Several excellent commentaries were likewise written by him
upon the greatest part of the classicks, and other Latin authors, as Horace,
Juvenal, Martial, Lucretius, Seneca, Salust, Valerius Maximus, Quintilian,
Aulus Gellius, and others; all which he printed himself in folio very elegantly
and correctly, though some of the first he caused to be printed by John Trechsel,
whose daughter he afterward married and had many children by her. To all his
editions, which were not a few, he used to prefix an epistle dedicatory,
addressed to some person, eminent either for his quality, piety or learning.
Among others, he dedicated the first Volume of Tho. Waldensis works to pope
Clement VII. After he had taken the business of printing upon him; he became so
excellent a Printer, that the learned Rob. Gaguin, general of the Trinitarian
Order, who was perfectly well acquainted with his merit, wrote a letter to him,
to desire him to undertake the printing of his works. This with some other
invitations of the learned, brought Badius to Paris about 1499, presently after
his father-in-law's death, where he designed to teach the Greek tongue, and
where his last endeavor, after he had furnished himself with fine sets of
Roman characters, was to explode the old Gothic both in his works, and by his
example, as we hinted before. And accordingly printed the Philobiblion of that
great encourager of learning, Richard Bury, lord high chancellor of England,
bishop of Durham, and founder of the Oxford library, toward the middle of the
14th century; which book was sent to him by Dr. Bureau, bishop of Cisteron, and
confessor to the French king, in order to be printed by him. This was the first
book known that came to the press after he set it up at Paris; it is dated 1500;
the next year he printed the Provinciale, seu constitutiones Angliae, cum
Annotationibus Gullielmi Lindewode 1501, in ^ vol. fol. in a beautiful round
Roman. This book, as de la Caille tells us, is very scarce, and much sought
for, being very necessary for those who would understand the old French used in
William the conqueror's time, though I doubt he is mistaken, the work itself
being in Latin. He began to print by himself about the year 1495, at which time
the great Aldus Manutius began at Venice; than whom neither that age nor the
next produced two more learned or excellent Printers.

As this later was chiefly engaged in printing and correcting of Greek authors,
so Badius was employed in the Latin ones; and there seemed a kind of friendly
emulation between them, each carrying away the palm in a separate province.
Upon account of this merit the editor of Guil. de Rubione in his dedication to
the earl of Castille calls Ascensius a person skilled in all kinds of science,
and the prince of printers Omnigenere disciplinarum eruditissimo Ascensio,
impressoriae artis primati.
; and Trithemius ranks him among the Scriptores Ecclesiastici, when he was but
two and thirty years of age, and gives him the following panegyric, viz. that
he was a perfect master of literature, not unskilful in the holy scriptures, a
good philosopher, orator and poet, a man of a bright genius and a fluent
tongue, Vir in secularibus literis eruditissimus, and divinarum scripturarum
non ignarus, philosophus, rhetor, and poeta clarissimus, ingenio excellens and
disertus eloqui^.
etc. Erasmus likewise gives him a great encomium in his dialogue entitled
Ciceronianus; prefers his style to that of Apuleius, and highly applaudes his
admirable facility of writing. I shall give the Latin reader a specimen of his
poetry in the margin, which is a tetrastich in^crib'd to the learned Fath. Mark
Benevent, to whom the edition of Holkoth upon the sentences, printed by J.
Treschel anno 1497, is dedicated, and of which himself was the corrector; in
which verses he desires him in a most el^gant manner to excuse the faults still
remaining in it Jam portum optatum per inhospita saxa secuti
Prendimus, ex alto prospiciente deo.
Siqua tamen lacerae portent inculta carinae,
Humane ignosces, Marce diserte, Vale.

. He was no less skillful in restoring of corrupt manuscripts, than careful in
printing of them with the greatest accuracy; so that some of his Errata's have
contained but five words. In printing the work of any living author, he always
followed the copy exactly; and he tells us in his preface to his edition of
Angelus Politianus Curavimus -- ut quam minimum ejus scripta quasi degenerent
ab origin, imitantes sane non tacendi, imo semper laudandi, hominis Aldi M. R.
diligentiam.
, that he endeavored to imitate the laudable diligence of Aldus Manutius, and
to print from his copies with the utmost exactness. This made not only the
learned very ambitious to have their works printed by him, but the most eminent
booksellers of Paris were glad, in order to have him for their Printer, to
associate themselves with him; among whom, John Petit sworn bookseller to that
university, and one of the most famous of that age, caused several noble
editions to be printed by him as the Calepini Dictionarium octo Linguar. 1516.
Origin. Opera Latin 4 vol. fol. 1519, some of which beautifully printed on
vellum, are still to be seen in several libraries of that city, with many
others: He had other associates besides Petit, viz. Andreas Bochard, Dionys
Roce, Geofrey Marneff, and many others, all eminent men in their way. Thus he
continued printing and writing with great applause and reputation till the year
1534, in which he died. Some authors indeed have affirmed that he died anno
1526, because they knew of no works printed by him after that year. Chevillier
gives us two particulars, which fix the year of his death beyond dispute. The
first is the last book printed in his name, viz. Alphonsus a Castro contra
Haereses. fol. 1534. and Peter Lombard in Epistolas Pauli. fol. ann. 1535. pro
haeredibus Jodoci Badii, mense decembri, both which editions he saw in the
Sorbon library. He used to put the following Latin verse to the first page of
his impressions;

Aere meret Badius laud auctorem, art legentem. Sometimes this,

Era meret Badio tersa atque impressa per ipsum. Or thus,

Era meret Badio, nomenque decusque parenti. Some Impressions have only. Era
meret Badio.

His mark was the draught of a printing house with the words Praelum
Ascensianum upon the head of the press, the glory and credit of which died not
with him, but continued above 35 years in his own family; for Badius, whose
love to learning, and in particular to the Art of Printing, was conspicuous
through his whole life, prevailed upon himself to breed up his only son Conrard
Badius to the business of Printing, after he had perfected him in the Greek and
Latin tongues, and in several other branches of literature. Conrard became so
famous upon all these accounts, that the learned Henry Stephens has thought fit
to transmit to us an elegant Latin epitaph made upon him, which the reader may
see in de la Caille p. 131. Badius had likewise a brother named John, who
became an eminent printer, and left a considerable number of good editions
behind him; and as if this had not been enough to have three out of his family
brought up to the Art of Printing, he married his three daughters to three of
the most eminent printers in Paris, Robert Stephens, Michael Vascosan, and John
de Roigny. The two former of these are too celebrated to need a panegyric
here; and the last took his father-in-law's mark, succeeded him in his
printing house with great reputation, and signalized himself by the elegancy
and correctness of a great number of editions, which came from his presses; he
left a son named Michael, who did not prove much inferior to his father or
grandfather.

We find two epitaphs on this great man, the one in Henry Stephen's book, De
artis typographicae querimonia, anno 1569; which is as follows;

Jodoci Badii Epitaphium.
Hic liberorum plurimorum qui parens,
Parens librorum plurimorum qui fuit,
Situs Jodocus Badius est Ascensius.
Plures fuerunt liberis tamen libri,
Quod jam senescens coepit illos gignere,
Aetate florens coepit hos quod edere.
His other epitaph is to be seen upon his tomb in St. Bennet's church at Paris,
where he lies buried. It is as follows;

On this side is the picture of Badius.

D. O. M. B. Q. V. M. S.

And on this side his wife, Trechsel.

Viator, arts qui bonas piasque amas,
Siste hic. Quiescunt subter illustres viri
Qui litteris junxere virtutem arduam.
Jacet Jodocus hic Badius Ascensius,
Candore notus scriptor and scientia.
Gener Jodoci Vascosanus prope situs est,
Doctissimorum tot parens voluminum,
Socer Morelli, regis olim interpretis;
Musarum alumni quae gemunt hic conditum,
Foedusque Federici ademptum sibi dolent.
Tres cyppus unus hic tegit cum uxoribus
Lectissimis et liberorum liberis.
Hos Christus olim dormientes suscitet,
Ad concinendum Trinitati almae melos.
I.. TH. Y. C.

FEDERICUS Morellus Paris. professor and interpres regius Federici Morelli
nobilis, genere Campani, regii quoque interpretis; Michael Vascosani scutiferi
Ambiani nepos, Jodoci Badii illustris Belgae pronepos, marmoreum hunc
epitaphium patris, avi, proavi piae memoriae, aere suo posuit; ejusdem, cum
Deus vocans volet, tumuli compos fieri optans, (...) anno salutis 1603.

Qui idem Morellus unus erat e Duumviris togatis hujus aedis sacrae D.
Benedicti (...) praefectus.

BADIUS lived at the sign of the three wolves in St. James's street, and his
house was so much frequented by learned men of all nations, who for
conversation's sake, were forced to use the Latin tongue, that his daughters
had obtained such knowledge of it, that no conversation passed in that language
but they understood it; the same has been affirmed of some of his domestics.
He was one of the sworn Printers of the university of Paris, as appears by the
inscriptions to his epistles didicatory Ex officina nostra literaria in
Academia parisiensi, etc.

Accuratione Ascensii in nobilissimo Parisiorum Gymnasio.

Ex Aedibus nostris in Parisiorum Academia, etc.


, as well as by the order which he received from the rector of it (by virtue of
his oath of obedience and fidelity to it) to print the censure made by that
body against Luther's doctrines.

BEFORE I conclude this article of that noble Printer, it will be necessary to
give the reader a caution, which he gives us in the title of his Calepin
corrected, augmented, and printed by him in 1516, that some vile Printers had
put his name to several editions never published by him; for which reason he
desires the reader to see that his mark be to them, least they be deceived by
those impostors. It seems these plagiaries were more modest than some Italians
and others, who scrupled not to counterfeit both the name and mark of his
contemporary Aldus.

THOUGH we have but one impression of his extant done at Lions, which city he
left about the close of the century, to which we have confined the lists of
impressions; yet I hope the reader will excule our transgressing those limits
in the account of his life and excellent character, as we have done in that of
other eminent Printers, who have outlived that epoch any considerable time.
The edition spoken of is as follows;

GULIELMI OCKAM opera, fol. per Jodoc. Badium Ascensiunt Lugdun. 1495.

As Badius is the last considerable Printer that made his entrance into the
province of printing within this century, and of all the other cities and
places which have received that art before the close of it, a small number
excepted; we shall abridge the remainder of this history, and content our
selves with giving our readers only their names, and number of their works,
that we may have the more room to open the scene of the last promised twenty
years, viz. from 1500 to 1520, in the two last chapters of this II. Book.

THE rest of the Primers of the city of Lions are as follow;

20. JOHN de Wingle of Picardy, 5 edit. from 1496 to 1499.

21. CLAUDIUS GIBOLET, 1 edit. 1498.

22. NIOHOLAS WOLF, 2 edit. from 1498, to 1499.

23. JOHN DYAMANTIER, 1 edit. 1500.

24. JOHN BACHELIER, 1 edit. 1500.

25. GASPARD ORT, 1 edit. 1500.

and 26. PETER SCHENCK, 1 edit. 1500.

27. CLAUDIUS de Huschia, a Latin bible with outs without date, with above
twenty more without Printers names.

Article III. The Cities of GENEVA, BRUSSELS, COSCENCE and PAVIA, 1478.
I SHALL not trouble the reader with a needless description of those cities,
their productions in the Art of Printing being so inconsiderable, as barely to
deserve a place here, especially the three first.

. 1. GENEVA produced four editions, from 1478 to 1498, without printers names.

. 2. BRUSSELS, two edit. from 1478, to 1480, without printers names.

. 3. COSCENSA, two editions, the first by Octavian Salamonio de Manifredonia,
1478, the other without the printer's name, of the same date as the former.

. 4. PAVIA, in Latin Papia, a noble city and university of Lombardy, received
the Art of Printing about the same time with the three foregoing, according to
the date of her first known edition, and her productions were somewhat more
considerable than theirs. Her first Printer was,

FRANCIS de S. Petro, of whom we have but one edition, dated 1478.

2. ANTONY de Carcano, 3 edit. 2 dated 1478, the last 1494.

3. ANDREAS BONETI, 1 edit. 1486.

4. CHRISTOPHER de Canibus, 1 edit. 1488.

5. JOHN ANTONY BIRRETTI 3 edit. all 1489.

6. FRANCIS de Gyrardengo 3 edit. all 1489.

7. GABRIEL de Crassi, 1 edit. 1490.

8. BERNARD de Rovelli, brothers, 1 edit. 1493.

9. AMBROSE de Rovelli, brothers, 1 edit. 1493.

10. LEONARD GEROTA, 1 edit. 1497.

WITH about 10 more without Printers names.

Article IV. GOUDE and ZWOL, 1479. CAEN, CEULEN, CENZANO and QUILEMBOURG, 1480.
. 1. GOUDE in Holland, between Hague and Utrecht, where Gerard de Leen, or de
Lene, printed from anno 1479 to 1480, after which he removed to Antwerp, and
printed there till 1491, as shall be shown in its place. We have but six
editions of his printed at Goude, the first is a dutch bible, fol. 1479, the
last is dated 1484.

. 2. ZWOL, a City in Lower Germany, between the rivers Isel and Vider. We find
5 editions printed here from 1479 to 1499, all without printers names.

. 3. CAEN, in Latin Cadomum, an episcopal city and university, and the capital
of Normandy, had two sworn booksellers, viz. Peter Regnault, and Richard Mace;
but whether many Printers, or whether they had their books from some other
place, we find but two editions printed here, viz. Horatii Epistolae, 1480, and
Alberti Magni Compend. Theologic. Veritat. 1500.

. 4. CEULEN. Our annalists are at a loss where to find this place, I imagine it
to be the city of Cologn, which the Printer might not know how to spell right,
neither do the Germans write it much unlike it. We find but one impression in
Low Dutch, it is called Splegel der Sassen met de Glossen daarop, fol. 1480.

. 5. QUILEMBOURO, in Holland, where the same Dutch edition was printed in the
same year, and no other as I can find.

. 6. GENZANO, Corn. Beughen in his Incunab. Typogr. mentions an edition of
Joannes Annius de futuris triumphis contra Saracenos, fol. and dates it from
Gentiae, 1480; de la Caille mentions the same edition of the same year, and
dates it from Genzano. Father Orlandi is not sure that Gentiae and Genzano are
the same place, but if it is, he tells us, that it is a place in the Roman
territories, more famous for an excellent wine in great request at Rome, than
for this obscure edition which is the only one we have printed there. The same
author mentions also a single edition, viz. Laurent. Gilelmi de Saona
Rhetorica, printed at Villa S. Albani, 1480, but whether it be our St. Albans
in England, which had the art much sooner, or any other town of that name,
beyond sea, of which there are a great many in almost every province, is not
easy nor of great moment to determine.

Article VI. LIGNITZ, HASSELET, REGGIO, and MONT-ROYAL, 1481.
. 1. LIGNITZ in Silesia, in which was printed the following book, Fr. Hermani
dialogus; Lignis, without the Printer's name, 1481.

. 2. AT Hasselet, a place unknown, was printed Recollectorium ex gestis
Romanormm, fol. Hasseleti, Orl. 1481.

. 3. REGIO, a city in Lombardy, belonging to the Marquess of Este, rich,
ancient and populous, had the Art of Printing from

1. PROSPER ODOARD, and 2. ALBERT MAZALI, 1471.
OF whom we have 3 edit. The two first 1481, the last 1487.

3 BARTHOLOMEW BOTTONUS, alias Bruschi of Reggio, 1 edit. 1482.

4. DIONYS BERTOCH, who wrought first at Treviso, next at Venice, then at
Modena, settled at last at Reggio, where we find 4 edit. of his from 1496 to
1498.

5. FRANCIS MAZALA, of Reggio, 3 edit. from 1498, to 1499.

. 4. MONT-ROYAL, in Latin Mons Regalis, in the Kingdom of Sicily, and near the
city of Palermo, where Dominic de Nivaldis and his sons printed an edition of
Aesop's Fables in Latin verse, fol. 1481.

. 5. AT Wartsburg, in Latin Herbipolis, was printed Missale in usum Ecclesia
Herbipolensis, impress Herbipoli, fol. 1481.

This book the earl of Pembroke told me he saw at Oxford; it has a Latin
privilege at the end, impowering Mr. Isorius Ryfer to print those Missals, and
to adorn them with rubricks. We have already taken notice, that this book had
been set down in the list of Archbishop Laud's books for a MS. which is the
reason it has not been mentioned by any of our annalists.

Article VII. The Cities of PISA, AQUILA, ERFORD and LANGRES, 1482.
. 1. PISA is an ancient, rich and populous city of Tuscany, where the Art of
Printing got but small footing and encouragement. It is very likely that the
wars which raged in several parts of Italy, from the time of the art's being
brought to it, might be a great cause of the small progress it made in this, as
well as many other, otherwise, considerable cities of Italy. We find but 4
editions printed here, the three first dated 1482, 1484 and 1489, are without
Printers names. The only one that has, is Antonii Parnormit. libri IV. dictorum
factorum, etc. fol. by Gregory de Gente. Pisis 1485.

. 2. AT Aquila, an episcopal city in the territory of Abruso, distant about
sixty miles from Rome, was printed an Italian version of Plutarch's lives, by
Adam de Rotwill, a German, who styles himself Stampatore excellent. Aquilae
1482.

ORLANDI tells us page 196, that Mr. Robert Frebairn, (now the king's Printer
in Scotland, and a particular friend of mine) showed him among some of his
curious annotations upon editions which he had seen, the first part of the
aforesaid lives printed at Aquila, ann. 1472; but said, he never could see the
second part which was afterward added to the first. The credit of this
entirely depends upon that gentleman's observation; but our author says, that
he never saw any other part but this which we have given, nor heard of it from
any but him.

. 3. AT Erford, a large city in Germany, erected into an university ann. 1391,
and subject to the elector of Mentz, was printed Lutreus de anima. Erford 1482.

. 4. AT Langres, an episcopal city in Burgundy, the people of which were called
Lingones by Lucan, Claudian, etc. and still reta in that name; we find the
following edition, viz.

Jo. de Turre-cremeta ord. praed. card. expositio super psalterium. Impress per
Johan. Fabri Lingonensem, 1482.

IT has no place's name; only la Caille, and after him Orlandi have supposed
it, from the Printer's appellative, to have been printed at Langres. However
the reader may find the same Printer at Turin, from anno 1474 to 1477, and at
Lions from 1478 to 1485. Orlandi dates the same edition from Turin, by the same
Printer, where I think it more properly belongs.

Article VIII. GAUNT and MEMINING, 1483.
. 1. GAUNT, in Latin Gandavum, is too well known by most readers to need a
description. Here were printed the two following editions without the Printers
names.

1. GUILLELMUS Parisiensis de rhetorica divina, 4to. Gandavi. Orl. 1483. 2.
BOETII de consolatione Philosophiae, lib. 5. cum S. Thom. Aquin. comment. fol.
ibid.
. 2. AT Memining, a City in Swabia, between Ulms and Ausburgh, we find six
editions printed from ann. 1483 to 1494, all without Printers names.

CHAP. XII. The rest of the Cities and Places, which began to print before the
year 1500, with an Account of the Books printed there.
Article 1. The Town of SONCINO, 1484.
SONCINO is a town or castle in the duchy of Milan, between Brescia and
Cremona, and famous for being the place in which the first Hebrew books were
printed. The Christians had hitherto esteemed such a design too expensive and
impracticable; it being scarce possible to find artists in those early days,
who could cut punches exactly enough in that difficult and unpracticed
character. Another difficulty, which seemed to them almost unsurmountable was,
that to cast the letters with the points and accents, would multiply the cases
to an excessive degree; and to print without points, accents, etc. would have
infallibly prevented the sale of their books, because few at that time, except
the Jews, could read without them; and to cast the points and accents by
themselves, and interline them as now, seemed then perhaps wholly
impracticable. We have seen under the article of Aldus Manucius, that he
procured a fone of Hebrew types; but though the Jews had already printed at
Soncino and elsewhere for above twelve or fifteen years, which might have given
him an insight into their method of printing in that language, yet he found it
so difficult, that he made but little use of them; and I can find nothing done
by him in that kind, but an Hebrew alphabet, which Chevilier tells us is
preserved in the Sorbon library. The Jews therefore, as they were the fittest
for such a province, were the first who set about it. What encouragement they
might receive from the Christians in such an undertaking, I cannot affirm; yet
it is probable they might in a great measure depend upon that; and without
leave from the Pope and the Dukes of Milan they dared not have attempted it.
Soon after the Jews had propagated this art into several cities of Italy, such
as Brescia, Bologna, Rimini, Fano, Pesaro, and even as far as Constantinople
and Salonica, in all which places they inscribed their editions as done by some
of the family of Soncino; the Christians who now began to print in Hebrew in
most cities of Europe, in Italy, at Venice, Cremona, Mantua, Verona, Ferrara,
Leghorn, Padua, Naples, etc. in England, London and Oxford; in Germany, Basil,
Frankford, Cologn, etc. in France, Paris, Lions, etc. with some cities of
Spain, Holland, Poland, etc. set up some ingenious artists, who engaged in that
province; though it must be owned that the editions of the Jews were far
preferable to those for beauty and correctness. However there were few
impressions of this kind printed any where, but by these Jews of the Sontino
family, 'till after the year 1500. Mr. Mattaire Ann. Typog. vol. 1. p. 152.
makes a curious observation after father le Long, which is, that in all the
books that he had seen printed in this tongue before that year, as often as the
name of God occurs in the text, they made use of the letter Daleth instead of
He. Thus for instance they printed (...) for (...), and (...) for (...); for
which no reason can be assigned.

I MUST not omit giving the reader an account, which we meet with in Buxtorf
the father, of a book, that he tells us was in the possession of Joseph
Scaliger, of a much older date than those of Soncino. It was an Hebrew grammar
entitled Mahala Scevile Haddas, written by R. Moses Kimchi, which Buxtorf says
had been printed in Sicily 152 years ago; Habuit Josephus Scaliger impressum in
Sicilia ante annos 152. (These words Buxtorf the son did not alter, when he
reprinted his father's book at Basil, anno 1640 in 8vo.) This, if it be true,
will oblige us to seek much higher for the origin of Hebrew-printing, than the
year 1484; which is the time wherein Rabbi Gedaliah, and after him the learned
Bartolocci have affirmed it to have begun; for if we substract 152 years from
1613 in which Buxtorf wrote, it will bring us to the year 1461. Chevilier p.
267 tells us, that he saw a third edition of this grammar, printed at Ortona in
the kingdom of Naples, in the second year of Charles king of Sicily and
Jerusalem, i. e. anno 1496, which shows that there must have been two editions
of it before; and Cornelius a Beughen in his Incunab. Typog. p. 126 mentions an
old Hebrew edition printed at Bologna, anno 1471, with this title, R. Obadia
Sephorno lux populorum. Liber Hebraicus sic dictus, Bononiae 1471. But as he
does not tell us in what library he met with it, and as we have not a
sufficient certainty of the truth of the dates of this and the other book
mentioned by Buxtorf; I can see no reason for departing from the epoch of our
latest annalists, to assign a new one upon uncertain grounds.

THE first Jew who obliged the world with Hebrew impressions, was

MOSES the Son of RABBI ISRAEL NATHAN, 1484.

A NATIVE of Spire in Germany, whose family multiplied so much, and received
such encouragement in this undertaking, that they spread themselves over
several parts of Italy, and printed many noble editions with vast success and
applause. Among these a son of this Moses named Rabbi Gerson, after he had
printed several works at Brescia, of which we have given an account, went and
set up a Press at Constantinople, some time before the close of this century,
and continued printing there till ann. 1530. Some of his sons removed to
Salonica, and other cities of the Ottoman empire, where they met with the same
success. But as their works, at least as far as we know of them, were done
after the year 1500, I shall not give the reader a list of them, but confine
myself to those printed in Italy before that time. The editions at Soncino are
as follows.

1. MINCHAH Happenini 4 to. Soncini, anno mundi 5244. which answers to our 1484.

2. BECHINAL Olam. (Hebr.) ibid. 1485.

3. PROPHETAE priores. (Hebr. absque punctis) cum Com. R. David Kimchi. fol.
ibid. 1486.

4. IKKARIM. per R. Joseph Albo. ibid. 1486.

5. BIBLIA Hebraica cum punctis per Abraham fill. Rabb. Hhajim. fol. ibid. 1488.

6. BERACHOTH and Beitzah. ibid. 1489.

7. JAD HHASAKAH RAMBAM. 2 fol. 1490.

Article II. LEIPSICK. 1484.
LEIPSICK, in Latin Lipsia, the Capital of Saxony, and founded into an
university in 1404 by Frederic. 1. elector of that name, received the Art of
Printing in 1484; and though it produ'd but few impressions before the year 1500,
and yet it is become one of the most famous cities in Germany for the numbers
of books printed there. The first Printer who settled there was,

1. MARK BRANDT,

OF whom we have only the following edition, viz.

ALBICII Archiepiscopi Pragensis praxis medendi. 4to. per Marcum Brandt.
Lipsiae. 1484. 1 At the End of the Pentateuch are these Words;

Et absolutum est opus ministerii, viginti quatuor sapiens ad docendum legem in
Israel excellens and illustris Josua Selomo (^ideat semen, producat dies vitae.
amen.) filius illustris sapientissimi Israel Nathan, feria tertia xi mensis
Jiar ann (...) juxta minorem supputationem; manu minimi in familia sua, fidelis
chalcographi, Abraham F. illustris Rabbi Hhajim felicis memoriae, ex viris piis
terrae Pisauri Bononiae, Impressum opus Soncini.

Chevillier p. 80. mentions another Hebrew bible printed in fol. at Bologna in
the same year 1488. It is in the Library of C. Barberini at Paris; the
Catalogue of which gives us an account of it in the following Words, page 147.
Biblia Hebraica Bononiae ab impressoribus Soncinensibus apud Abrahamum Jarzium
Pisaurensem. 1488. But it is a question whether it be not the same with this of
Soncino.




2 Rambam is an abbreviation of Rabbi Mose-Ben Maimon; as Abenezra is of
Abraham-Ben-Exra, etc.
2. GREGORY BOETICHER, 1 edit. 1493.

3. WOLFGANG MOLITOR de Monaco, 2 edit from 1495, to 1496.

4. JAMES THANNER, 2 edit. from 1498, to 1499. WITH about twenty more without
Printers names.

5. ANDREW Faisner, a learned man, of whom we have given a full account under
the article of Nuremberg, where he followed the Business of printing and
correcting till the year 1478, after which he removed to Leipsick, and became
Rector magnificus of that university. The only book we find printed by him here
is the Historia Longobardica, but our German author not having given us the
date of it, no proper rank could be assigned to it in this list.

Article III. VIENNA and URBINO, 1484.
. 1. VIENNA (not the capital of Austria, as Orlandi thought) but a city in
Dauphiny had two Printers, viz.

1. PETER Schenk of whom we have only the following edition, l'Abuse de Cour,
fol. par Pierre Schenk.

2. CONRARD Celtis, 1 edit. 1500.

. 2. AT Urbino a city in Italy famous for being the native place of that
excellent painter Raphael Sancius; sirnam'd from it Urbin, was printed the
following book without the Printer's name.

PAULI Middleburgensis Episcopi Semproniensis Practica de pravis
constellationibus, ad Maximilianum Caesarem, Urbini, 1484.

Article IV. ANTWERP, HEIDELBERGH, CREMONA and HARLEM. 1485.
. 1. ANTWERP, a large, rich and populous city in Flanders, did not much
signalize itself in the art of printing in this 15th. century, but made ample
amends for it in the two following, having produced some of the finest and
largest editions of any place in the world, and by the number of its Printers,
among whom were the famous Bellers, Raphelengius, Plantin, Morellus, Gumelers,
Mevosius, Verdufen, and many more, all too well known to the learned, to need a
digression here in their praise. The first known Printer here was

1. GERARD LEU or de LEEU. 1485.

WHO printed first at Goude in 1480, whence he came to Antwerp: we have but
four editions of his extant, from 1485 to 1491.

2. ADRIAN de Liesvelt, 1 edit. 1495.

3. NICOLAS Kesler of Basil, where he wrought from 1486 to 1494, betwixt which
times we find a Latin bible, fol. printed by him, in 1487.

WITH a few more without Printers names.

2. HEIDELBERGH is a city and university in the lower Palatinat, and seat of
the elector Palatine, where we find 5 edit. from 1485 to 1489, all without
Printers names.

3. CREMONA is a city and university in Lombardy, famous for the best violins,
etc. the following edition was printed here in 1485.

HERMOLAI Barbari Castigatio in Plinii Not. Hist. without the Printers name.
Though this is all our annalists mention, yet a learned gentleman assures me he
has seen two editions more printed here, one was Fracastorius and the other
Vida.

THE only Printers of this city as yet known are the two following, viz.

1. BERNARDINE de Misenti of Pavia, 1 edit. 1492.

and 2. CAESAR de Parma. 1 edit. 1492.

WE have seen Misenti under the article of Brescia, ann. 1495.

4. HARLEM a city in Holland, sufficiently known to those who have read the
first part of this history, for the great controversy started in favor of it,
and for the number of her champions, who have endeavored to deck her COSTER's
tomb with the trophies of this noble art, has produced so small a number of
works during this 15th century, if we allow it the Donatus, Speculum, etc. done
upon wooden blocks so much boasted of by the Dutch Writers (though their title
even to these has been shown to be as precarious as that of Mentz;) that the
reader no doubt will be surpised, that we have not been able to find but one
book printed there before 1500, viz.

DE Proprietatibus Rerum libri xviii Opus Theologicum and Philosophicum, fol.
1485.

Article V. ABBEVILLE and TOLEDO, 1486.
1. ABBEVILLE a city in Picardy, had two famous Printers and Booksellers
settled there for a small space, viz. John du Pre and Peter Gerard of whom we
have but one edition printed here; after which they removed to Paris as has
been said.

S. Augustine de la Cite de Dieu, fol. par Jean du Pre and Pierre Gerard xxviii
Novem. 1486.

2. TOLEDO, in Latin Toletum, an archiepiscopal city of Aragon in Spain printed

PETRI Ximenes Confutatorium errorum contra Claves ecclesiae, nuper editorum
Toleti, without the Printers name, 1486.

PETER Hugembach reprinted by order of Cardinal Ximenes.

MISSALE mixtum secundum Regulam Beati Isidori, dictum.

MOZARABES fol. 1500.

TWO years after he was ordered by the same Cardinal to print the breviary of
the same St Isidorus.

THESE two Books are reckoned very scarce and valuable, especially by those of
the Church of Rome.

3. RIMINO, in Latin Ariminum, a city in Romania, had a Printer of the Jewish
family of Soncino, before mentioned, who printed

R. Joseph Albo Philosophi, Arbor plantata, in Hebrew 4to. 1486.

THIS book contains the fundamentals of the Jewish religion, and is levelled
against the Christians.

4. AT Munster, in Latin Monasterium, an episcopal city, we meet with the
following editions printed by John Limburgh.

RODOLPHI Langii nobilis Westphali and Monasteriensis Canonici Carmina, 1486.

5. AT Messina, a famous city of Sicily, we find two books printed, one without
Printers name, viz.

HISTORIA praeliorum Alexandri Magni Ducis Maced. fol. 1486.

THE other is printed by

WILLIAM Schonberger of Frankford, and is dated, 1498.

Article VI. 1. MODENA, 2. BOISLEDUC, 1487, 3. EYCHSTADT, 4. TUBINGEN, 5.
ROCCEN, 6. GAETA, and 7. TOULOUSE, 1488.
1. MODENA, in Latin Mutina, is an ancient city in Italy, now under the
dominion of the house of Este Duke of Parma and Modena. The first Printer we
find here was

1. DOMINIC Rocociola of whom we have seven editions from 1487 1498.

2. DIONYS Bertoch, whom we have seen already under the articles of Venice,
Treviso and Reggio, and under several names, did at length conclude the century
at Modena. We have two editions left of him from 1499 to 1500.

. 2. AT Boisleduc, in Latin Boscum-Ducis, a strong city in Brabant was printed
one edition, viz.

PRAECEPTA XX. Elegantiarum grammaticarum, 4 to. 1487.

. 3. AT Eychstat in Upper Bavaria, in Latin Eisteta, was printed Obsequiale
sive Benedictionale Eistetense per Michaelem Keiser, 1488.

. 4. TUBINGEN a city in the duchy of Wirtemberg, and made an university in
1477. had a Printer named.

FREDERIC Meynberger, who printed two editions of Gabriel Biel's expositio
Canonis Missae, from 1488 to 1489. The last of which was revised by Vendelin
Stembach, and is much more correct than the first, but has neither Printer nor
places name.

. 5. ROUEN in Latin Rothomagum, is an archiepiscopal see, and the capital of
Normandy, whose first Printer was,

1. JOHN le Bourgois of whom we have 2 edit. from 1488 to 1498.

2. MARTIN Morin, 3 edit. from 1494 to 1500.

3. PETER Regnault, Printer and bookseller, whom we have seen in the article of
Caen, 1 edit. 1500.

At this place was printed a book, on the subject of grammar, for Martin
Coestin dwelling at Exeter, and the only one I ever met with, which is in the
Earl of Pembroke 's library.

. 6. AT Gaeta an ancient city in that part of Italy, called Latium, was printed
by,

MASTER Justus, 1 edit. viz.

DIALOGO de S. Gregorio Papa, fol. 1488.

. 7. TOULOUSE is the capital city of Gascony, in which we read of John James
Colomiez with some more of his own family exercising the Art of Printing before
and after the year 1500, but can meet with only one edition before the close of
the century, viz. Thomae de Valois in D. Augustini de Civitate Dei Commentarii,
Toulouse 1488, without Printer's name.

Article VII. The Cities of SIENA and HAGENAW, 1489.
. 1. SIENA, an ancient city and university in Tuscany, had an eminent Printer
named Sigismund Rot, of whom we have two editions still extant, one without
date, viz. L. Florus de gestis Romanorum, and Cicero's Clausulae Epistol. 1489;
but whether he was the same with that Sigismund, who sirnam'd himself de
Libris, and for whom Dominic de Lapis printed several books at Bologna anno
1476, or some other, is not easy to determine: these two are all the books
which I could find printed at Siena before the close of the century.

. 2. AT Hagenaw, a city in Alsatia in upper Germany, but now under the French
king, we find the following edition dated 1489, but without Printer's name, viz.

JOH. de Garlandia Cornutus, sive Disticha Exametra Moralia cum
interpretatione. Hagenoae.

THE two following Printers, Joh. Ryman and Henry Gran, did likewise print in
this city: we have two editions of theirs, one dated 1497, and the other 1500.

WE find likewise some other works done here without Printer's names from 1493
to 1500.

Article VIII. The Cities of LISBON and SEVIL, 1491.
. 1. LISBON, in Latin Ulyssipo, the metropolis of the kingdom of Portugal, did
not signalize itself by any productions in this kind, if we except the two
following ones, which being both in Hebrew, might be done by some of the family
of Soncino, mentioned before. They are as follows,

PENTATEUCHE Hebraia cum Paraphras. Chald. and punctis, fol. Ulissipone, 1491.

ISAIAE and Hieremiae lib. cum Comment. Rabbi David Kimchi, Hebraice, fol.
Ulyssipone, 1497.

2. SEVIL, in Latin Hispalis and Sevilia, is an ancient archiepiscopal city and
university in Spain, in which we find

PAUL de Colonia, Joh. Pegniczer de Nuremberg, le Grand and Thomas, flourishing
anno 1491; in which they printed the two following works, after which we hear
no more of them.

ALPHONS. Test. Episc. Abulensis opera, fol. Hispali.

FLORETUM S. Matthaei collectum a R. Praesule Cauriens. Petro Praxano in sacr.
Scriptura Professore Siciliae, both 1491.

BESIDES these we meet with three other works printed by

MEYNARD UNGUT German, and STANISLAUS Polonese, Partners.

THEY are all three in Spanish, the first is dated 1494, and the other two 1495.

Article IX. DOLE and INGOLDSTAD, 1492.
. 1. AT Dole, a city in low Britany, was printed the following book,
HARNMUNDIENSIS Lectio declarativa de Epidemio morbo, 4to, per Johannem
Hebertin, Dolae, 1492.

. 2. AT Ingolstad, a city in Bavaria, was printed in the same year, Porphyrii
Isagoge, fol. Ingolstadii 1492, without Printer's name.

Article X. LUNEBURGH, MAGDEBURGH, THESSALONICA, FRIBURGH and ANGOULESME, 1493.
. 1. JOHN LUCE printed at Luneburgh in lower Saxony, Tho. a Kemp. de Imitat.
Christi, 8vo, per Jo. Luce, 1493.

. 2. AT Magdeburgh in lower Saxony was printed Vincentii -- Ordin. praed. anno
Christi 1455, canonizati contemplatio de Homine interiore, without Printer's
name, Magdeburgi 1493.

. 3. AT Thessalonica, an archiepiscopal city in Macedonia, we find the
following edition in Hebrew by one of the family of Soncino, as is supposed,
though there is no Printer's name to it.

R. ISAAC ABARBANEI, seu ut alii, Abravanel celebris Judaei, and magnae
aestimationis, qui obiit A. M. 5269, Commentarius in Prophetas priores,
videlicet Jesuae, Judicum, Samuelis I and II. Regum I and II. Haebraice, fol.
Thessalonicae, 1493.

. 4. AT Friburg in upper Germany, we find three editions printed by one Kilian,
from 1493 to 1499.

. 5. AT Angoulesme in France was printed the following work, viz. GRAECISMUS
Angolismi. without Printer's name.

Article XI. LYRIA, MADRID and BARCELONA, 1494.
. 1. LYRIA is a castle in the kingdom of Valentia in Spain, where the following
Hebrew work was printed by some of the Soncino family, viz.

PROPHETAE priores cum Com. R. David Kimchi, fol. Leiriae, 1494, without
Printer's name.

. 2. AT Madrid the capital of Spain was printed Concilium Illiberitanum, fol.
Madrid 1494.

. 3. AND at Barcelona, the capital of Catalonia, we find three editions from
1494 to 1500, without Printer's names.

Article XII. GRENADA, MONTFERRAT, MIRANDULA and PAMPELUNA, 1496.
WE have but one edition of each of th^se four places; the three first are
inconsiderable, and without Printer's names: the last is print^d by William de
Brocario.

Article XIII. AVIGNON, LEYDEN and PROVINS, etc. 1497.
1. AT Avignon, a city in the southern part of France, subject to the pope, we
meet with a Printer named Nicolas Lepe, a native of that city; we have but one
edition of his before the close of the century, viz. anno 1497.

2. AT Leyden in Holland, one edition in low Dutch.

3. AT Provins (not a province so called in the south part of France, as
Orlandi and others have mistook it) but a town in the county of Brie in the
same kingdom; we have one small edition printed by one William Tavernier, 1497.

4. AT Bergamo, we find one edition dated, anno 1498; and

5. AT Bemberg two, anno 1499; the former is without the Printer's name, the
last by John Pfeil.

I MUST not omit acquainting the reader that there are still above twenty
editions, which being without dates, places, or Printers names, were not
reducible to our former lists, though they are supposed to have been printed
before the close of the 15th century. The reader may find them at the end of
Mr. Mattaire's annals, vol. 1. with such remarks as that diligent author could
make upon them.

I SHALL conclude this chapter with this observation, that the Art of cutting
upon wooden blocks having past from the Printers to the engravers of cuts, they
began to intersperse them among their works; so that we find many histories,
both sacred and profane, adorned with wooden cuts, which, though already
mentioned in the lists of impressions under every city, yet we shall subjoyn
here altogether, at least the most considerable of them.

1. THE Speculum, or mirror of our salvation in Latin, and another in low
Dutch.

2. THE Speculum morientium, or mirror of a dying person.

3. THE history of St. John's Apocalypse.

ALL these are challenged by the Dutch writers in favor of Harlem.

4. MEDITATIONES in figuras, quas Romae in templo S. Mariae supra Minervam
pingere.

5. CURAVIT Jo. de Turre cremata, Romae, anno 1467 and 1473, fol.

6. FASCICULUS temporum, printed at Louvain, 1474, and afterward both here and
elsewhere, fol.

7. VALTURIUS de re militari, at Verona, 1472.

8. PASSIONALE van Jesu und. Mariae Leben. at Strasburgh, 1477; Geneva, 1490.

9. AESOPI fabulae, fol. at Naples, 1481, and elsewhere afterward.

10. DIALOGUS creaturarum, in low Dutch, at Goude, 1482.

11. THE Bible, in high Dutch, fol. at Nurembergh, 1483.

12. LA mer des histoires, 1 vol. with 286 cuts, at Paris, 1485.

13. LE process de Belial, etc. translated out of Latin into French, 4to, at
Lions, 1485, 1490.

14. ALBAMASAR Arab. astrolog. flores astrologiae, at Ausburgh, 1489, and
elsewhere.

15. SEBASTIAN BRANT's navis stultifera, at Basil, 1491, 1496, and 1497.

16. HORTUS sanitatis, at Mentz, 1491.

17. REVELATIONES S. Brigittae, fol. at Lubeck, 1492, and elsewhere.

18. TERENTIUS, 4to, at Lions, 1493; Strasburgh, 1496.

19. OPUS libri chronicon. fol. at Ausburgh, 1497.

20. GUIL. COURSIN's siege of Rhodes in Latin, at Ulms, 1497.

21. POLIPHILI Hypnerolomachia, fol. at Venice, 1499, and elsewhere.

IT must be owned, that the design and performance of these, and many more of
that sort, were very rude and uncouth, as all must acknowledge, who have seen
them; which is rather owing to the covetousness of the booksellers, who chose
to employ the cheapest hands, than to any want of excellent artists in that
kind. For soon after the very infancy of Printing we meet with a great number
of these engravers, whose performances were vastly superior to the best of
those in the foregoing list. Of this number were Andreas Martegna in Mantua,
Maso Finiguerra in Florence, Bon Martin in Germany, Michael Volgemut and Albert
Durer at Nurembergh, Israel Van-Mecheln at Mentz, Hans Schauflich at Nordeling,
and many more; some of whom, though they were excelled by their successors in the
following century, yet were all excellent masters, and whose names and works
will be still valued by all skilled in that Art. Engraving upon wood became
afterward no small ornament to the Art of Printing, not only for the fine cuts
with which the editions were interspersed, but likewise for the front, head and
tail-pieces, initial letters, etc. which in time became in great vogue. It
proved also of great use in books of architecture, geometry, prospective, and
others, which require a considerable number of demonstrations, figures, etc. in
all which cases the wooden ones are much more expeditious, being contrived of
the same height with the letters, and so imposed, locked up and printed with
them at once; whereas the copper ones must be printed off by themselves, and
with a different press, which makes this method more tedious and expensive.

CHAP. XIII. Of some eminent Printers from anno 1500 to 1520; their
Improvements to the Art; and their Encouragement from the Great and Learned;
with a Catalogue of their most considerable Impressions in the Oriental
Tongues, etc.
I HAVE, in the introduction to this second book, given the reader my reasons
for extending this history so far beyond the year 1500; and I presume that he
is now fully satisfied that it would have been imperfect, if I had stopped there;
since the far greatest part of those Printers, who signalized themselves,
either for their learning or their industry, in improving every branch of
Printing, appeared not till the close of that century, or the beginning of the
next; and consequently, he must have known little of those persons, to whom the
world is particularly obliged for the vast improvements to this Art. Upon this
account I have continued, in the preceding chapters, the history of several
famous Printers to the end of their lives, though some of them survived even this
epoch many years. But we omitted to give a list of their works beyond 1500,
because that would have swelled this volume exorbitantly, and those impressions
are less scarce than those of the former century. We shall add nothing
therefore to their history, but proceed to do justice to the merit of those,
who though they entered not this province, till after the beginning of the 16th
century, yet may be justly esteemed contemporaries with the former.

IT IS not however to be expected that we should prosecute the same method, as
in the former chapters, by showing the progress of the Art through every city,
much less by giving an account of every particular Printer, and the number of
their impressions; since such an history, how succinct soever, would be too
large for a single chapter. Our design is therefore only to mention the most
considerable Printers, and to point out the great improvements which each of
them made to this Art, the encouragement they met with, and the noble
impressions in all languages, particularly the Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic, etc.
(the first of which had been justly essayed, before 1500, but the other scarce
attempted) with an account of the undertakers and assistants in that difficult
province. For as to the beauty of the characters, whether Roman or Greek, they
were brought to such a degree of perfection in the preceding century by the
Italians and French, as hardly admitted of much additional beauty.

TO proceed in order, we should begin with the Germans, to whom we owe the Art;
though the Italians were the authors of those improvements, which the former were
too indolent in imitating; for the oriental tongues, and even the Greek, which
the Italians had made a very considerable progress in, was still much neglected
by them; so that except Amerbach and Froben at Basil in Switzerland (which can
scarce be called a part of Germany) who printed an Hebrew psalter, and
Erasmus's Greek testament with his Latin version of it, anno 1586, we meet with
but three eminent persons, who attempted to print in the Eastern languages. The
first is John Schott of Strasburgh, anno 1515, who printed Lucian's dialogues
of the gods in Greek with the Latin version of Othomar Nachtgall, with the
title page in red, and some ornaments on the margin of the Greek text, and an
errata at the end. By the compliments which the translator makes him in the
preface, he seems to have been a very good Printer. He printed for George
Maxill about five years before. His rebus or mark is in the table at the end of
this book. The second is Eucharius Cervicorn (i. e. Hartshorn) at Cologn, who
printed some Greek editions, the first, anno 1517, is the Hours of the blessed
Virgin Mary, the seven penitential Psalms, and some litanies and prayers in
Greek, with one or two more after. His types are tolerable, but the edition
somewhat faulty. The third is John Potken of the same city, who published there
a psalter in Hebrew, Greek, Latin and Aethiopic, anno 1518, 4to. This person
traveled into India, Aethiopia, Egypt, etc. in order to become master of the
Chaldiac or Aethiopic, and translated the psalter into that language, and
published it with the other versions. He promised in his preface to perform
something likewise in the Arabic, if he should meet with sufficient
encouragement; but I do not find that he executed this. As for the Printer of
this psalter, his name is no where to be found in the book.

THIS is all I know of, that has been attempted by the Germans in that kind;
though to do them justice in another respect, they were industrious in printing
Latin works that were very voluminous; particularly the Decretum Gratiani,
printed by Henry Eggestein, at Strasburgh, which exceeds all that have been
since printed for bulk; and Vincentii Speculum, by John Mentel, in ten large
volumes, fol. In the following century they have been no less diligent, and
published a very considerable number of impressions.

ITALY follows in course; where, though great numbers of editions of the ancient
Greek and Latin writers, as well as of the modern, were published; yet the
Hebrew, Arabic, etc. seemed almost wholly neglected. It Is true, that there had
been, as we observed, two Hebrew editions at Lisbon in Portugal, one anno 1491,
and the other anno 1497; and that the Jews of Soncino had printed several
Hebrew volumes there from 1485, to the close of the century; and, having
dispersed themselves into other cities of Italy, continued printing their own
books in that language. But with respect to the Christians, no direct attempts
were made that way, 'till Daniel Bombergh, an Antwerpian, set up a
Printing House for Hebrew at Venice. His first work was the Hebrew bible, anno
1511, 4to, reprinted by him several times, and particularly anno 1518; in which
year he likewise printed his Bibliae Hebraea Rabinica in fol. containing the
Hebrew text of the bible, the Masora and Targums of Onkelos, Jerusalem, and
Jonathan, R. Joseph, sirnam'd the Blind, and other Rabbi's comments, etc. which
he dedicated to Leo X. But though Bombergh took a great deal of pains in this
impression, and was himself a good master of the Hebrew, which he had learned
of Foelix Pratensis, a learned Italian, who persuaded him to undertake this
edition, and assisted in correcting it; yet the Jews set no value upon it; but
Rabbi Chajin prevailed on him to print another in 4 vol. in fol. which he did
anno 1525; and which was reprinted anno 1548. It Is not my business to enquire
into the merit of those editions; yet I cannot but observe, after several great
critics, that the Jews have always succeeded better in works of this kind than
the Christians, as being more used to the niceties of the tongue, especially in
its points and accents. Bombergh continued printing in Hebrew near forty years;
and all his works were highly esteemed on account of the beauty of the
character and impression, their correctness, the fineness of the paper, and the
number that he printed, which Jos. Scaliger tells us amounted to above four
millions of crowns of gold. He made use of the most learned Jews for his
correctors. His greatest work was the Talmud printed anno 1520 in xi vol. fol.
F. Bartolocci observed, that after his death Hebrew-printing declined
exceedingly.

THE next improvement of this Art was by printing Polyglot works; and herein
the city of Genoa first obliged the world. Peter Paul Porrus, a native of
Milan, but inhabitant of Turin, an eminent Printer, undertook to print the
Impressit miro Ingenio, Petrus Paulus Porrus, genuae in Aedibus Nicolai
Justiniani Pauli praesidente Reipub. genuensi pro Serenissimo Franc. Rege
praestanti viro Octaviano Fulgoso, anno christianae salutis millesimo
quingentesimo sextodecimo mense VIIIIbri. Petrus Paulus Porrus Mediolanensi,
Taurini degens.
Pentaglot psalter of Augustine Justinian, bishop of Nebo, anno 1516, in the
house of Nicholas Justinian Paul, at Genoa. It was in Hebrew, Arabic, Chaldaic,
and Greek, with the Latin versions, glosses and Scholia, which last made the
8th column, in fol.

SINCE I wrote this I have seen a fine copy of it upon vellum at my Lord
Pembroke's, on which I shall venture to make the following observations, viz.

THAT it is a complete masterpiece in that kind.

THE different disposition of the columns are very regular and neat, and kept
up to their exact proportions, nor having one double line in the Latin
versions, nor are any chasms or white lines seen throughout the work; so that I
dare affirm that to this time I have never seen a work so well contrived, and
so completely finished. The Hebrew is printed with all the points, both
orthographical and musical, the Greek and Roman is very neat, but above all the
Arabic (allowing for its antiquity) surpasses all I have ever seen of the kind;
and, that nothing may be wanting to complete the whole, the press-work and ink,
both rubricks and black, excels any thing I have seen, except Durand's
Rationale, printed by the inventor, Faust, in 1459, which book I have also seen
in my Lord's library.

THE Arabic was the first that was ever printed, and this the first piece of
the bible that ever appeared in so many languages; for that of Potken at Cologn
was not published till two years after, and wanted the Arabic. The reader might
reasonably imagine, that this work met with deserved encouragement; yet the
reverse appears from the just complaints of the author. For F. le Long in his
account of the polyglot bibles, p. 36, tells us, 'that he (Justinian) caused no
less than 2000 copies to be printed off, presuming that such a work would not
only procure him a vast reputation, but likewise prove very gainful to him; the
profits of which he designed to bestow upon some of his family who were then in
want. He fancied that it would infallibly meet with a kind reception, and that
all rich prelates and princes would think themselves obliged to encourage it,
and reimburse and enable him to proceed with the other parts of the bible.' For
this he promised in his preface to the psalter; and, about twenty years after,
in his annals of the Republic of Genoa, he proposed to add the whole old
testament in all those languages to the new one, which was preserved there,
done after the same manner; and this he would undoubtedly have performed, had
he not been unfortunately drowned in his passage to the isle of Corsica the
following year. 'But, continues Le Long, he (Justinian) was deceived by his too
great credulity; every body applauded the work, but few proceeded further than
that; scarce a fourth part of what he had printed was sold off.' He says
afterward, 'that, this psalter being of no use to any except the learned, he
found it impossible to reimburse himself the expense he had been at; because,
besides the 2000 copies upon paper, he had about fifty printed upon vellum,
which he presented to all the kings, whether Christians or Infidels.' Vid.
Matt. annal. Typ. Tom. II. par. 1. p. 121. sub not. C.

IT IS well that the author's disappointment did not discourage both him and
others from attempting the like glorious performances: though we do not find any
more works of that prelate in the oriental tongues, yet I have met with the
following one printed at Paris, in 1516, which convinces me, that he published
more of them, and in particular that which is mentioned in it. It is entitled,
Liber Job ad Hebraicam veritatem restitutus, duplici Latina versione, una
vulgata, altera ex Hebreo Augustini Justiniani, 4to, i. e. the book of Job
restored to the Hebrew text, with a double version of it, viz. the vulgate, and
another from the Hebrew by Augustine Justinianus, 4to. But when and where
Justinian printed the book of Job in Hebrew and Latin, I can no where find. As
for Porrus, the Printer of the psalter above mentioned, though he was paid by the
Bishop who employed him, yet it is probable he ventured no more upon that
province; for we do not find that ever he printed any thing more in those
languages, though he returned to Turin, and printed for several years after. His
mark or rebus was a leak with a P on each side, alluding to his name Peter Paul
Porrus, as was the custom of that time to find some beast, bird, plant, etc.
that had analogy to the person's surname, in order to form a rebus; as appears
from the table of them at the end of this book.

THE next considerable work is the bible of that great Mecaenas, Cardinal
Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, printed at Alcala de Herares in Spain, in Latin
Complutum, from whence it is called the Complutentian bible. But before we
leave Italy, I shall just mention some other printers, who, though they did not
excel in this kind, yet obliged the world with many noble volumes in Latin and
Greek. Of this number was Andreas Azulanus, father-in-law to the great Aldus of
Venice, who succeeded him in that Printing House, and kept up the credit of it
for several years. His acquaintance with the members of the learned assembly at
Aldus's house, as well as with his other foreign correspondents, and his own
extraordinary learning enabled him to print many noble editions, which it is
not my design to give an account of here, since they may be seen in Mr.
Mattaire's Annals, vol. II.

THE Junta's at Florence, a noble family of Printers, some of whom we have
spoken of under the heads of Florence, Rome, Venice and Lions, signalized
themselves in the preceding and this century; particularly those of Florence
were famous for their beautiful and correct editions in Greek and Latin.

THE Lilly was their rebus, with this motto, Nil candidius, i. e. nothing is
whiter; to which they sometimes added the initial Letters of their names, and
sometimes printed them at length. There were two of them at Genoa, viz. Philip,
who began to print in 1497, and continued till 1518, about which time he is
supposed to have died, and Bernard Junta, but whether a brother or kinsman to
him I cannot determine. The former having cause to suspect, that his works
might be pirated, according to the custom of those times, obtained a patent
from pope Leo X. of a ten years privilege for all the Greek and Latin editions,
which he should print from that time. As the former are all very curious and
highly esteemed, I shall give a list of the most considerable of them, which is
as follows.

1. BASILII Magni liber de exercitatione grammatica. 8vo, ann, 1515 2. AUSONII
sophistae praeludia, and Hermogenis rhetorica, 8vo, 1515 3. MUSAEUS,
Batrachomyomachia, Oppiani Halieutica, 8vo, 1515 4. NOVEM Comoediae
Aristophanis, 8vo, 1515 5. APOLLON de constructione, 8vo, 1515 6. THEODOR.
Gazae grammatices introductionis, lib. 4, 8vo, 1515 7. DION. Areopag. opera,
8vo, 1516 8. XENOPHONTIS opera, sol, 1516 9. PLUTARCHI vitae parallelae Graec,
etc. fol, 1517 10. PHILOSTRATI icones and heroie, etc. fol, 1517 11. ARISTIDIS
orationes, fol, 1517 12. SOPHOCLES cum scholiis Graecis, 8vo, 1518 13. HOMERI
opera. 8vo.
THIS is the last book which he printed; the next, viz. Florilegium diversorum
epigrammatum, etc. 8vo, being printed by his heirs.

I SHALL mention but one more Printing House in Italy, viz. at the
Quirinal-college at Rome, under the care of the famous Angel Gallotius, and
protection of pope Leo, who was the founder of that college and Printing House,
and among other marks of his favor, gave them a privilege of ten years for all
their impressions, some of which were extraordinary fine and correct, and
revised by the learned Constantine Lascaris, often mentioned in this book; of
which number were the Porphyri quaestiones Homericae and de nympharum antro,
etc. and a very ancient Latin translation of Homer, both printed in 1517.
Sophocles's Scholiast, 1518, and others of great value.

I SHALL now return to that famous bible of cardinal Ximenes, as I hinted
before, commonly called the Complutensian bible, which is the only considerable
one published, either in Spain or any other part of Europe before that time. It
consists of six large volumes in fol. the first of which contains the new
testament in Greek and Latin, finished in 1517; the second is a Hebrew and
Chaldee vocabulary of all the old testament with some other dissertations,
finished May 31, 1515; the third is the Pentateuch in Hebrew, Greek and
Chaldee, with a Latin version of each; the fourth is a second part of the old
testament, and contains the books of Joshua, Judges and Ruth, the two books of
Samuel, of Kings, and of the Chronicles, with the prayer of Manasseh, in Hebrew
and Greek, with their Latin version; the fifth is the third part of the old
testament in Hebrew and Greek, with the Latin version, and contains the books
of Esdras, Nehemiah, Hester, Job, the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, Wisdom of Solomon, and Ecclesiasticus, the Apocryphal part of Hester
only in Greek; the sixth is the fourth and last part of the old testament in
the same languages as the former, and contains the prophecies of Isaiah,
Jeremiah, with the Lamentations at the end, Baruch, Ezekiel, Daniel (with the
history of Susannah, and of Bell and the Dragon) Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah,
Jonah, Michah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zachariah, Malachi, with the
three books of the Maccabees; these four last volumes were finished ann. 1517,
July the 10th; though Mr. Mattaire says, that the whole six volumes were not
published till the year 1520. Every page both of the old and new testament is
divided into three columns: in the old, the first column contains the Hebrew
text; the middle the vulgate Latin; and the third the Greek of the Septuagint:
besides the Chaldee, which is placed in the inner margin with the version of it
opposite to it. The vulgate is printed with Gothic letter.

THE only objection against this work is, that the Printers made use of a sort
of false letter to fill up the spaces, whenever any of the versions run to a
greater length than the text; that there might be no line shorter than another,
nor any blank spaces in the column. The new testament is in a very plain large
character, without ligatures, abbreviations or accents; though that of the
Septuagint is different; the reason of which they give in the preface, to the
following purport; that since all the ancient Greek authors, whether sacred or
profane, were originally written without them, they were unwilling to introduce
any thing into those holy books, which it is certain was neither originally in
them, nor of any use toward the understanding of them; but with respect to the
Septuagint, which is but a translation, they thought it unnecessary to be too
scrupulous about it.

THIS work was printed by Arnold William de Bracario, in the university of
Alcala de Henares in Spain, at the charges and under the direction of that
learned prelate, whose merit in this respect can never be sufficiently
extolled. Alphonsus Zamora tells us, that he gave no less than four thousand
crowns of gold for seven Hebrew manuscripts; and it would be difficult to
determine the sums, which the Greek, Chaldee and Latin manuscripts cost him. As
for the learned men, whom he sent for from all parts of Europe and Asia to
assist him in this undertaking, Malincrot tells us they were very numerous, of
whom we shall mention some. Among the Greeks were Demetrius Cretensis, Antony
Nebrissenus, Lopes de Astuniga, and Terdianus Pintianus, who were all
professors of the Greek and Latin tongues, and famous for their works. Of the
Hebrew professors were Alphonsus Medicus, a native of Alcala, Paul Coronellus,
Alphonsus Zamorali and John Vergera, to the last of whom was committed the
translation of several books, in which he restored a great number of texts,
which were wholly unintelligible in the vulgate Latin. These, with many of the
most considerable men of the university of Alcala, were engaged by the Cardinal
with very large salaries in this work, for the space of 15 years, viz. from
1502 to 1517; soon after which he was prevented by death from executing several
other glorious designs. A larger account of this work may be seen in Malincrot,
p. 110. and Mr. Mattaire's Annals, p. 124, etc.

WHILE I am upon the subject of Polyglots, I must not omit one great advantage
which the art received from it, and which it hitherto wanted, viz. that of
printing in columns, by which the text and version are so easily disposed, that
the reader may at one view satisfy himself in any scruple, that may arise
either from a word wrong printed, or misunderstood in the one, by casting his
eye immediately on the other. This is particularly necessary in Greek works and
their versions; in which when there happens to be some fault of impression, as
it is almost impossible both text and version should be faulty in the same word,
the one may be easily corrected by the other. Chevillier gives us many
remarkable instances of this, from page 240 to 243. I shall only mention one of
them, in which the Printer or corrector makes Aelian call all the greatest and
noblest men of Greece errant liars through every part of their lives [omnes
Graecorum clarissimi proestantissimique viri per totam vitam in extrema
mendacitate versati sunt] a reproach which neither the author nor translator
ever dreamed of fixing upon that nation. But upon a careful examination of the
Greek text, the word appears to be (...), and consequently it should have been
printed mendicitate, i. e. Poverty, instead of mendacitate [lying] which
escaped the corrector's observation.

THERE is another convenience in this method, viz. that it obliges a translator
to be more concise, and to paraphrase less, since the exorbitant length of his
version would be visible at first sight. I have already taken notice of Aldus's
method of Printing the text in one page, and the version in the other; but he
was not followed in it by any Printer that I know of: whereas as soon as they
had taken the hint of these columns from the Polyglot psalter and bible, it was
immediately followed by most Printers; and the famous Badius, in his edition of
Angelus Politianus's works, anno 1519, printed all the epigrams and versions
after this manner. How plain soever the advantages of this method may seem, yet
several men of learning have decry'd it; and particularly Antony Muretus and
Jos. Scaliger have complained, that this way of printing the Greek and the
version in two columns had been the cause of the former being wholly neglected.

BESIDES books in two languages, the columns are very necessary in large
folio's, and sometimes in large quarto's, where the lines run to so great a
length, that they puzzle the reader, who is apt to read the same line over
again, or perhaps to skip the next, unless he constantly keep his finger moving
from one to the other; which is easily remedied by dividing the pages into two
columns. This method has obtained almost from the middle of the 15th century,
and is entirely owing to that of printing the sacred books in several languages
and columns. This shall suffice concerning this work printed in Spain; in which
I find but two Printers more of any note, viz. John Peter Bonhomin at Lisbon,
anno 1514, where he printed a Spanish book, entitled Ordinationes, etc. fol. in
Gothic; and John de Porris at Salamanca, perhaps a relation of Peter Paul
Porrus, who printed the psalter at Genoa, mentioned before.

I COME now to speak of the French Printers, whose merit, though late, became at
least equal with that of Italy, or any other kingdom, in all respects. Henry
Meibomius, a German historian, owns, -- quod scribendi genus ut Moguntiae in
Germania inventum, ita apud Italos excultum, and in Gallia demum persectum est.
Chronic. Riddaggbusens. Tom. 3. p. 380.
, that the Art of Printing, which was invented at Mentz in Germany, and
improved in Italy, was at last perfected in France: which is sufficiently
evident from the impressions of Henry Stephens, in Hebrew, Greek and Latin,
were there no other Printers to be produced in favor of that kingdom. But this
courtry has given greater encouragement, or abounded more in excellent
Printers, than that; and considering the care the university of Paris, whose
power and authority over Printers and booksellers we have given an account of
under the article of Paris, had continually over them, and the many signal
marks of their favor, joined to the genius of the nation, we shall not wonder
at the pe^fection which they brought the art to, though somewhat later than their
neighbors. For we may remember that Badius, one of the first who signalized
himself in this province, did not begin to print till almost the close of the
last century, nor come to Paris till the beginning of this. Hitherto, though the
Roman character, and the elegant manner of printing introduced by the Italians,
were here exactly imitated, and in some cases excelled; yet with respect to the
learned languages, especially the Eastern, they were much neglected throughout
France; and though the noble Greek impressions of Aldus, had raised an universal
desire of reviving that tongue, yet the French were backward in introducing it,
till they began to be contemned by the Italians, who were become every where
masters of it. The only pieces printed by them in that tongue till that time,
were some quotations so wretchedly performed, that Mr. Mattaire tells us, they
were rather to be guessed at than read. The character was rude and uncooth,
without accents, etc. for which Badius makes an apology, and desires his
readers to impute those errors and omissions to the scarcity of types, and want
of compositors who understood in that language. Franc. Tissard, a person
completely skilled in Greek and Hebrew, and qualified for such a task, revived
those tongues, and prevailed upon the Parisian Printers to introduce them,
having printed several books in those languages: whereas before this the
expense of importing them from Venice was so great, that it deterred many from
the study of them. At first he addressed a pathetic discourse to the scholars
of Paris upon that subject; in which he represents how contemptible their
neighbors in Italy thought them; what epithets they gave their nation, such
as, barbarous, proud and ignorant, who pretended to give laws to Italy, the
most learned and polite nation of the world, whilst themselves were not
contented to despise the muses at home, but must make excursions over the Alps,
to disturb them in their beloved abodes there. He exhorted them to retrieve the
honor of their country, and to apply themselves immediately to the study of
those languages; he promised them his own and other learned men's assistance;
and tells them, that he had caused some Greek books to be printed, which, though
cheap, would be great helps to them in that study. In short, he laid before
them such powerful motives, and convincing arguments, that he at length raised
a desire in them of rivalling their neighbors for learning. His extraordinary
merit soon procured him the esteem and friendship of the great, who jointly
assisted this noble design; among whom was the duke de Valois, afterward king
of France, and sufficiently known by the name of Francis I. the great patron of
learning, who received him into his family and protection.

THE first Greek book which Tissard caused to be printed at Paris, was entitled
(...), containing the sayings of the seven wise men of Greece, Pythagoras's
golden verses, Phocylides's ethic poem, and the verses of the Erithrean sybil
upon the last day, with a Greek alphabet and some other inconsiderable pieces.
It was printed in 4to, anno 1507, by Giles Gourmont, and dedicated to the
prince de Valois and the archbishop of Thoulouse. This work was so well
received, that he caused the same Printer to dispatch three more books in that
language the same year; viz. 1. Homer's (...), 4to, or The battle of frogs and
mice. 2. Hesiod's (...), 4to. 3. (...) or Chrysolaras's Greek grammar, 4to.
This last has a tetrastich written by Cb. Rouseau, to acquaint the world that
Francis Tissard caused the first Greek editions to be printed at Paris Primus
Parrhasia Graiae nova gloria linguae Tissard was a native of Amboise, in Latin
Ambaca: for which reason the poet calls him here Ambacus.
Ambacus Argivum concinet urbe melos: Quo duce morales Sophiae amplexabere
leges; Hoc igitur stabili pectore fige memor.
; which Tissard himself took care to transmit to posterity in some epistles
prefixed to the books above mentioned. In these he likewise informs us of the
difficulties which he met with in procuring Printers, who would engage in this
new province; that they all alleged there was neither a sufficient number of
Greek matrices and characters in Paris for such a work, nor any compositors
that understood or could read that language; that the expense of setting up
such a Printing House must be very great, as well as the danger of losing both
their labor and money Cum incussorum sibi hoc munus, hanc provinciam assumere
vellet nemo nullus non id laboris subtersugeret -- characteres praeterea Grae
cos nobis hactenus defuisse vidi; ad eorum quoque aliquot scalpendos, and
postmodum liquefaciendos, and denique ad cos impressioni aptandas tradendosque,
ut aiebant, sumptibus -- opus esse: ad haec ea non intelligere, ne legere
quidem, ejusque insolentes sateri.
. Notwithstanding this, Tissard stopped not here, but resolved to bring the
Hebrew into vogue; and to this end caused a font of Hebrew letters to be cast,
and the following year printed an Hebrew alphabet and grammar with a Greek
alphabet, and some hymns in Greek and Latin at the end; which book he dedicated
to his great patron Francis prince de Valois. Giles Gourmont, who had printed
his Greek works, likewise undertook the Hebrew. It is printed with his name;
and though there is no date to it, yet it is plain it was publish'a in the year
aforementioned. However as he was the first who merited the title of Greek and
Hebrew printer to the city and university of Paris, and has published several
other Greek works after the year 1508, viz. the Idyls of Theocritus, some of
Lucian's works, a second edition of Chrysolaras's grammar in 1511, the
Gnomologia and Aldus's Greek Lexicon of 1497 much enlarged in 1512, the Grammar
of Theod. Gaza in 1516, etc. I thought my self obliged to do justice to his
merit. He used to put his coat of arms at the beginning or end of his books,
and sometimes at both, with this French motto; Tossed ou tard, pres ou loing, a
le fort du foible besoing, i. e. sooner or later, far or near, the strong stand
in need of the weak, with his name Giles or Aegidius Gourmont. His mark
sometimes was the three crowns of the Kings of Cologn with the 25th verse of
the 37th psalm; I have been young, and now am old, etc. in Hebrew and Greek,
under them. He lived overagainst the college of Cambray, in the square of that
name; and his books are much valued by the lovers of antiquity, especially at
Paris. He continued printing till after the year 1527. As for the learned
Tissard, as we find nothing printed by him, after his Hebrew grammar, he is
supposed to have died about that time.

HOWEVER, he did not want a successor of equal merit to carry on this work; for
Jerome Aleander, a person so well skilled in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, as to
speak them with as much fluency as his own language, was sent for by Lewis XII.
from Italy, where he professed the Greek and Latin tongues with universal
applause. His reputation was so great, that the elector Palatine sent his own
brother Wolfgang de Bavaria to be instructed by him, and the learned Vatablus,
who had been formerly his scholar, was proud to assist him in some of his
works, and take care of their correction, whenever Aleander was hindered by
sickness or avocations. As soon as he came to Paris, he employed Gourmont's
presses in printing those Greek works which we mentioned just before in
speaking of that Printer. The King failed not of giving him immediate
encouragement; for he settled on him a pension of 500 crowns of gold, with many
other marks of his favor; so that he was chosen principal of the college of
the Lumbards, and, in 1512, rector of the unversity, with general applause;
though he had not yet taken his doctor's degree there. At last he was made
library keeper to the pope, a bishop and nuncio, and then cardinal, by Clement
VII. I shall only add, that he was one of Aldus's learned academy; and that
under his care the Greek and Hebrew tongues were so well settled in France, as
to flourish there ever since.

BUT it must be owned, that those editions of Gourmont were very far from
perfection, since the types were ill shaped, the punches ill finished, and the
matrices worse sunk; besides which defects they had not cast a sufficient font
of types, and were for that reason obliged sometimes to stop till a form was
worked off and distributed, before they could go on. Another defect in those
types was, that the accents not being cast to place between the letters as now,
but by themselves, and so composed in intermediate lines, as the Hebrew points
are done at this time, they were often placed over the wrong letters, and
frequently confounded one for another, through the unskilfulness of their
compositors. Tissard complains of this more than once, but tells his readers,
that they were taking all proper means to remedy those defects; and hopes in
time, that those characters would be brought to as great a perfection there, as
in Italy. And indeed we find that the success of Gourmont's impressions, under
all these disadvantages, excited other printers in that city, to procure better
types, workmen, correctors, etc. (not to mention that beautiful font of small
Greek which king Francis I. caused to be cast at his own charge) in which they
succeeded to admiration, and soon published much finer editions than those of
Gourmont. We shall only mention some of the most considerable, though they all
came out later than 1520, except Angelus Politianus's epigrams, printed by
Badius in 1519, already spoken of in this chapter; and his edition of
Guillelmus Budaeus's Greek epistles, 4to, in 1520. After this, Peter Vidoue, or
Vidaeus, master of arts, and an eminent printer, printed Berault's Greek
lexicon in fol. and Or. Apollo's Hieroglyphics, 8vo, in Greek and Latin, in
1521 and 1523. Gourmont printed Homer's first and second Iliad, 4to, with
Wolmar's short notes; and the Greek lexicon of Magnus Chaeredamus; and in 1527,
Gwinler's Greek syntax, 8vo. Anno 1528 Simon Colinaeus, or de Colines, printed
Sophocles tragedies, and in 1534, the new testament. These, with a few
inconsiderable ones more, were all that came out in Greek during the space of
27 years, viz. from Tissard's first impression in 1507 to 1534; which I have
mentioned here, though they run beyond our period, to show how slow their first
progress was, though their advances afterward were prodigious. Chevilier, from
whose list I have extracted the best part of these editions, has carried it on
to the year 1560; and the reader will find, both in this piece and the
remainder of it, several remarkable works omitted by Mr. Mattaire in his
Annals, particularly the Greek lexicon and the new testament above named.
However as Chevilier tells us, that he saw them all in the Sorbon library, I
thought proper to mention them.

THE reader perhaps will be surpised to find nothing attempted by the
Parifians in the polyglot way, whilst the Italians, Germans and Spaniards set
them so fair an example. But, whatever be the reason of this neglect, it is
certain, that if we except the Psalterium quincuplex of Mr. Faber, or Fabry,
printed in fol. 1509, by Henry Stephens, in Hebrew, Latin and French, with the
Psalterium vetus and conciliatum, in five columns, and reprinted by him in
1513, and again at Caen [Cadomi] in Normandy, by Peter Olivier, in 1515, I can
find nothing of that kind during the greatest part of this century. However, it
must be acknowledged they have made the world ample amends in the next, in
which Antony Vitre printed that noble work, known by the name of Monsieur le
Jay's polyglot bible in 1657; which being of too late a date, and so well known
to the learned, I shall only say of it, that as sar as relates to the Printing
part, (for as to the author's merit with respect to learning, it is not my
province to enquire into) it has not yet been equaled by any work published,
in any nation, either for beauty of character or elegancy of disposition,
fineness of paper or richness of embellishment; in all which Mr. le Jay, who
was at the charges of the impression, spared neither cost nor labor, in order
to render it a master piece of that kind. Here I must draw a veil over my own
country, which is greatly injured, if it did not contribute to the ruin of the
undertaker of this glorious work. An intimate friend at Paris sent me word,
that the sheets of Mr. le Jay's Polyglot was unfairly procured from the press
at Paris before the work was published, and, by the editor's of the English
Polyglot, improved and published so soon after, as to reduce Mr. le Jay almost
to want; after his having expended above 5000 l. sterling to complete his work.
But, as it is unpleasant to relate, I shall proceed.

As for the other printers who flourished at Paris during this space of 20
years, since my design is only to mention those who were eminent for
improvements, unattempted in the former century, I have but few to add to the
preceding. The first in rank and merit is Henry Stephens, the father of that
numerous family of Printers, whose learning and impressions for near 200 years
have been celebrated by much better pens, and particularly by Mr. Bail and
Theod. Janson abroad, and by Mr. Nichols, Collier, but much more fully by the
laborious and learned Mr. Mattaire, in his Vitae Stephanorum and Annals
Typograph. I shall therefore content my self with giving a short account of
their great progenitor Henry, as far as relates to my present subject. He began
to exercise the Art of Printing about 1502, in company with Wolfgang Hopyl, a
noted German Printer at Paris, of whom we have given an account in the
foregoing century. He had afterward several other partners, viz. John Petit,
Dennis Roce, John de Brie and John Hongel, all eminent Printers. We have
already spoken of his Polyglot Psalter, which, for ought I find, was the only
piece he did in that way. As for the Greek, it was so little in vogue in his
time, that he printed but little in it. He used two sorts of characters for the
Latin, viz the Gothic and Roman, both good in their kind. It were, superfluous
to tell the reader, that he was a man of great skill in the learned languages,
and wrote several curious pieces in elegant Latin. He was extremely correct in
his editions, so that their faults are so few, as scarce to deserve an errata;
yet he always readily acknowledged the smallest number of them, as appears from
his edition of Erasmus's apology against Latomus, in which he confesses, Locis
aliquot incuria nostra aberratum est.
that some saults escaped him through neglect; though the whole was but twenty. Hi
chief correctors were Peter Porta, Volgatius Pratensis, John Solidus of Cracow
in Poland, and Beatus Rhenanus. As he was sworn Printer of the city of Paris,
instead of a mark or rebus, he used to put the arms of that university to his
impressions, which is the escutcheon of France, with a hand from the clouds
holding a book. Several other printers of that city followed his example in
this. He died in 1520, leaving among other children three sons, who became very
eminent, vid. Mattaire Vit. Steph. the two first Robert and Francis in
printing, and Charles in physic.

HIS successor was Simon de Colines, or Colinaeus, who married his relict, and
educated his two sons before mentioned; and with them raised the reputation of
his Printing House higher, than their father could, whilst the learned
languages were in their infancy there. I shall only add, that Robert became so
great a proficient under his father and father-in-law, that he was able to
manage that great Printinghouse at the age of 18; and that one of his editions
of the new testament in 16o. ann, 1549, printed in a very fine Greek character,
and very scarce, is affirmed to be without a fault. This deserves notice,
because there is another of his likewise in 16o, 1546, which has an errata at
the end, and is frequently sold for the other. I cannot but observe, that to
this Robert Stephens we owe the invention of dividing the chapters of the bible
into verses, found out by him on a journey from Paris to Lions, as we are
informed by Theod. Janson de Vit. Stephanorum, printed at Amsterdam ann. 1643,
page 48; the great advantage of which is obvious to every person.

BEFORE I dismiss the city of Paris, I cannot forbear mentioning a most curious
and elaborate work, which though not printed till the year 1529, yet, both for
its singularity and its having been begun many years before, ought by no means
to be omitted, I mean the book entitled Champ-Fleury, written by the famous
Godfrey Tory, printer and bookseller of the city of Bourges, at the sign of the
broken pitcher, and printed by Giles Gourmont likewise, Printer and bookseller
at Paris, under the following title;

CHAM-FLIURY, auquel est contenu le Art and Science de la deue and vraye
proportion des Lettres Attiques, qu'on dit autrement Lettres antiques and
vulgairement Lettres Romans, proportionees selon le corpse and Visage humain.

THE author, who for his learning had been some time before chosen president of
a college in Burgundy, and had translated and published several learned works
out of Greek and Latin, ever since the year 1512, was afterward admitted sworn
Printer and bookseller to the king, and to the university of Paris; but became
most famous for the curious work abovementioned; in which he endeavors to
demonstrate the due proportion of letters from those of a human body and face,
as appears by the title. As it would spin this chapter to too great a length,
were I to give the reader a more particular account of this scarce and singular
piece, I shall content my self with referring him to Mr. Mattaire's Annals
Typogr. vol. II. part 2. from page 550 to 559, where he will find such
particularities both of the book and its author, as he will think worth
reading, if he has any taste in this way.

I HAVE already dwelt so long upon the subject of Polyglots, the most
considerable improvement of the Art in this century; and upon the city of
Paris, the most celebrated in France for productions of that kind; that I shall
scarce have room to speak of Lions, Rouen, Toulouse, Caen, etc. which have
produced many excellent works, if not in the Polyglot way, yet in all branches
of the Art. I shall confine my self therefore to those Printers who have
cultivated the Greek or Oriental tongues, and refer the rest to Mr. Mattaire's
Annals, where the reader may see their merit, and the list of their impressions.

THE city of Lions has been always the next in rank to Paris, in every branch
of Printing; and if we consider that it received less encouragement from their
princes and the learned, the latter choosing to reside at Paris, where there was
a greater probability of advancement, we shall wonder that Lions was so little
inferior to Paris; and may remember, that it produced many valuable impressions
during the last century. However, the reader must not expect any productions in
Greek, much less in Hebrew and the Polyglot kind, during these 20 years, or
long after, since he has seen the slow progress of those languages at Paris;
and with respect to the Latin and modern tongues, they are foreign to our
present purpose. I shall therefore only say, that the Lions Printers published
many editions of the classics, etc. law books, and especially Latin bibles,
there being scarce a year past for a long time, in which they did not print two
or three of them of different versions, and some with very fine rubricks and
other curious embellishments. The most remarkable Printers of them were James
Sacon, or Sachon, who printed some works of the fathers, and one time two Latin
bibles in one year; James Mareschall, John Moylin and Nicholas de Benedictis.

THE city of Rouen, in Latin Rothomagium, and Caen follow next: but their
productions for these twenty years, and after, are so inconsiderable, if we
except a Latin bible in 4to, anno 1511, and the Psalterium quincuplex of Faber
aforementioned, which was printed in the latter anno 1515, both by Peter
Olivier, and a Latin bible in the former; that I shall insist no longer upon
them. With respect to the other cities of France, which received the Art either
before or after the close of the last century, their impressions are still less
considerable. I now pass therefore to Holland and Flanders, where the reader
will be surpised to see the Art rather sunk and lost than improved. In the
preceding century we find several cities in Holland, as Utrecht 1473, Delph
1477, Goude 1479, Harlem 1485, and Leyden 1497, received and cultivated the
Art; yet now we meet not with a single edition done in any of them; nor find
that any other city received it during those twenty years. As for Flanders and
Brabant, it is manifest they have been less negligent than the Dutch; for the
city of Antwerp entertained one or two Printers, who published three or four
books during this space; the most considerable of which was the new Testament
in Latin and Dutch, in 4to, anno 1509; and the university of Louvain had an
eminent Printer, Theodore Martin, who, having printed at his own native town of
Alost 'till the end of the 15th century, removed to Antwerp, where he published
some Latin editions, and at length came hither and continued printing till
1528, or perhaps longer. His impressions in this city are not indeed very
remarkable for their bulk, beauty or number. I find but nine or ten, most of
which are school-books, either written or published by Erasmus; yet his most
considerable work is the Latin testament in 8vo, anno 1519, if it was printed
by him, as is probable, since we find no other Printer here during this space,
though F. le Long mentions not the Printer's name.

AS for the other cities, which received the Art before 1500, as Bruges, Alost,
Brussels, Gaunt, Boisleduc, etc. we find so profound a silence among the
annalists and historians, as makes me suspect that it either ceased entirely
there, or that their produce was not worth preserving, unless we suppose that
they were lost in the war, of which this country was the seat in those times;
which is evidently the case of other countries, especially of those upon the
Rhine, Switzerland, etc. Some eminent authors have told us, that they purchased
some of those valuable pieces, which had been plundered by the soldiers, during
the wars, out of the libraries of the monks and others. If this be fact, it is
strange that Louvain, which calls itself the maiden city, because it was never
taken by any foreign power, should not have preserved some more valuable
impressions than those of Theod. Martin, just mentioned. However, to do justice
to the Low Countries, and Holland especially, I must say, that how negligent
soever they were at first in this respect, they have sufficiently obliged the
world since by their improvements to this Art; nor need I tell the reader how
much they have excelled the English in the goodness of their paper, beauty and
variety of characters, and in elegance and correctness of composition; in
short, how they have equaled any nation of Europe in every branch of Printing
since. In the second volume we shall show what improvements they have made to
the mechanic part of it, and in particular to the Printing-press, chases, etc.
the former of which is so complete, as scarce to admit a greater degree of
perfection.

HERE I cannot but observe the strange vicissitudes that have attended this Art
since its first invention. We have seen how diligent the Italian nation has
been in improving it, what quick progress they made in it, and to what a degree
of perfection they brought it even before the close of the 15th century;
whereas scarce any nation in Europe has neglected it more within these hundred
years, having suffered their elegant Roman and Italick to degenerate, and are
become very careless in their compositions, ornaments, etc. so that they are
almost inferior to any country in all the branches of Printing. The French, on
the contrary, who did not introduce the fine Venetian Roman, Italick, and Greek
'till late in the 16th century, have been allowed the best Printers, 'till
Elzevir arose; since which time the Dutch, who were by far the latest of any
nation in Europe in bringing it to the perfection which their neighbors had,
have been lately superior to all. I shall say but little of England, where
every reader is already sensible what rank our Printers here deserve with
respect to other countries; but it is with the utmost regret that I observe our
nation, which took so much pains to have the Art brought over in its earliest
days, and cultivated it with so much application, should have been so far
excelled by the French and Dutch Printers, and even by those of our own nation,
who lived a century and a half ago. But were the reader conscious of the
disadvantages we labor under, and the small Profit we reap from our labor, he
would rather be apt to wonder that any of us have been able to keep it up to
that degree of perfection it is still in. I could easily make it appear from
whence these difficulties arise. This complaint, which is far from being new,
the Latin reader will find elegantly expressed above 150 years ago by Cornelius
Kelian, one of the great Plantine's correctors, in an epigram of sixteen
verses, which I have subjoined at the bottom of the page Typographus
Mercenarius. Art mea varias excudo Typographus arts;
Ars tamen haec tenues artifici addit opes,
Rite characteres ad justam redigo normam,
Constet ut ex aequis pagina versiculis.
Incisas nigra fuligine tingo figuras;
Callosa prelum volvo trahoque manu.
Eece iterum hesternus ruihi adest labor actus in orbem;
Quas struxi formas destruo, and inde struo.
Diruo and aedifico; vigilatus transigo noctes;
Sollicitam cruciat cura, premitque labor.
Verum quid prosunt curae durique labores,
Cum misero pateat semita nulla lucri?
Noster alit sudor numatos and locupletes,
Qui nostra^ redimunt, quique locant operas.
Noster alit sudor te, Bipliopola, tuique
Consimiles, quibus est vile laboris opus.

. However, this I may modestly say for our selves, that, whenever we have met
with sufficient encouragement, we have demonstrated our capacity by printing as
beautiful and correct impressions as any of our neighbors.

BUT to return from this digression, which I hope will merit the reader's
pardon, I shall now mention some cities in other kingdoms, which received the
Art after the 15th century, and conclude this chapter with some remarks on the
success of it in other parts of the world.

HITHERTO we have not seen that any Printer ventured farther North than the
empire of Germany. As for the kingdoms of Poland, Sweden, Denmark, etc. they
imported books from Germany and other countries, and transmitted any works
thither, which they wanted to have printed. I can find no city in those parts,
except Cracow, the metropolis of Poland, that received it so soon as 1520; and
even in this we have but one inconsiderable impression done in 1518, viz. a
diary of Sigismund, the king of Poland's nuptials, printed by one Jerome Victor,
in 4to. I shall therefore pass over to Turkey; were we find some of the
dispersed Jews of Soncino, and particularly Rabbi Gerson, who, as we gave an
account under the article of that place, brought the art to Constantinople;
whilst others settled at Thessalonica and other parts, of which we have but a
small account, and carried on the business of printing with good success. But
it must not be supposed that the Turks invited them or any other Printers
thither, much less that they gave them any other encouragement than a large
toleration. On the contrary, we have shown in a former chapter, how Sultan
Bajazet II. published an edict in 1483, against the use of printed books under
pain of death; which edict was afterward confirmed by Selim I. his son. The
encouragement therefore which they received was from the Christians and Jews;
the latter undoubtedly were pleased to have their own books at a more moderate
rate, than when they were only transcribed; and the former, being willing not
only to have the old Testament printed by them more correct than the editions
of Christian Printers, but likewise to have it dispersed among the Turks,
Indians, etc. who were wholly ignorant of those important truths contained in
it, spared no cost to purchase them. Besides this, their Targums, Talmud, and
other Rabbinical learning were brought up by the Christians to furnish
themselves with what arguments they could, against that poor infatuated people,
out of their own books. And perhaps this might be the main motive which induced
those two Sultans to publish so severe an edict against printing any books in
the Turkish language, since the aversion of that nation to almost every branch
of learning, and especially the religious, is sufficiently known.

I FIND however but three editions of the sacred books printed in that
emperor's territories, during these twenty years, viz. at Constantinople.

1. THE book of Tobit in Hebrew, without points, in 4to, in 1517.

2. THE book of Esther in Hebrew, with the commentary of Rab. Isaac Armah, 4to,
1518.

And at Thessalonica.

THE book of Psalms, Proverbs, Job and Daniel in Hebrew, with the commentary of
R. Rasi, in fol. in 1500. Besides these three editions, which are all that Mr.
Mattaire has given us out of father Le Long's Bibliothec. sacr. Chevilier, page
266, mentions some others which I shall here subjoin, viz.

1. ONE at Constantinople in 1506. Chevilier does not tell us what it is.

2. Jad Khasakkah, fol. ibid. 1509.

3. Josippus Ben Gorion, fol. 1510.

THE two last M. Simon tells us, he made use of in his critical history of the
Old Testament.

4. Berescith Rabbah, of Rab. Bar. Nachman, fol. Constantinople 1512.

THIS book is now in the Sorbon library.

THOUGH these be all that we can yet find to have been printed in Turkey from 1500
to 1620; yet I cannot persuade myself, that they were all which the Jews
printed there, but am apt to believe, that they were bought up by the eastern
Christians, Jews, etc. and carried to the remote parts of Asia and Africa;
whilst the Jews of Soncino and others were grown so numerous as to supply those
countries with works of that kind. However that be, I do not find that this art
made any further progress in these parts of the world during this space, or at
least that those authors, who have represented its advances greater, have been
much depended on by those that wrote after them; and therefore I think myself
obliged to stop here.

I HAVE already transgressed my proposed limits, as often as the life of any
eminent Printer has extended beyond them, or any material occurrence happened
worthy of the reader's notice. Agreeable to which liberty, I shall now close
this chapter with some remarks on the success which attended the art, though at
some distance of time from the year 1520. First it is observable, that it has
extended itself to Africa and America; not indeed at the invitation of the
natives, especially of America, but by means of the Europeans, and particularly
of the Spanish missionaries; who carried it to the latter for their ends, where
it has throve, though not flourished ever since. The Romish society de propagando
fide, gives us an account of printing-houses being set up in the cities of Goa,
Rachol, in the country of Salsetta, Manella, the metropolis of the Philippine
islands, etc. in the first of which were printed the two following works, viz.
Doctrina Christiana lingua Malabarica Tamul et litteris Malabaris in collegio
Goano, 1577. This edition was in Scaliger's possession, and is now among those
which he bequeathed to the university of Leyden. The other is part of
Confucius's works printed likewise at Goa in 1569; a copy of which is now in
the emperor's library at Vienna. We find also some printing-houses set up about
this time in the city of Lima, capital of the empire of Peru, and in several
cities of the kingdom of Mexico. I shall only add, that our honorable society
for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts, having heard of the good
success, which Mr. Zidgenbalgh and Mr. Grundler, two Danish missionaries, sent
to the coast of Tanquebar by his Danish majesty, had in converting a great
number of the natives of that country to the christian faith, were pleased to
send them the whole apparatus of a printing house, with proper workmen and
large quantities of paper, which they thankfully received, and immediately set
to work, having since printed a fine quarto New Testament, prayer-books,
catechisms, etc. in Portuguese and several eastern languages and characters,
for the promoting of their pious design.

To return again to Europe, the Printers, who first introduced the art into
Muscovy about 1560, were less successful. That nation was too little friendly
to learning to give it any encourgement; and even suffered both the
printing house and its whole apparatus to be burned and destroyed, without ever
enquiring after the authors of the mischief. The famous Thevet, historiographer
to Henry III. of France, and a great traveller, gives us the following account
of it: 'As for the Art of Printing, they (the Muscovites) had not the use of it
till 1560; when it was discovered to them by a Russian merchant, who bought a
number of types, etc. with which many neat editions were printed. Nevertheless,
as they are a very superstitious nation, and apt to raise scruples without any
foundation, in which they imitate their followers of the Greek church; some of
them hired several fellows privately to burn all their characters, apprehending
that printing might make some change or confusion in their religion. And yet
not the least enquiry or prosecution was made after this, either by the prince
or his Subjects.' But since that time they have admitted it into their
metropolis of Moscow, and elsewhere in the last century, though they print but
little, and sell at excessive rates.

I HAVE already hinted, that the emperor of Ethiopia, and monarch of those
christians, that are commonly known by the name of Abyssines, who is falsely
called by some writers Prester John, wrote a letter in 1521, to Don Manuel,
king of Portugal, and another in 1524 to his successor John III. (which letters
are to be seen in the Hispania illustrata, translated by Paul Jovius, tom. 2.
p. 1293, 1297,) in which he desires those princes to send him some of the most
curious artificers of Europe; and in the latter he says thus: 'I entreat you,
my lord and brother, to send me some workmen to carve images, to cast books,
make swords and all sorts of weapons; likewise masons, carpenters, physicians,
surgeons, apothecaries, coiners of gold and silver, and persons who understand
how to extract gold, silver, and copper out of the mines, to cover houses with
lead, to make shields and muskets; and in short, all sorts of necessary
workmen.' What success these letters had, and whether king John answered his
request in any of these particulars, I cannot determine. But the second tome of
the Abyssine history by Job Ludolph, or rather the commentator upon it, informs
us, that when Abba Gregory Abyssin saw the library of father Alphonso Mendez a
jesuit, whom the pope had sent into Ethiopia in quality of patriarch, in 1623,
he could not forbear extolling that art, which had produced so many books, and
esteeming it as a sacred invention, worthy to be placed among the regalia of
the greatest princes Existimasse Typographiam, seu sacrum quoddam inventum,
inter Regalia principum haberi. Vide Chevil. p. 274.
. By this it seems, that printing had been wholly unknown to them at that time;
and consequently that it was never sent thither by the king of Portugal or any
other. However, our knowledge is very imperfect of those remote parts of
Africa; and even of those which are nearer, as Morocco, Fez, etc. we can only
say, that it is certain they received the art early from their neighbors, the
Spaniards or Portuguese, and encouraged it for a considerable time; yet
whatever be the reason, scarce any footsteps of it now remain, if we believe
Mr. S. Olon the French king's ambassador to the king of Morocco; who, in his
present state of that empire, printed in 1694, assures us, that there is scarce
one printing house left in it. He adds, that it is a piece of religion among
them not to suffer any corn, horses or books to be exported; and that their
fondness for books is the greater, by reason of their scarcity, since there is
hardly a press in the whole empire.

WE read of some attempts made by the missionaries in Persiae to introduce
printing there; which proved ineffectual. I shall say nothing here of the
kingdoms of China and Japan, nor of their manner of printing, having already
spoken of it upon another account in the first book of this history.

CHAP VIII. Of the Abuses of the Art of Printing.
IT would have been very wonderful, if the encouragement, which that art
received from the great and learned, should not have induced at the same time
some persons, whose ignorance and avarice would not permit them to aim at that
degree of perfection; which they saw others arrive at, to engage in base
methods of enjoying the fruit of their ingenuity and diligence, without the
trouble of imitating them in it. We have already given occasionally some
accounts of these practices, in counterfeiting the works, names and marks of
the best Printers, who have been obliged to remonstrate against them to the
world. For as soon as they had published a curious and correct edition, with
prodigious charge and labor, some of these pirates immediately printed another
after it, though in every respect inferior to the former; and either by
underselling, defrauded them of the reward of their care and expense, or by
counterfeiting their names and marks, destroyed their reputation. By these
abuses, they were obliged to make many fruitless attempts in order to suppress
these counterfeits, and at last to have recourse to the higher powers for
privileges and patents, the only effectual way to prevent such practices. We
have likewise hinted, that some of these pests of learning have imposed upon
the world, by selling their impressions as done at Venice or some other famous
place, or pretending they were printed characteribus Venetianis, with Venetian
characters, etc. though they were the production of some obscure place and
printer, whose only aim was profit.

ANOTHER abuse consequent upon this, was the counterfeiting of dates. For when,
by the care of a Froben, a Badius, or some other eminent Printer, the world was
so far appriz'd of these counterfeits, that the authors of them could not vend
their impressions, they immediately reprinted the title page, perhaps with some
alteration, put a new date, and sometimes a new name to it, and so passed them
off for new editions. To recommend them the more to the buyers, they generally
asserted them to be newly revised, diligently compared with the best MSS.
corrected in above 500 places, and the like. It was with great difficulty that
these abuses were detected in such a manner as to make the world aware of them.
The complaints of the learned, and their vain efforts to remedy such
inconveniences are too well known to be mentioned here. I shall pass to another
equally shameful and dangerous abuse, viz. printing of lewd, infamous books, of
which the learned Gerson, among many others, complains with great zeal; and
mentions particularly a romance, entitled the Romance of the Rose, composed in
1300, of which he said, that if he was the master of the last copy, he would
rather choose to burn it than part with it at any price Si esset mihi Liber
Romancii de Rosa, qui esset unicus, and valeret mill pecuniarum libras,
comburerem potius quam venderem.
. Pastor fido, is a poem almost universally known, which, we are told by J.
Nicius Erith, caused many virgins and married women to prostitute their honor.
Yet great numbers of a much more pernicious nature have been published in those
times. I shall only mention one, which I esteem a masterpiece in that kind,
heightened by the art of engraving, that it might be a consummate piece of the
most scandalous lewdness in nature. George Vasari, in the lives of the Italian
painters, gives us this short account of it; that Julius Romanus, the most
celebrated painter of his age, invented above fourscore designs, which he
caused to be engraven on wood, while Peter Aretine, a great Libertine and
Atheist, composed a sonnet for each of the prints. This vile performance was
published about the year 1525. I shall conlude with Vasari's character of it,
Io non so qual fusse piu o brutto le spettacolo de i desegni di Giulo ali'
occhio, o^le parole dell' Aretino a gl'erechi Vite ad Pittori, part 3 p 302.
that he knew not which was most brutish and shocking, the design of Julius to
the eye, or the verses of Aretine to the ear. This same avarice which prompted
Printers to undertake such infamous works, as the foregoing, induced them to
abuse their art in another respect, viz. in printing scandalous and defamatory
libels' to the shame of their profession, and the regret of the virtuous. As
printing and the reformation begun about the same time, the former was
prostituted by the meaner sort, who printed the vilest forgeries on each, though
that which was uppermost, acted most flagrantly, when the other was obliged to
work covertly. But as this and the last do not so properly fall within my
province as a Printer, I shall content myself with having just mentioned them,
with abhorrence of such practices, and return to some other abuses.

THE next arose from want of good correctors; for persons of that class were
thought too chargeable by many Printers; who therefore made use of illiterate
fellows, whom they could hire much cheaper; or, which often happened, used none
at all. It will easily be imagined, what a number of wretched editions the
world must have been pestered with by this sordid neglect. However, as books
were not yet so plentifully propagated, as to suffice the number of students,
there wanted not persons either dull or poor enough to purchase them,
especially upon a small abatement of the common price. This made some Printers
designedly suppress the errata, which would have inevitably endangered the sale
of such books; though others were obliged by the authors or editors to print them
at the end of their works. The reader will no doubt be surpised to hear of
some of them so prodigiously large, as to be scarce credible. We have a
remarkable instance in the works of John Francis Picus de Mirandula, printed at
Strasburgh for the first time in 1507, by John Kroblouch, a man of some note,
and at the charges of Matthias Schurrer, another eminent Printer of that place,
who styled himself master of arts. This edition was so faulty, that the author
was obliged to make an errata of fifteen pages in filio, though the book was but
a thin small folio. Were I to trespass the bounds of this period, I could
mention some which amounted to fourscore and eight pages, even in Venice
itself, where Bellarmin, who had been very unsuccessful in the former
impressions of his polemick works, sent them in order to have them more
correctly printed; though quite the reverse happened. Rome, Paris, Lions, etc.
have been no less complained of upon this account. The learned Mich. Fernus,
who with prodigious labor had collected, and revised the works of bishop
Campanus, was so provoked to see them so incorrect, that he put an errata in
the edition of Rome, with this surprising title at the head Vix ex stulto
demens, idemque ex de (...)? Libros Romae primas imprime. Corruptorum
recognitio.
; 'If you have a mind to show yourself completely foolish and mad, print your
books at Rome first, etc.' Gaguinus was not less displeased to see his history
of France printed at Paris with such a vast number of faults, that he thought
it impossible to add an errata to it. He therefore sent it to Lions to be
reprinted, and tells the bishop of Mascon, to whom he entrusted the revising of
it, that he wished he could get all the 500 copies of the first, in order to
burn them. The like complaints against the Printers, he repeats in another
edition at Paris in 1497, and wishes these incorrect and mutilated editions
could be condemned to perpetual oblivion. Galatinus's book De Arcanis
Catholicae Veritatis, printed at Ortona, by Jerome Soncino in 1518, was so
wretchedly maimed by the Printer, that the author inveighed vehemently against
all Printers in general, accusing them, in his 12th book of adulterating and
corrupting the best copies, though ever so accurately written, in such a manner,
that it is impossible to mend them. But the Printers sufficiently revenged
themselves on him, by reprinting, though long after his death, the Pugio Fidei,
written by Raymund Martin, a Dominican friar in 1280 against the Jews; in which
edition they unjustly accuse Galatinus of having taken the best part of his
book out of this; though Galatinus does ingeniously own in his preface, that he
had taken the greatest part of his book out of it. Paul Middleburgh, a learned
Dutchman of the university of Louvain, and afterward bishop of Fosembrona in
Italy, having wrote a Treatise about keeping Easter, which he called Paulina,
gave it to a Printer of his own metropolis, named Octaviano Petrucio, to be
printed; but he committed it to the care of an Ethiopian youth, wholly ignorant
of the business, and who probably made his first trial upon it; so that, in
spite of all the accuracy of Posthumous who corrected it, it was so maimed and
incorect, that the author was obliged to complain publicly against such
ignorant and careless Printers; who (says he) in the preface to the errata of
that very book, invert the letters, change and transpose whole syllables from
the end of one word to the beginning of another, and put one word in the text
instead of another: he might have added, that they have sometimes omitted not
only words and lines, but whole paragraphs and chapters, or else misplaced them
extremely. We have in the last chapter given an account of Rob. Stephens, who
was certainly an excellent Printer; and yet, however it happened, M. Le Clerc
tells us, Bibl. An. and Mod. page 415, that he has an edition of the bible in
8vo, printed by him in a small character, containing the vulgate, and the
version of Leo Juda, with Vatablus's notes, in which there is a chasm of one
whole sheet, though the figures of the pages follow each other exactly; so that
there wants from part of the 2 to half of the 11th chapter of the prophet
Zachary. If so great a man could over look so important a mistake, what could
be expected from those who valued neither their own reputation, nor that of
their authors, being actuated only by the views of gain. His son Henry Stephens
afterward wrote a poem of about 150 Latin verses, entitled Querimonia Artis
Typographicae de illiteratis quibusdam Typographis propter quos in contemptum
venit.
A complaint of the Art of Printing against some ignorant Printers, upon whose
account it is fallen into contempt. At the end of this, are some Latin and
Greek epitaphs, in honor of the most learned Printers till that time. In this
complaint he tells us, that the corruption of so many editions was entirely
owing to the gross ignorance of the Printers, some of whom he knew, that could
not tell the letters of their names Proh pudor! haud rarus numero reperitur in
illo, nominis ignorans prima elementa sui.
. The reader would in all probability be tired, if I should mention the tenth
part of the complaints which we meet with in the writings of the greatest men
of that time, against the avarice, ignorance and negligence of the Printers;
some of which are so sharp as to call them beasts and drunkards, the offspring
of wild centaurs and of Vulcan 's untamed Cyclops; but I shall choose to give
some more diverting instances of their own, and their corrector's ignorance and
neglect.

John Chapius tells us of a change and transposition of words, which rendered
the sense wholly unintelligible, in his Sext. Decret. printed at Paris in 1510;
where under the title De dolo et contumacia, he found these words; Et nuntio
ella cum creditur ex de appiurato parati; instead of, Et nuncio jurato creditur
ex De Apella cum parati. Henry Stephens, in his preface to his Querimonia just
mentioned, tells us of an ignorant corrector whom he knew, who, wherever he met
with the word procos, used to correct it porcos, and change the word exanimare,
into examinare. He mentions others, who altered a word they understood not, for
one more common and known; thus in the second epistle of the first book, Horace
says, Nunc adbibe puero pectore verba, puer; but the word adbibe not being
understood by them, they substituted that of adbibe, which was more obvious to
them; yet even this absurd correction, is still retained in some more modern
editions. To this, I believe, we owe another correction in the same poet, where
they have changed sectis unguibus, into strictis unguibus; whereas, Horace only
meant the kind fair ones pared their nails close, when they encountered with
the youths, least the scratches which decency and formality obliged them to
give them when they played too rudely, should enter deep enough to hurt them.
Chevilier speaks of a book printed by Guido Mercator at Paris, in 1493, in
which there is a flagrant error in the very frontispiece, for the title is
Elegantiarum viginta praecepta. It may be objected, that this was an oversight;
but the contrary is plain, since it is printed so in the next leaf, and at the
end of the book, Expliciunt elegantiarum viginta praecepta Parisiis per
Guidonem, etc. so that it evidently arose from their ignorance of the Latin
tongue. Nor is this to be wondered at, when Erasmus tells us, in his preface to
the 4th edition of his Adages in 1525, that some of the Printers of Rome,
Venice and Germany, scarce knew how to read. This same author likewise wrote 10
or 11 years before this to his friend Schurrer, a Printer of Strasburgh. John
de Savigny had been so ill used by these drunken and ignorant Printers, as he
styles them, in a work of the learned bishop of Gaieta, which he published in
1520, that he took the most effectual way to make them trumpeters of their own
ignorance, by couching his reproaches in such terms in Greek and Latin, as were
not understood by either Printer or correctors. His words are these: In istos
haud abstemios (...) a Clitorio font long remotissimos cudatur faba. Let the
blame be laid upon those drunken and illiterate Printers, who are equally
remote from learning and politeness. We shall conclude this subject with one
instance more. After the bishop of Aleria had published his edition of Pliny's
natural history, in the dedication of which he tells the pope, that he had
spent nine whole years in correcting it, though he believed nine more would
scarce suffice to make a perfect edition, Hermolaus Barbarus corrected almost
five thousand faults in it. Several other learned men engaged in the same
province, and in particular John Caesareus corrected about four thousand faults
in his edition printed at Cologn, by Eucharius Cervicornus, a famous Printer of
that city, in 1524, as he acquaints us in the preface. But the composer and
corrector suffered a prodigious blunder to go uncorrected in the frontispiece
of that book, wherein the reader is told, that this new edition is corrected in
no less than four hundred thousand places -- opus hoc locis non paucioribus
quam quadringentis millibus emaculatius atque olim, nunc demum in lucem prodire.
. It Is surprising, that a book should be corrected in so many places since the
last edition of it; but when the reader comes to the preface, he finds but four
thousand, and the Printer put quadringentis millibus, instead of quatuor
millibus.

WHEN it was found, that neither the remonstrances of the learned, nor their
sarcasms continually printed against such Printers, could prevail upon them to
be more diligent, and procure better correctors; several countries took methods
of putting a stop to this growing evil. Spain was, I think, the first which
showed the example, by a way to make the composer and corrector more careful in
their respective provinces. It was ordered, that before a book could be sold,
it should be examined by censors appointed for that purpose, and compared with
the manuscript; and that all the faults of the impression should be set down in
the first least; after which they were to write underneath, that the book, the
faults of the impression above noted excepted, was faithfully printed. This
certificate had generally the following title in Spanish. Esta este libro bien
impresso y correcto conform a su original de mano. En Madrid, etc. signed N.
N. It was sometimes printed in Latin. Where they could not obtain such an
order, they followed the Spanish method as far as they could. Thus Jo. Ravisius
Textor, professor of rhetoric at Paris, made a kind of affidavit, that he had
corrected all the errata of the dialogue of Henry Hutten, entitled Aula,
printed at Paris in 1519, by Antony Aussurd, who put under the title page.
Textor emaculavit. The same method was followed by Henry Stephens, who in his
edition of the Pimander of Hermes Trismegistus, printed in 1505, published by
James Fabry d'Estaples, has set down the names of the correctors in these
words; Parisiis ex officina Henrici Stephani, recognitoribus mendasque ex
officina eluentibus Jacobo solido Cracoviensi and Volgatio Pratensi, anno 1505.
We could trace this method as far as the beginning of the 15th century; which
had this good effect, that those books, in which the correctors had put their
names, were always preferred to those where no mention was made of any. There
were afterward better regulations obtained from the higher powers in every
kingdom, in order to abolish these pernicious abuses; but as they do not come
within our epoch, we shall forbear mentioning them.

THE reader will excuse me, if I so far digress from my subject, as to give an
instance or two of the dangerous consequences, which had like to have happened
to two eminent writers of that age, to the one by the addition, and to the
other by the substraction of a single letter. The first is of Erasmus, who in
his paraphrase on chapter 16, v. of S. Matthew where S. Peter says, Tu es Christus
Filius Dei vivi, had written, Non suspicione proferens, sed certa and
indubitata scientia pros^tent, illum esse Messiam a prophetis promissum,
singulari more Filium Dei, etc. by which last words he only meant, as he
afterward explained it, that Christ was the son of God after a particular
manner, different from that which was common to men. But it happened, that in
his Basil edition printed by Froben, the letter a being added to more, made it
have a quite disserent sense. Hereupon Noel Beda, a famous divine of Paris, and
enemy to Erasmus, failed not to take him to task for that expression, and
charged him with having affirmed, that Christ was only the son of God by
adoption, and by a particular love of God toward him (fingulari amore) and not
his eternal son, etc. Soon after which, the divines of Paris published a
censure of that proposition to the following tenor; That it gave a false sense
to the words of the Evangelist, and a handle to men, to think wrong of the
divinity of the Son of God, as Nestorius had done; for that Christ was not the
Son of God by any particular love of God toward him, nor by any adoption or
favor, but that he was originally and necessarily so. Erasmus cleared himself
by saying, that it was a fault of the impression, and appealed to his original
and former edition of the same paraphrase, in which they would find the word
more, instead of amore; but he was too much suspected by those gentlemen, to be
easily believed either in this, or any other case.

THE other happened to the learned Dr. Flavigny, author of some letters against
Mr. Jay's polyglot, in which two learned Maronites had been employed by Mr.
Jay, viz. Abraham Echellensis, Regius professor of Syriac and Arabic, who had
given the text and Latin version of those two languages of the book of Ruth;
and Gabriel Sionita, professor of the same languages. The former of these had
committed a great many errors in his translation, as well as in the text of
that book, nevertheless he attacked his brother Maronite, and charged him with
some mistakes in his part of the work. Hereupon Dr. Flavigny, who knew them
both equally guilty, undertook to rebuke the aggressor; and in a letter to him
(Echellensis), made use of these words of our Savior; Quid vides f^stucam in
oculo fratris tui? (why beholdest thou the mote in thy brother's eye?) etc. It
happened unfortunately, that the first letter of the word oculo being either
taken up by the balls, or dropped out of the sorm, or some other way lost, after
the first proofs had been corrected, gave a very harsh sound to it, and made it
seem a profane jesting upon that sacred book. Echellensis, in his answer, took
notice of this, and calls him a sacrilegious and Jewish perverter of the holy
text; and, without acquainting him with his faults, tells him, that such an
abominable correction of the text, was too foul for his pen, and only worthy
the writings of a Flavigny; in short, he spends near a whole page in the most
opprobrious language against him, that the height of malice and resentment
could inspire an inveterate antagonist with. Dr. Flavigny was a long time
before he could discover the cause of this accusation, and in all probability
might have been still longer ignorant of it, had not a friend of his showed it
to him in the printed copy; for in the two first proofs the word was printed
perfect. The result was, that the author being recovered of his surprise, threw
the fault upon the corrector, appealed to his original, and to the two first
proofs, protested his innocence and abhorrence of such an action, and took a
solemn oath, in order to clear himself. Chevilier, who relates this story,
tells us, that Flavigny, some time before his death, happened to mention this;
and though it was above 30 years after this transaction, he could not forbear
expressing the highest indignation against his Printer and corrector. These
instances sufficiently demonstrate the dangerous consequences of neglect in
correcting to the author of any book, especially in divinity.

BEFORE I dismiss this article of the incorrectness of the press, I cannot but
mention some of the greatest Printers; who, when any of their editions have
happened to be incorrect, have made an ingenuous confession of, and apology for
it, that the commonwealth of learning might not receive any disadvantage by it,
nor the authors suffer in their reputation through their neglect. I shall begin
with Martin Schurrer, of Strasburgh, allowed by Erasmus to be a person of
learning, who printed in 1500 the treatise De Patientia of Bapt. Mantuanus. But
as he had committed the care of it to a negligent and ignorant corrector, he
found himself obliged to add an errata of a page and half to it, which he
prefaces in the humblest terms imaginable Maluimus potius pudore, nostro
fatendo plecti, quam tacendo respublica literarai suo damno nostra peccata sint.
; I rather choose, says he, to take the shame of them upon myself, by
confessing my fault, than to let the republic of learning suffer by my
concealment of it. Of this kind is the apology which the same Printer makes for
the errors of impression in an edition before mentioned, viz. the works of
Picus de Mirandula; wherein he desires the reader, Errores chalcographis, non
authori adscribito. Fatemur ingenue culpam nostram.
that he would not attribute those errors to the author, but to the Printer,
who frankly confesses his fault. Such errata's not only make some kind of
reparations to the authors, but oblige likewise an honest Printer to be more
careful for the future. Henry Stephens has often taken the same method, and
owns, that some errors have crept unawares into some of his editions Locis
aliquot incuria nostra aberrotum est.
. I should digress too far, if I should instance in all those Printers, who
have followed so good an example; it is sufficient to say, that none of those
eminent ones, of whom we have given an account in this whole book, have ever
been ashamed of acknowledging the faults of their works, when they had any
share in them. I shall close this with a pleasant way, which the abovementioned
Stephens took to correct a fault in his edition De praesagiis in morbis acutis
of Hippocrates, anno 1512. It Is obvious to every scholar, that the first
syllable in the word Febris (a fever or ague) may be either long or short; but
he having through inadvertency spelt the word with oe, which made it absolutely
long, he corrects himself for it, by saying, Febrem longam sibi chalcographus
delegit' tametsi febris correpta sit minus periculosa.
That the Printer had foolishly chosen a long fever, when a short one was much
more eligible, as being less dangerous.

BUT after all that has been said concerning the baseness, negligence, and
ignorance of some of the Printers of those times, it must be owned, that many a
negligent and ignorant author, when he has been admonished of his errors, has
not scrupled to throw them upon the Printer and corrector; which I esteem
another abuse of the Art of Printing. I could give many instances of it, were I
not apprehensive of betraying too great a fondness for our profession. However,
any judicious reader will easily perceive by the largest Errata's which we have
mentioned, that the authors had as great a share in them as the Printers and
correctors. Chevilier, who cannot be suspected of partiality to the latter, has
excused them in many cases, and shown that the fault was rather to be imputed
to the former. But he has furnished me with an instance of this, which, I
believe, he little thought of; in the case of a learned divine of the
university of Paris, whose works having been censured by that body, and he
refusing to retract them, he was expelled that university, but was afterward
prevailed upon to recant. After his death a paper was published in his name, in
which the blame was laid upon the protestant Printers, to whom he had entrusted
the work. I shall relate the story exactly after Chevilier, though somewhat
abridg'd, and leave the reader to judge, whether the wrong persons were not
unjustly blamed. I hope the singularity of the fact will sufficiently excuse
me, though it is of later date, than our prefixed period.

Rene Benoist, D. D. curate of S. Eustace at Paris, made a French version of
the bible, which he caused to be printed in fol. ann. 1566 by three eminent
booksellers of that city. This book immediately met with many opposers, who
censured it as heretical and erroneous, alleging, that it was only the Geneva
translation; in which the author had softened those expressions which were most
shocking to the Roman Catholics. The divines of that university, having met
several times, agreed to censure the book, which they did accordingly, July 15,
1567. The same censure was renewed, and subscribed to, by seventy three doctors
of that faculty, and approved viva voce by above one hundred and twenty more
about 7 years after. Gregory XII. confirmed the censure, and condemned the
book, by a brief dated Nov. 3. 1475. During this, Benoist absolutely refused to
submit, in spite of all the endeavors of that body to persuade him to it. At
length they agreed upon expelling him that university as an obstinate heretic,
and the sentence of his proscription was written in great letters, and set up
in the common disputation-hall of the university, by which he was, as it were,
executed in essigie. However, Henry IV. took him into favor, made him his
confessor, and promoted him to a bishopric; but the Pope refused to grant him
his bull. At last, his seniority entitling him to be chosen dean of the
faculty, they all refused their votes, unless he would submit to their former
censures, which he was at length obliged to do by a recantation, in which he
condemns his version, and rejects some parts of it as being falsely attributed
to him. This was not done till the year 1598, i. e. 32 years after the
publication of it.

IN 1608, a little before Benoist's death, came out a book in 8vo, entitled, A
declaration of Rene Benoist, concerning his translation of the bible and
annotations thereupon; in which he declares,

'That the ground of all his sorrow was the treachery of the corrector,
composer and press-man, who had been entrusted with the impression of his
bible; that the copy which he had given them was a printed one (here Chevilier
notes, that it was a Geneva one,) upon which he had made his corrections and
erasements, which were not so fully eras'd, but that they might be easily read:
THAT some of the journeymen (they did not dare publicly to attack their
masters, who would in all probability have cleared themselves) were of the
Geneva leaven, and printed nothing in the first and second proofs but what was
in his copy; but when they came to the third, which he did not see, they
substituted, instead of his corrections, the words or notes, which he had
eras'd (some instances of which the author of the book gives), and which the
composer and press-man in confederacy had maliciously falsify'd:

That it were tedious to enumerate all such pieces of treachery; but that the
result of it turned to his reputation, notwithstanding his unsuccessful
attempts to bring those journeymen to punishment:

That his books had been sold under his name, though he had disowned them:

That the censure of the university, and the confirmation of it by the court of
Rome, which had condemned the work, and not the author, was the consequence of
this imposture, etc.'



I SHALL not enter into a detail of the reflections which Chevilier makes upon
the Calvinist Printers, as he calls them, nor enquire whether this declamation
was really penned by Benoist, or fathered upon him; or if the former, whether
it might not be extorted from him, a practice not unusual with the divines of
that church. I shall only observe, that, were the case as it is related in that
pamphlet, it is scarce credible, that the doctor could have been 30 years
unappris'd of it, especially when the censures and libels, continually
published against him, sufficiently pointed it out to him; and if he knew it,
can it be imagined that he would have continued so long under all that scandal,
and the persecution of his enemies, when he might have easily cleared himself
of the one, and so put a stop effectually to the other? Upon the whole, whoever
the author of this declaration is, this story evidently confutes itself, and is
no other than one of their pious frauds, on which it is not my province to
animadvert, any further than the credit of our profession is concerned.

BEFORE I close this chapter, it will be necessary to remind the reader, that
this second book being wholly confined to the history of printing in other
parts of Europe, (what relates to our nation being the subject of the next
book,) I have given none but foreign instances of the corruptions and abuses
introduced into this art.

IT IS not therefore to be concluded, that it has been free in any case from
them in England; since we have imitated our neighbors in these bad, as well as
in their other good, examples; and therefore as these abuses have been equally
common to us and them, I shall not repeat them in the English part, but only
request the reader, once for all, to remember, that we have had our share as
well in the disadvantages, under which our art has labored, as in the
advantages and improvements, which it has received.

APPENDIX. An Account of a newly discovered Edition, printed by John Guttenberg
at Stratzburg in 1458, communicated to me by, and now in the possession of, the
Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke.
THE reader may be pleased to recollect that I have, throughout the first book
of this history, constantly endeavored to fix the glory of the invention of
Printing upon John Faust, and that of the improvements of it upon his worthy
son-in-law Peter Scheoffer, exclusive of John Guttenberg, notwithstanding the
testimony of some few writers who have ascribed the first discoveries to the
latter. I did likewise offer it as a probable conjecture of the ingenious Mr.
Maittair, that Guttenberg, having been cast in a lawsuit at Mentz for
non-solvency of his quota, might retire to Stratzburgh, and there teach John
Mentel, what he had been able to learn of Faust's art. We had not till then the
least ground to conjecture that he ever practiced it himself, no annalist that
ever I could meet with ever mentioning, or perhaps dreaming of, any edition
printed with his name. But since then the noble lord abovementioned, unwilling
to rest satisfied with conjectures, has spared no pains or cost to inform
himself whether there was any impression extant done by Guttenberg, and has at
length procured this curious one, which his lordship has been pleased to
communicate to me. The reader, I doubt not, will be highly satisfied to find
that, instead of contradicting any thing I have advanced upon that subject, it
rather confirms it all beyond any possibility of doubting.

THE book is the dialogues of St. Gregory in Latin, it has no titlepage, but
begins abruptly with the subject itself, only at the end of it are these words;

Explicit liber quartus
Dyalogor 4 Gregorii.
Then follows in red letters,

Presens hoc Op9. factum est per Johan.
Guttenbergium apud Argentinam,
Anno Millesimo cccclviij.
I SHALL now beg leave to make a few remarks on this curious piece, and to show
how manifestly it confirms all my former conjectures.

1. IT is very rude, and comes vastly short of those of Faust and Scheoffer;
and the great and almost constant difference of the shapes of the same letters,
shows it to have been done upon wooden blocks, after the manner of the paginae
conglutinatae mentioned above, page 49 and seq. there is, however, this
difference and improvement in it, that it is not printed with the same (that is
with the) common Ink, which made them incapable of a reiteration, i. e. of
being printed but upon one side, but with the new invented sort, which was a
mixture of oil-varnish and lamp-black, and will bear printing on both sides.
This, therefore, shows that he had only got an insight into the first
discovery, but was an utter stranger to the last and more useful one of
separate metaltypes, which Faust had probably kept concealed from him.

2. SUPPOSING it to be the first piece that ever he did, as it probably was, if
not the only one of that kind, it was printed in 1458, i. e. about three years
after the lawsuit and his falling out with Faust; so that it took him up all
that time in cutting his blocks, and getting the rest of the apparatus of a
Printing-press, making of trials, maculatures, etc. after he was settled at
Stratzburgh.

3. IT is printed one year after the psalter of Mentz, which was done in
separate metal-types, and wherein Faust and Scheoffer assume to themselves the
whole glory of the invention; so that had Guttenberg had the least pretension
to it, he would not have failed doing himself justice by altering the style of
his colophon, and telling the world what share he had borne in this noble
discovery, that his silence was not owing to his honesty is plain from his
refusing to pay his dividend of the charges, much less to his being ignorant of
the publication of Faust's psalter, because Mentz and Stratzburgh being both
situate upon the Rhine, and not above 60 leagues asunder, it was morally
impossible he should not have heard of it. On the contrary, it is likely that,
having seen it, and observed it to be printed with fusile types, he might just
finish this rude edition of his, and then stop his hand until Mentel and he had
fallen upon the same way of casting them.

4. THIS piece is printed upon the same paper that Faust did use, which is
marked with the heifer's head and horns, and might either be his share of the
paper-stock which they divided at parting, and which he took away with him, or
else might be designedly imitated by him, to give a credit to his work. Upon
the whole, its having neither titlepage, running title, signature, nor
direction-word, and being altogether a rude piece of workmanship, does plainly
show it to have been of the nature of the first essays of Faust, and that it is
by no means antedated.

A Catalogue of some of the most eminent Persons, Authors and Editors, etc. who
condescended to prepare MSS. and to correct for the Press during the 15th
Century, with the Character of some of the most considerable of them.
At BASIL for JOHN AMERBACK.

1. JOHN CAPNIO, alias Reuchlin, an eminent lawyer, who had studied at Paris
under the famous John de Lapide, doctor of Sorbonne, at whose request he wrote
three books de verbo mirifico. He wrote another treatise which he entitled
Oculare Speculum, for which the universities of Cologn, Mentz, Louvain, and
Erphord condemned him of Heresy and Judaism, and made pressing instances to
that of Paris to do the same. To prevent which, Reuchlin wrote to the doctors
of Sorbonne, and reminded them, that he had been Lapidanus's disciple, and that
the university of Paris was his dear mother: but, as all his rhetoric could
not prevent his book being censured by the Paris divines, he calls her
afterward an unnatural stepmother. He was one of the most diligent promoters
of the study of Hebrew, of which himself was a good, master, though he did not
learn it of Lapidanus, as some have imagined, but from a Jewish rabbi, called
Jacob Jehiel Loans, to whom therefore he directs a letter inscribed as follows,
Johannes Reuchlin praeceptori suo Jacobo Jehiel Loans Judaeo, etc. it is
likely, therefore, that after his squabble with those universities he retired
to Basil, where he became corrector to the great Amerback, who was himself a
very learned man, and had taken his degrees of master of arts in the university
of Paris. Vide page 218.

2. JOHN CONN. CONUS, a native of Nurembergh, famous for his skill in the Greek
and Latin tongues.

3. AUGUSTINE DODO, a learned canon of Basil, who, dying of the plague in 1513,
was succeeded by

4. FRANCIS WILER, a learned franciscan.

5. CONRARD PELICAN, an eminent divine, and

6. BEATUS RHENANUS.

For JOHN FROBEN, ibid.

1 PETER CASTELLANUS. 2. SIGISMUND GELENIUS. 3. MARK HEILAND. 4. DES. ERASMUS
of Rotterdam. 5. WOLFGANG MUSCULUS. 6. JOHN OECOLAMPADIUS. 7. WOLFGANG LACHNER.
ALL these are sufficiently known to the learned, especially the 4th, 5th, and
6th.

At BOLONIA.

BENEDICT HECTOR and PLATO DEI BENEDETI, both eminent and learned, who printed
and corrected their own works.

At BRESCIA for BONINO DE BONINIS.

MARCUS SCARAMUCCINUS, a native of Palazolo in the territories of Brescia.

For JAMES and ANGEL BRITANNICI, ibid.

ANGELUS DE MONTELMO, a learned franciscan.

At FLORENCE.

DEMETRIUS CALCONDILLA, a native of Milan, printed and corrected that noble and
beautiful edition of Homer's works, fol. in 1480, of which I have given an
account above, page 196. He corrected many other Greek and Latin works, and at
length went and set up a press in his own native city, where he continued
printing and correcting for himself.

For FRANC. LAURENCE de ALOPA, ibid.

JOHN ANDREAS LASCARIS, a famous critic in the Greek and Latin tongues. He was
descended from an illustrious family in Greece, which gave birth to three Greek
emperors. After the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, he retired into
Italy, and some time after went into France, whence he was sent ambassador to
the republic of Venice by Lewis XII. As he was thoroughly versed in all the
ancient authors of his own nation, he spared no pains to procure the best
manuscripts from thence, to compare, correct, and fit them either for the
Press, or for translating into Latin. He was in such credit with Francis I.
that Genebrard tells us, that he and the great Budaeus persuaded that monarch
to erect that noble library in his own palace of Fontainbleau, and to found a
college at Paris for the royal professors in the learned languages. He is also
supposed to have been the corrector, if not the editor, of that noble edition
of Avicen, which was printed at Lions by Trechsel and Clean in 1498, in 3 vol.
fol. to which he prefixed a dedication to Dr. Ponceau the king's physician.
Erasmus thinks it a kind of miracle that any Greeks should ever become such
masters of the Latin tongue as he and his two countrymen Marcus Musurus, of
whom we shall speak by and by, and Theodore Gaza proved.

At LIONS for JOHN TRECHSEL.

THE famous Jodocus Badius, surnamed Ascensius, who became afterward one of
the most eminent Printers.

At MILAN for ANTONY ZAROT.

PETER JUSTINUS PHILELPHUS.

For LEONARD PACHEL, ibid.

BENEDICT, surnamed Rhetoricus.

At NAPLES for MATT. MORAVIUS.

JUNIANUS MAJO, professor of grammar and rhetoric.

At NUREMBERG for ANT. COBURGER.

THE learned Frederick Pistorius.

At PARIS for ULRICK GERING and his two Associates.

JOHN LAPIDANUS, or a Lapide, doctor of Sorbonne, and a great promoter of
learning. Vide supra page 166, and seq.

WILLIAM FITCHET, a native of Aulney in Normandy; he was doctor of divinity,
and fellow of the college of Sorbonne. Vide supra ib.

ERHARD WINDSBERGH, doctor of physic in the university of Paris.

For ULRICK GERING and BERTOLD REMBOLT, ibid.

THE learned John Capuis, editor of the Corpus Juris Canonici, with the gloss,
short notes, index, etc. printed by Gering and his associate in 3 vol. fol. in
1501. This was a most elaborate and expensive work, every page being charged
with letters ranked in five or six columns, and mixed with red and black. This
edition was so highly liked, that it was presently sold off, and a new one of a
smaller size came out soon after.

At ROME for CONRARD SWEYNHEYM and ARNOLD PANNARTZ.

1. JOHN ANDREAS, bishop of Valeria, and library keeper to pope Sixtus IV. He
wrote some learned comments on the IVth, Vth, and VIth book of decretals, and
gave the world the first edition of Pliny's natural history, in correcting of
which he had spent nine whole years. We have likewise a volume of his letters
which are very curious, and the book itself scarce. His province was to furnish
these two German Printers with the most valuable manuscripts out of the Vatican
and other libraries, to compare, correct, and prepare for the press, and then
to revise the sheets as fast as they came out. All which he performed with
indefatigable application. Vide supra page 123, etc. He died in 1470, and was
succeeded by

2. BARTHOLOMEW (by others called Baptist) Platina, famous for his history of
the popes.

For ULRICK HAN or GALLUS, ibid.

1. JOHN ANTONY CAMPANUS, bishop of Teramo. This prelate undertook the same
province for Han that the bishop of Valeria did for Sweynheym and Pannariz,
viz. to procure, correct, and prepare for the press, and to revise the proofs.
He was also at the pains and charges of collecting the Latin translations of
Plutarch's lives, which till then did lay dispersed, and by pieces among other
manuscripts; and published the first edition of it in two vol. fol. it has
neither date, place, or Printer's name, and is dedicated by Campanus to
Cardinal Piccolomini. In all these provinces he was so diligent and assiduous
that he scarce allowed himself time to eat, and not above three hours to sleep.
He died in 1477, in the 50th year of his age, and was succeeded by

2. CHARLES de Alexandris.

For EUCHARIUS SILBER, ibid.

1. BARTHOLOMEW de Salicetis.

2. LUDOVICUS de Regiis.

3. MICHEL FERN, surnamed Archipoeta, editor of bishop Campanus's works, and a
severe satyrist against careless and incorrect Printers, plagiaries, etc.

For GEORGE LAVER, ibid.

1. CELESTINE PULVERINUS.

2. POMPONIUS.

At TREVISO for MICH. MANZOLI al. MANZOLINI. JEROME BONINI.

For BARTHOLOM. CONSOLONERI, ibid. BARTHOLOMEW PEROT.

At VENICE for NICOLAS JENSON.

OMNIBONUS LAODICENUS, a native of Vincentia, famous for his learned comments
upon several ancient authors. He revised and corrected some of Cicero's works,
as likewise Quintiliani Oratoriarum Institutionum libri, fol. which were
printed by Jenson in 1471, with this colophon, Quintilianum Eloquentiae fontem
ab eruditissimo Omnibono Laodiceno emendatum, M. Nicolaus Jenson miro impressit
artificio, etc.

For VINDELIN de SPIRA, ibid. GEORGIUS ALEXANDRINUS, and CHRISTOPHORUS BERARDUS
de Pesauro.

For CHRISTOPHER WARDAFFER, ibid.

THE famous Ludovicus Carbo, who is said to have corrected his proofs with red
ink, from which one might be led to conclude that they had not yet got the
method of writing their corrections on the margin of the proof.

For BERNARD PICTOR and ERHARD RADOLT, ibid.

PETER LOSLEIN de Langencen, who, from being their corrector, became their
partner, and afterward set up a Printing House of his own.

For ANTONY della STRADA, ibid. VICTOR PISANUS.

For PETER VERONENSIS, ibid. JEROME CENTONE of Padua.

For PHILIP PINCI, ibid. BENEDICT BRUGNOLI, famed for his great skill in the
Greek and Latin tongues.

For ALD. P. MANUCIUS, ibid.

1. PETER ALCION.

2. DEMETRIUS CALCONDILLA, mentioned above.

3. ALEXANDER BANDINUS.

4. BENEDICT TYRENUS, and

5. MARCUS MUSURUS, who was a native of Candia, and became a famous professor
of the Greek and Latin tongues in the university of Padua, and for his great
learning and merit was afterward made bishop of Ragusium. We have already
mentioned what Eraesmus said of him and his Countrymen Laescaris and Theod.
Gaza, concerning their great skill in Greek and Latin; to which Beat. Rhenanus
adds in his Vita Erasmi, that he was a man of such extensive reading and
profound erudition, that there was nothing so obscure and intricate which he
could not render plain and easy by his eloquence. Ald. Manucius does likewise
commend him very highly not only for his vast learning, but also for his
indefatigable diligence and accuracy in comparing and correcting ancient
manuscripts, both Greek and Latin, and fitting them for the press. Upon which
account the care and correction of that noble edition of the Etymologicon
Magnum, printed at Venice by Zacbary Caliergius in 1499, was committed to him.

For BENET LOCATELLI, ibid.

MAURICIUS de Hibernia, afterward bishop of Tuamo..

At VINCENTIA, for HERMAN LEVILAPIS.

AENEAS WOLPIUS, prior of the convent of the Holy Cross.

I HAVE only mentioned some of the most famous for their learning and
diligence, besides whom there were many more, who, though of an inferior class,
in comparison of the former; yet were all men of letters, and vastly superior
to those, which Printers have been forced to make use of in process of time. It
must be also remembered, that many of those Printers of the 15th, and part of
the 16th century, were men of great learning and parts, and indefatigable
industry, able to prepare their manuscripts for the press, and to correct their
own works: Such were the great Amerback at Basil, who was master of arts in the
university of Paris, Froben his worthy partner and successor, Ant. Coburger at
Nurembergh, Aldus Manucius and Azulanus at Venice, Jodocus Badius at Lions and
Paris, and many more, of whom we have given an account in this history. And yet
it is observable from this table, that those, who were the most capable of
correcting their own works, did still entertain the greatest number of
correctors.

HOWEVER, I must not omit acquainting the readers, that those great persons
whom we have mentioned in this list, were not properly correctors in the sense
we now understand that word; that is, men retained by a proper salary to
perform that function, but editors or authors, and correctors only of their own
works; or if at any time they were prevailed upon to oversee any curious
edition, it was done rather out of curiosity than for gain. For it is certain
that every Printer had besides a corrector of an inferior rank to revise and
correct every proof, if he did not do it himself, before they were sent to
those great men, whose corrections were generally of a higher nature. What
makes me mention this distinction, is the grief which the famous Erasmus
conceived at his being upbraided by count Carpi, and more particularly by Jul.
Staliger, with having served as corrector in Aldus's Printing House, and the
pains he took to clear himself from that imputation. Every body knows that
Erasmus had ventured to print a dialogue, entitled Ciceronianus, in which he
endeavored to show that Cicero was more cried up than he deserved; at which
Scaliger was so enraged, that he wrote a vindication of that great master of
eloquence in two different orations, which he soon after printed. In the last
of which he addresses himself to Erasmus in words to this effect; Did not you
get a livelihood by correcting Aldus 's proofs? and were not those errata we
meet with in them more owing to your drunken carelessness than to the Printer?
do they not smell stronger of your drunken cups than of the composer's dullness?
He afterward affirmed that he met with Aldus one day at Mantua, who told him
that Erasmus was wont to dispatch as much business in one day as other
correctors did in two, and to solace himself the rest of the time with drinking
of good Malmsy wine. Erasmus was so galled at this oration, that, as Merula
tells us, he bought and burnt all the copies he could possibly get of it, and
that he succeeded so well that there was not one to be met with. However, in
his answer to count Carpi, he says that he was so far from correcting for
Aldus, unless it were his own works, that he refused that office to some
eminent cardinals who desired him to revise the laft proofs of some works then
printing: that if he took any thing else in hand, whilst he staid at Venice, it
was not for lucre, but out of curiosity; and acquaints us, that Aldus had a
constant corrector to his press named Seraphim, and then adds, Can he be called
a servant who revises only his own works? for I never did any thing else for
Aldus, whose Printing House I used only for my convenience. He has likewise
been supposed to have corrected for Theodore Martin at Louvain, but it is
likely that it was in the same manner, and on the same foot as he did it at
Venice. I had not dwelt so long on this nice distinction, were it not that
those annalists, who have mentioned these great and learned men as correctors,
have not sufficiently taken notice of it. Besides, it ought to be considered
that there is a vast difference between Printing and correcting the works of
ancient authors after a number of manuscripts, which have been mutilated and
spoiled by every hand through which they passed; and Printing the works of a
modern author after his own manuscript-copy, who is at hand either to revise
it, or to be consulted upon any difficulty. The former province requires
persons of the greatest learning, abilities, and most indefatigable
application, in reading and comparing their manuscripts, in order to
distinguish between the genuine meaning of an author and the blunders of his
transcribers; whereas the latter may be supplied by a person of moderate parts
and industry. As therefore, they have been the greatest promoters of learning,
I hope the reader will not blame me, if I have endeavored to do them all
possible justice, and to distinguish them from those lazy and ignorant ones who
have been, and are still, justly reckoned the common pests of it.

The End of the Second Book.
The EDITOR to the READER.
SOON after Mr. Palmer 's death, I was desired to see what was still wanting to
complete his History of Printing, according to his first proposal, and what
materials he had left behind. I found, upon enquiry, that five sheets of this
last Number were already printed off; but that the third sheet in course, viz.
Q q, was left unfinished, being partly composed, and partly in manuscript, most
likely in expectation of that curious edition which the R. H. the Earl of
Pembroke was then in search after, which has been mentioned in the Appendix to
this second Book; and this seems to have been the cause of his delaying this
last Number so long, that his last sickness prevented his publishing it.

The reader will, no doubt, be as much surprised as I was myself, at finding
the last page of the second book and the first of the third book so differently
numbered; and that there is a retrogression from 312 to 121: but, as the
signatures of each sheet do follow in their regular course, I am fully
persuaded that it must have been an oversight either of the compositor or of
the author, which we hope the reader will easily forgive, especially
considering that there is not any thing wanting to complete this second book;
and that the materials he left behind do even exceed his computation for
filling this suspended sheet. However, as there were but three sheets thus
mis-number'd, having been printed off long before the author's death, I have
ventured to set all the remaining ones in their due order, to avoid the
confusion that would otherwise unavoidably happen in the Index; and hope the
reader will be kind enough to do the same with his pen to these three following
sheets. Those, who know what a tedious sickness Mr. Palmer did labor under
during the last two years of his life, will pass by so inconsiderable an
oversight, in consideration of what he has done when he enjoyed a better state
of health. As for the rest of this History, we hope to find the materials in so
good an order, that there will be little to do but to print after his
manuscript, excepting where the noble Lord abovementioned, or some of his
learned correspondents, have communicated some new discoveries too curious to
be passed by. And this furnishes me with an opportunity of adding a new
authority to what has been before advanced, concerning the first invention of
Printing by John Faust at Mentz, omitted by Mr. Palmer, and since communicated
to me by an ingenious friend of his. It is a paragraph extracted out of Fox 's
book of martyrs, printed in 1537, page 837, wherein that learned author gives
an account of the first discovery of that art, in all the main particulars
exactly agreeable to what has been advanced in the first part of this History,
and is to this purpose; That about the year 1440, or, as others affirm, 1446
and 1450, one John Faust of Stratzburg, and since a citizen of Mentz, found out
the way of Printing by engraving upon metals, and by degrees improved it to
cutting of single words, and at length single letters: that, after some essays,
he communicated his discovery to John Guttenberg and Peter Scheoffer; and these
three, being first sworn to inviolable secrecy, made some considerable
improvements in it: that Guttenberg did at length, with John Mentel, publish
the art at Stratzburg, which was soon after brought to greater perfection by
some eminent Printers in other places; and in particular by Ulrick Han, or
Gallus, at Rome, etc. From this short account it is plain that our English
author had his intelligence from much better hands than many of the writers
that have been quoted on that subject; and it is no small pity that he, who has
so exactly informed himself with what had been done at Mentz, had not given us
also an account of the introduction and progress of the art here in England, we
might then have found a much more satisfactory account of it, than the reader
will find in the next book from all that Mr. Palmer could possibly procure from
other authors and records. However, as to this testimony, I doubt not but he
would have been glad to have given it an honorable place in his first book,
had he been apprised of it; but it is not much to be wondered at, that a book
of martyrs should be one of the last pieces of history wherein one would have
looked for it. What Dr. Fox says of their cutting or engraving upon metal, and
not upon wood, as Mr. Palmer and others have since more truly affirmed, can be
only looked upon as a pardonable mistake in the former, who could not be
expected to be a judge of things of this nature; whereas, what the latter
advances may be surely relied on, not only because it was in his own province,
and that he neither wanted opportunities, nor spared any pains to inform
himself aright in all those curious particulars, but also because his modesty
would not suffer him to rely upon his own judgment, till he had it confirmed by
other eminent masters in the art of Printing, letter-cutting, etc.

BOOK III. OF ENGLISH PRINTING AND PRINTERS.
CHAP. I. Of the Art's being first brought to England.
ALL our English historians and chroniclers, who have touched on this subject
before Richard Atkins, viz. Stowe, Baker, Howel, etc. have proceeded only upon
conjecture or common and fallacious reports; or perhaps the first of these
forementioned authors led the rest into these mistakes, that printing was not
invented till the year 1459, nor brought into England till anno 1471; that at
the Abbey of Westminster the first presses were set up; that Dr Islip, Abbot of
Westminster, first introduced the art into England; and that England had it at
least 10 years before any other city of Europe, except Mentz and Harlem. The
falsity of several of these particulars, sufficiently appears from the first
book of this history; and the others are manifestly disproved since I have seen
a book in the Earl of Pembroke's library, printed at the university of Oxford,
anno 1468. However, their mistakes were unavoidable in those times; because
they were ignorant of several material particulars, and of the first editions,
which were absolutely necessary to determine the true periods of the invention
and introduction of the art into England.

BUT in 1664, Richard Atkins, Esquire published an account of the forementioned
edition and an old manuscript chronicle, preserved at Lambeth in the
archbishop's palace, in his Original and Growth of Printing, printed by order
of the right honorable Mr. Morris secretary of state. The design of this
book, which is little more than an invective against the Company of Stationers,
is to prove that printing is a branch of the royal Prerogative, and a flower of
the English Crown. This chronicle however, of which a friend of his, whom he
does not name, sent him a copy, is far from being of undoubted authority, since
it is liable to these exceptions. 1. That neither Atkins nor his nameless
friend pretend to have seen the original, much less to have compared the copy
with it. 2. They give no account when and by whom this chronicle was written,
and how it was bequeathed to the Lambeth library. 3. No author, that I know of,
besides Atkins, mentions this chronicle in Lambeth library, except those who
quote it from him; though that author hoped that his book would occasion the
discovery and publication of it in time for public satisfaction, p. 4. 4. It
is not to be found there now; for the Earl of Pembroke assured me, that he
employed a person for some time to search for it, but in vain. 5. It gives an
account of some particulars, altogether inconsistent with the more authentic
accounts, which we are now masters of, with respect to the circumstances of the
first discovery of the art; so that we may suppose, that whoever the author
was, he has taken some part of his account from common report, and from the
Dutch, who have laid claim to this invention. I might add, that Atkins has so
interspersed the chroniclers account with his own observations, that it is very
difficult to distinguish them exactly. However, imperfect and precarious as it
is, since it gives us the most probable and clear account of this important
affair, I shall here set it down, as I find it in the author abovementioned;
after which I shall endeavor, by reconciling some inconsistencies in it,
explaining several particulars, and adding some necessary remarks upon the
whole, to lead the reader, if not to a certain, at least to the most probable
account of this matter.

The chronicle is as follows.

Thomas Bourcher archbishop of Canterbury, moved the then King [Henry 6th.] to
use all possible means for procuring a mold (for so'twas then called) to be
brought into this kingdom; the king (a good man, and much given to works of
this nature) readily hearkened to the motion; and taking private advice, how to
effect this design, concluded it could not be brought about without great
secrecy, and a considerable sum of money given to such person or persons, as
would draw off some of the workmen from Harlem in Holland, where John
Guthenberg had newly invented it, and was himself personally at work. 'Twas
resolved that less than one thousand marks would not produce the desired
effect; toward which sum, the archbishop presented the king with three hundred
marks. The money being now prepared, the management of the design was committed
to Mr. Robert Turnour, who then was of the robes to the king, and a person most
in favor with him, of any of his condition. Mr. Turnour took to his assistance
Mr. Caxton, a citizen of good abilities, who trading much into Holland, might
be a creditable pretense, as well for his going, as stay in the Low Countries.
Mr. Turnour was in disguise (his beard and hair quite shaven off;) but Mr.
Caxton appeared known and public. They having received the said sum of one
thousand marks, went first to Amsterdam, then to Leyden, not daring to enter
Harlem itself; for the town was very jealous, having imprisoned and apprehended
diverse persons, who came from other parts for the same purpose. They stayed
till they had spent the whole one thousand marks in gifts and expenses; so as
the king was fain to send five hundred marks more; Mr. Turnour having written
to the king, that he had almost done his work; a bargain (as he said) being
struck between him and two Hollanders, for bringing off one of the workmen, who
should sufficiently discover and teach this new art: At last with much ado they
got off one of the under workmen, whose name was Frederick Corsells (or rather
Corsellis), who late one night stole from his fellows in disguise into a
vessel, prepared before for that purpose, and so the wind (favoring the
design) brought him safe to London.

'Twas not thought so prudent to set him on work at London, but by the
archbishop's means, who had been vice chancellor, and afterward chancellor of
the university of Oxon, Corsellis was carried with a strong guard to Oxon;
which guard constantly watched to prevent Corsellis from any possible escape,
till he had made good his promise, in teaching how to print: so that at Oxford,
printing was first set up in England; which was before there was any
printing-press or printer in France, Spain, Italy or Germany, except the city
of Mentz, which claims seniority as to printing even of Harlem itself, calling
herself Urbem Moguntinam Artis Typographicae inventricem primam; though it is
known to be otherwise, that city gaining that art by the brother of one of the
workmen of Harlem, who had learned it at home of his brother, and after set up
for himself at Mentz.

This press at Oxon was at least ten years before there was any printing in
Europe, (except at Harlem and Mentz), where also it was but new born. This
press at Oxford was afterward found inconvenient to be the sole printing place
of England, as being too far from London, and the Sea: whereupon the king set
up a press at St. Albans, and another in the Abbey of Westminster, where they
printed several books of divinity and Physic, for the King, for reasons best
known to himself and council, permitted then no law books to be printed, nor
did any Printer exercise that art, but only such as were the king's sworn
servants; the king himself having the price and emolument for printing books.

THUS far the chronicle, or our author's extract from it; for, as I observed
before, he distinguishes not his own from the chronicle, nor acquaints us
whether it be literally copied from the chronicle, or an abstract of it; nor
whether it mentions any other transactions besides that of bringing printing to
England. I shall therefore follow him no further, at present, but examine the
truth of the several particulars of this account: yet previous to this, I shall
observe, that we have the like account of this affair in Antony Wood 's History
and Antiquities of the University of Oxford, printed in 1674, i. e. ten years
after Atkins had published his piece; from which the forementioned author seems
to have taken his account wholly; in many particulars, of which he has been
confuted by several writers, as shall be shown immediately. To return to
Atkins's book; which is unknown to foreigners, and seen but by few in England;
the author of that chronicle is mistaken in several points; 1. in supposing
Harlem or Harlein, as he calls it, to be the place from whence Corsellis came:
It is not probable, that the art was invented there, especially by Guttenbergh,
and in the year 1459, since it appears, the psalter was prinat Mentz by Faust
two years before that, besides the several books printed on wooden blocks.
Again, if the book mentioned by Atkins and Wood to have been printed at Oxford,
anno 1468, be the first book printted there, it is plain, that city had not the
art ten years before any other; because I have lately seen a book printed at
Strasburg by John Guttenberg, in 1458, as I have already hinted in the
postcript of the foregoing number; besides Strasburg, it was at Venice, the
monastery of Sublaco, Ausburgh, Rome and France before 1468. If it be urged,
that there might be other books printed before that at Oxford, or that it
required some time to get all the necessary materials of a printing house; the
same pleas will equally serve for those other places now mentioned. Lastly, if
we admit Guttenbergh to have carried the art to Holland, which we shall show
hereafter to be extremely probable, it will be still false, that Mentz received
it from the brother of one of his workmen. These are the inconsistencies and
contradictions to plain facts, now certainly known, which derogate from the
authority of this chronicle and of those that follow it. We shall now endeavor
to clear these inconsistencies, or at least to show how the author of it was
led into these palpable errors, and from thence to discover the real truth of
the whole transaction.

WE have already hinted at the probability, that he rather followed the reports
spread about from Holland, than made a strict enquiry into this subject. This
will appear more plain from the following considerations. 1. We hinted in our
1st book, that during the infancy of the art, Faust and Schoeffer, and together
with them Guttenbergh, carried on the business with all possible secrecy, till
the former being obliged to discover it at Paris for his own safety, and the
latter having broke the partnership, and gone to set up the art elsewhere; it
was thought of no further use to conceal this invention. 2. The reader may call
to mind that we advanced a probable conjecture of Mr. Mattaire's, that
Guttenbergh being cast at law, and sentenced to reimburse his moiety, and pay
the charges of the suit, went away to Strasburgh to evade the sentence, which
is now confirmed by the book printed there just now mentioned; where not
thinking himself fafe from further prosecution, he might really come down to
Harlem, and there instruct Coster, or some others in the art. This seems to be
more than probable, not only from the chronicle's mentioning Guttenbergh, and
not Coster, as inventor of the art, but likewise from his dating the invention
nine years later than it was discovered; which must be ascribed to its not
having been known at Harlem till the year 1459, though it had been practiced at
Mentz from the year 1450, or soon after, as has been sufficiently shown before.

AGAIN, if we consider that Holland and the Low Countries were the only places
of Germany, into which we traded, whereas the city of Mentz, which lies very
far in the continent, was then little known to us, we shall not wonder, that
our first accounts of the original of printing, should be taken from the Dutch,
agreeable to their violent claims to the invention of it, and their scandalous
stories invented to deprive Faust of his discovery; for the chronicle acquaints
us, that the city received it from a fugitive servant of Guttenbergh, who had
learned it from his brother then working with him, and went to set it up there.
There remains one single difficulty still; why the chronicle attributes the
invention to Guttenbergh, when all their writers make no mention of him, but
ascribe it wholly to their countryman Coster. To solve this, if we suppose this
account given to the author by Frederick Corsellis, or even by Mr. Caxton or
Turnour, which is very probable; we may justly presume, that they spoke as they
were informed on the spot, agreeably to the account which Guttenbergh gave of
himself and of his invention, which the Dutch dared not to contradict, till
after his death or departure from Holland, when they assumed the whole
discovery to themselves, and represented Coster as the sole inventor, exclusive
of every other pretension. I have dwelt longer on these circumstances, because
they notoriously demonstrate, that those contradictions to plain facts,
universally known and assented to by all but the Dutch writers, confirm the
authority of the rest of the chronicle; since they are exactly drawn from the
legends of that nation, which were then generally believed over all the
Low Countries, and were the only accounts that our merchants, and particularly
the two gentlemen employed by the king, could procure concerning the original
of printing. And it is not improbable that what the chronicle mentions of the
imprisonment of several persons at Harlem, on suspicion of a design to steal
the art, might be done rather out of fear least any of those strangers should
rob them of their honor by exposing the vantiy of their pretensions; since
themselves could not be ignorant of what was done at Mentz long before that
time.

BEFORE I dismiss this chronicle,) which, as I observed, was unknown till Mr.
Atkins published it, I shall give an account, which I found in a manuscript now
in my possession, which seems to be much older than the year 1664, when Mr.
Atkins published his account, and which, a few Circumstances excepted, entirely
agrees with that of the chronicle. The part relating to the introducing of
printing into England being very short, I believe will be acceptable to the
reader, and is as follows.

The rise and progress of printing in England.

The art of printing was first brought into England in the time of Hen. vi. at
the charges of the archbishop of Canterbury (Bourchier,) who employed one
Turner master of the robes to the king, and one Mr. Caxton a mercer of London,
but using the trade of a merchant, to go to Harlem to endeavor to bring over
some of the workmen, that had then newly practiced the art there, who prevailed
upon some of the under-workmen to come over with them into England, and to
teach them their trade. As soon as they were landed, they were conveyed under a
guard to the university of Oxford for fear they should run back again; and
there they set up a press about the year 1467, as appears by several books that
were printed there about that time. The names of those workmen were Rood an
Almayn (or German) and Winken de Word; and the charges of the journey cost the
archbishop 1500 marks, as appears by several papers and memorials relating to
this matter, that are still extant in the library at Lambeth. Shortly after
there was a press set up at the Abbey of St. Albans, which continued till the
dissolution, etc.

THE remainder being foreign to this chapter, shall be communicated in some of
the following, to which it more properly belongs. I need not observe that this
manuscript ascribes all the honor of this transaction to the archbishoshp;
whereas the chronicle assures us that the king contributed the greatest sum
toward it. The date mentioned in my manuscript is a year before the Oxford
edition came out.

It may be here objected that the year 1467 cannot bring it within the reign of
Henry VI. who had been deposed six years before; but I answer that the
manuscript does not assert that the Dutch printers came not into England till
that year, but that their press was not set up till then; and though this
happened in another reign, yet it will still be true that king Henry caused
them to be brought over, whilst he was upon the throne, though the civil wars,
and his being deposed, put a stop to their proceedings for six or seven years.
We shall have occasion to remark further upon this in the next chapter. As for
its complementing the archbishop with having been at the whole expense of the
journey; it may be ascribed to want of better information, or partiality to
that prelate, who might still be in great esteem under king Edward; whilst the
good king Henry was stripped of the royal dignity and wholly neglected. With
respect to the two printers mentioned there; the first is probably the same,
Theodoric Rood, who printed afterward by himself, and of whom we have but two
editions printed at Oxford in 1480, and 1481, of which we shall give a further
account in the next chapter. Whether he came along with Corsellis as an
under-workman, is difficult to determine,

I am of opinion that Winken de Word came not to England till some years
after; though he might easily be confounded by the author of the M. S. with the
other, on account of his Dutch name, and of his having signalized himself
afterward by the number and elegance of his editions, which he printed both
under Caxton and by himself. Thus it is ^^ain that the few records, which we
have, agree in the following particulars; that archbishop Bourchier solicited
king Henry VI. to procure the establishment of the art of printing in this
kingdom; that the king not only consented, but contributed largely to it; that
Turner and Caxton were employed in this design; that it cost 1500 marks to
execute it; that it was happily effected during the reign of Henry VI. i. e.
before the year 1461, since in the beginning of that year he was deposed by
Edward IV. and lastly, that Oxford was fixed upon by the king and Archbishop to
set up the first press in, and make the first essays of this art; which city
therefore shall be the subject of our next chapter.

CHAP. II. Printing at Oxford by Frederic Corsellis.
SOME English authors, and particularly Mr. Howel, are of opinion, that the
first trials of this art were made in the Ambry belonging to Westminster-Abby,
where Mr. Caxton afterward carried on the business with good success for a
considerable time; as shall be related in its place. But as they affirm this
upon the supposition, that the Abbot of that place, [Islip], was the person,
who procured the art to be brought to England; whereas the chronicle
abovementioned, which they knew nothing of, asserts the contrary; in both these
respects, I think it more reasonable to follow it, than those writers: nor
indeed is it probable, that any but a crowned head, or some persons employed by
him, would venture upon such a dangerous project. Besides, this account of the
chronicle is confirmed by the edition of 1468, mentioned in the preceding
chapter, of which we shall speak more fully hereafter: for though this comes
short in date of the last year of Henry VI, by seven or eight years, yet it is
older by at least as many, than any impression of Caxton's at Westminster, as
far as has been yet discovered. Add to this, that according to their
Supposition, that Mr. Caxton learned the art from the workman brought over from
Holland, we must necessarily suppose the latter to have made several essays,
and printed a volume or two at least, before the former could be perfect enough
in it to engage in that province. But I am far from thinking, that Caxton
either learned the art from him, or even came over to England with him; since
it is much more probable, that he dispatched Mr. Turnour with Corsellis thither,
and carried on his commerce as well as his studies beyond sea. I am inclined to
this opinion, by a passage in the preface to the second book of his history of
Troy, which he tells us he translated from the French at the desire of the
Duchess of Burgundy, the King's sister; which translation, he says, he began
at Bruges, anno 1468, continued at Gaunt, and finished at Cologn, anno a
thousand four honderd lxxi. Hence it is plain, that he was still traveling in
Flanders and Germany three years after the first edition printed by Corsellis
at Oxford: nor does it appear, that Caxton came presently after to England, but
stayed to write a third book in the last mentioned place, Cologn, as he informs
us in these words; " The third book of the destruction of Troy -- I have now
good leyzer in Cologn -- I have delibered in my self being -- to take
thislaboure in hand" It Is unreasonable to imagine, that a man of his years, (of
which he complains in the same preface, saying, that age crept on him daily and
feebled all the body,) should come along with the Dutch Printer, and learn the
art from him, and then go traveling again, having one book to translate, and
another to write, viz. his Fruits of Time. I am of opinion therefore, that he
learned the art, at least got a good insight into it abroad, and perhaps at
Cologn; though he might make himself master of the practical part of it after his
return into England.

THUS far therefore it is plain, that Caxton had been on his travels some time,
when Corsellis printed that first edition at Oxford; that the latter was the
first Printer in England; and that Oxford was the place, where the first press
was set up. The chronicle gives these reasons why that Printer was sent
thither; 1. Because it was an inland town, out of which it would be less
possible for him to escape, than from London or any place near the sea; 2.
Archbishop Bourchier, who had been vice chancellor, and was then chancellor of
that university, may be supposed to have had a more than ordinary regard for
it, and, in consequence of that, to have prevailed upon the King to honor it
with the first press. To these we may add the two following, viz. 1. That an
university was the most proper place for such a work; because it would still be
under the eye and direction of the learned men there, who could make choice of
the best works to be printed, the best MSS. to print from, and the most skilful
persons to correct them; 2. the city of London, and almost the whole kingdom
being disturbed and divided by the Earl of March's party* and the court engaged
in opposing his measures, an university was a much safer and quieter place to
lay the foundation of this art in, than any other in the kingdom. Corsellis
therefore, and those to whom he was to discover the secret, having sworn
fidelity to the king and his successors, and being admitted into the number of
the king's servants and household, began to exercise this art as soon as they
had got all things ready for it. How long they were thus employed in their
preparations, and what progress they made after I shall next enquire.

THE reader will have just cause to admire, that, if they began so soon as the
latter end of Henry VI's reign, viz. before anna 1461, they should have
published no work yet discovered till seven years after, viz. 1468; and that
there are but three editions extant between that time and the year 1481, the
edition of 1468 included; and, what is still more admirable, that from that
year to 1585, which is above 100 years, thee is not one volume to be found
printed at Oxford, though the art flourished in several other parts of England,
as will appear in the progress of this history. This last particular I can by
no means account for; but the other, I mean their slow progress at first, is
easily solved by what has been hinted before, viz. the troubles which were then
breaking forth, and fell upon the king and court, as well as his deposition,
which happened immediately after their first settlement in that university,
together with the opposition made continually by his Queen and friends against
his victorious rival. Besides, if we consider that the Printers were sworn
servants to the crown, and consequently incapable to act without the king's
special order, or at least his license, whilst Henry their Patron was out of
power, and the reigning monarch otherwise employed, it will be very easy to
account for these delays, and the small progress which they made in those
troublesome times. We may likewise with great probability suppose, that most of
their works were such as were adapted to those times of superstition, as
prayer-books, manuals, legends, etc. which perished soon after the reformation.

IT must be owned indeed, that the author of the chronicle, so often mentioned,
tells us, that as soon as Corsellis had performed his promise, and instructed a
sufficient number of others in the art, it was thought proper to disperse them,
some to Westminster, others to St. Albans, etc. Yet it is still very
surprising, that so considerable a place as Oxford could not detain one of them
by a sufficient encouragement. However, it is plain, that except Theodoric Rood,
a German, and native of Cologn, who very probably came over with Mr. Caxton
from thence, and of whom we have discovered but two editions, there are no
other footsteps of printing in this university extant from that time to 1585,
nor any tolerable account among the writers of those times for such a wonderful
scarcity. But this is not the only thing which the reader will be surpised at,
with relation to the slow progress which printing made at Oxford.

I have, in the former book, given an account of vast improvements made to that
art in foreign countries, and to what a degree of perfection the Italians and
French, in particular, had brought it, not only with respect to the exquisite
beauty and variety of characters, richness and elegancy of composition, etc.
but likewise by their introducing the learned and eastern languages, as Greek,
Hebrew, Arabic, etc. into their printing-houses, even before the year 1520, and
printing several curious polyglot works in all these tongues, besides the
Latin. But though I have extended this English history thirty years further than
theirs, viz. to the year 1550, yet the reader must not expect to find any thing
of this nature done in England during that time. Our first Printers, though
excellent men in their way, contented themselves with printing in their own
tongue; and if they ventured sometimes either upon Latin or French, their
productions in those languages were few and inconsiderable: but with respect to
Greek and Hebrew, either through want of due encouragement from the learned, or
of courage in them, it is certain they never attempted any thing of that kind
till a long time after.

THE reader may remember with what difficulty the Parisian Printers were
prevailed upon to venture upon such works; what objections and obstacles they
raised against so expensive and hazardous an undertaking: yet a learned
Frenchman so far prevailed with some of them, that he had the pleasure of
seeing several of his own works printed in those languages; the reception of
which soon encouraged them to proceed in several noble undertakings. But the
case was far different in England: for the learned Dr. Wakefield, having made
an oration in 1584, to recommend the study of the Hebrew and Arabic tongues,
and show the usefulness and necessity of them, was obliged to publish it maimed
and imperfect, wanting near a third part, because, as he tells us, the Printers
of that time had no Hebrew types; though it was printed by Wynken de Word, one
of the most eminent Printers in Europe of that age. Printing in Greek made no
great figure in England before the 16th century; and the most learned work,
which we have to boast of, was the polyglot bible of Dr. Walton, mentioned at
the latter end of the last book, which was not printed till after the
restoration by Mr. Thomas Roycroft, of whom I shall say more hereafter.

EXCEPT this, I don't find any footsteps of any works in the polyglot kind, but
what were small and inconsiderable. However, we, like the Dutch, have
sufficiently since atton'd for the slow progress which our ancestors made in
those noble branches of printing.

I shall now give an account of the editions before mentioned between the years
1468 and 1585.

1. Sancti Hieronymi expositio in Symbolum Apostolorum, 4to, (without the
Printer's name.)

Oxon, 1468.

THIS ancient piece begins with the following title. Incipit Expositio Sancti
Jeronimi in Symbolum Apostolorum ad Papam Laurentium. At the end are the
following words: Explicit Expositio Sancti Jeronimi in Symbolo Apostolorum ad
Papam Laurentium, Impressus Oxonie and finita Anno Domini MCCCCLXVIII. xvii.
die Decembris. There is one in the Bodleian library, given by the learned
bishop Barlow, who wrote with his own hand, in the first page, that this
exposition was not St. Jerome's, but Rufinus's: Rufini est haec Expositio, non
Hieronymi: and in the last page he wrote as follows,

Stephen Bateman doctor of divinity, and chaplain to Hen. Carry Ld. Hunsden upon
Bartholomaeus de proprietatibus rerum [the book was writ in Latin anno 1366,
translated into English in 1397,] in the last he tells us, that Bartholomeus
was first printed in English in 1471, and then he adds, -- at which time
printing began first in England, the 37th year of Hen. VI. but he is manifestly
mistaken, for this foregoing book was printed in 1468 at Oxford, at least two
years before. This remark of Dr. Bateman has another gross mistake, besides
that observed by bishop Barlow; which is, that the year 1471 was far from being
the 37th of Henry VI. who had been deposed 10 years before. The 37th year of
that King's reign was the year 1459; in which it is probable some foundations of
printing had been laid in England, though, for the aforementioned reasons, we
meet with nothing done in that kind till eight or nine years after. We shall
affirm nothing concerning this English edition of Barth. de Propriet. Rer.
(though it is reasonable to suppose it printed at Oxford,) since we have no other
account of it but this manuscript note of bishop Barlow.

2. Leonardus Aretinus in Aristot. Ethic. Comment. Oxon, 1479.

I THINK 'twill not be amiss to insert here what is wrote before these two
books, which are in the Pembroke library, it is as follows.

'Here are the only two books to be seen by Corsellis, the first Printer at
Oxford; though there are other copies of the first, of the second we know of only
this. These are printed on the same shaped letters as the Rationale and
Catholicon by Faust (vulgarly doctor Faustus.) The civil wars in Edward IV's
time might probably hinder the progress of the press; the third book, viz.'

3. Aegidius de Romd, alias Aegidius Columna Romanus Archiep. Bituricens. Ord.
Eremit. S. Aug. de Peccato Originali, 4to. Oxon, 1479,

'was printed about the time of the second, and, it is probable, this was
printed by Corsellis, for the next Printer at Oxford was Rood, as appears by
the following book.'

4. The destruction of Troy in Latin, by Guido de Columna, by T. R. Oxon, 1480.

THERE is also one more printed by Rood at Oxford, mentioned by Orlandi, viz.

5. Alexandri ab Hales Angli Sententiosa, atque studio digna expositio super
tertium Librum de Anima. Impressum per me Theodoricum Rood [Road] de Colonia
xi. October, in Alma Universitate. Oxon, 1481.

'Both Corsellis and Rood are mentioned by our historians, to have been brought
over by Caxton. Caxton with Sir Richard Whetehilt were sent, after he brought
in the art, by Edward IV. to settle a commerce" with the Duke of Burgundy, in
1464. Vide Rymer's Faedera.'

THUS much for Oxford in the infancy of the art.

CHAP. III. Westminster. MCCCCLXXIV.
WESTMINSTER being the most considerable place on several accounts, and
particularly for its productions, and the great applause with which Mr. Caxton
carried on the business of printing there for above 21 years; we have for this
reason given it the priority; yet hope I shall be excused for this digression
concerning St. Albans, which has been far less eminent on this account, and as
a history of the two books printed there, I shall here relate as I found it
wrote before the Book of Miscellanies, printed at St. Albans, in the Pembroke
library. It Is as follows.

'IT is agreed, that Corsellis was the first who printed in England, and that
Oxford and St. Albans were the two first places; the types, as may be seen in
my Lord's books, at Oxford were like those of Faust; the types of this at St.
Albans are like the Dutch Spieghel. Junius argues for the first printing to be
at Harlem from the Dutch Spieghel; but it appears from what is writ before the
five books, called Paginae Conglutinatoe, that the Latin one of this Dutch was
before it, the which he had not seen, neither does it conclude where it was
printed; however, this book of St. Albans affords an argument, which Junius
could not then know of, that the Dutch letter might be before 1460, and it
favors what Atkins says of a press brought over from Harlem in the time of
Henry VI. who died in 1460. This is the same letter, and we read that Frederick
Corsellis did at St. Albans instruct an old learned schoolmaster to print, and
Corsellis was of a considerable age when Theodoric de Rood of Colen succeeded
him at Oxford, by whom we have two books printed; the first as old as 1480,
already taken notice of. It has been a doubt, whether they first printed at St.
Albans or at Oxford, the oldest book of St. Albans with a date is here; but we
cannot prove this book of Miscellanies to be older than the dissolution of the
Abbeys by K. Henry VIII. 'till when a press remained, and the first letter used
as late as 1490, such a year appearing in this book. We know of but one more
book at St. Albans, the which my Lord also has; it discovers that there was
another press set up at St. Albans after this, with the letter of the Spieghel,
because that is printed with Caxton's types, and has (as Caxton's books have)
the two improvements of indenting paragraphs, and dividing words by hyphens at
the ends of the lines; the Printers of this, with the letter of the Spieghel,
continued to print as they began, without the two improvements, even after the
press of Caxton; though even here that press used his improvements. This other
book is dated 1486 in words at length, at the end of the book of hunting,
besides the arms of that monastery, which are at the end of the whole book.
Spelman in his Aspilogia, quotes the whole book, as wrote by Juliana Barnes,
and is so referred to by Bale in his Scriptores, though she appears to be the
author only of the piece of hunting; the treatise in that book of coat arms, is
only a translation of Upton de re Militari. That printed by Caxton at
Westminster in 1496, was a second edition of this book. OF this, with the types
of the Spieghel, there is a second edition in 1529, printed by Winken de Word;
it consists of miscellanies, and has something very remarkable, as the old
trial in K. Henry VI's time at Leicester, (not taken notice of in our great
collection of state-tryals) of the cardinal of Winchester, impeached by the
Duke of Gloucester before the House of Lords, in which appears the names of the
mitred Abbots among the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the form of the
clerks entering as they came in, and at different times took the oaths. The
names of the thirty six churches in London and suburbs that were not parochial;
also of the hundred and eighteen parish churches and their patrons. In this is
the Nut brown maid, supposed by Chaucer, as Skeleton confirms, by having had a
copy given him by Lidgate, Monk of Bury. Mr. Prior has made a paraphrase on it,
and has also printed it from the old English, but knew not that it was by
Chaucer; besides, in his, each verse is divided into two, as the first verse
ends with among, and the second ends with it is, etc.

Also in his, Woman and Man, is printed at the beginning of each Stanza [here
they are suppos'd] as they speak. Also the last Stanza (which makes twelve
lines by his division) is wanting.'

THUS far we have copied from my Lord's manuscript notes before his books of
St. Albans. We now proceed to Westminster; and here it is requisite to observe,
that Dr. Islip, abbot of Westminster, having very liberally promoted this art,
and encouraged Mr. Caxton, to whom he assigned that part of the Abbey, supposed
by some of our historians to be the Ambry or Eleemosinary. As a confirmation of
this opinion, Mr. Newcourt in his Repertorium, tom. i. page 721, has it thus:
'St. Ann's, an old chapel, over against which the Lady Margaret, mother to
king Henry VII, erected an almshouse for poor women, which is now turned into
lodgings for the singing-men of the college. The place, wherein this chapel and
almshouse stood, was called the Eleemosinary or Almonry, now corruptly the
Ambry, [Aumbry] for that the alms of the Abbey were the^e distributed to the
poor; in which Islip, abbot of Westminster erected the first press for
book-printing, that ever was in England, about the year of Christ 1471, and
where William Caxton, citizen and mercer of London, who first brought it into
England, practiced it.' This might occasion the report, that this abbot first
brought printing to England at his own charges. This notion of his introducing
the art into our nation, which has prevailed among several of our writers, is
not only contradicted by the author of the chronicle, but seems to be
groundless on this account, that if there had been any truth, in it, Mr. Caxton
would have been obliged in gratitude to have taken notice of this singular
piece of merit of his friend and patron, in some of the prefaces to his works.

I HAVE followed the same method in this book, as I did in the former, dating
the places according to the oldest edition extant, that bears any certain date;
though I am not ignorant that some of them may come short of being the first that
were printed there. Mr. Bagford (whose papers are now in the possession of the
right honorable the Earl of Oxford, at Wimpole in Cambridgeshire) tells us, in
a proposal he published for a History of Printing, that Caxton's first
impression seems to be that of Game of Chess, in 1474; because it carries that
date in the device, as the reader may see under his picture at the front of the
second volume, though he owns there was another impression of it without that
device, as well as several other of his works without any date at all. However,
the oldest that has a certain date, ought in reason to fix our epoch,
according to our method.

WILLIAM CAXTON. 1474.
MR. Caxton was born, as he writes himself, in the Weeld of Kent, where the
broadest English is spoken; but as Fuller, in his English Worthies asserts, he
was born at Caxton in Hertfordshire, being perhaps lead into that error by his
surname, since it was the custom of that time for persons to denominate
themselves from the place of their birth. I think it will be necessary to
subjoin his own account of himself in this respect, from his preface to the
Recule of the Historyes of Troy, translated by him out of the French of Raoul
le Fevre, Priest. -- 'When I remember myself of my unperfitness in both
languages. -- In France was I never, and was born and learned mine English in
Kente in the Weeld, where English is spoken broad and rude. -- I have continued
for the most part in the countries of Brabant, Flanders, Holland and Zeland. --
The Duchess of BOURGOGNE sister of the king of England, when she had seen v
or vi quairs, found default in mine English, which she commanded me to ammand,
and to continue and make an end of the residue, -- whose command I durst not
disobey.' -- Thus far Mr. Caxton: and I cannot but observe, that the faults of
his English are owing more to his long continuance abroad, than to the place of
his birth; which will easily appear from an accurate observation of his
language and manner of spelling, which discover the foreigner more than a
broad-spoken Kentish man. His education was owing to his mother, and extended
no farther than to read and write, which, he says, procured him a good
maintenance. Mr. Bale tells us indeed, that he understood the Latin tongue;
which is plain, from his translations out of that language. But, as he does not
mention it as a part of his youthful education, it is very probable that he did
not apply himself to the study of it till a long time after. He was bred a
mercer of the city of London, and became a Conjurys thereof, I have indeed,
through the favor of Mr. Crump, at Mercer's hall, searched their book of
freemen, but could not find his name there. There was one Richard Caxton made
free about that time, whether it was a relation of his, or a mistake in
transcribing his christian name, I cannot be sure of; but however, as he calls
himself a Mercer of London, we have no reason to doubt it.
as he styles himself in his preface to Cato, that is, a sworn member of that
company, which in those days consisted of very considerable merchants, trading
more particularly into the Low Countries, and some of the maritime parts of
Germany. To these he was frequently sent, but never had the fortune to visit
France; though he became so good a master of that language, as to translate
several volumes into English, of which we shall give an account hereafter. His
travels likewise so well accomplished him in the High and Low Dutch, that upon
the account of this, and his knowledge of those countries and their trade, the
king chose him as a fit person to undertake the bringing printing to England.
This task, how difficult and hazardous soever, he acquitted himself with great
integrity.

Mr. Caxton, besides his accomplishments as a merchant, acquired a great deal
of politeness, partly by his travels for 30 years, and partly by his frequent
residence at the court of the duchess of Burgundy, sister to king Edward IV,
who caressed and patronized him very much; for, in the preface abovementioned,
he tells us, that he was a servant to her grace, and received of her a yearly
fee, and other many good and great benefits. He was likewise a favorite to
several of our kings, particularly Henry VI, Edward IV, Richard III, and Henry
VII; and highly esteemed by the prime of our nobility, and especially by the
duke of Clarence, the king's uncle, to whom he dedicated some of his works; the
countess of Derby, king Henry VII's mother; the earl of Rivers, Arundel, with
many others. As he was a person indefatigable and ambitious of applause, as
well as earnest in promoting the glory of his own country, he read incessantly
the histories of his own and other nations; which at proper times he digested
into order. At his return to England, he became acquainted with a learned
schoolmaster of St. Albans, supposed by some writers upon good grounds to have
been the printer of Juliana Barnes. This person, having laid the foundation of
a complete body of English history, kept a constant correspondence with Mr.
Caxton, and was assisted by him in his translations; but, being prevented by
death from finishing his work, Mr. Caxtom procured his papers, examined, and
reduced them to order, and compared them with the best authors he could get, as
Livy, St. Austin, Gildas, Beda, Isidorus, Cassiodorus, Geoffrey of Monmouth,
William of Malmesbury, Martin Cansulanus, and others; from whom he also
extracted many considerable passages, which he added to the history. This work
he entitled Fructus temporum, or the fruits of time, in seven books; to which
he subjoined a chronology. The history begins with the giants, the first
supposed inhabitants of this island, and concludes with the 23d year of Edward
IV. viz. ann. 1483. What share our author had in this performance, and how
great a part was done by the schoolmaster, is impossible to determine. This
book was often reprinted and much valued at that time; yet, though it is the most
considerable piece which Mr. Caxton published, we have several others written
and printed by himself, which are as follow: 2. An appendix to Trevisa's
English translation of Randulph's polychronicon, 1 book; 3. The image of the
world, 1 book; 4. The description of Great Britain, 1 book; 5. The life of
Edward the Confessor, 1 book; 6. The history of king Arthur, 21 books;
and some others, all in English. The appendix to Trevisa is continued, from
the year 1397, in which the supplement of Trevisa to the polychronicon ends, to
the year 1460, in which he wrote it. The learned Mr. Seldom indeed ascribes the
whole to Trevisa; but, besides that, Caxton takes the supplement and other
additions and interpretations to himself; but it is plain, as Dr. Nicholson
observes, that Trevisa, according to that supposition, must have wrote near a
hundred years after his death. Those which he translated out of Latin and
French are as follows:

Out of Latin.
1. Vegetius de re militari, or of the art of war, 4 books; 2. Joannita of the
game of chess, 4 books; 3. The history of the destruction of Troy, 3 books; 4.
Bonaventure of the Life of Christ, 1 book; 5. The history of Lombardy, 1 book;
6. John Tinmouth's Sanctilogium Britanniae, epitomized by Capgrave.
From French.
1. The siege and conquest of Jerusalem, by Geodfrey of Bologne, dedicated to
King Edward IV. 2. The royal book, entitled in French le livre royal.
BESIDES these, there are several others in the list of his printed works
subjoined to the account of his life. He printed likewise some books in French,
as La legende doree, etc. and some in Latin, as Vita patruum and Boethius de
consolatione philosophiae, etc. This catalogue of his works, as an author, I
have taken from Pitts and Bale; the latter of whom gives him the character of
vir non omnino stupidus nec ignavia torpens, neither a perfect dunce nor
abandoned to laziness: I shall more readily assent to the judgment of a much
later and more judicious writer, Dr. Nicholson who says of Bale (p. 177) that
he gives the account of men and their labors at random; and of Caxton (p. 190)
that the opportunities he had, of being acquainted with the court-transactions
of his own time, would encourage his reader to hope for greater matters from
him; but that his fancy seems to have lead him into an undertaking (with
respect to his Fructus temporum) above his strength. There is one thing very
observable concerning this excellent Printer and author, that he translated,
printed, corrected, illuminated and bound all his Books within his own office
or printing house. As he printed long before the method of adding the errata at
the end of books was in use, so his extraordinary exactness obliged him to a
great deal more trouble than can easily be imagined; for he tells us, in the
preface to some of his books, that his chief care, after a work was printed
off, was to revise it, and mend all the faults with his own hand with red ink;
which being done to one copy, he caused some of his journey-men to do the same
throughout the whole impression; which he afterward compared with his first
sheet, to see that they had not omitted any of his corrections. It Is true, they
did not print off so large a number of books as now; for 250 or 300 were
thought a large impression; but even that number made it very tedious to
correct throughout: though this was practiced by several eminent Printers of
other nations, 'till they found out the way of printing the errata in some
blank leaves of the book.

MR. Caxton having made himself a perfect master of the Art of Printing (not at
Oxford under Fred. Corsellis, as some authors imagine, but during his travels
beyond sea, as will appear hereafter) came and settled at Westminster, where
abbot Islip (as some say) his friend and patron, assigned him one of the
chapels belonging to the abbey, as we have before quoted from Newcourt, as being
retired and free from interruption; and from this or some other chapel, it is
supposed that the name of chapel has been given to all printing-houses in
England ever since. And notwithstanding it is by some reported, that it was set
up in the chapel there, I can trace no footsteps of its having been practiced
in that place. My manuscript beforementioned says, 'that a press was set up in
Westminster abbey by abbot Islip, in the little ambry, where William Caxton was
master.' Mr. Bagford assigns the house in the ambry which was formerly the
king's head, as the place where Caxton carried on his printing, but had I been
early enough in my enquiry before 'twas pulled down, as Mr. Bagford was, I
flatter my self I could have found some remains. I have great reason to think
it had been a printing house, by having been informed, that some persons found
among the rubbish some remains of printing materials; but, through ignorance of
the curiosity of them, they are either lost or destroyed. As I have given my
reasons against the arts being practiced in the chapel at Westminster, I rather
think, that our technical terms in printing, such as a printing house being
called a chapel; and where printing is gray in one place, and too black in
another, the gray is called a friar, and the black a monk; I think, I say, that
these terms took their original from the art's being practiced in other
religious houses besides that at Westminster: for it is evident, by the book
hereafter mentioned, printed in the exempt monastery of Tavistock in
Devonshire, by Dan Thomas Richard, monk of the said monastery, that several of
the religious orders exercised this art, perhaps in some outer chapel, which,
being dedicated to some saint, was only used once a year on the anniversary of
that saint.

THE reader will find, that printing-houses were set up in several cities and
towns in England, where they had any considerable religious house. Thus we see
the abbey of St. Albans had printing there very soon, as before notic'd. Nor was
this the only religious house where printing was practiced, and that very
early; for time has discovered to us several others, such as Tavistock, as
aforesaid, Worcester, Canterbury, Ipswich; which were chosen for that purpose.
We have already hinted, that the first Printers were sworn servants to the
Crown; and in particular Mr. Caxton not only printed as such, but all his
impressions were recommended either by the king, or princes of the blood, or by
some eminent patron amongst the nobility, who bore the charges of the whole.
The types with which he printed were peculiar to himself, and easily
distinguished from any other, being a mixture of secretary and Gothic in shape,
the size great primer. He had several eminent workmen under him; particularly
Winken de Word, a Dutchman, and Rich. Pynson, a citizen of London, who
afterward printed for themselves many valuable pieces, which shall be
mentioned in their proper place. They likewise used a letter peculiar to
themselves, which as I shall take notice, differed from their master's, and was
more refined and moderniz'd. Mr. Caxton, besides his other valuable
qualifications, was a person of exemplary piety and strictness of life. He
continued printing from before the year 1474 to 1495, as is evident from the
end of the Vita patrum and Hilton's scale, printed, or rather finished, in that
year by Winken de Word. Mr. auditor Jett deceased, assured me, that he was
buried in St. Margaret's church, Westminster; and that he saw the remains of
his tombstone, but I have not as yet been able to find it.

THE list of his works is as follows; in which I could not possibly recover the
right titles of each book; but such as I could meet with, I have set down
exactly as printed by him. Those which have no certain date are put at the end.

1. The Game of chess. fol. translated out of the Latin of Joannita, and by him
dedicated to the duke of Florence, brother to king Edward IV, who was murdered
in the tower, ann. 1477. There are two editions of Caxtons of this book; one
which has a kind of cipher or device, bearing the date of 74, and the other
without both. The former therefore I suppose to be first printed, which has the
date, Westminster, 1474. IT is now in the Pembroke library, nor do I know of
one any where else.

2. A book of sayings of the philosopher Socrates, translated out of Latin into
French, by Johan. de Tronville, provost of Paris, and out of the French into
English, by Wydewyll, Earl of Ryvers -- emprinted by me William Caxton at
Westmestre. 1477. The work was by the Earl's desire overseen by Caxton. Caxton
me fieri fecit. This book is in the library of my worthy friend and promoter of
this work Mr. Granger.

3. Memorare novissima, which entreats of the four last things, the first of
death, the second of the last judgment, the third of the pains of hell, the
fourth of the joys of heaven; translated out of the French by Antony, Earl of
Rivers, Lord Scales, and of the Isle of Weight, defensor and dictator of the
causes apostolic for our holy father the pope, uncle and governor to my
lord, prince of Wales: printed by William Caxton, in the year of Edward IV.
4to. Ibid. 1478. 4. Ovid's metamorphosis. Ibid. 1479. 5. Thymage or mirror of
the world, translated from the French into English. ibid. fol. 1480. BEGAN the
second of January, 1480, and finished it the 8th of March in the same year.
Caxton me fieri fecit. 6. The history of England, together with the history of
Ireland, taken out of the polychronicon. fol. ibid. 1480. THERE are two
editions of this book, both by Caxton, and since then it has been frequently
reprinted by others till the year 1530.

7. The life and history of king Arthur, etc. in 21 books, written and printed
by Caxton. ibid. 1480. 8. The history of the last siege and conquest of
Jerusalem, translated from the French of Godfrey of Bologn. With many histories
therein comprised translated, and reduced out of French into English by me
simple person William Caxton, which book I present unto the most christian king
Edward IV. -- which book I began in march 7, and finished the 7th of juin,
1481. and the 21st year of king Edward IV. and in this month set in form and
emprinted the 20th of november the year aforesaid in the abbey of Westminster by
the said William Caxton.
ibid. 1481. 9. The history of Reynard the fox. 4to. ibid.1481. 10. Tully of
old age and of friendship, in English. fol. 1481. 11. The continuation of
Ranulph's polychronicon, Englished by Trevisa. fol. without the place's name.
by W. Caxton. 1482. First translated out of Latin by John Trevisa, chaplain to
the lord Berkley, and then continued by me simple person William Caxton, etc.
printed july 2.
12. Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum Anglice. fol. ibid. THIS was
communicated to me whilst I was printing this list, so that I had not time to
enquire after the English title of it.

13. Cathone's exhortations or precepts, with comments, fol. ibid. At the end
are these words: Cathon translated out of French into English by William
Caxton, in the abbey of Westmynstre, 1483, first year of our king Richard the
third, 23d of decembre.
december xxiii. 1483. 14. The history of the knights of the tower. ibid. 1483.
15. The pilgrimage of the soul, translated out of French into English with
somewhat of additions. fol. emprinted by me William Caxton at Westmestre. 1483.
Finished the sixth day of juyn, the first year of king Edward the fifth.
16. Cato Englished by Caxton. fol. 1483. 17. Confessio amantis, the confession
of the lover made by Johan. Gower, born in Walys, in the time of king Richard
the second. fol. emprinted by me William Caxton at Westmestre. 1483. Finished
the second of september, the first year of Richard the 3d, in the year a
thousand CCCCXXXXIII. In this date it is plain, by the king's reign, that the X
's must be taken for twenties and not for tens.
18. The book of homilies in English. fol. ibid. 1483. 19. La legende doree.
ibid. 1re annee de Richard III. 1483. 20. Directions for keeping the feasts of
the whole year. fol. ibid. June the last. 1483. 21. The lives of the saints.
ibid. 1484. 22. The royal book, entitled in French, Le livre royal. A special
book to know all vices and the branches of them, and also all virtues. This
book shows and enseigneth it so subtly, so shortly, so perceivingly, and so
perfectly, that for so short comprehension of the noble clergy, and of the
right great substance that is therein comprised, it may be called above other
books, the royal book, or book for a king.
fol. translated and printed by William Caxton, in the second year of king
Richard III. without the place's name. 23. Walter Hilton's scale of perfection.
ibid. 1484. 24. The history of the noble and valiant knight Paris, and the fair
Vienne, the daughter of the doulphin of Viennes. fol. ibid. 1485. Translated
out of French into English by William Caxton of Westminster, finished the last
of august, 1485, and emprinted the 19th of december the same year.
25. The life of Charles the great. ibid. 1485. 26. Vita patrum. ibid. 1485.
27. Malvire's history of king Arthur. ibid. julii ult. in the year 1485. 28.
The book of good manners. ibid. 1486. Composed by friar Jacques le Grant,
religious of the order of St. Augustine.
29. A treatise against pride. ibid. 1486. 30. Dives and Lazarus, a dialogue on
the decalogue. fol. ibid. 1488. 31. The book of (...), (Christian) of
Pysedracon, out of Vegetius de re militari, and out of the arbre of battle,
with many other things setten to the same, requisite to war and battles;
which book was delivered to translate and print, to William Caxton by king
Henry the seventh, in the fourth year of his reign. fol. ibid. 1489. Which
Translation was began the 23d of january, and finished the 7th of july the same
year, and emprinted the 14th of july next following.
32. The book of feats of arms. ibid. 1489. 33. Virgil's aeneid translated, or
rather epitomized, from the French in prose by William Caxton: printed by him.
fol. ibid. 1490. 34. The history of Jason. ibid. 1492. 35. Confessio amantis,
or the confession of the lover, of Johan. Gower, etc. ibid. This is the second
edition, with the same colophon as the former. 1493. 36. Vita patrum. Second
edition. ibid. 1495. 37. Recueil of the history of Troy, per Caxton. 1502.
THIS edition, with some others, were communicated to me by a learned
antiquary, in those very words, but whether he was really the Printer of it, or
only the author, and the book Printed by some other, is what I cannot
determine, unless I could have seen the book.

Those that follow are without date.

1. Liber festialis.

THIS edition, though I have given it no higher rank, upon the account of its
having no date, does yet manifestly appear to me to have been the first book
extant of Caxton's Printing. I have seen it at my Lord Pembroke's library, and
compared it with those of the Game of Chess, his three books of the history of
Troy, and his Polychronicon; all which have been severally looked upon as his
oldest edition by one annalist or other, and find in it these two
unquestionable marks of antiquity above the other three, viz 1. The types on
which it is printed appear to be entirely new, though they be the very same
which he used in all his other works; whereas, in the others they seem to be
more used and worn. 2. This edition is the only one whose lines are not spaced
out to the end; this being an improvement and elegancy introduced by him in
imitation of foreign Printers; whereas all the first editions had the same
defect with this.

As for the three books of the history of Troy, the second is that which I
imagine to have been printed first. I have seen it very perfect in several
libraries, but the first and third I never could meet with any where, but in
the noble library above mentioned. And even here they are somewhat imperfect,
the first book wanting a few leaves at the beginning, and the third at the end.
However, they all bear alike the mark of antiquity, and are unquestionably done
with Caxton's types. The oldest book I could ever meet with that bears a date
is his second edition of the Game at Chess, in 1474, as may be seen by the
catalogue above; and what inclines me to believe it to have been the first of
that kind, is that the same date 74 is continued in his following works that
are dated, to which he sometimes added the two initial letters of his name, as
in the mark or rebus here subjoined.

N. B. W C stands sor William Caxton, and the Figure between, for 74, i. e.
1474; the reader will plainly perceive the 7, and the other is a figure of 4,
as made at that time. William Caxton's printer's mark

We have met with but five editions without date, though we have ventured to
add several more upon the authority of Mr. Maunsel and other authors, who we
think may be relied on.

2. The game of Chess. Part of Caxton's Preface to the Game of Chess, in the
hands of Maurice Johnson, Esquire is as follows; 'And when I so had acheved the
said Translacion I did do set in emprynte a certain no more of them which
anon were depeshed and sold, and wherefore by cause this said book is sul of
holsom Wysedom and requysyte unto every astate and degree, I have purposed to
emprynte it, showing therein the figures of such persons as longen to the
Play.'


3. The rule of the monks of St. Bennet. fol. ibid.

4. The life of our Lady. fol. Written in verse by John Lidgate, monk of Bury.


5. The life of St. Winifred. 4to. translated and printed by William Caxton.

6. St. Austin raising two dead persons. 4to.

7. An exposition on the Lord's Prayer, Belief, Commandments, seven sacraments,
seven virtues, seven deadly sins: item, the general sentence, or sentence of
cursing, modus fulminandi sententiam: the beads on sunday. fol. Printed by
William Caxton at Westminster. This book begins thus; The master of sentences
in the second book and first distinct. says, that the sovereign cause why God
made all creatures in heaven, earth, or water, was his own goodness.


8. The fruit of time. fol. collected, compiled, and Printed by William Caxton.
ibid.

9. The spousage of a virgin. 4to. ibid.

10. The siege of Rhodes. fol. ibid.

11. Boethius de consolatione philosophiae. ibid.

12. The mirror of the blessed life of Jesus Christ, written in Latin by the
worshipful Dr. Bonaventure; translated into English in 1410, and brought to the
reverend father Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Caunterbury, who commanding and
allowing the same, was afterward printed by William Caxton. ibid.

13. Chaucer's Canterbury-tales, collected into one volume by Mr. Caxton.

14. The book of arts and sciences by Mr. Caxton.

15. The Curiace of Master Alayn Charetier, translated by Caxton. Belonging to
Maurice Johnson, Esquire

16. Parvus chato -- Cato's precepts in Latin and English verse.

17. De fide and cantu samule sue.

II. WINKEN DE WORD. MCCCCXCV.
WINKEN de Word, the Dutchman, is supposed to have come over with Mr. Caxton,
and was his servant and journey-man. He succeeded him in his Printing House, as
appears from some of his first impressions done by him, as he tells us, in the
house of Mr. Caxton. It Is difficult to assign the exact time when he came to
England; whether with Frederick Corsellis, as my manuscript affirms, or some
years after, which is more probable. After Mr. Caxton's death, he carried on
the business, and finished some volumes begun by his master, as the
Canterbury-tales and Hilton's scale of perfection. This last Mr. Mattaire dates
in the year 1494, and Mr. Bagford 1465, who gives it as the first impression
done in Winken de Worde's name. I have chosen to follow Mr. Bagford, who was
very exact, as far as he could procure materials; for I have not yet met with
the book my self. Though the list of this Printer's works is very large, yet I
am certain there are many more either lost or still latent in some libraries;
for he was a person of vast industry, and received all imaginable
encouragement; so that he published several volumes in one year, though we meet
with some considerable chasms in others, during which time we cannot suppose
him idle. He left Westminster, and set up his Printing House in Fleet Street,
at the sign of the Sun, in the parish of St Bride. I cannot determine the year
of his removal; though his first impression there was done, anno 1503. He
printed several Latin, as well as English volumes, but no Greek, as I can find.
He continued Printing with great applause till the year 1533, if not beyond
that time. At his death he left a sum of money for an annual obiit for his soul
to the parish of St. Bride's, of which he was an inhabitant. He was a person of
great accomplishments in learning, as well as strictness of morals; and though
he was the immediate successor of Caxton, yet he improved the art to a very
great perfection. At his first setting up for himself, his first care was to
cut a new set of puncheons, which he sunk into matrices, and cast several
sorts of Printing-letter, which he afterward used. As Caxton used but two
sizes, Double Pica and Great Primmer, viz.

Begun and finished by me simple Man, W. C.

Begun and finished by me simple Man, W. C.

Winken de Word gave a greater scope to his fancy, and formed such a variety
of sorts and sizes of letter, that for several years after him, none of his
successors attempted to imitate him therein. If he was the manual operator in
cutting and casting in his own founding-house, it is an incredible improvement
which he made to the art; but, if he had his letter from any other Printer
abroad, though it robs him of this glory, yet his excellent method of
disposition, composition, and presswork, shows him to have far excelled his
master, and even to rival any of of his contemporaries abroad. There is one
circumstance that induces me to think that he was his own letter-founder; which
is, that in some of his first Printed books, the very letter he made use of, is
the same used by all the Printers in London to this day; and I believe were
struck from his puncheons.

The first is the two lined Great Primmer black,

by me Winken de Word

The next is the Great Primmer black,

This Work was finished by me, Winken de Word.

He is the first English Printer, who introduced the Roman letter in England,
which he used with his Gothic or black letter, to distinguish any thing
remarkable, as we do the Italic with the Roman at this time. His letter is
different from most other Printers, and is cast so true, and stands so well in
line, as not to be excelled by any ever since: in his Gothic and Roman letter
he fell in with the custom of those times by using abbreviations, even in his
small sized letters. One circumstance I would observe is, that he is the only
Printer I can find in England that used very small body'd letters in the
infancy of the art, and he was fond even to the very last of using his master
Caxton's rebus, of which we have given a specimen at the bottom of page 340.
Upon the whole, he was a very curious, laborious, and indefatigable Printer;
and I doubt not but time will add to his character, by bringing to light some
noble testimonies of so great a man, which for want of, I am obliged to say so
little here. He is the first Printer I have yet discovered who began to print
the year-books. He and his Successor Richard Pinson Lincoln's End
Manuscript-library, being inprinted above 40 year-books, which are in scrib'd
Libri manuscripti.


The List of his Works, as far as I have been able to collect them, are as
follows.
1. Polychronicon. 1495. 2. Chaucer's Canterbury-tales collected by William
Caxton, and printed by Wynken de Word at Westmestre. fol. 1495. 3. The lives
of the holy faders hermits, translated by Caxton, with cuts, 10. Hen. 7.
Westmynstre. 1495. 4. Walter Hylton's scale of perfection, printed in William
Caxton's house. 1495. 5. Meditations of St. Bernard, translated from Latin into
English by a devout student of the university of Cambridge, and has been put to
be imprynted by W. de W. 4to. Westmynster the ix. of March. 1496. 5. A
compendyouse treatise, dialogue of Dives and Pauper, viz. the rich and the
poor, fructuously treating upon the ten commandments, emprynted at
Westmonstre, 111. Decembre. 1496. 6. Treatyses pertaining to hawkynge and
hunting, and a treatise of cotarmours. ibid. 1496. 7. Nicholas Uptonus
Sarisberienfis canonicus, and scriptor haraldicus: de re haraldica Anglice.
Westmynster. 1496. 8. Fruit of times, compyled and emprynted by one sometime
Scholemayster of Saint Albons; and in 1497 emprinted at Westmestre. 1497. 9.
Contemplation of sinners, for every day in the week, a singular meditation,
compyled at the request of Richard Lord Bishop of Duresme, Lord Privy seal of
England, by dit. ib. 4to. July 10. 1499. 10. Jo. Gubriand. sinonima. 4to. 1500.
11. The Hill of perfection entitled in Latin, Mons Perfectionis, written by
John Alcocke, Bishop of Ely, by ditto, ibid. 4to. 1501. 12. Vobabula Magistri
Stanbrigi. 1501. 13. The Ordinary of Christen men. 4to. 1502. 14. Hoar Beat
Marie Virginis, cum fig. printed upon Vellum. 1502. 15. John Gerson's three
books of the Imitation of Christ, translated into English, by Will. Atkinson,
DD. at King Henry VII th's Mother's desire. 1502. 16. Aesopi fabulae, cum comm.
1503. 18. The book of the Recules of the siege of Troy, emprynted in London in
Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Son, with figures. 1503. 19. Garlandia
vocabulorum interpretatio. 1505. 20. The Ordinarye of Christen men. 1506. 21.
Ars moriendi, that is the craft to dye, for the health of man's soul, by ditto.
4to. 1506. 22. The castle of honor, a poem. 1506. 23. The Festival, or sermons
on sondays and holidais, taken out of the Golden Legende, 4to. 1508. 24. The
book of carving. 1508. 25. The golden legende, reprinted. 4to. 1508. 26. The
parliament of devils. 1509. 27. The court of sapience, a poem. 1510. 28.
Demands joyous. 1511. 29. Promptuarium parvul. clericor. 4to. 1512. 30. History
of Hilyas, knight of the swans, with figures, on parchment. 4to. 1512. 31.
Bucolica Virgilii. 1512. 32. The long Accydence. 1513. 33. The fruit of
redemption. Approved by Richard, bishop of London. 1514. 34. Liber Theodeli,
cum comm. 4to. 1515. 35 Expositio Sequentiarum secundum usum Sarum. 1515. 36.
The Chronicle of the world, or the fruit of time, in 7 books. 1515. 37.
Virgilii bucolica, cum comm. 2d. edition. 1516. 38. Seneca de 4 virtutibus
cardinalibus. 1516. 39. Ortus vocabulorum alphabetico ordine fere omnia quae in
catholicon, Breviloquio, cornucopia, gemma vocabulorum atque medulla
grammaticae ponuntur; cum vernaculae linguae Anglicanae expositione continens,
impressus per Wincandum de Word, ac in urbe in parochia Sanctae Brigidae (de
Fletestrete) ad signum solis moram trahentem, 4to. 1516. 40. Fabulae Aesopi,
cum comm. 4to. 1516. 41. Rob. Whittintoni Litchfield. gramm. lucub. 4to. 1517.
42. Parabole Alami, cum comm. 1517. 43. Sulpitius Verulamus de moribus
puerorum. 1518. 44. Whittintonus de concin. gram. construct. 1518. 45. -- de 8
partibus orat. 4to. 1519. 46. Familiaria colloquia Erasmi. 1519. 47. The
Orcharde of Syon, with the revelations of Saint Catherine of Seen, translated
by Dane James, at the cost of master Richard Sutton Founder of the
Charter House.
, Steward of the monastery of Sion. 1519. 48. The passion of our Lord,
translated from the French, by Andrew Chertsey, Gent. 1519. 49. The dietary of
ghostly health. 1520. 50. History of England. fol. 1520. 51. Vocabula Magistri
Stanbrigi (2d Edition) 1521. 52. Whittintonus de nominum generibus. 1521. 53.
Vulgaria Rob. Whittintoni Lichfeldiensis. 1521. 54. The mirror of the Church
of St. Edmond of Abyndon. 1521. 55. The flower of the commaundments of God,
with many examples and authorities drawn out of the holy scriptures and ancient
Doctors, translated out of French. fol. 1521. 56. Whittintonus de syllabarum
quantitate. 1522. 57. -- lucubrationes. 1523. 58. -- Verborum praeterita and
supina. 1524. 59. -- Declinationes nominum. 1524. 60. Roberti Wakefeldi oration
de utilitate ling. Arabicae and Hebraicae. 4to. The Author excuses himself to
the king [Hen. VIII.] to whom he dedicates this speech, that he is forced to
omit one third part of it for want of Hebrew types, which he says his Printer
had none of; and it is very probable that there were none as yet in England,
since nothing of that nature had been attempted, that ever I could hear of; no
doubt the Author made enquiry whether any such types were in England, before he
resolved to let it go maimed of its best and most curious part. I have seen
this book, and find the Arabic and Hebrew types cut on wood.
1524. 61. Vulgaria Rob. Whitintoni. (2d Edition) 1525. 62. The image of love.
1525. 63. Whitintonus de heteroclitis nominibus. 1526. 64. The lives of the
three kings of Colein, 4to. 1526. 65. The mirror of gold for a sinful soul,
translated out of the French by the right excellent Princess Margaret Mother
to King Hen. 7. Countess of Richmond and Derbie. 4to. 1526. 66. The golden
legende, wherein been contained all the high feasts of our Lord, and of our
Lady, the lives, passions, and many other miracles of many other saints
histories, finished the 27th of August. fol. 1527. 67. Whitintoni vulgaria, and
de instit. gram. 4to. 1527. 68. -- de syllabarum quantitate. 1528. 69. --
lucubrationes. 2d. edit. 1529. 70. -- syntaxis. 1529. 71. -- de partibus
orationum. 1529. 72. Constitutiones Othonis. 8vo. 1529. 73. The miracles of our
Lady. 4to. 1530. 74. Grad. Comparat. cum verb. anomal. 1530. 75. Parvulorum.
inst. ex Stranbrig. collect. 1530. 76. The pilgrimage of perfection. fol. 1531.
77. The plowman's prayer and complaint. 1531. 78. Abbey of the Holy Ghost. 4to.
1531. 79. Bonaventure's lessons. 4to. 1532. 80. Life of Edward the confessor.
4to. 1533. 81. Virgil's Bucolica, Lat. 4to. 1533. 82. Whitintoni syntaxis. 8vo.
1533. 83. -- de Heteroclitis. 4to. 1533. 84. A work for householders and
governors of families, etc. 4to. 1533. 85. Life of Hildebrande. 1534. 86. The
Rosary of our Savior Jesus. 4to. 1536.
BOOKS Printed by W. de WORD. without dates.
1. The life of Johan Picus, earl of Myrandula. 2. Bartholom. de
proprietatibus, or the proprieties of things. 3. Donatus minor ad Anglican.
scholar. usum. 4. The rose and mirror of consolation and comfort. 4to. 5.
Vulgaria Stanbrigi. 6. Whitinton. de 8 partib. orat. 4to. 7. Quaestiones
magistri Alberti de modis significandi, by W. de Word in Fleet Street. 8.
Nichodemus's gospel, with other tracts, 4to. 9. Gradus comparationis, etc. 8vo.
10. The book named the Royal, Englished by Caxton. 11. Sermones declamati coram
Univer. Cantab. per Steph. Baron. 12. A treatise called Parvula in Caxton's
house. 13. Accidence. Westmustre. ibid. in Caxton's house, Removed into
Fleet Street at the Sun. 14. A morning remembrance had at the month-mind of the
noble Princess Margareth, Countess of Richmond and Derby, Mother to King Henry
VII. To which is added a funeral sermon to King Henry VII. his body being
present, preached May 10, 1509, by John Lord bishop of Rochester, and printed
at the special request of the Countess of Richmond, the mother of the deceased.
15. A short treatise of contemplation taught by our Lord Jesus Christ, or taken
out of Margery Kempe of Lynn. 16. The life of Joseph of Arimathy, taken out of
a book found by Theodosius the Emperor in Jerusalem, in the pretory of Pilate.
17. The comfort against tribulations. 18. Richard Roll, hermit, of Hampull's
contemplation of the dread and love of God; with other diverse titles. 19. The
meditations of St. Bernard. 20. A little instruction out of St. Jerome, drawn by
Tho. Botton. 21. Hornodeus, or the remorse of conscience, a poem. 22. The
Abbaye of the Holy Ghost, with 29 ghostly ladies in it. [i. e. a good
conscience] printed at Westminster. 23. The lamentation of our Lady. 24. A
collection from Gerson and several authors, by Tho. Botton. 25. The Bewge of
court, a poem. 26. Against pestilence, and of infirmities. 27. Stans puer ad
mensam. 28. Bishop Grosshead's treatise of husbandry, or rather a translation
of his out of the French. 29. The life of Robert the devil, afterward called
the servant of the Lord. 30. The history of Jacob and his twelve sons. 31. The
proverbs of Lydgate, a poem upon the fall of princes. 32. King Edward, and
Robin Hoode, and Little John. 33. The assembly of the gods. 34. The merry jest
of the Friar and the Boy. 35. How the plowman learned his Paternoster, a poem.
36. The Churl and the Bird, a poem. 37. The Horse, and Sheep, and the Goose, a
poem. 38. The governal of health. 39. The eleven grammars by Winken de Word.
THIS curious piece is in the Lord Pembroke's library, and has some
observations written on a blank page at the beginning, which are to this
effect; 'The eleven grammars printed by Winken de Word, who was the 2d Printer
in Westminster, he lived afterward within the walls of London, at the sign of
the Sun in Fleet Street. Richard Pinson, afterward his worthy successor, and
he printed above 40 year-books which are in Lincoln's Inn Manuscript library;
they being inscribed Libri Manuscripti. He was son-in-law to Caxton, who first
printed at Westminster in the Almonry beyond Westminster-School. These eleven
grammars were all printed above 100 years before Lily's grammar, and appear to
be the foundation of his.'

WE shall have occasion to give a further account of these year-books, when we
come to speak of R. Pinson, who continued printing them a considerable time
after Winken de Worde's death. As for the eleven grammars they are in one
volume in the form of a very small quarto and neatly printed, and it is
judiciously observed that they were printed above a century before that famous
one of Lylly, which has been thought (and is still, by those who never heard of
this edition,) to be the first grammar that ever was printed in England.

FROM this large catalogue of Winken de Worde's works, it is plain that he must
have been an indefatigable Printer; and that the chasms that frequently happen
in some years must be owing to the books being either lost, or as yet
undiscovered; but more probably the former: and whoever considers that the
greatest part of them were either school-books, classics, prayer-books, etc.
(besides a vast number of popish ones, which might daily perish soon after the
Reformation) and of how short duration the former are in the hands of
schoolboys and devotees such as that age abounded with, will rather wonder
that so great a number of them have escaped the common fate of such
performances. So that we may justly conclude, that the preservation of these
books is more owing to the character and excellency of the Printer than of the
authors, and to the neatness and correctness of the work, rather than the
goodness or usefulness of the subject. After he was removed from Westminster to
London, we do not hear of any other Printers at the former; if there were any,
they were such whose works and memory in all probability died with, or soon
after them.

The City of LONDON, MCCCCLXXXI.
THOUGH Richard Pinson be the first known Printer that set up his Press in this
famous city, and all former annalists have ranked it in their list from his
first edition, 1493; yet father Orlandi has since discovered to us a much more
ancient one which was printed in London, anno 1481, that is 12 years before the
former; which makes me hope that time may still discover more, if not of older
date, yet at least to fill up the chasm between this and the first of Pinson.
For it is scarce to be supposed that Westminster should begin so soon to
encourage the art, as we have seen in the last article, and that London should
wholly neglect it. However, be that how it will, it is certain that if it was
but slow in receiving it, it made ample amends for it afterward, and that
Pinson and De Word, when he removed thither, gave a new life to it; so that in
a little time there were several considerable Printing-houses set up in the
most convenient parts of this large metropolis, wherein it has flourished and
improved ever since. Some of those eminent Printers received likewise great
encouragement from the Crown, particularly by patents for printing of Bibles,
and other works, of which I shall give an account under the names of the
Printers to whom they were granted.

N. B. As Caxton printed all his works in the old letter, and W. de Word in a
mixed character of Roman and Black, we have distinguished their works in the
two former catalogues, from those that follow, by printing them in Italic: but,
as the Roman types became by this time more common, we shall give the list of
the following Printers works in that character.

THIS ancient and curious edition above mentioned is as follows; Valdesius
super Psalterium Londini. 1481.

I. RICHARD PINSON. Anno MCCCCXCIII.
RICHARD PINSON, alias PYNSON, is the first known Printer in the city of
London, no edition having been hitherto discovered, except that anonymous one
mentioned above, of older date than his dialogue of Dives and Pauper in 1493.
Besides, as we have about 15 editions of his that are without date, we may more
reasonably suppose that they were printed before than after this year, in which
he began to put a date. He was brought up under Mr. Caxton, as well as Winken
de Word, and being become a thorough master of the art, went and set up a
Press of his own at Temple Bar, as the inscription of his first edition shows.
The friendship which he had contracted with De Word, whilst these two wrought
under Caxton, was so far from being disturbed by any mutual emulation or
rivalship, that it continued to their death; and it is thought that after their
master's death, Pynson prevailed upon him to leave Westminster, and to come and
settle nearer to him, which he accordingly did. What makes this more than
probable is, that the last edition of Caxton is dated, as we have shown, anno
1502, and the first that De Word printed in London, as far as we have been
able to discover, is dated 1503. These two were joined in the Printing of the
king's year-books, as long as De Word lived, which were afterward continued
by Pinson; and this is a sufficient testimony of his having been an excellent
Printer, were there nothing else to assure us of it: for it is not to be
supposed that he would have associated himself to any other. Pynson styles
himself Printer to the king in some of his editions, probably from a grant he
had for the printing of those year-books above mentioned. For we neither find
that he printed any bibles, or other books, for which patents were granted by
the crown. I don't find that he used any rebus, but he either printed his name
at length, or else only the two initial letters R. P. The list of his works is
nothing so copious as those of his associate, though he continued Printing at
least 34 years, as appears from the dates of his first and last edition, which
makes me conclude that a great part of them are lost. Those I have been able to
recover are as follow;

1. Dialogue of Dives and Pauper upon the X Commandments, emprinted by Richard
Pynson at Temple Bar of London, V. day of July. 1493. 2. Sulpitii Verulami opus
grammaticum. 4to. 1494. 3. Boetius's Fall of Princes, etc. by John Lydgate,
Monk of St. Edmund's Bury: 1494. 4. Gerson's Imitation of Xt. Englished by
Atkinson. 4to. 1503. 5. Navis stultifera, or the ship of fools; done into
English by Barclay. fol. 1509. 6. Liber intrationum. 1510. 7. An Exposition of
the 7 penitential Psalms, compyled by the Right Reverende Fader in God Johan.
Fyffer D. D. etc. Bp. of Rochester, at the Exortation and Storyinge of the most
Excellent Pryncesse Margaret, Countess of Rychemont and Darby, and Mother to
our Sovereign Lord King Henry the Seventh, on whose Soul Jesu have Mercy.
1510. 8. John Beckham, Arch. Cant. de summa Trinitat. and Fide Cathol. 1510. 9
Colet; Dean of Paul's Sermon to the Convocation. Lat. 8vo. 1511. 10. The Hist.
Siege and Destruction of Troy, Englished by J. Lidgate, with Cuts. 1513. 11.
Textus Alexandri, etc. 1516. 12. The Kalendre of the new Legende of England,
compyled by Master Walter Hylton, emprynted at London in Flete-strete, at the
sign of the George, by Richard Pinson, Prynter unto the King's Noble Grace, in
the Year of our Lord God 1516, and endy'd in the last Day of February. 1516.
13. Guil. Hormain. Vulgaria. 4to. 1519. 14. The Life of St. Verburge. Virg.
4to. 1521. 15. Assertio Septem Sacramentorum adversus Marin. Luther. edita ab
invictissimo Angliae and Franciae Rege, and de Hybernia Henrico hujus Nominis
octavo. Apud inclytam urbem Londinum in aedibus Pinsonianis, an. M. D. XXI.
quarto Idus Julii, Cum privilegio a rege indulto. Editio prima. 1521. 16.
Cutberd. Tonstalis Ars supputandi. 4to. 1522. 17. Froissard's first Volume.
4to. 1523. 18. Powel's Propugnaculum summi Sacerdotii contra Lutherum. 4to.
1523. 19. Tho. Linacr. de emendata Latini Sermonis structura. 4to. 1524. 20.
Froissard's second Volume. 4to. 1525. 21. Whittintoni Vulgaria and de
Institutione partium. 4to. 1525. 22. Old Tenurs newly corrected. 1525. 23.
Accidence. 1526. 24. Magna Charta. 8vo. 1527. 25. The Book of John Bochas on
the Fall of Princes, Englished. 1527. 26. Literarum quibus, etc. or K. Henry
VIII's Epistolary Answers to Luther. 8vo. 1527.
Those that follow are without date.

1. Salust translated by Sir Alexander Barclay, Priest, at the Commandment of
Thomas Duke of Norfolk. 2. Littleton's Teners new corrected. 3. Natura
Brevium. 4. Tonney's Rules of Grammar, etc. 5. How young Scholars now adays
emboldened in the Flyblown Blast of the much vain glorious pipplying Wind,
when they have delectably lycked a little of the lycorous Electurry of lusty
Lernyng, in the much studious Scole House of scrupulous Philology, countyng
themselfs Clerks excellently informed, and transcendingly sped in much high
conyng, and when they have ones superciliously caught. By Skeleton Poets
Laureat. By R. Pynson. 6. Littleton's Tenures. French. 7. Barclay's Figure of
Mother Church oppressed by the Fr. King. 4to. 8. The Chapter of Evil Men, where
Lucifer is head, etc. 8vo. 9. Henry VIII's Answer to M. Luther. 8vo. 10.
Bonaventure's Life of J. Christ, translat. by Caxton, and reprinted. fol. 11.
The Life of St. Alborow Virg. 4to. 12. A Sermon preached long ago at Paul's
Cross, He that has Ears to hear, etc. 4to. 13. The Mirror of good Manners,
etc. fol. 14. Speculum Vitae Christi, or Mirror of the Life of Christ. 15. The
Destruction of Jerusalem by Vespatian and Titus. Printed by Richd. Pinson the
King's Printer.
BESIDES these he printed a considerable number of Year, or Law Books that
passed under several Kings Reigns, as was hinted before; some with Winken de
Word, and others after his death; some with the dates of the Year and Month in
which they were printed, and his name at the end, and some without either.
However, it must be observed that a great part of the oldest of them have the
name (...) (Guilelmus Rastell) written at the head, by which we conjecture that
they only printed them for him. For Rastel was Printer to the King, and a very
considerable person at that time, and in great credit at Court upon the account
of his having married Sir Thomas More's Sister. So that it is very likely he
had the Privilege of printing all these Royal Books, and gave them a sanction
by prefixing his name to them, whilst the others only acted under him. What
seems to confirm it, is that those earlier ones with Pynson's name mention only
Ex Officina Pynsoniana; whereas in those of later date he calls himself Printer
to his Majesty, in which Office he probably succeeded Rastell, who died
according to Dr. Nicholson, an. 1536. Thus at the end of the 2d Edition of that
of the 2 of Edward IV. We find this Colophon, Explicit annus 2dus Ed. iiij.
Townsend de novo impressus in Academia, etc. ac Impensis honesti viri Richardi
Pynson Regii Impressoris. These Year-Books were of different Bulks, though all
Folio's, some of them containing but 4 on 5, others 10, 20, 50, and even as far
as 90 Sheets. They are as follows;

Years of Edward III. 7th, 21, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43. 2d Edition, ditto 44, 45,
46, 47, 48, 49, 50. -- Henry VI. 2, 8, 9, 10, 12, 20, 21, etc. -- Edward IV. 1,
2, 3, etc. -- Edward V. 1. -- Richard III. 2. -- Henry VII. 9. -- Henry VIII.
14.
WHETHER those that are wanting in the List are lost, or were printed by
others, we cannot affirm, but more probably the latter; because we find some
few printed by Graston, etc. But, as these are only of use to the Lawyers, this
Specimen shall suffice. Those who want a more particular account of them, may
have recourse to the Lincoln's-Inn-Library, where they are carefully preserved
in a large wooden Chest.

II. WILLIAM FANQUE. MD IV.
William Fanque styles himself the King's Printer in the only Edition I have
been able to find of his, viz.

Psalterium ex mandato victoriosissimi Angliae Regis Henrici Septimi.

Per Guillelmum Fanque, Impressorem regium anno MD IIII. septimo Februarii.

III. JULIAN NOTARY. MD XV.
We have two Editions of the same work printed by him, viz.

1. The Chronicle of England, with the fruit of Times, newly imprinted by me
Julian Notary, dwelling in St. Powlis Churchyard, beside the West-dore by the
Lords Palyese. fol. in the year M CCCCC and XV. 1515. 2. The same with Cuts,
etc. reprinted an. 1537.
IV. HENRY PEPWELL. MD XXI.
The Dietary of ghostly health divided into twenty four Considerations. 4to.
London, by Henry Pepwel. 1521.
V. PETER TREVERIS. MD XXV.
Who lived in Southwark, ^^d subsc^^b^d the place of his abode as follows;
Dwelling in the sign of the Wodow's in Southwark. We have but the three
following Editions of his.

1. Jherom of Brunswick's Surgery. fol. 1525. 2. The Polichronicon corrected by
Winken de Word. fol. 1527. 3. The great Hearbal, with Cuts. fol. 1527.
VI. THOMAS BERTHELET. MD XXX.
T. BERTHELET was Printer and Bookseller to K. Henry VIII. had a Patent for
printing the English Bible, and some other Books relating to the King's
Divorce; the first of which has the following pompous Title.

1. Gravissimae atque exactissimae illustrissimarum totius Italiae and Galliae
Academiarum Censu^ae, efficacissimis etiam quorundam Doctissimorum Virorum
Argumentationibus explicatae, de Veritate illius propositionis, videlicet; quod
ducere Relictam Fratris mortui sine liberis ita sit de Jure Divino and Naturali
prohibitum, ut nullus Pontifex super hujusmodi Matrimoniis contractis sive
contrahendis dispensare possit. In Officina Thomae Berthleti Impressoris Regii.
4to. Londini, mense Aprili, An. 1530. 2. The same in English, translated and
published by the King's Command, and printed by T. Berthlet. 1531. 3. The same
in Latin and English. 8vo. by ditto. 1531. 4. The New Additions, by ditto.
1531. 5. Salem and Bizance, a Dialogue against Sir Tho. Moore's Apology. 8vo.
1533. 6. A Treatise written by Johan. Valerian, a greatte Clerk of Italy, which
is entitled in Latin, pro Sacerdotum Barbis, translated into English, with a
Preface of the Translatour to the Reader. 8vo. Londin. in Aedibus Tho.
Berthleti. 1533. This is a scarce and curious Piece. At the End of the Book is
the Picture of Lucrece, with these Words in Capitals, LUCRETIA ROMANA. THOMAS
BERTHELETUS.

Then follow these Words; Endloss Grace, Bliss, Thankyng and Praising unto our
Lord God Omnipotent, by whose Aid and Help this Translation was ended at
Berkeley, the vi day of Feverer, the year of our Lord, M CCC LXXXXVII. the
year of King Richard the Second after the Conquest XXII. the year of My Lords
Age Sire Thomas Berkeley, that made me make this Translation XL VII.


7. De Contemptu Mundi, or Contempt of the World. 8vo. 1533. 8. Sir Thomas
Knight's Translation of Cyprian's Sermon on Mortality. 8vo. 1534. 9. Additions
to Salem and Bizance. 8vo. 1534. 10. Matthews's Sermon at St. Paul's 8vo. 1535.
11. Barthol. de Proprietatibus Rerum. Cum Privilegio a Rege indulto. Translated
into English. fol. 1535. 12. Dives and Pauper, a Dialogue on the 10 Comm.
reprinted. 8vo. 1536. 13. Comparison of a Virgin and a Married Woman. 8vo.
1537. 14. Sturmius's Epistle to the Cardinals and Bishops of Rome. 8vo. 1538.
15. A Treatise, that by the King's Laws the Bishops of Rome have no Supremacy
in England. 8vo. 1538. 16. The Most Sacred Bible, which is the holy Scripture,
containing the Old and New Testament, translated into English, and newly
recognized with great diligence after most faithful Exemplars by Richard
Taverner. Dedicated to K. Henry VIII. with decent Humility. Prynted at London
in Fleet street at the sign of the Son, by John Byddel for Thomas Barthlet.
1539. At the End are these Words; To the honor and praise of God was this
Bible prynted and fynished in the year of our Lord God. M D XXXIX. A very
scarce Edition. 17. St. Cyprian's Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, etc. 8vo.
1539. 18. Henry Ld. Parker's Declaration of the 94th Psalm. 8vo. 1539. 19.
Tonstal, Bishop of Duresm's Sermons. 8vo. 1539. 20 Of Guaccum Wood against the
French Pox, Stone, and Gout, 8vo. 1539. 21. R. Taverner's Recognition of the
Bible. fol. 1539. 22. Frontine's Stratagems of War, Englished. 8vo. 1539. 23.
The necessary Erudition of a Christen Man, etc. 1543. 24. Cope's History of
Hannibal and Scipio. 4to. 1544. 25. St. Tho. Eliot's Banquet of Sapience. 8vo.
1545. 26. Ant. Gisbie's Answer to Steph. Gardener, Bp. of Winchester. 8vo.
1547. 27. Erasmus's Sermon on God's Mercy. 8vo. 1547.
The following are without date.

1. Dean Colet's Sermon to the Convocation. 8vo. 2. Tho. Starkey's Exhortation
to the People to Unity, etc. 3. A Dialogue between a Knight and a Clarck about
Power. 4. Erasmus's treatise on Pater Noster. Englished by a Young Win. 19
Years old. 4to. 5. Ricardi Sampsonis Regii Sacelli Decani Oration contra Papam.
4to. in Pergam.
VII. WILLIAM RASTEL, Printer to the King, as was mentioned before, was an
eminent Citizen of London, and a good Historian. We find an English Chronicle
of his quoted by Athen. Oxoniens. John Petit, and other ancient Historians, but
now lost, in Dr. Nicholson's Opinion. He lived in St. Bride's Churchyard,
Fleet Street. M D XXX.
1. A Dialogue of Sir Tho. More touching the pestilent doctrine of Luther and
Tyndal. Prented by Willyam Rastel. fol. Land. 1530.

2. Registrum Omnium brevium tam Originalium quam judicialium. Londini apud
Guillelmum Rastel. Cum privilegio. 1531.

At the Beginning of the Book are these Words printed in Capitals;

Hunc librum Regiis litteris ne quis alius in hoc Regno impune imprimat infra
septennium cautum est. At the End of the Book thus;

Thus endyth this Book called the Regyster of the Wrytyngs orygynal and
judycyal. Prentyd at London by Wyllyam Rastell, and it is to sell in Fleet
street, at the house of the said Wyllyam, or in Poulys Church yard, or else at
Temple Bar, at the house of Robert Redman. Cum privilegio. 3. The second part
of the Confutation of Tyndal's Answer by Sir Tho. More. Prentyd by W. Rastel.
fol. 1533.

4. Fabyan's Chronycle newly prentyd. Cum privilegio. 1533.

5. A merry Play between the Pardoner and the Friar, the Curate and Neighbor
Patte. 4to. 1533.

6. The Apologye of Sir Thomas More Knight. 1533.

Without date.

1. German Gardiner's Letter against John Fryth lately burnt. 8vo.

2. A New Commodye in Englysh, in manner of an interlude, right elegant and
full of Craft and Rethoryke, wherein is showed and descrybed as well the Bewte
and good properties of Women as their Vices.

VIII. ROBERT REDMAN, against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. MD XXX III.
1. A plain and godly Exposition or Declaration of the Creed, (which in the
Latin tongue is called Symbolum Apostolorum) and of the X Commandementes of
Gods Law. 1533.

Newly made and put forth by the famous Clerk Master ERASMUS of Roterdame.
At the Request of the most honorable Lord, Thomas Earl of Wyltshyre: Father
to the most gracious and virtuous Queen Anne, Wife to our most gratyous Lord
King Henry the viii. Cum privilegio.

At the End thus;

Imprinted at London in Fleet street by me Robert Redman, dwelling at the
sign of the George, next to Saint Dunstone's Church. Cum privilegio Regali.

2. Otho and Othobone's Provincial Constitutions. 8vo. 1534.

3. Mirror of Xt's Passion, translated by John Fruterer. fol. 1534.

4. Sum of Xtianity out of the Scriptures. 8vo. 1536.

5. Erasmus in Latin and English. 4to. 1538.

6. Magna Carta in French, whereunto is added more Status than ever was
imprynted in any one Book before this time: with an Alminacke and a Calender to
know the Mootes. Necessary for all young Studiers of the Law.

At the End thus,

Here ends Magna Charta, and diverse other Statutes. Imprynted at London in
Fleetstreet by me Robert Redman dwelling at the sign of the George next to
Saint Dunstones Church. 1539. in 12mo. in the Front 1529. 1539.

7. John Standish against the Protestation of Robert Barnes at the time of his
Death, by the Widow of Robert Redman. 1540.

Without date.

1. Confession exhibited by the Germans to the Emperor Charles V. with
Milington's Apology for it. 8vo.

2. Of the Lives of Priests, Canons, Clerks, and Church-Ministers. 8vo.

3. Sermon on the Child Jesus. 8vo.

4. Lantorn of Light. 8vo.

5. A Book of Medicine of King Boethius. 4to.

6. Littletons Tenures.

7. The Paradox of Marcus Tullius Cicero, translated lately out of the Latin
Tongue into English by Robert Whittinton Poet Laureat.

8. Tho. Moulton Doctoure of Dyvynyte, of the Order of ^rere-Preachours Myrrour
or Glass of Health, necessary for every person to look in that will keep
their body from Syckness of the Pestilence. 8vo.

The Author tells us that he wrote this Treatise whilst the plague raged.

9. Returna Brevium, vel si mavis, Rescripta Vice Comitum eum aliis scitu
dignioribus. 8vo.

At the End, Rob. Redman me fecit.

10. Littleton's Tenures.

11. A Work for Householders, by Rich. Whitford.

12. The Year-Books printed by him are as follows;

24 of Edward III. 25 Sheets

40 -- 26 Sheets

And above 30 more.

At the End are the Words following;

Imprime a Londres par moy Robert Redman le X. jour de March l'an de grace M
CCCCC XXXIII. Cum privilegio Regali.

IX. JOHN BYDDEL. MD XXXIV.
JOHN BIDDEL is the Printer mentioned above, p. 360. who printed the great
English Bible for Benthelet; his Printing House was at the sign of our Lady of
Pise next to Fleet-bridge: his Rebus was a Heart pierced with a double Cross,
on each side of which within were the two initial letters of his name I. B. to
which he sometimes added his name at length, JOHN BIDDEL. John Biddel's
printer's mark

1. Of the old God and the new, of the old Faith and the new, of the old
Doctrine and the new, or the original Begyning of Idolatry; imprinted at
London by John Byddle, at the Sign of our Lady of Pise, etc. M VC XXXIIIJ. the
XX day of June. 1534.

2. Rob. Whittingtonus de nominum Gener. 4to. 1536.

3. A Bible in Engl. fol. Printed by him for Berthelet. 1539.

4. Of the old and new God, old and new Faith, etc. 8vo. 1539.

5. Cupito's Prayers and Meditations on the Psalms, Eng. 8vo. 1539.

6. A Chronicle of Years from the beginning of the World, wherein ye shall find
of all the Kings of England, of the Mayrs and Shiriffs of the City of London,
and briefly of many notable Acts done in and since the reign of King Henry the
fourth, newly augmented and corrected, Anno Domini, M VC XLII. by John Biddle.
1542.

Without date.

1. John Roberts Master of Schismatic Bps. of Rome. 8vo.

2. A Book of Feasts Royal and Cookery for Princes. 4to.

3. Accidentia ex Stanbrigiana Editione nuper recognita a Whittinglono Laureato.

4. A Seraphick Dirige of 7 Secrets granted to St. Francis. 8vo.

5. The Lives of Pope Hildebrand and Henry IV. Emperor of Germany. 8vo.

X. ROBERT WYRE. M D XXXV.
He lived at the sign of Saint John the Evangelyste in Saint Martyn's Paryshe
in the Filds beside Charynge-Cross, in the Bishop of Norwytche's Rents, as he
says himself, and used to subscribe some of his Works, especially the
Year-Books, with his name in large Capitals thus, ROBERT WYRE.

We have but one Piece of his that bears a sure Date, which is as follows;

1. The Deffence of Peace, lately translated out of Latin into English: with
the Kings most gracious privilege. The Author, Marsilius of Padway.
Imprynted and published, and set forth abroad in the English tongue by Wylliam
Marshal, who prays for our Soveragne Lord King Henry the Eight, of his most
virtuous Lady Queen Anne, and of the Lady Pryncess Elyzabeth, Daughter and
Heir to them both. 1535.

N. B. This Book appears by its date to have been published about the time when
King Henry 8. had resolved to break with the Court of Rome. At the End are
these Words;

Prynted by me Robert Wyer for Wylliam Marshal, etc. with the King's privilege
for 6. years.

2. The Debates between the Heralds of England and France, compyled by Jn.
Coke, Clarke of the Kynge's Recognysances, or vulgarly called Clarke of the
Statutes of the Staple of Westmynster, and finished in the year of our Lord M
D L. At the End as follows; 1550.

Finished by me John Coke le dernier jour Doctobre den yaer ons here duissent
venf hundred negen en viertick (that is thousand five hundred and forty nine.)
Finis Laudat opus. Imprinted by me R. Wire, etc.

Without date

3. Ten Places of Scripture against the Traditions of Men. 8vo.

4. Wm. Hunnis Abridgement of Meditat. on certain Psalms in meter. 8vo.

5. Antithesis comparing the Word of God and Men's Inventions by Th. Beacon. 8vo.

6. Antidotarius or the way of making Salves, Ointments, etc. 8vo.

7. Macer's Herbal. 8vo.

8. Th. Linacre. M. D. Compend. regimen of Health used at Montpelier.

9. The Castle of Love, translated out of Spanyshe into English, by John
Bowrchier Knight, Lord Bernes, at the Instance of the Lady Elyzabeth Carew,
which book treats of Love between Leriano and Laureola Daughter to the King
of Masedonia.

10. The Breviary of Health.

11. The Signs in the Zodiac.

12. Erra Pater.

13. A Piece of Tycho Brahe upon the Heavens.

14. A Year-Book for the 9th of Henry IV. printed by Robert Wyre dwelling at
the sign of St. John the Evangelyst, etc.

XI. THOMAS GIBSON. M D XXXVI.
A Treatise against the Pestilence, written by a Danish Bp. and Phisician. 4to.
1536.

XII. JAMES NICHOLSON, at Southwark. M D XXX.
1. Exposition on the 1. 2. and 3 Canonical Epistles of St. John. 8vo. 1537.

2. The New Testament both in Latin and English, each correspondente to the
other after the Vulgar Text communely called St. Jerome's, faithfully
translated by Johan. Hollybushe. By James Nicholson dwelling in Southwarke.
1538.

3. Invectives against Cardinal Wolsey, by L. R. at Wesel. 1546.

N. B. Maunsel affirms it to have been printed by Nicholson; no doubt but he
compared it with some other of his Works, and it is certain that nothing was
more common in those ticklish times than to date any dangerous Book from some
place abroad, or to inscribe it printed -- beyond Sea.

4. A Treatise of Measuring, without date.

The Title runs thus,

This Book shows the manner of Measurynge of all manner of Land, as well of
Woodlande, as of Land in the Field, and comptynge the true Nombre of Acres of
the same, By Sir Richard Benese, Chanon of Marton Abbay beside London.

Printed in Southwarke by James Nicholson.

XIII. THOMAS PETIT. MDXXXVIII.
1. Longland Bp. of Lincoln's Sermon before the King. 4to. 1538.

2. Treasure of poor men, a Book of good Medicine 8vo. 1540.

3. St. Bernard's fruitful Treatise of living well. Translated by Th. Paynel.
8vo.

4. Chaucer's Works dedicated to Henry VIII. no date.

XIV. JOHN WAYLAND. MDXXXVIII.
1. Nicholas Wise's Chrystian Consolation, 8vo. 1538.

2. James Chanceller's Path to Obedience.

3. The Tragedies of John Bochas, translated into Eng^^she by John Lydgate,
Monk of Bury. without date.

XV. RICHARD GRAFTON. MDXXXIX.
RICHARD GRAFTON, Citizen of London, from an indifferent Author and Historian,
became a famous and eminent Printer. Among other of his works under the former
character, we have his Abridgement of the Chronicle of England, in which he is
a constant borrower from the bulkier work of Edward Hall Recorder of London,
who wrote the History of the Wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster,
wherein the Reader will find little worth notice, if we may believe Dr.
Nicholson, than the fashions and changes of Dress in each King's Reign. As
Grafton was not over judicious in the choice of this Author, so neither was he
in the compiling of his Abridgement; in so much that the learned Buchanan, in
his History of Scotland, does not scruple to call him a very headless and
unskilful Writer, though he has had the honor of being quoted by Stow, and other
Historians.

THE occasion of his turning Printer was his being pitched upon to procure an
Edition of William Tyndal, alias Hickins Version of the New Testament, and
afterward of his Bible revised and corrected by Miles Coverdal, a learned
Franciscan Friar, well learned in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin tongues. Some
impressions of the former had already been dispersed about England and
elsewhere, but were bought up by Tonstal Bishop of London, and Sir Thomas More,
and been burnt at St. Paul's Cross; and it was very dangerous to undertake the
reprinting of such a work in London upon that account. This made Grafton and
his associate Edward Whitchurch resolve to get it done at Hamburgh, whither
they likewise sent Coverdal to correct the Press. This proved a very expensive
work, and the impression of the Bible alone cost them 500l. a great sum in
those days. When it was brought over into England, it met with great opposition
from the Romish Priests, they having some time before obtained a Royal
Proclamation, to prohibit and abolish that among other heretical books; and,
had not Bonner Bishop of Hereford bought up the greatest part of the Copies in
order to destroy them, the undertakers must have been infallibly ruined. This
Edition is supposed to have been printed anno 1535.

HIS New Testament met with worse fate, of which we have an authentic
testimony extant in the Library of the Honorable Earl of Pembroke, viz. two
Editions of it printed at Antwerp in the same year, viz. anno 1434, one of
which has a Preface prefixed to it, to justify that Edition, from the other of
the same year printed under his name, but strangely mutilated and misprinted. A
more particular account of which is given in the Introduction to Wickliff's
Bible lately published.

FINDING that a version of the Bible was as much desired by the favorers of
the Reformation, as it was cried down by the enemies of it, they ventured to
print a second edition of it under the patronage of Archbishop Cranmer and the
Lord Cromwell. But Tyndal having been by that time burnt as a heretic in
Flanders, and his name growing then somewhat ignominious, they thought fit to
publish it under the name of Matthews's Bible, though Tyndal is affirmed to have
finished all but the Apocrypha as some, or as far as Nehemiah, as others
affirm. Grafton having finished the printing of it presented it to his two
great Patrons, by whom, at his request, it was likewise presented to the King
to whom it was dedicated. It had these words in red letters printed at the
bottom of the title page set forth with the King's most gracious license. But,
as they were suspected to have been foisted in, Grafton obtained leave to have
it further licensed under the privy seal. Soon after this it being observed how
acceptable an English Bible was to the people, some persons formed a design to
print it in a smaller volume, in order to undersell Grafton's, which obliged
him to apply to Cromwell, and to obtain a patent from the King, that none
should print it for three years; and for the better sale of this, that noble
man did likewise procure him an order that every Curate of a parish should be
obliged to have one, and every Abbey six of them; so that this second
impression, wherever printed, was very soon bought up.

GRAFTON and his partners in the work observing that there was still a call for
them, resolved to reprint it a third time, and in a larger volume, but without
these notes and prologues which they observed had given some offense. Paris was
the place pitched upon to print it at, and Cromwell, who favored the
enterprise, procured letters from King Henry to the French King, to permit a
subject of his to print the English Bible in the university of Paris, because
of the goodness of the French paper and workmen. Bonner, then Ambassador from
England to the Court, had likewise orders to assist the undertakers of that
good work in all reasonable suits. Bonner obtained not only the desired
license, but likewise letters patents for printing this Bible, and for
conveying it safe over to England. This edition, being thus encouraged, went
briskly on to the end; but Bonner, who never liked the work, and did only
promote it to make his court to Cromwell, found means to obstruct it privately,
notwithstanding the King's patents.

ACCORDINGLY, anno 1438, the Printers were taken up, and charged with heresy,
by order of the Faculty, and Coverdale the corrector, Grafton the Head Printer,
and other Englishmen, who contributed to the charges of the impression, were
sent for; but they foreseeing the consequences, fled away as fast as they
could, and left the whole impression which was just finished, and consisted of
2500 Copies, behind them. This was immediately seized by the Lieutenant
Criminal, and ordered to be burnt, except some few which he sold, through
covetousness, for waste-paper, which were afterward bought up again, being
about four fats or chests full.

MY Lord Pembroke favored me with the sight of an English Bible printed in
Gothic characters, an. 1537. without place or Printer's name, with these words
at the end;

The end of the New Testament, and of the whole Bible.

To the Honor and Praise of Good was this Bible prynted and fyneshed in the
year of our Lord Good. a M D XXXVII.

BUT whether this is one of them that were printed at Paris, or one of the
former edition I cannot determine; but it is more probable to be the latter,
because it has a Concordance of the most remarkable texts of Scripture against
the errors of Popery: whereas, as I observed before, they had suppressed most
things of that nature in the Paris one. But let this be of what edition it
will, it is very probable that the Concordance proved the cause of the almost
total destruction of it, in so much that I question whether there be any other
copy of it left except this above mentioned. However, Grafton and his
associates, by Cromwell's encouragement, went soon after to Paris, and got the
presses, letters and workmen, and brought them over to London, and so set up
for Printers themselves, which they never intended before, and began to reprint
the same Bible, which they finished in 1537; an account of which you will find in
the following list of Grafton's works.

WE find a patent in Rymer's faedera, vol. 17. p. 766. from King Henry VIII.
appointing him and his partner Whitchurch to print the Book of divine service;
but, as I have not been able to meet with the Book, I have not inserted it in
the list. The patent is dated Jan. 3. 1543. Grafton styled himself Typographus
Regius. His mark or sign was an Appletree springing up out of a Tun, or Ton, as
they spelled it then, alluding to his name Graft-ton, with this motto suscipite
insitum verbum, Jacob. 1. He had likewise a Cipher over the Tun, with the two
initials of his name one in another thus. Richard Grafton's printer's mark

His works are as follows.

1. The New Testament in English and Latin. 8vo. London, printed by Rich.
Grafton and Ed. Whitchurch. 1439.

2. The Bible in English, that is to say, the contents of all the holy
scripture, both of the Old and New Testament, truly translated out of the
veryty of the Hebrew and Greek textes, by the dylygent study of dyvers
excellent learned men, expert in the foresaid tongues. Printed by Richard
Grafton and Edward Whitchurch. Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum. fol. At the
end is as follows; 1539.

Fynished in Apryll, Anno M CCCC XXXIX.

The Title is adorned with a noble piece of History, supposed to be done by
Holbein, of King Henry 8. Archbishop Cranmer, and Vicar General Cromwell, with
their Coats of Arms.

3. The Primmer in Latin and English. 4to. Printed in the precinct of the
dissolved house of Gray Friars, by Richard Grafton, Printer to the Prince's
Grace the VI. day of September. M D XLIII. Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum.
1543.

4. Plutarch's Precepts for the preservation of health. 8vo. 1543.

5. The Chronicle of John Hardyng, etc. with a Supplement in prose. Londini ex
officina Ric. Graftoni, mense Januario. 1543.

6. The Answer of Charles fifth, Emperor, ever more August, unto the Letters
Convocatory of Paul the third bishop of Rome, concerning a general Council to
be celebrated at Trident. 1543. Ex officina Rich. Graftoni 8vo. 1543.

With a remarkable Preface to the Reader.

7. The Primer in English and Latin. 4to. Printed in the precinct of the
dissolved house of Gray Friars, by Richard Grafton, Printer to the Prince's
Grace the VI day of Sept. M D XLV. Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum. 1545.

8. An Abridgement of Polidore Virgil of the Divisers, etc. of Arts, by T.
Langley. 1546.

9. Philip Gerard's Invective against stopping the free passage of the English
Bible. 8vo. 1547.

10. Certain Homilies or Sermons appointed by the King's Majesty to be read by
all Persons, Vicars, or Curates, every Sunday in their Churches where they
have Cure. 4to. 1543.

11. Articles to be enquired into in the Visitation to be had within the
Diocese of Canterbury, in the second year of the Reign of our most dred
Sovereigne Lord Edward VI. by the Grace of God King of England, France and
Ireland, Deffender of the Faith, and in the Earth of the Church of England,
and also of Ireland the supreme Hedde. 4to. 1548.

12. Expedition into Scotland of the most worthy fortunate Prince Edward Duke
of Somerset, Uncle to our most noble Sovereign Lord Edward VI. etc. by way of
Diarie, by W. Paten. 1548.

13. Alcoran of the Barefoot-Fryars. 8vo. 1550.

14. John Marbeck's Concordance of the Bible. fol. 1550.

15. Hall's Chronicle. fol. 1550.

Besides a number of Year-Books.

XVI. EDWARD WHITCHURCH. MDXXXIX.
HE was also one of the King's Printers, and a famous one. We have mentioned
him already in the last article, as having printed,

1. Coverdale's New Testament Lat. and Engl.

2. The English Bible. fol. with Rich. Grafton.

The rest of his Works are as follows;

3. Earl of Purlilia's Precepts of War. Englished by Philip Betham. 8vo. 1544.

4. A Treatise of Moral Philosophy, containing the Sayings of the Wise,
gathered and Englyshed by Wylliam Baldwyn. London, Imprinted by Edward
Whitchurch, the 10 day of January. 8vo. 1547.

5. Christ. Langton's Treatise of Naturals and Non-naturals, etc. 8vo. 1547.

6. Melancton upon weighing and considering the Interim. Englished by John
Rogers. 8vo. 1548.

7. Paraphrase on St. Paul's Epistles and Revelations, by several hands. fol.
1549.

8. The Book of the Common Prayer and administration of the Sacraments, and
other rites and ceremonies of the Church; after the use of the Church of
England. Londini in Officina Edouardi Whitchurch, cum privilegio ad imprimendum
solum. Anno Do. 1549, Mense Junii. 1549.

The King's Majesty by the advice of his most dear Uncle the Lord Protector,
and other his highness's Counsel, strictly charg^th and commands, that no
manner of Person do sell this present book bound, above the pr^ce of ii
Shyllynges and ii pence the piece. And the same bound in paste or in boordes,
not above the price of three Shyllynges and VIII pence the piece. God save the
King.

Imprinted at London in Fleet Street, at the sign of the Sun over against
the Conduyte by Edward Whitchurch, the XXVI day of June, the year of our Lord
1549.



9. Epistle of Consolation and Advertisement to the Duke of Somerset before his
troubles, and translated by him in his Imprisonment. 8vo. 1550.

10. Edmund Allen's Catechism. 8vo. 1550.

11. Form of Common Prayer used at Geneva, with Calvin's Catechism. 8vo. 1550.

12. Paraphrase on the Gospels and Acts. Englished by N. Udal. fol. 1550.

XVII. WILLIAM MIDDLETON. MDXXXIXI.
Richard Whitford, a Brother of Sion, his Treatise on Patience, and the Lets
and Impediments to Perfection. 4to. Imprinted at London by me Wylliam
Middleton. 1541.

XVIII. JOHN MAYLER. M D XXXIXII.
1. A Sermon, that no Man can be hurt but by himself. 8vo. 1542.

2. Necessary Doctrine and Erudition for a Christen Man. By the King. 8vo. 1543.

XIX. JOHN DAY. M D XXXIXVI.
HE was a curious and diligent Printer; how soon he began to print is not easy
to guess, because I find several of his editions without date. He continued
printing till the year 1575; however, I shall carry the list of his works no
farther than 1550.

1. R. Crowley's Confutation of Nich. Saxton, Bishop of Sarum. 8vo. London 1546.

2. A godly Meditation upon xx select and chosen Psalms of the Prophet David,
etc. 4to. By Sir Ant. Cope. Dedicated to Queen Catherine. 1547.

3. Heavenly Acts of Parliament made by Father, Son and Holy Ghost, how Men
ought to live. 8vo. 1547.

4. John Bancroft's translation of the Basil Preacher's Answer. By J. Day and
W. Seres. 1548.

5. Confutation of Miles Hoggard's Ballads in defense of Transubstantiation.
8vo. by J. Day and W. Seres. 1548.

6. A simple and religous Consultation about making a present Reformation till
God send a better by a general Council, etc. 1548.

7. Fr. Lambert's Judgment against the Freedom of Man's Will. 8vo. 1548.

8. Rob. Hutton's Sum of Divinity. 1548.

9. A Warning against the Anabaptists. 8vo. by J. Day and W. Seres. 1549.

10. St. Austin's 12 Steps to Abuses, by J. Day and W. Seres. 1550.

11. An Apology of Johan. Bale against a rank Papist, answering both him and
his Doctors, that neither their Wowes, nor yet their Priesthood, are of the
Gospel but of Antichrist. 8vo. 1550.

12. Homilies on the 6th of St. John. 8vo. 1550.

13. Confession of the Christian Faith, with respect to God, the King, etc.
4to. 1550.

14. Exposition of Daniel's Prophecies out of Melangton, etc. 1550.

Without date.

1. Expostulation against a phrentic Papist of Hamshire. 8vo.

2. Basil the Great to Gregory Nazianzen about a Monastic Life.

3. 25 Sermons on Predestination. Englished by a Gentlewoman. 8vo.

4. Communication between a poor Man and his Wife, etc. 8vo.

5. Brief Exhortation in the time of Visitation.

6. Ancient Testimonies about the Faith of the Church of England about the
Sacrament. 8vo.

7. A very familiare and fruitful Exposition of the Apostles Creed, made in
Dialogues, wherein thou maiste learn all Things necessary to be beleved,
Compyled by Peter Viret a Frenchman, and translated into English. 8vo.

8. Thomas Norton's Warning against the dangerous practices of Papists, and
specially the Parteners of the late Rebellion. Land. by John Day, no date, but
supposed to be printed about the year 1549. 4to.

XX. JOHN HERTFORD. M D XXXIXVI. at St. Alban's.
HE printed at first at St. Alban's, and we have two editions of his printed
there, one without date, and the other done in 1538, of which we need not give
any further account here. What I have been able to recover of his Works, after
he removed to London, is as follows;

1. Richard Smith, D. D. Defense of the Sacrament of the Mass. 8vo. London.
1546.

2. Stephen Gardner Bishop of Wynchester's Declaration of such true Articles
as George Joye has gone about to confute as false. 4to. 1546.

Without date.

1. St. Jerome's Exposition. Printed at London in Aldersgate Street, by John
Hertforde for Robert Toy.

2. The Epistles and Gospels, in 4to. by John Hertforde in Aldersgate Street.

The following was printed by his Widow.

The Censure and judgment of the famous Clark Erasmus of Roterodam; whyther
Dyvoursemente between Man and Wife stondeth with the law of God, with dyvers
Causes wherefore it is permitted; with the mind of the old Doctors, etc.
London, Prynted by the Wydowe of John Hertforde for Robert Stoughton, without
date. 8vo.

XXI. ROBERT TOY. MD XXXIXVI.
1. Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester's Declaration of such true Articles as
George Joy has gone about to confute as false. 4to. 1546.

2. Detection of the Devil's Sophistry, etc. 8vo. 1546.

3. Of the Resurrection of the Dead, and last Judgment, by John Clarke. 4to.
1547.

Without date.

4. The Works of Geffray Chaucer newly printed, with dyvers works which were
never in Print before.

Imprinted at London by Robert Toy. fol.

N. B. There was afterward a much fuller Edition of Chaucer's Works published
by John Stowe, and printed by John Kyngston for John Wight, in 1561. fol.

XXII. NICHOLAS HILL. MDXLVI.
John Clark's Declaration of certain Articles and capital Errors, etc. 8vo.
1546.

XXIII. WILLIAM SERES. MDXLVI.
WILLIAM SERES was a very eminent Printer, curious and correct; but he was much
excelled by his Successor and Assignee Henry Denham, who kept the sign of the
Star in Paternoster Row, and became an extraordinary Master of his Art, not
only for his wonderful Correctness, but for the beauty of his Types, whether
Greek, Roman, Italic, or Gothic, of which he had a great variety of sizes as
neat and beautiful as any now in use. I have seen a Dictionary of his printed
in 1580, under the title of An Alviarie (Beehive) or a quadruple Dictionarie in
Greek, Latin, French, and English; which I think a masterpiece of art for
beauty and correctness, as well as great rarity for its order, method, and
disposition, it being the only one of that kind I ever met with.

As for William Seres he lived without Aldersgate, and went partner in some
works with John Day, and in some with Ant. Scholoker; as the list of his works
does show, which is as follows.

1. Robert Crowley's Confutation of Shaxton's Recantation. Printed by W. Seres
and J. Day. 1546.

2. Bancroft's Translation of the Basil Divines on the Lord's Supper. By ditto
1548.

3. Confutation of Miles Hoggard's Ballad in defense of Transubstantiation. By
ditto. 1548.

4. Peter Viret's Collection of Scriptures which explain the Lord's Prayer.
8vo. By Seres and A. Scholoker. 1548.

5. A Warning against the Anabaptists 8vo. with Day. 1549.

6. St. Austin's 12 Steps to Abuses, etc. 8vo. ditto. 1550.

Without date.

7. The Trial, Examination, and Death of Sir John Oldcastle. 8vo. with A.
Scholoker.

8. Private Prayers for every Day of the Week, first printed in King Edward's
days. 8vo.

9. The right Institution of Baptism, by Herman Archbp. of Cologne. By Anthony
Scholoker and Wyllyam Seres, dwelling without Aldersgate.

XXIV. REYNOLD WOLF. MDXLVII.
HE was chosen Printer to the King (Edward IV.) for the Hebrew, Greek and Latin
tongues. His Patent, which is extant in Rymer's Faedera, 15 Vol. p. 150, is
dated from Westminster April 19, 1547. But I have not been able to meet with
any thing done by him in any of those learned languages. His other works are as
follows.

1. Dr. Smith's Declaration upon his Retraction at St. Paul's Cross. 8vo. 1547.

2. A Deffence for Marriage of Priests by Scripture and ancient Writers,
before the Bishop of Rome by his wicked decrees ordained the contrary; made by
John Pouel, Doctor of Divinite. Imprinted at London, by Reynold Wolf. Cum
serenissimi Regis privilegio. 8vo. 1549.

3. Ant. Corvinus's Postils on the Gospels of Sundays and Holydays. 4to. 1550.

4. Coverdale's New Testament conferred with that of W. Tindal. 8vo. 1550.

5. Defense of the Catholic Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood,
etc. 4to. 1550.

6. Injunctions of Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London to his Diocese. 4to. 1550.

1. Advertisements partly for the order of public prayer, and partly for
regulating the Ministers apparel. 4to.

2. An Answer to Doctor Smith's Calumnyes in his confutation of the said book.
8vo.

XXV. WILLIAM POWEL. MDXLVII.
At the sign of the George, next to St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street.

1. A Treatise of Justification by Faith, translated by Nich. Less. 8vo. 1547.

2. The Fall of the late Arrian. 8vo. 1549.

3. The Voice of the People against such Parsons, as fly away from their Cures.
8vo. 1549.

4. St. Augustine to Pollentius against adulterous Marriages. 8vo. 1550.

5. Anto. Ascham's Treatise of Astronomy, and of Medicines under each planet.
8vo. 1550.

6. Proverbs or Adagies gathered out of the Chiliades of Erasmus, by Richard
Taverner, as well Latin proverbs as English. London, Imprinted by Willyam
Powel XX day of April. anno M D L. 1550.

7. The A B C set forth by the King's Majesty (Hen. viij) and his Clergy, and
commanded to be taught out all his Realm, and all other utterly set apart, as
the Teachers thereof tender his Grace's favor. 8vo. London, by Willyam Powell.
without date.

XXVI. HUMPHREY POWEL. MDXLVIII.
1. The Harvest is at hand. By John Champneis. 8vo. 1548.

2. The Sin and abominable Blasphemy of the Mass. 8vo. 1548.

3. John Proctor's Fall of the late Arrian. 8vo. 1549.

4. The ordinary fashion of good living. 8vo. no date.

XXVII. GUALTER LINNE. M D LXVIII.
1. Richard Bonner's Treatise of worshipping Christ in the Sacrament. 8vo. 1548.

2. Archbp. Cranmer's Catechism. 8vo. 1548.

3. Urban. Regis Epistle to his friend about the causes of Church Controversy.
8vo. 1548.

4. Bern. Ochinus's Dialogue of the unjust Supremacy of the Pope. 4to. 1549.

5. Peter Martyr's Epistle to the Duke of Somerset. 8vo. 1550.

6. John Ponet's Sermon before the King. 8vo. 1550.

XXVIII. WILLIAM HILL. M D XLVIII.
1. Heron. Bodin's Collection out of St. Austin de Essent. Divinitatis. 8vo.
1548.

2. The Endightement of Mother Mass, by way of Dialogue. 8vo. 1548.

3. The Soul's solace against Sickness and Death. 8vo. 1548.

4. Sum of the H. Scripture about Xtian Faith, Baptism, and gospel-life. 8vo.
1548.

XXIX. THOMAS RAYNOLD. M D XLVIII
1. Declaration of God's power in the Sacrament against the Mass. 8vo. 1548.

2. Lesson of the Incarnation of J. Christ. 8vo. 1549.

3. The Bible translated by Tho. Mathews, anno 1537, and new imprinted by Tho.
Raynold and Will. Hill. 1549.

4. John Mardey's Instructions to the Rich and Covetous. 8vo.

Addenda to the Article of GRAFTON.
We are since informed that the Edition of the New Testament against which
Tyndal justifyes himself in the Preface mentioned page 370. was a third Edition
privately printed under his name in the same year and place by Joyce, and
designedly corrupted, in order to make him pass for a Heretic, as he shows in
that Preface, which was the occasion of his publishing this second Edition in
the same year.

XXX. ANTHONY SCHOLOKER. M D XLVIII.
1. Sermon on the Keys and Absolution. Englished at Ipswich. 8vo. 1548.

2. Zuinglius's Instructions of Youth. ibid. 8vo. 1548.

3. Scholoker's Translation of Peter Viret's Collection of Scripture-places
explaining the Lord's Prayer. 8vo. with W. Series. 1548.

4. John Old of the old Faith of Great Britain. 8vo.

5. Pyor's Plowman's Exhortation unto the Lords, Knights and Burgoysses of
the Parlyment-house. Land. temp. Ed. VI.

XXXI. ROBERT STOUGHTON. M D XLVIII.
1. Two Epistles of Henry Bullinger, and two of Calvin about assisting at the
Mass. 8vo. 1548.

2. Urban. Regius's Comparison between old and new Learning. 8vo. 1548.

3. The Censure and Judgment of the famous Clark Erasmus of Roterdam; whyther
Dyvoursement between Man and Wife stondeth with the law of God, with dyvers
Causes wherefore it is permitted; with the mind of the old Doctoures, etc.

4. Peter Martyr's Judgment of the Lord's Supper. 4to.

XXXII. ROBERT CROWLEY. M D XLIX. an Author and Printer.
1. Voice of the Trumpet, containing 12 Lessons for 12 several estates in
meter. 1549.

2. A New Year's Gift, wherein is taught the knowledge of God, of our self, and
the fear of God, worthy to be geven and thankefully receyved by all Christen
men. 1549.

3. Psalter of David. 1549.

4. Voice of the Trumpet, etc. 1550.

5. Battery of the Pope's Boteveux, or the high Altar. 8vo. 1550.

6. The Way to Wealth, teaching a most present remedy for sedition. Written and
imprinted by R. Crowley. Land. 1550.

7. Lady Eliz. Fane's Psalms and goodly Meditations, with 102 Proverbs. 1550.

8. Prologue for the understanding of the Bible. It is by Crowley entitled the
Pathway to Knowledge. 8vo. 1550.

9. An Information and Petition against the Oppression of the pore Commons of
this Realm, etc. to the Parliament. no date.

XXXIII. WILLIAM TILLY. M D XLIX.
Coverdale's Testament. By Wylliam. Tilly, dwelling in St. Anne and Agnes
Parish at Aldrishgate.

1549.

XXXIV. RICHARD KELE. M D XLVX.
1. Translation of a Dutch Prognostication out of the Script. and Proph. 8vo.
London, Richard Kele. 1549.

2. Image of Both Pastors, by Zuinglius. 8vo. By Richard Kele and W. Seres.
1550.

3. Exposition on the Epistle of St. Jude. 8vo.

4. Mirror or glass of Health, 8vo. nedeful for every person to look in that
will keep their Body from the Sykenesse of the Pestylence, and it shows how
the planets do raygne.

XXXV. ANDREW HESTER. M D L.
The English Bible corrected and revised by Miles Coverdale. 4to. 1550.

XXXVI. JOHN CAWOOD. M D L.
John Cawode or Cawood. -- I can find but one of his works extant, though he was
appointed by the King to print the Patents. His Patent is in Rymer's Faedera,
and the Book is,

A spiritual and most precious perle, etc. Dedicated to Edward Duke of
Somerset. A most fruitful Treatise of behavior in the danger of Death.
Somerset-Place, 6 May, 1550.

XXXVII. RICHARD JUGGE. M D L.
1. Tertullian's 2d. Book to his Wife about the choice of a Husband and Wife.
8vo. 1550.

2. The New Testament of King Edward VI.

3. Whether it be mortal sin to transgress the Civil Laws, with the judgment
of Melangton and other Divines thereupon. 8vo.

XXXVIII. RICHARD CHARLTON. M D L.
A Treatise of all the Arguments of the Old and New Testament. 8vo. 1550.

XXXIX. STEPHEN MIERMAN. M D L.
The Market or Fair of Usurers, a new Pasquil or Dialogue against Usury, etc.
8vo. Land. by Steph. Mierman. 1550.

XL. JOHN TISDALE.
Sermons on Jonas. 8vo. 1550.

Abridgment of Polydore Virgil.

BESIDES these we meet with a Patent in Rymer's Faedera, Vol. XIV. page 745,
granted to Stephen Merlar for the sole printing the English Bible. It is dated
at Westminster, March 12. an. 1542. but I never could meet with this Bible, nor
any other of his works. I found moreover about half a score more who printed
for, or under some of the more eminent masters above mentioned, some of whose
works have dates, and others not, beside a very considerable number of other
anonymous editions, not worth swelling this list with.

The City of YORK. M D XVI.
I have seen in the late Mr. Rawlinson's library the following edition printed
at York, viz.

Whyttintonus de Concinnat. Grammat. and Construct. 4to. Eboraci 1516.

THIS is the only one I have seen or heard of printed there so early, and did
not the Types convince me of its being an ancient piece, I should have thought
that the date had been misprinted, i. e. 1516 for 1616.

At CAMBRIDGE. M D XXI.
THIS University seems to have given but small encouragement to the Art of
Printing, either by the earliness of its reception, or the continuance of it
there. Mr. Maittaire tells us that he has not been able to meet with any thing
printed there of earlier date than 1521, and all that either he, the late Mr.
Bagford, or any of my correspondents from thence have been able to procure, is
only four editions, all printed in the same year, by John Siberch, and one in
1522 without Printer's name, though probably done by him. This Siberch used to
put the King'sarms to the title of his books, and to style himself in some of
them, Primus utriusque linguae in Anglia impressor, meaning Greek and Latin.

These Editions are as follows;

1. Libellus de conscribendis Epistolis Autore D. Erasmo opus olim ab eodem
caeptum, sed prima manu, mox expoliri caeptum sed intermissum, Nunc primum
prodit in lucem. 1521.

Apud praeclaram Cantabrigiensem Academiam.

Cum gratia and privilegio.

At the End, Impressum Cantabrigiae per Joannem Siberch, Anno M D XXI. mense
Octobri.

It is dedicated by J. Siberch, Cantabrigiensis Typographus to J. Fisher,
Bishop of Rochester.

2. Henry Bullock's Oration against Cardinal Wolsey, by dicto. ib. 1521.

3.
Lepidissimum.
Luciani opusculum (...)
Henrico Bulloco interpret
Oration ejusdem cum annotationibus marginalibus
Ex praeclara Academia Cantabrigiensi An. M D XXI.
At the End, Impressum est hoc opusculum Cantabrigiae per Joannem Siberch, etc.

4. Galeni de temperamentis and de inequali intemperie libri tres. Thoma
Linacro Anglo interpret. 4to. per Jo. Siberch, apud praeclaram Cantabrigiam.
1521.

5. Papyrii Gemini Eleatis Hermathena, seu de Eloquentiae victoria. 4to. ex
praeclara Cantabrigia. 1522.

Tavistock in Devonshire. M D XXV.
The Book of Confort called in laten Boethius de consolatione philosophy.
Translated into Englesse tongue.

At the End thus, Here ends the book of Confort called in latin Boecius de
consolatione phil. Emprented in the exempt Monastery of Tavestok in Denshyre by
me Thomas Rychard Monk of the said Monastery. To the instant desire of the
right worshypful Esquyer Master Robert Langdon, Anno D' MDXXV.

Deo gratias Robertus Robert Langdon's printer's mark Langdon.

This is supposed to have been Esquire Langdon's Mark.

JOHN OSWIN at Ipswich and Worcester. MDXLVIII.
1. Mind or Opinion what a Xtian ought to do that duells with the Papists. 8vo.
By John Oswin at Ipswich. 1548.

2. Christopher Hegendorphine's household Sermons. Englished at Ipswich. 8vo.
1548.

3. Of the true Authority of the Church. ibid. 16o. 1548.

4. John Ecolampadius's Epistle against respect to persons. 16o. ibid. 1548.

5. Invective against Drunkenness. ibid. no date.

6. Hegendorphine's household Sermons. 8vo. at Worcester. 1549.

7. The Book of Common Prayer, etc. fol. ibid. 1549.

8. Spiritual Matrimony between Xt and his Church. 16o. ibid. 1549.

9. Consolatory for all Xtians. 8vo. ibid. 1549.

10. Dialogue between the seditious Anabaptist and the true Xtian about
Obedience to Magistrates, etc. 8vo. ibid. 1550.

11. Short Pathway to understand the Scriptures. Englished by John Vernon. 8vo.
ibid. 1550.

12. St. Ambrose of Oppression. Translated by John Oswin; entitled Poor Naboth
oppressed by rich Ahab. no place's name.

JOHN MYCHEL.
THOUGH this Printer put no dates to these few Editions of his I have been able
to meet with, yet they seem both by the language, types, etc. to be older by
much than 1550.

1. Two Dialogues of Erasmus in English. Translated by Ed. Beke. 8vo. Emprynted
by me John Mychel, dwelling in St. Paul's Parysh in Canterbury. 8vo.

2. Randal Hurleston's Dialogue against the Papists. 8vo. at Canterbury.

3. Lan. Ridley of Canterbury's Exposition of the Epistle to the Philippians.
8vo.

N. B. I designed to have enlarged this Catalogue with the complete list of all
the curious editions of the most ancient Printers, such as printed only from
Manuscripts as I have seen in my Lord Pembroke's library, etc. but am glad to
find that Mr. Maittaire has been beforehand with me in favoring the world with
it in his Annals Typographici.

IN the conclusion of the second book of this History, page 257. I ventured to
affirm after Orlandi and other Annalists, that the invention of ingraving began
much about the same time with that of Printing; but I have been since
convinced, that the former began much earlier, from a curious collection which
my Lord Pembroke was pleased to show me, in which the whole progress of that
invention is set down in writing under each print. Having therefore obtained
his Lordship's leave to copy it from his own book, and to give it a place in
this work, I think I cannot better conclude this History than by obliging the
curious with this valuable collection.

AN APPENDIX To the GENERAL HISTORY of PRINTING of BOOKS: BEING AN ADDITIONAL
HISTORY OF THE RISE and PROGRESS of PRINTS, Which are Incus'd.
Exactly copied from the R. H. the Earl of Pembroke's curious Book of those
PRINTS, in which each Piece has its own particular account of its manner, etc.
in Manuscript, in a right progressive order, as follows.

1. ANTONIO POLLAIOLOLO not. 1426. ob. 1498. Baldinucci says that he engraved
the Battle at Florence about 1460, and that Andrea Montegna graved his Triumph
at Rome soon after his being there. They both graved upon Pewter. The former
printed his name on it thus, Opus Antonij Pollaiololo Florentini.

2. Israel van Meckenem his own Effigies.

3. This Israel van Meckenem is by some authors called Van Mecklin and Mentz
and Moguntin. Lomazero says he was the first that engraved; he was Master to
Bon Martino, who was Master to Albert Durer, whose first Print was a Copy after
this of Israel's an. 1497. and as Baldinucci says Israel did not engrave till
he had seen the Triumph of Ant. Montegno, anno 1467, which is the oldest date
that any author has mentioned, and the termination being Spanish, shows that
the art spread very soon.

4. A. M. was, as is supposed, Andrea de Murano 1412. This Print is upon that
mixed metal on which Goldsmiths used to engrave their first proofs. It is now
likewise used by other artists. Founders call it the hard metal, and Printers
the Type-metal, though the latter has a greater proportion of Iron. The other
materials are Lead, Block-tin, and Regulus of Antimony. Albert Durer began by
copying of old Prints, as you will see when you come to him; this Print is
older than that of 1467, which stands by it, which was taken to be the oldest
of any one with a date by the author, who mentions this for want of knowing of
that. As for the year 1412 above mentioned it agrees with the time in which A.
de Murano flourished; and Baldinucci speaks in one place as if other authors
were uncertain how near 1400 the invention of Prints was. Yet he seems to say
that Maso Finiguerri was not long before Pollaiololo, who followed Baccio
Baldini, who imitated Maso the inventor of Prints, by taking off some from
engraved silver work to see the impression: but, unless he did so some years
before, this Print must be older.

5. Andrea Montegna N. 1431. an. 1517. The next after Pollaiololo who engraved
in Italy. His best works were after the Antique. But this first is none of the
nine which he composed from the Antiques.

6. The sixth in order of his painting. This is his original Print; they have
since finished (within these outlines) the Prints that are commonly sold for it.

7. This was printed when they used the smoke of a candle instead of ^^mp-black
ink.

8. Mich. Angelo on silk. This is only from a drawing, the painting of which
has much more in it, and is to be seen in my Lord's Gallery. This is the first
Print that is not upon Paper.

9. The Suavius was the first Print done on two Copper Plates. This Print,
besides the blue ground, has the figure of old Time clipping Cupid's wings.
After this Perrier did engrave this, and then the five more on three
Copper Plates, as Carpi did upon wood.

10. The Head of Lutma the Father, done with the hammer; the black and white
disposed contrary to Mezotinto. Per Janum Lutma.

11. In this John Lutma has added graving to the hammering.

12. Jacobus Lutma mixed etching with engraving.

13. Venus and Mavors (Mars) by Joannes Collaert. This is the only Print that
ever was graved on Steel.

14. Dominico Campagnola, the first that printed with red on a black ground.

15. This manner, which was invented in Germany, differs from all Prints,
because the ink rises upon the paper.

16. This, done by J. S. (as in the shield) came from Venice; the lines are not
engraved, but made by Points.

17. Four Mezotinto's varying from the common manner of those Prints. In this
the figure (our Savior on the Cross) is engraved, the rest is done in
Mezotinto, the other three are each in a different color.

18. Mr. Tailor a Painter, who improved the printing of Stuffs in Holland, he
invented this Art of printing in colors; and Mr. Le Blond (though he might
take the hint from this) has further improved it by printing his pieces so as
to look like painting; the first that he did in this kind was after the
Baroccio in my Lord Pembroke's gallery.

19. The first Print of Martin Sch^^n, (al. Chon, as the French write and
pronounce it) and called Bon Martino by the Italians, Bon being a kind of a
translation of Sch^^n; which in the High-German signifies sine beautiful.
Martin was Master to Albert Durer, but learned his Art at first by copying
after the Print next to it of Israel van Meckenem.

20. Israel van Meckenem. This is the only one of his that has the place's
name, viz. Tzu (at) Boackholt.

21. The first Print of Albert Durer 1497, which is a Copy after Israel's. He
engraved this also upon Pewter.

Albert Durer not. 1470, ob. 1528, was famous for cutting on Wood, and all
other manners of ingraving, as may be seen by these four that follow, viz.

1st. Engraved on Pewter, which was his first manner.

2d. Cut on Wood, and on three planches.

3d. Engraved on Copper, in which he was the first and the best, and was
imitated by Mark Antonio.

4th. Etched, being the first of that kind.

22. Maso Finiguerra, a Goldsmith at Florence, the inventer of Prints, though he
made no Print till after A. Pollaiololo. Albert Durer copied this so as to
stand the same way as the Original. They stand each by the other in the book.

23. Albert Durer made this piece in imitation of the oldest Print, which was
graved, anno 1412.

24. This bears the oldest date of all his, whether on Wood or Copper. This is
also dated 1502, but the mark differs from his usual mark.

25. If Hugo Carpi was the inventor of Printing upon three planches, he must
have been very young; for he was but 18 years old when A. Durer did this in
1522, which is the Head of Ulricus Var^buler very large from three planches,
with his own name to it Albert Durer.

26. The first Print etch'd upon Iron by A. Durer.

27. Another of his of anno 1518, in which he perfected the Art of etching on
Iron, even before Parmigiano; though this last in Italy is affirmed to have been
the first Etcher.

28. Albert Durer before his he used a mark, the manner of this ^ that of his
Master.

29. The first Print on Copper by A. Durer, with his mark before he began to
date; this is his first manner.

30. This is without cross-strokes; Melaine's manner is a fine improvement of
this.

31. This piece is dated 1502, and bears the oldest date either on Copper or
Wood.

32. One of 1504. This Adam and Eve were the chief of his last manner, vastly
neat, and imitated by Marc Antonio in Germany. This is reckoned more scarce
than his St. Jerome.

33. The St. Jerome. This the Bolonia edition of Vasari calls La Maraviglia, or
the prodigy of Art.

34. The last piece that Durer engraved. It is the head of Erasmus, and is
dated 1526.

35. A Crucifix engraved on a golden head of the Emperor's Cane. It was sold
for 150 Gilders, and is the only Print taken from Gold; that of An. Caracci is
only from a silver salver. My Lord has it: there is but this one Print of it,
which he took off as a proof before it was gilt.

36. The famous Bag-piper by Lucas van Leyden. This is the Original, which was
sold for 60 Duccatoons. The Copy, which stands next to it, is pretty scarce.
These two, and that on the gold cane, were on one Cartoon in the Arundel
Collection.

N. B. Incused is the proper term to signify those plates which bear the ink
between the lines of the graving, as excused is of those that have it on the
face of the line. Thus the prints in the Paginae Conglutinatae were excused,
but those of Albert Durer incused, he being the first inventor of this manner,
as being cheaper, and easier cut than upon copper.

The following is a List of XVI Volumes of DRAWINGS and PRINTS in the same
Library relating to the same subject as the former, and copied from the
Manuscript-Titles of the Books themselves.
THESE DRAWINGS and PRINTS consist but of a very few, in comparison of many
numerous collections; for here are chiefly Italian designs, and only one of
each master, to see the variety of manners, except of the most noted Italian
masters a pretty many, and all of such Italian Painters, as also themselves
graved, etched, or cut in Wood: of original Drawings here are but two volumes
of 220; Italian Painters (except a few who were also esteemed in Italy) in a
chronological order, The 1st Vol. has 200 Painters, one of each; the 2d Vol.
has 20 of the chief Painters, of each five, but of Rasael Urbin and Correggio
20 of each. As to Prints, Marolles had more than 50 times as many. In his 1st
book he says he had above 120,000; and in his 2d he added about 50,000 more.
(The King of France has since bought them). But he gathered all, and of all
sorts that he could find, well or ill preserved: as for entire books graved,
there are very many, but here are only those of Italian Painters, antiquities
excepted; as for loose Prints, only 14 volumes, as follows.

IN the first 4 volumes of Prints are above 1500, each by a different master,
ending with Edelinck, Andran, and their disciples, engraving and etching being
brought to perfection by them.

Vol. III. but the first of PRINTS. Part I. The Introduction comprehends the
first inventors of all the different manners, many of them now disused, or the
Art lost. Part II. Gravers, all of Italian Pictures.
Vol. IV. Part 1. Etchers, all of Italian Pictures. 2. Cut on Wood, all of
Italian Pictures. 3. Mezotinto, all of Italian Pictures.
Vol. V. Gravers by Pictures of other nations not Italian.
Vol. VI. Part 1. Etchers, by Pictures of other nations not Italian. Part 2.
Cut in Wood, by Pictures of other nations not Italian. Part 3. Mezotinto, by
Pictures of other nations not Italian.
Vol. VII. The 17 chief Gravers, their principal Prints all after Italian
Paintings of Rafael Urbin, and all that they graved.
Vol. VIII. 23 Etchers, who were also Painters; and at the end are all that
Ang. Caracci graved, the other two Caracci's being in this book.
Vol. IX. 12 More noted Etchers who were also Painters; most of these are
famous for Landskips, and some also for little figures.
Vol. X. The 5 chief Artists who cut in Wood, and only after great Italian
Painters, all that they did both single, and as entire books.
Vol. XI. All these are after Rafael Urbin by many Gravers and Etchers,
different from those beforementioned, at the end of which are many Drawings by
Santo Bartholi, after such of Rafael's Pictures as were never graved, he
intending, had he lived, to have graved them, they were sold by his Widow. Of
Raphael and the following three, here are collections of single Prints also,
the other great Painters have been graved chiefly in entire books.
Vol. XII. All these are after Correggio, both single Prints, and as entire
books.
Vol. XIII. All these are after Guido Rheni of single Prints.
Vol. XIV. All these are after Barocci: but the 2d part is of the Arundel
collection, only of the Italian historical Pictures or Drawings.
Vol. XV. in two parts. The heads of Vandyke, both those which he etched
himself, and that were done by others, of which here are above 300. Part I.
has 100 of them, 19 of which are etched by Vandyke, the rest of the 100 are of
M. Vander Enden.
Vol. XVI. Single Prints of Antiquities, and chiefly those by Lafreri, being by
the largest scale, as well as before they were mended, and some are also as
mended, by which one may compare what parts were truly antique; I have also the
book of Lafreri with the Title Page, but though scarce, and of an old date, yet
after these, some body got an imperfect collection of some of his Plates, and
mixed them with others of less value.

These Volumes of DRAWINGS and PRINTS my Lord tells me were collected by his
Father, except some few, agreeable to his design, which were afterward added
by my Lord himself, especially such as related to the origin of Prints.

AN ALPHABETICAL and CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE Of all the CITIES and PLACES in which
the ART of PRINTING Began to be exercised before the Year 1500, and in ENGLAND
to 1500.
The first Number is the Date of their first known Edition, and the second is
the Page in which they are mentioned.

A. ABBEVILLE an. 1486 page 252 Alban St. an. 1486 page 327 Alost an. 1487 page
215 Amberg an. 1471 page 191 Angoulesme an. 1493 page 256 Antwerp an. 1485 page
250 Aquila an. 1482 page 245 Argentina, al. Stratzburg and Argentoratum an.
1458 page 183 page 299 Augusta Vindelicorum, alias Ausburgh an. 1466 page 121
Avignon an. 1497 page 257
B. BAMBERG an. 1499 page 257 Barcelona an. 1494 page 256 Basil an. 1475 page
216 Bergamo an. 1498 page 257 Boisleduc an. 1487 page 253 Bolonia an. 1471 page
186 Brescia an. 1474 page 214 Brudges an. 1477 page 231 Brussels an. 1478 page
242
C. CAEN, al. Cadomus an. 1480 page 243 Cambridge an. 1521 page 386 Canterbury
an. 1550 page 389 Ceulen an. 1480 page 243 Colle an. 1471 page 191 Cologn an.
1470 page 178 Coscence an. 1478 page 242 Cremona an. 1485 page 250
D. DAVENTER, alias Deventria an. 1472 page 209 Delft an. 1477 page 232 Dole
an. 1492 page 255
E. ERFORD an. 1482 page 245 Esling an. 1475 page 228 Eychstadt an. 1488 page
253
F. FERRARA an. 1471 page 197 Florence an. 1471 page 193 Friburg an. 1493 page
256
G. GAETA an. 1488 page 254 Gaunt, Gandavum an. 1483 page 246 Geneva an. 1478
page 242 Genoa, Janua an. 1474 page 213 Gentia, Genzano an. 1480 page 243 Goude
an. 1479 page 243 Granada, Grenata an. 1496 page 256
H. HAGENAW an. 1489 page 254 Harlem an. 1485 page 250 Hasselet an. 1481 page
244 Heidelbergh an. 1485 page 251 Herbipolis, Wortzburgh an. 1481 page 240
Hispal, alias Sevil an. 1491 page 255
I. INGOLSTADT an. 1492 page 255 Ipswich an. 1548 page 388
L. LANGRES an. 1482 page 245 Leipsick, Lipsia an. 1484 page 249 Leiden an.
1497 page 257 Ligniz an. 1481 page 244 Liria an. 1494 page 256 Lisbon,
Ulisipone an. 1491 page 255 London an. 1481 page 352 Louvain, Lovanium an. 1473
page 210 Lubeck an. 1475 page 230 Luneburg an. 1493 page 256 Lions, Lugdunum
an. 1477 page 233 Lypswick, vid. Leipsick
M. MADRID an. 1494 page 256 Magdeburgh an. 1494 page ib. Mantua an. 1472 page
208 Memmining an. 1483 page 246 MENTZ, Moguntia and seq. 115 and seq. an. 1457
page 71 Messina an. 1486 page 252 Milan, Mediolanum an. 1470 page 180 Mirandula
an. 1496 page 256 Modena an. 1488 page 253 Mountferrat an. 1496 page 256 Mount
Real, or Royal an. 1481 page 244 Munster, Monasterium an. 1486 page 252
N. NAPLES, Neapolis an. 1471 page 191 Nurembergh, an. 4172 page 199 Norimberga
O. OXFORD an. 1468 page 321
P. PADUA, Patavium an. 1472 page 209 Pampelona an. 1496 page 256 Paris an.
1469 page 165 Parma an. 1472 page 207 Pavia an. 1478 page 242 Pignerol an. 1475
page 228 Pisa an. 1482 page 245 Placentia an. 1475 page 228 Provinz an. 1497
page 257
Q. QUILAMBOURG an. 1480 page 243
R. RATISBON an. 1471 page 191 Reggio, Regium an. 1481 page 244 Reutling an.
1469 page 140 Rimino, Riminium an. 1486 page 252 Rome an. 1467 page 122 Rostoch
an. 1476 page 231 Rouen, Rothomagum an. 1488 page 253
S. SIENA an. 5489 page 254 Sevil, vide Hispal Soncino an. 1484 page 246 Spire,
Norimagium an. 1477 page 232 Stratzburgh, vide Argentina Subiaco an. 1465 page
120
T. TAVISTOCK an. 1525 page 387 Thessalonica, an. 1493 page 256 Salonich Toledo
an. 1486 page 252 Toulouse an. 1488 page 253 Treviso an. 1471 page 189 Tubingen
an. 1488 page 253 Turin, Taurinum an. 1474 page 213 Turon, Gall. Tours an. 1467
page 139
V. VALENTIA an. 1475 page 230 Venice an. 1461 page 140 Verona an. 1472 page
206 Villa St. Albano an. 1480 page 244 Vienna, Vindebona an. 1484 page 250
Vincentia an. 1475 page 229
U. ULMS an. 1473 page 212 Urbino an. 1414 page 250 Utrecht, Ultra-trajectum
an. 1473 page 212
W. WARTZBURGH, Vid. Herbipolis Wesiminster an. 1474 page 327 Worcester an.
1548 page 388 YORK an. 1516 page 386 ZWOL an. 1479 page 243

FINIS.
Explicit Liber quartus

Dialogorum Gregorii.

Finding in this Book of My Lord's, that what was in Red was Printed, made me
Print what I have said of it; but my Lord, not approving of it, I promised to
Print at the end of the Errata what his Lordship had writ at the beginning of
his Book, as follows:

I bought this Book, because it is Printed before they made use of Matrices to
cast single Letters. From the variation of the Shapes of the same Letters, it
appears to be Wooden Movable Types: As for the Red I told the man, that I
believed there was some Cheat in it, because I had some Months before such a
Book, printed without the Red, brought to me by an other Person, who asked me
more for it then I cared to give. The Paper has the Bull's Head, on which
Faust, etc. printed, and is reckoned to be older than any dated by Faust, and
so older than the Date here in Red.


