A LETTER To the Reverend Mr. Dean Swift, etc.

Price Three Pence.

A LETTER To the Reverend Mr. Dean Swift, Occasioned by a SATIRE Said to be
written by Him, ENTITLED, A DEDICATION to a GREAT MAN, concerning DEDICATIONS.
Discovering, among other wonderful SECRETS, what will be the present Posture of
Affairs a thousand Years hence.

By a Sparkish Pamphleteer of BUTTON's Coffee-House.

LONDON, Printed for James Roberts in Warwick Lane. 1719.

A LETTER To the Reverend Mr. Dean Swift, etc.
Dear Doctor,
I Thank you, in the Name of the Public, for your continuing to be useful,
notwithstanding you are a dignified Churchman. The celebrated Lord Falkland,
talking of the Clergy in the House of Commons, said, That as their Preaching
was the Cause of their Preferment, so they made their Preferment the Cause of
their not Preaching; and, when I knew you were made a Dean, I grew in mortal
Fear that you would live like your Brethren, and be good for nothing. I confess
a Deanary is a very good Reason for being idle; and we infer that you are of
the same Mind, from your not having once set the three Kingdoms a-laughing in
five Years together; whereas you used formerly, when you had Wit in
Pocketfulls, and no Money, to be tickling the Sides of Mankind once a Week, at
least: What a Misfortune is it, that the rich Man should always thus spoil the
merry Fellow?

I my self find it by Experience, that Plenty is a damned Baulk to Mirth; for I
am always dull in Proportion to my Cash, and witty in Proportion to the
Feebleness of my Purse: When I am Master of a few Half Crowns, you would swear,
by my Looks and Heaviness, I were an elder Brother, or an Alderman, such a
magisterial Stupidity do I carry about me: However, for my Comfort, I am seldom
attacked by this Fit of Lethargy above once a Year.

On the other Hand, when there is a Famine in my Fob, my Head is in the best
Plight in the World, and I can write a Pamphlet in half an Hour. NEC ONUS, NEC
FRAENUM; a Colt, or a Girl, or a young Cat, has not more Tricks and Liveliness.

One Day, (I shall never forget it!) as I was raising a Ghost, or describing a
Monster, or committing a horrid and bloody Murder, Faith, I cannot tell which,
but one of them it was, and the Press and the Hawkers both stood still for it;
I say, upon that self-same Day, when I began, with my usual Elegance, to
flourish and form my Periods, I felt an unusual Slowness in my Invention; and
my Fancy, though I pumped it again and again, and drew it by all its Teats,
would not yield one Drop of Milk, and I could not, for the Heart of me, make my
Readers wonder.

In this deplorable and never-enough to be lamented Dullness, what does me I do,
but search first in my Noddle, and then in my Breeches, for the strange Ground
of my present Woe and Unfruitfulness; and, to my great Astonishment, in a
private Corner of my Pocket lurked a crooked Sixpence, unfelt 'till then by
human Finger. The Reason of its long Imprisonment was, that in many Months I
had never sent my Hand on any Message into my Pocket, as well knowing it had no
Business there.

As soon as I had laid my Hands on this single Inhabitant, I resolved to make
an Example of him, and drowned him immediately, without Mercy, in half a Pint
of Sherry. I then went readily and cheerfully to work, and having now neither
Let nor Molestation, finished my Ghost with good Reputation to my self; for it
was reckoned the very best and most terrible Apparition that haunted Grubstreet
that Evening.

I have not met with such another Obstacle in all the numerous Pamphlets which
I have since produced. While I have any Cash, I neither think, nor speak, nor
write, but ramble, and drink, and pay; and when I can pull out no more Money, I
pull out my Inkhorn, and grow witty again. N. B. For three Weeks past, I have
been a Wit without Interruption.

I appeal to you, dear Doctor, whether the Case, which I have been here
describing, was not once yours, while your Circumstances were yet but lean, and
your Purse Grey-Hound-gutted.

I was therefore not a little surpised to find you writing, in Spite of your
Gold and your Deanary. I at first imagined there might be a general Famine in
Ireland, and that you were reduced to dine upon your Wit again; but the Mirth
and Festivity of your Book relieved me instantly from all Apprehension of this
Kind, and I have since considered you as only venting your Spleen against a
Piece of fulsome Roguery, which continues still to go on in shameless
Luxuriancy.

Generally speaking, you can as easily grope out Color and Complextion with
your Fingers, and pore into the Nature of Harmony with your Eyes, as discover
the Characters of Great Persons in the Descriptions which are made of them in
Dedications.

Your Essay upon that Subject was certainly very useful and seasonable; and I
think you are owned to have executed it with just Wit and Severity.

Will the Quality never see, that in these Panegyricks which Authors sell them,
they are first belied and then cheated? The Language, in most of those Cases,
is in Truth no other than this -- My Lord, give me 20 Guineas and I will
deceive you. Every Man who is decked in a Character which does not become him,
is so far dressed in a Fool's Coat and Cap, and exposed to the Grin and
Contempt of all that can see it, that is, every Body but himself.

Fame is a fleeting tender Thing, and even where it is due, it is lost or
corrupted when bestowed by improper or mercenary Hands.

I knew a pretty young Girl in a Country Village, who, over-fond of her own
Praise, became a Property to a poor Rogue in the Parish, who was ignorant of
all Things but Fawning. This Fellow used to wait on Mrs. Betty every Morning,
and she being a Shopkeeper, his usual Salutation was, Lord love your Heart,
Mrs. Betty, you be main handsome, will you give me a Pipe of Tobacco? Am I,
Isaac? (answers Mrs. Betty) let me see your Box; and then she fills it. Thus
Isaac extolls her out of a Quartern of Cut and Dry every Day she lives; and
though the young Woman is really handsome, she and her Beauty are become a
Byword, and, all the Country round, she is called nothing but Isaac's Best
Virginia.

There is but one Way of carrying Flattery to a greater Height than it is
already arrived to. All Patrons have been, Time out of Mind, perfectly wise,
perfectly just, perfectly valiant, perfectly witty, and perfectly beautiful;
all Patrons are so, because all Authors have said so. Now what remains to be
done for the Improvement of Flattery? even this: Let the Poet buckle himself in
Armor, and, mounting a mettl'd Steed, sally forth into the Streets and
Highways, and challenge to single Combat any bold Varlet who dare assert that
all the rest of the World are, in the least Degree, comparable for Virtue, and
Beauty, and all that, to one single Lord or Lady, who is, perhaps, if known,
despised by all the rest of the World.

I expect the Thanks of our Authors for this Hint of mine, which yet I have
borrowed from themselves. Considering what several of them have threatened long
ago, and do, upon Occasion, still threaten, I have waited a good while to see
them grasp the Lance, and fall into the immediate Practice of this Piece of
Author-Errantry, after having most humbly invoked his Grace, or her Ladyship,
to be propitious, etc.

Says one Author,

-- I know, Sir, your Modesty will be tortured by what I have here asserted,
but I am resolved to maintain my Point to the last Drop of my Pen.

This Author, I doubt, carried his Quixotism too far; he threatens to attack
the noble Squire himself, in Defense of the noble Squire himself.

Another runs his Head against the Universe, in Behalf of his Lord and Patron,
and cries,

My Lord,

In Spite of the Growlings of an envious World, I will maintain it, in the
Face of Mankind, that your Lordship is, in all Respects, the Only most -- and
most -- and most -- and most -- and most --



He goes on in telling a great many more Lies, which I do not care to repeat:
You see he makes a Curr of the Universe, and sets it a-growling at my Lord, who
is a much greater Man than Mr. Universe himself: And then he threatens to run
Mankind through the Body, if they do not own with him, that my Lord is, in all
Respects, the sweetest Creature in the three Parishes.

A Third boldly pronounces,

-- This Character, which I have drawn of your Grace I will stand by, and
support, while I have Life or Limb. This was a She-Author, and whether by her
supporting and her Limbs, she did not mean bawdy, I am not sure: But I think
the Meaning of the next is plain, when she tells her youthful Peer, that Though
he had committed sufficient Ravages among the Sex, yet the Loveliness of his
Looks, and the Firmness of his Make, made her conclude he was but beginning.

In this Manner it is that you Poets and Parsons create Gods, and invent
Religions, and then force us, that are but Laymen and Readers, to worship the
one, and submit to the other, on Pain of being damned and knocked down.

And it is most natural, in the Business of Falsehood and Forgery, for those
that have an Interest in their Maintenance, to appear, as much as is possible,
in great Earnest; and, in Order to it, to punish and inveigh against all that
dare see so well as to distinguish the monstrous Features and Deformities of
your Deities and Doctrines.

Suppose now I cannot, with all my Optics perceive, that the Eyes of a certain
Earl are so very brillant, or, that the Ceremonies of a certain Church are so
very decent; you must, to be consistent with your selves, and of Importance
with the Multitude, censure and destroy me, for being an obstinate Enemy to the
Church and the Earl; for should the People, by hearing my Reasons, come to
embrace my Opinions, it might be my Turn next to direct and govern your seeing
and your believing.

I should not, dear Doctor, have fallen into these Reflections here, had it not
come suddenly into my Mind, that they are not unlike those I have heard you
make formerly, before you were convinced and converted by a Deanary.

Some have wondered how Doctor Swift, whose Affection to the Church was never
doubted, though his Christianity was ever questioned, should think the worse of
some of the Clergy for their Trampling upon Loyalty and Oaths; and, for all his
Reverence for the late Q -- and her Counselors, should make such honorable
Mention of King George and his Ministers; but as it is well known you never
were a Slave to Constancy and Principle, we can easily account for this your
Behavior, and in Defense of it say, That in this Instance, you have put off
Prejudice, and resumed your Understanding.

Besides this, others allege, that your Panegyric is contradictory to your
Banter upon Dedications: But this you have your self answered in your Preface
to the fourth Edition, in which you have the following Lines.

'As to the Characters and Inscriptions at the End, I still think them so just,
that I am not like to repent of them; which may serve to show me as much a
Friend to well-grounded Panegyric, as I ever shall be a Foe to all false
Coloring. There is no such Thing as Praise and Blame, where they are not
applied; and as I take upon me to expose the one, I think I need ask no Pardon
for attempting to practice the other.'

It remains now for me to entertain you with some Remarks on the present State
of this Town, which no Man knew some Years ago better than your self.

And to begin with that which, with Gentlemen of your Faculty, claims
Precedence of the King himself, the GOOD CHURCH of ENGLAND, I am sorry to tell
you, she is in the same puny, complaining Condition, which you, Mr. Dean, left
her in; and languishes so immoderately, that if she do not very shortly kick up
her reverend Heel, and depart this established Life, your Brethren, the
Parsons, are false Prophets; for they have not only, with one Mouth, predicted
her Downfall these thirty Years, but are, at this very Juncture, preaching the
paralytick old Lady's Funeral-Oration every Sunday that passes: So that if she
be not already stone-dead, there is no believing the Cassock.

The Spreading of Reports that the King is in Danger, or dead, is generally, if
not always, taken as a Mark of Disaffection, and as such punishable. If the
forging of Tales concerning the Danger of the Church may be judged by the like
Rule, I doubt most of her pious Sons will be found errant Bastards.

The present Tottering State of that Venerable Matron, proceeds from the
dreadful Power which a new Act of Parliament gives to old Women to teach
Children to read. From hence it is orthodoxly concluded, that the said old
Women will, like Giants and Generals, head an Army of Infants, armed with
Psalters and Horn-books, against the Hierarchy. Add to all this another
terrible Circumstance; a Man may now venture to hear. Tom Bradbury without
being ruined by the Forfeiture of his Place, and the neglected Priesthood can
have no other Vengeance upon such a Delinquent, but barely CURSING him.

A Quaker in Kent, when he was pressed by a zealous Tory to conform to the
established Church, made this roguish, reasonable Answer, Friend, thee may
spare thy Breath and Persuasion; I will never be of that CHURCH which is always
in Danger: And some People, as arch and atheistical as our Quaker, are ready to
tell you, that neither their Principles nor their Noses will allow them to
communicate with a Church, which, if our latest Advices from the Pulpit be
true, is already stinking in her Sepulcher.

The Right Reverend and right learned Lord Bishop of London, differs from many
of his Clergy upon this Head, and seems of Opinion, that the established Church
has still some Existence.

This orthodox, primitive Bishop has lately writ a perspicuous and persuasive
Epistle to the Priests of his Diocese, and in it warns them, with a paternal
Tenderness, against the new Doxologies of ancient Heretics. Besides, he tells
them, that if they neglect their Duty to God and the King, they are liable to
pay five Pounds; and his Lordship, no doubt, knew what Arguments were like to
be of most Force with them.

We have had lately two new Plays; one is, Sir Walter Raleigh, a Tragedy: It is
acted with good Applause at the New House, its own native Worth hiding, in a
good Degree, the Insufficiency of some of the Actors. You will find in it many
beautiful Thoughts and Lines.

The other is a new Play of an ancient Poet; it is called, The Masquerade, and
acted in Drury Lane: It filled the House a few Nights with People and Hissing;
but that Theater never fails having a large Audience, though they act Charles
Johnson or Tom Thumb.

This Winter has produced but few Pamphlets which the Town has vouchsafed to
smile on. You know, to be sure, what Acceptance your Essay upon Dedications has
met with; and there is an Apology for Parson Alberoni, which has already run to
the ninth Edition. This little Book is such a Thorn in the Sides of the Clergy,
that it is every where taken for granted you are the Author of it. So that you
are this Year, as you used to be, at the Head of all the Pamphleteers in Great
Britain.

I am just now told, that the Right Honorable the Players and Privy
Counselors in the Old House, have found out that they are a Ministry within
themselves, and have notify'd the same, in Form, to my Lord Chamberlain, by the
Mouth of their Plenipo and Copyer in Chief, the well bred Mr. Colley Cibber:
But, I hear, his Grace frowns upon these Actors of State, and is almost
provoked to shut up their Palace, because they were saucy to him, and pleaded
their Patent for it.

Vice and Dullness, Dear Doctor, never reigned more irresistibly, than they do
at the very Time of the signing and sealing hereof. Our Wits leave us in Pairs;
Grath and Row are just gone, and others, of their Spirit and Genius, are in a
fair Way to follow them; but Debauchery, Beaus, and Insolence, gather Ground
and Numbers. For my Part, I cannot help foreseeing and dreading the Day, when
it will be as unfashionable to be Witty, as it is now to be Good-natured or
Sober.

I am, Dear Doctor, your Friend and Servant. P. A.
Covent Garden, Jan. 30, 1718/9.

