A CIRCULAR LETTER TO THE SEVERAL PETITIONING COUNTIES, CITIES, AND TOWNS,
Addressed to their respective general Meetings, against the late Proposition
for a triennial Election of REPRESENTATIVES, By GRANVILLE SHARP.

SECOND EDITION.

To the Gentlemen, Clergy, Freeholders, and other Inhabitants, of the
GENTLEMEN,
THE last general meeting of the County of York having adopted a proposition to
shorten the duration of parliament to a term not exceeding three years, the
worthy gentlemen of your own committee may probably have been induced, by the
laudable desire of preserving unanimity with that respectable county, to
recommend the same proposition for your adoption. Be pleased, therefore,
previously to consider, whether it is probable that a majority of the
freeholders, etc. of the Yorkshire meeting did really mean to prefer triennial
elections to the ancient legal usage and constitution of annual parliaments, or
whether they may not rather have been induced to postpone the open declaration
of their loyal attachment to that ancient law for frequent parliaments, (viz.
every year once, and more often if need be,) merely through a desire to
preserve the unanimity of their own meeting, by yielding a little, for the
present, to the prejudices of a few particular gentlemen among them, (persons,
indeed, of great worth and esteem, in many respects, and whose sentiments in
general deserve the utmost attention and regard, but) who unhappily, in this
point, are apt to conceive, that annual elections, and more often if need be,
would be attended with some inconveniences to themselves.

You have undoubtedly, in your own county, also, several worthy gentlemen of
fortune, to whom great respect is due from the people, on account of their
known independence, and steady opposition to bad measures in general, who
nevertheless, perhaps, may entertain the same erroneous conceptions of frequent
elections; and therefore you can, by your own feelings, (I mean your respect
and esteem for such worthy men,) more easily judge of the effect which the same
kind of laudable influence must necessarily have caused in the Yorkshire
meeting; which is the best reason, I believe, that can be assigned for their
having adopted that unconstitutional measure.

You are therefore most earnestly requested to consider the following plain
propositions.

I. That, though great deference and respect be certainly due to such worthy
and independent gentlemen as I have described, yet your condescension to them
ought to have some due limitation.

II. That the bounds of the ancient parliamentary constitution of the kingdom
ought surely to mark out the utmost extent of your compliance with the worthy
part of the aristocratical interest.

III. That if, on the contrary, your endeavors to preserve UNANIMITY should
carry you beyond these legal bounds, you will really injure those very
gentlemen whom you wish to oblige, as well as the whole aristocratical interest
(the crown, the lords, the country gentlemen in general); because there is but
one true common interest, which the fundamental laws of the constitution alone
can preserve. Consider also,

IV. That unanimity is as baneful in a bad measure as it is salutary in a good
one: and,

V. That, if any compliance in proceedings is to be made at all for the sake of
unanimity, it ought certainly to be made where a compliance is most due; viz.
to the constitutional resolutions of a select body of intelligent gentlemen,
deputed to a national conference, by freely-elected committees from a very
considerable proportion of the counties and most populous cities and towns in
England; -- to resolutions, which were unanimously agreed upon by the said
deputies; and, therefore, "a compliance, for the sake of unanimity," was most
justly due to them; and, the more especially, as it appears that they formed
their conclusions by the fundamental laws and usages of the constitution. The
deputies, in their memorial, declare, that shortening the duration of the
sitting of parliament can only be done, CONSISTENTLY WITH THE CONSTITUTION, or
with the best policy in any enlarged view, BY SHORTENING IT TO THE PERIOD OF A
YEAR. And this they farther explain in the words of the old statutes, viz. that
a parliament should be holden ONCE every year, and MORE OFTEN if need be; from
whence it is manifest, that the longest duration, consistent with the
constitution, is the period of one single session, even though two or more such
sessions should be necessary in one or the same year.
The striking, similarity also of this deputation, in many respects, to an
ancient example of a national deputation from all the counties, cited, on this
occasion, by lord Carysfort, See page 15 of his lordship's very judicious and
loyal letter to the committee of the county of Huntingdon.
from Hoveden, adds great weight to the resolutions in question, as well as to
the importance of that unanimity with which they were formed.

VI. That the members of the late deputation have unanimously declared, in
their memorial, that annual parliaments are the ancient constitution of this
kingdom, and the birthright of Englishmen; and, in the three last paragraphs of
their memorial, which are highly worthy your most careful attention, have not
only proved that the old laws, requiring a parliament to be holden every year
once, and more often if need be, meant a new parliament every year, etc. (by
the instances of writs issued two or three times in the same year, for new
elections,) but they also prove, from the experience of former ages, that these
very frequent elections were not attended with any such inconveniences, as the
advocates for long parliaments commonly pretend, but, on the contrary,
recommend them, "as consistent with the greatest peace," etc. -- The fact is,
(say the deputies from the several petitioning counties, etc.) during the whole
of that reign, (king Edw. III.) and for the first eighteen years of the
following one, writs were annually issued, and, in some instances, two or three
times in the same year, for new elections, till Richard II. made himself
absolute. And various were the occasions, in those times, when the commons gave
for answer, to any new propositions of magnitude, that THEY DARED NOT AGREE
WITHOUT CONFERENCE WITH THEIR COUNTRIES. At what period then was it, that the
consent of the people was asked and obtained to so momentous a proposal as that
of divesting them of their expected control over their representatives? in
fact, of changing the terms on which the delegation had passed from their
hands? ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS are, therefore, the ANCIENT CONSTITUTION of England,
and the BIRTHRIGHT of Englishmen.

Nor are they less beneficial in policy than unalienable in right. In the
language of ancient times, before the prejudices of habit had thrown false
colors over names and things, they were ever described as consistent with the
greatest peace, and most peaceably conducted. And, in parliamentary records,
for more than two hundred years together, from 49 Hen. III. till 22 Edw. IV. we
find not so much as one double return, nor more than two or three instances of
elections questioned on any ground; -- a circumstance surely most inviting,
when put in contrast with that multitude of perplexing enquiries which, of late
years, has consumed so much time in committees, to the great hindrance of the
national business. The plain reason is founded not in the time, but in the
nature, of the thing; the duration of the seat was not an object for a violent
contest. This will also dispel the objection arising from the probability of
tumult and expensiveness; to remove which it will farther contribute not a
little, if we would give attention to what passes now among those large bodies
of electors, who annually choose their corporate officers. But the argument
against corruption surmounts every thing else. Nothing can give so much
assurance of defeating it as this limitation. A seat for three years might
induce a man's attention to a bribe. He that sits but for one is very unlikely
to experience such an offer, or will certainly reject it, if he would not wish
to put all his future expectations to an imminent risque.

When once the constitution of parliament is improved in these leading points,
every thing else, that may appear to have its share in reformation, must be
subordinate in its class, and must follow in its time. And, the more
effectually to insure these, we entreat you, neither at the next or any future
election, to engage your support to any candidate, before you are satisfied
that he will give his assistance, in parliament, to the establishment of so
much of these reforms as may not then be accomplished.


And, therefore, you are desired to consider,

VII. That the Yorkshire proposition for shortening the duration of parliaments
to a term, not exceeding three years, is totally different from the shortening
of duration, explained and recommended by the said deputies, as the ancient
constitution of the kingdom, and the birthright of Englishmen; and, what is
worse, has been adopted without the least mention of that birthright in any
saving clause, to assert and preserve your just claim to it for a future time:
whereby it is manifest, that the promoters of this triennial scheme have really
been the first offenders against that desirable unanimity, which the conference
of deputies was intended to effect; and, therefore, the cry of "necessary
unanimity," by which alone that unconstitutional proposition is at present
recommended, deserves not the least attention. What! would you be unanimous
against the ancient legal parliamentary constitution of the kingdom, which the
triennial scheme is manifestly calculated to supplant? You ought never to
forget,

VIII. That the people have already been betrayed by a triennial parliament!
That the representatives of the people, in a triennial parliament, usurped the
legislative authority of their constituents for a longer time than it was
delegated; and treacherously presumed, without consulting their countries, to
prolong the duration of parliaments to the present unreasonable term of seven
years; whereby by they established the basis of that detestable system of
corruption which has been the true source of all your present grievances! And,
therefore, be pleased to consider, --

IX. That triennial parliaments, as well as septennial, are manifestly
dangerous to the state, and so grossly inconsistent with the ancient legal
parliamentary constitution of this kingdom, that the most essential laws and
usages, by which that constitution is declared and known, are really suspended
by them. You cannot, therefore, without notorious disloyalty, (in the strictest
sense of the word,) adopt the proposition for triennial parliaments: so that
you have a most ample excuse for not concurring with a few particular
gentlemen, (whom you would otherwise wish to oblige,) viz. that your compliance
with them, in this matter would exceed the constitutional bounds of
condescension, (mentioned in the three first propositions,) and would really
tend to subvert the people's just right to more frequent elections. -- Because
it is manifest, --

X. That the concession of a popular right, made by the people themselves in
their collective capacity, at their several county-meetings, is infinitely more
binding upon them (to exclude any future claim to the ceded right) than the
same concession would be, if made merely by their representatives in
parliament, without the instruction or concurrence of the people. And,
therefore, you ought to be particularly thankful, --

XI. That the people themselves, the great body of constituents, have never
yet, by any such concession, betrayed that valuable birthright, (as the
deputies call it,) the ancient law for annual parliaments. It has too often
been suspended indeed; sometimes through the disloyalty of kings, and lastly
even by the disloyalty of parliament itself, (of which the tyrannical triennial
and septennial acts are lamentable instances); yet, as the suspension of it has
never been promoted by the requisition or instruction of the people at large,
their right to it remains entire. The presumption and treachery of their
representatives, in consenting to the triennial and septennial acts, cannot
injure their just title to it; because, in both these instances, the
representatives presumed to act contrary to an established rule of parliament,
by adopting a new device, (which even affected a fundamental law of the
kingdom,) without consulting their countries, which the constitution absolutely
requires in such an important case; so that even that unwarrantable presumption
of the representatives (in neglecting to consult the people) is the very
circumstance which still preserves that fundamental and essential law as a part
of the constitution, and as a just right of the people, which they are entitled
to demand and resume whenever they shall be pleased to instruct their
representatives for that purpose; and to charge all persons with disloyalty,
and even treason to the constitution, who shall dare to oppose them! But if, on
the contrary, the people themselves, in their several county-courts, or
assemblies, should be so inconsiderate, or so depraved, as to consent
indiscriminately to the proposition for a triennial election, without a saving
clause to assert their birthright and reserve their title to more frequent
elections, (which the Yorkshire meeting has unwarily done,) know, for a
certainty, --

XII. That, in such an unhappy inattention to their own rights, (which, I pray
to God, they may never be cursed with,) they would betray the constitution of
the kingdom! -- they would betray a fundamental law of their ancestors; which
would mark their character with an eternal stain of disloyalty! And as they
may, perhaps, never have again so favorable an opportunity, as the present, of
recovering their ancient birthright of annual elections, it would probably be
lost, irretrievably lost, for ever! Your new triennial representatives (in such
a case) would most likely behave as former triennial representatives have
heretofore done, -- betray and enslave you by another septennial system of
corruption! And (what is worse) you yourselves would most justly deserve it!

But I hope better things of you; and I trust also that you will excuse the
severity of my expressions in this address, as being prompted merely by an
ardent zeal for your prosperity.

Old Jewry, April 11, 1780. Granville Sharp.


