A DEFENSE OF THE ANCIENT, LEGAL, AND CONSTITUTIONAL, RIGHT of the PEOPLE, To
elect Representatives for every Session of Parliament; VIZ. Not only "every
Year once," BUT ALSO "More often if Need be:" As expressly required in the old
Statute, and confirmed by the general Usage of ancient Times, demonstrated by
the Evidence of the ORIGINAL WRITS FOR ELECTION: IN A LETTER To a Member of the
SURRY Committee.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

LONDON: Printed by GALABIN and BAKER, Number 1, INGRAM-COURT,
FENCHURCH-STREET. M.DCC.LXXX.

COPY of a LETTER to a Member of the SURRY Committee.
DEAR SIR,
-- I Have paid all the attention, that the shortness of the time would permit,
in searching and procuring authorities, to enable you to oppose the objections
lately made to annual parliaments, as stated in your kind letter of the 17th
instant. -- With respect to the first, i. e. their incompetency, now that the
empire is so vast, and foreign connections so interwoven with us; I beg leave
to remind you, that the empire is not now more interwoven with foreign
connections, (I mean those of Europe, which alone have power to affect us,)
than they were when annual parliaments (and "more often if need be") were the
established law of the land; I mean in the glorious reign of king Edward III.
when several of the richest and most populous provinces of France were the
hereditary dominions of the family upon the throne; and when the remainder of
that mighty and extensive empire, with the exception of a very few provinces,
(the great duke of Burgundy himself doing homage for his estates,) belonged
absolutely to the crown of England, by the right of conquest. But the true
constitutional answer to the objection is, that all foreign dominions, acquired
by the crown of England, ought to be governed by free parliaments of their own,
duly elected by the inhabitants of each distinct country respectively, who have
not only the best right, but the best knowledge and abilities, how to prescribe
laws for their own government, safety, and necessities. This is the only true
means of removing all difficulty from the government of distant dominions,
because, in the first place, it is the only means that is strictly consistent
with the natural rights of the inhabitants in each dominion, separately
considered; and also, 2dly, the only means of preventing the inhabitants of
such distant dominions or colonies, from invading the natural rights of each
other, which is the source of civil war and disunion; and, if this most
essential principle of our constitution, and of natural equity, had been
regarded by administration, agreeably to what I have stated, in my Declaration
of the Peoples Rights, respecting Ireland, we should not have lost America! --
The only true means, for instance, to preserve the British empire in
East India, which still remains to us, is, to instruct the Sooders, and lower
casts of the Indian tribes, concerning their natural right to a share in the
government of those countries which they inhabit, that their duly elected
representatives, in a general assembly, may have confidence to reject and
confute that detestable lie of the Bramins, by which they are holden in
slavery, and rendered the prey of Tartarian, as well as European, wolves and
tigers.

The English company of merchants, aided by the British government, have, at
present, both power and influence sufficient to effect this, and restore them
to their rights: this would be an obligation never to be forgotten, and which
would establish trade upon its proper basis, and remove all difficulties, as
well as expense, from the government of that vast empire; but, if the
opportunity be too long neglected, it may be suddenly lost for ever!

With respect to the second objection, -- The apprehensions of disorder on too
frequent elections. -- The evidence of experience confutes it, as, I hope, I
have already proved in the two little tracts, See the Legal Means of political
Reformation, in two tracts, p. 31 and 32, also 55 and 56. See also the three
last paragraphs of the Memorial of the Deputies from the several petitioning
counties, etc. wherein it is declared, concerning ANNUAL parliaments, that they
were ever described as consistent with the greatest peace, and most peaceably
conducted.
and of which the preamble to the wicked act of the 8th of king Henry VI. is
itself an ample testimony; The legal Means, etc. p. 29, 30.
because the perverters of the constitution, at that time, could not say that
manslaughter, riots, batteries, etc. had then happened, as they really do now
at our septennial elections, but only in the future tense, that "they shall
very likely arise and be." They could not complain, that there were a number of
outrageous people at county elections, and therefore they perversely and
deceitfully complained only of an outrageous and excessive number of people:
the epithet, "outrageous," was not applicable to the people, and therefore they
have deceitfully branded the innocent substantive, "number," with the charge of
being "outrageous." The reason of this is plain: the manner of wording the act,
as it now stands, has the effect of an insinuation against the behavior of the
people, that is, to a careless reader, and thereby it answered the deceitful
purpose of those who framed (or translated) the act, which would have been null
and void for want of truth, had the adjective, "outrageous," been applied to
the other substantive, i. e. people; for falsehood in a preamble has the
unquestionable effect of destroying the force of any statute.

But, if the people really were outrageous at elections, as well as excessively
numerous, yet, it is certain, that they had right on their side, and intended
the good of the kingdom in general; because they have the evidence of all
antiquity, that the majority of these excessive numbers were generally for
sending to parliament the best and most respectable men they could find among
them; which is not only proved by the testimony I quoted from Prynne, in p. 31
and 32 of my first little tract, For a more equal representation, etc.
but also by the evidence of that learned antiquarian, Brown Willis, Esquire. who
tells us, in the preface of his Notitia parliamentaria, that the knights of
shires (viz. those that were chosen by the outrageous and excessive number of
people) have, EVER, IN ALL COUNTIES, been chosen out of the principal gentry
and quality: and though, says he, the citizens and burgesses were heretofore
elected out of their respective communities, and were only the CHIEF and MOST
EMINENT MERCHANTS, etc. of their own communities or corporate bodies; yet, in
king Edward IV.'s time, we find a great many of them distinguished by titles,
etc. This affords a farther answer also to the first objection against annual
parliaments.

For who are so fit to judge of public affairs, now that the empire is so vast,
and foreign connexions so interwoven with us, (according to the objector's
stating,) as the principal gentry and quality out of the counties, and the
"chief and most eminent merchants" out of the trading cities and boroughs? and
more especially such knights, citizens, and burgesses, as those of ancient
times, whose conduct in parliament procured them the honor of being annually
returned, and sometimes more often, for several years together?

Thus, the two first objections against annual elections are manifestly without
foundation; and, with respect to the third, that it never was the law of the
land, So far is this objection from the truth, that the deputies from the
several petitioning counties, etc. have, in their MEMORIAL, declared, that
shortening the duration of the sitting of parliament can only be done,
CONSISTENTLY WITH the CONSTITUTION, or with the best policy on any enlarged
view, by shortening it TO THE PERIOD OF A YEAR; and they afterward cite the
ancient acts, which ordained, that a parliament shall be holden every year
once, and more often if need be.
it savours either of such deplorable ignorance, or of such barefaced
falsehood and effrontery, as scarcely deserves an answer!

If I have made any error or misrepresentation in either of the little tracts,
let the objectors point it out, and they will not find me backward to submit to
truth; for that is my duty to God and man! -- But, to condemn the doctrine in
the lump, without deigning to give a single reason or proof against it, though
it is supported by the most unquestionable historical evidence, of which many
even of the original documents (I mean the annual, or rather sessional, writs
themselves) do still exist, in our public records, to this day, is such a
detestable perversion of truth, such a depravity of human nature, in the
baneful service of our great natural enemy, the "father of lies," that I should
hardly have believed my own ears, had I been present when the objection was
made.

Persons, who discover such impotent malice against truth, must be warned of
their spiritual danger, lest they should be lost for ever!

That you may be able more easily to confute such objectors, I have sent you
Brown Willis's Notitia parliamentaria; where you will find, in the very first
table of writs, (viz. that for the county of Bedford,) examples of annual
elections for twenty years together, in continual succession, except in one
single instance; which omission will be the more easily excused, if it be
considered that there were two general elections in the year which preceded the
year of omission, as also two general elections in the year which followed it.
-- The period I refer to is between the 15th of king Edward II. and the 15th of
king Edward III. In the 6th year of the latter reign, there were three new
parliaments; two in the 7th, two in the 10th, two in the 11th, two in the 12th,
two in the 13th, and FOUR in the 14th, year. It was an ancient usage of our
Saxon ancestors, to hold provincial parliaments, or shire-gemots, regularly
twice a year. -- For the assembling of parliament; which, by the institution of
king Alfred, was to assemble twice a year. See the speech of sir George Crook,
Justice of the king's bench, in Hampden's trial on ship money. Anno 1637, 13
and 14 Car.
"Two schire-gemot," or two county parliaments, are expressly ordained to be
holden "on gear," (i. e. "in a year,") by the 5th law of king Edgar, and the
17th law of Canute. See Lambard's Archionomia, p. 64 and 111.
This affords ample proof, not only that new parliaments should be holden every
year once, but even "more often if need be." The book contains a great
abundance of other examples: and, though the annual elections were sometimes
omitted, yet this affords no proof against the peoples right to have them.
Another learned antiquarian, Mr. Gurdon, informs us, in his History of the high
Court of Parliament, page 282, that new summonses were to go out for a new
parliament, The continuance of parliaments for a longer term, without
re-election, seems to have been begun in the reign of king Edward IV. after the
people had been so cruelly harrassed by civil war, that they had no spirit or
(perhaps) power left to oppose that dangerous usurpation of their parliamentary
rights by royal prorogations.

In preceding times the adjournments, or prorogations, (which words had then
the same meaning,) were seldom for more than a few days 8 Richard II. The same
Saturday the parliament, for certain causes, by the commandment, was ADJOURNED
until Monday ensuing; and, on the same Monday, it was adjourned until Tuesday
next following, for the like cause, at the king's commandment. See sir Rob.
Cotton's Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 303. -- N. B. These
adjournments, being made by the king's command, were manifestly what we now
call prorogations.
at a time; and that only on extraordinary and unavoidable occasions; as
sickness, the absence of the king or great lords, the neglect of "certain
sheriffs, in not returning their writs," 7 king Richard II. The same Friday,
being the 20th of April, for that the duke of Lancaster and other lords were
not returned from the North, and for that also certain sheriffs had not
returned their writs, the parliament was adjourned until the Wednesday
following; and, in the mean time, the commons were willed to go together to
choose their speaker. Ibid. 298.
etc. or when the representatives promised to travel to their countries, to
hold farther conference with their constituents, concerning any "new device."
13 king Edward III. The commons made answer, That they knew and tendered the
king's estate, and were ready to aid the same; only in this new device they
durst not agree without farther conference with their countries; and so,
praying respite until another time, THEY PROMISE TO TRAVEL TO THEIR COUNTRIES.
( Ibid. p. 17.) This last is the very best reason that can ever be given for
the prorogation of parliaments, as this alone can reconcile, with the people's
just rights, the re-assembling of a parliament without a previous re-election:
that is, when the representatives travel to their countries, for the express
purpose of conferring with the people, and to receive their instructions.



once a year, at the least. This book I have also sent for your perusal, and
likewise an historical Treatise of Cities and Boroughs, by Dr. Brady, who bears
ample testimony to the means which I have proposed in my first tract, for
obtaining a more equal representation; for he proves, that, IN SEVERAL
COUNTIES, the CITIZENS and BURGESSES were chosen in the COUNTY-COURTS with the
KNIGHTS, on the day of the KNIGHTS ELECTION, in the SAME court, and jointly
returned in ONE INDENTURE, especially before the statute of the 23d of king
Henry VI. and, in some, after that, etc. p. 75.

It would be too tedious to give you more proofs respecting the law of the
land, in answer to the third objection; and, in answer to the fourth objection,
( that the whole constitution must be new-modelled to that idea,) I shall be
still more brief, having only to add, that we are far from desiring that the
constitution may be new-modelled; we only pray, that the unjust usurpations,
(made without the consent of the people,) the corruptions, and other such
abuses, may be taken away and reformed: and then the ancient constitution of
annual elections, and "more often if need be," will recover its full vigor
without any other alteration.

I remain, with great esteem, Dear sir, Your affectionate friend And humble
servant, Granville Sharp.
Old-Jewry, March 22, 1780.
To *** **, Esquire.

