OBSERVATIONS ON THE Increased Population, Healthiness, etc. OF THE TOWN OF
MAIDSTONE.

The Arms of Maidstone


PRINTED AND SOLD BY J. BLAKE; SOLD ALSO BY J. FILE, PARISH CLERK. M,DCC,LXXXII.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
MAIDSTONE is situated upon the banks of the river Medway, nearly in the center
of the county of Kent. The country around it is remarkably fine, highly
cultivated, and exceedingly rich and fertile; and, from its continual diversity
of surface, affords as great a variety of pleasing views and beautiful
landscapes as can well be conceived. The soil is dry, firm, and rocky, abounds
with excellent water, nor are there any putrid marshes or stagnant pools within
or without to corrupt its atmosphere. The air is therefore pure and salubrious;
and a lofty ridge of hills serves as a screen against the unwholesome vapors
and pernicious blasts of the north and north east.

The population, and of course the trade and prosperity, of the town seem to
have been greatly advanced, during the present century. The inhabitants were
numbered in the year 1695, by the Reverend Mr. Innys, with a minuteness and
particularity which descended to the prefession, sex, and age of each
individual; and there were at that time, in the town and parish, 3676 persons;
in March 1781 a very careful, and, there is reason to believe, not inaccurate
survey again was taken, when the number was 5739, consequently an increase of
2063 inhabitants in the course of about 86 years; from a strict and fair
examination of the parish register, it appears, at least with a strong degree
of probability, that the greater part of this addition of more than half the
original number has been made during the last go years; the very period when
ingenious and speculative men have believed and asserted that the depopulation
of Great Britain has been uncommonly rapid, and that we have as it were been
sinking fast into absolute annihilation.

Before we proceed to our intended observations, it may not be amiss to
illustrate the advantages to be derived from accurate registers of mortality in
the words of Dr. Percival. "The establishment of a judicious and accurate
register of births and burials, in every town and parish, would be attended
with the most important advantages, medical, political, and moral. By such an
institution, the increase or decrease of certain diseases; the comparative
healthiness of different situations, climates and seasons; the influence of
particular trades and manufactures on longevity; with many other curious
circumstances, not more interesting to physicians, than beneficial to mankind,
would be ascertained with tolerable precision. In a political view, exact
registers of human mortality are of still greater consequence, as the number of
people, and progress of population in the kingdom, may in the most easy and
unexceptionable manner be deduced from them. They are the foundation likewise
of all calculations concerning the values of assurances on lives, reversionary
payments, and of every scheme for providing annuities for widows and persons in
old age; in a moral light also such Tables are of evident utility, as the
increase of vice or virtue may be determined, by observing the proportion which
the diseases arising from luxury, intemperance, and other similar causes bear
to the rest; and in what particular places distempers of this class are found
to be most fatal." Percival's essays, vol. 2d.

The parish registers of this kingdom, indeed, have not generally been kept
with that degree of minute and accurate discrimination necessary for all the
useful and curious deductions here suggested, nor can it be pretended that that
of Maidstone in particular has. It appears, however, that the insertion of
baptisms, marriages, and burials in it, after the common and ordinary way, has
been always so extremely regular as to afford, in conjunction with actual
surveys at different periods, much pleasing and satisfactory information. Nay
it may be truly added, that during the last 20 or 30 years, it has some
peculiar recommendation, which will be apparent from the tables subjoined.
Should the matter engage the attention of the medical gentlemen of the town
(who are certainly best able to assist and direct in an undertaking of this
kind) it will probably for the future have every requisite distinction, and be
annually published as regular bills of mortality. The cities of Norwich and
Carlisle, the towns of Northampton, Eccles, and some others have set the
example. Maidstone need not be ashamed to follow; as it will appear, that, in
some respects, she is little inferior to any, and greatly superior to most of
them. In the mean time, and till the register acquires this desirable
perfection, we will make the best use we can of it, in its present state.

TABLE I. BAPTISMS, BURIALS, AND MARRIAGES IN THE TOWN OF MAIDSTONE IN TEN
DECENNIARY PERIODS, BEGINNING WITH THE YEAR 1682, AND ENDING WITH 1781.
Baptisms Marriages Burials Dates. Males Females Total Mar. Males Females Total
1682 678 665 1343 249 762 663 1425 -- 92 625 638 1263 335 615 598 1213 1702 604
591 1195 253 606 619 1225 -- 12 573 633 1206 350 638 494 1132 -- 22 646 635
1281 381 735 623 1358 -- 32 669 640 1309 423 780 740 1520 -- 42 718 687 1405
484 787 711 1498 -- 52 739 723 1462 449 625 684 1309 1762 771 698 1469 460 706
720 1406 1772 903 839 1742 533 814 735 1549 Total 6926 6749 13675 3917 7038
6587 13625

The slightest inspection of this table suggests many curious conclusions. The
first 30 years, that is, during the reigns of James the 2d, of William the 3d,
and of queen Ann, we observe that both the baptisms and burials, and of course
the number of people were considerably diminished; notwithstanding that the
thread manufacture, which is now dwindled to almost nothing, was then in its
most flourishing state.

From this era quite through the reign of George the 1st, and to the latter
end of George the 2d, the baptisms were continually increasing. The burials
however advanced in a much greater proportion, and at intervals with singular
inequality, insomuch that in the 10 years, beginning with 1732 they were the
more numerous by above 200, or almost one 6th of the whole. We cannot therefore
certainly conclude that the inhabitants were much augmented, but only that the
mortality of the town, from whatever cause, was greatly increased. From that
time to the present, the baptisms have been almost continually gaining on the
burials, till in the 10 years, now immediately past, they have got nearly 200
before them, which probably indicates the double advantage of multiplied
numbers and diminished unhealthiness. Upon casting an eye over the annual lists
of burials we see, that, before the modern improved practice of inoculation was
introduced every 5 or 6 years the average number was almost constantly doubled;
and it is found upon enquiry, that at such intervals nearly the small pox used
to repeat its dreadful periodical visits. The numbers which died of this
distemper were not particularly noticed in the register till the year 1753;
when they amounted to 70 persons out of the 209 that died in that year, and 102
out of 223 in 1760, and 54 out of 181 in 1766.

Prior to these instances it broke out in the year 1734, and twice more in the
course of about 11 years immediately subsequent to that; at each of which times
it raged with greater violence and made much more terrible havoc than in
either of the periods abovementioned; we may therefore very fairly conclude
that in the short space of 30 years it deprived the town of between 5 and 600
of its inhabitants; whereas in the 15 or 16 years that have elapsed since the
general inoculation it has occasioned the death of only about 60. Ample and
satisfactory evidence of the vast benefit the town has received from this
salutary invention! And it appears, with a high degree of probability, upon
proofs similar to the above, that, from the same causes, in the kingdom at
large not less than 4 or 500,000 lives were lost in the former of the periods
now stated, and that nearly half that number has been saved in the latter.

In the year 1695 the inhabitants were only, as before observed, 3676; the
annual burials on an average of 10 years immediately preceding were 147; and
the annual mortality 1 in 25 of the whole population. In 1781 the people were
5739; the annual burials, upon an average of the same number of years, taken in
the same relation, only 152, and the proportionate mortality about 1 in 37; of
course a diminution thereof has happened of more than a 4th since the former
era. This may perhaps in some small degree be ascribed to the greater care and
cleanliness observed in our prisons; the bettered condition of many of our
inhabitants as well as houses; the improvements in physic and surgery, and the
generally more skilful treatment of various disorders; but principally and
chiefly to that distinguished blessing of providence inoculation.

TABLE II. ANNUAL AVERAGE MORTALITY, OR PROPORTION OF DEATHS TO THE WHOLE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE FOLLOWING PLACES RESPECTIVELY
Rome 1 in 23 Amsterdam 1 in 24 Breslaw 1 in 25 Berlin 1 in 26 Northampton and
Shrewsbury 1 in 26 Manchester 1 in 28 Liverpool 1 in 27 Warrington 1 in 34
Leeds, Yorkshire 1 in 21 Chester 1 in 41 Eccles, Lancashire 1 in 37 Feversham 1
in 33 *Dartford, nearly 1 in 32 *Gravesend 1 in 21 *Milton 1 in 18 *Maidstone 1
in 37 *Warminster, Wilts 1 in 37 *Barnstaple, Devonshire 1 in 35 *Wednesbury,
Staffordshire 1 in 28

This table exhibits the degrees of mortality in a variety of large towns in
different parts of the world, and it presents an advantageous idea of the
healthiness of Maidstone compared with most of them. Of the whole number indeed
there is only the city of Chester, which surpasses it in this respect; while
most of the others are left far behind. Those marked thus * are deduced from
very late surveys, and rest on the authority of the clergymen of those places
respectively.

TABLE III. BAPTISMS AND MARRIAGES IN MAIDSTONE DURING TWO PERIODS OF FIVE
YEARS EACH, THE FIRST BEGINNING WITH THE YEAR 1762, THE SECOND WITH 1777.
First Period. Second Period. Dates Baptis. Marria. Dates Baptis. Marria. 1762
144 49 1777 193 39 63 132 55 78 182 51 64 143 40 79 190 64 65 144 41 80 180 78
66 152 39 81 197 46 Totals 715 224 942 278 Avera 143 44 188 55

From this table we may conjecture the progress of population during the last
20 years, in the prodigious increase both of marriages and baptisms. The annual
average of baptisms for the 5 years beginning with 1762 was only, 143; but for
the 5 years now immediately past it has been 188; the marriages in the former
period were annualy 44; in the latter 55. Making the one or the other the
standard of computation, or both united, the town seems to have acquired almost
of its present inhabitants since the year 1761; and after every fair deduction
it can scarcely be less than 6 or 800 persons. And it may here be observed that
the marriage register, while supported by correspondent baptisms, is at once a
presumptive evidence of the past and the present, and a faithful promise with
regard to the future.

The marriage register considered in another point of view bears very
honorable testimony in favor of the inhabitants. One of the best and most
accurate of the French writers on the subject of population estimates the
average proportion of marriages to the whole number of people in France at
about 1 to 120; and in the city of Paris at 1 to almost 160. When it is
considered what multitudes their ecclesiastical institutions absurdly condemn
to celibacy, we may naturally suppose that the proportion with us is much
higher. By the following table we see that in Maidstone, it is as 1 to 103;
which is not only higher than the French average, with all the prodigious
advantage derived from ^he country parishes, but superior to most other towns
of similar description, though inferior size, even in England.

TABLE IV. PROPORTION OF THE NUMBER OF ANNUAL MARRIAGES TO THE TOTAL POPULATION
IN THE FOLLOWING PLACES RESPECTIVELY.
Counties. Parishes. No. of Inhabitants Proportion of Marriages. Essex.
Chelmsford 2436 1 in 106 Norfolk. Buckenham 1327 1 in 134 Norfolk. Swaffham
1876 1 in 119 Norfolk. Northwalsham 1627 1 in 117 Suffolk. Woodbridge 2600 1 in
136 Lancaster. Eccles 9125 1 in 123 Devon. Barnstaple 3176 1 in 121 Wilts.
Warminster 4209 1 in 122 Hants. Andover 2899 1 in 109 Kent. Feversham 2527 1 in
114 Kent. Maidstone 5739 1 in 103

From a view of table I. we see that the number of marriages for the 10 years
beginning with 1752 were considerably less than the 10 years immediately
preceding. Now this was the very period in which the marriage act took place,
and this decrease of weddings may at first sight suggest a conclusion greatly
to its disadvantage; and induce one to suppose that it has operated as a
powerful restraint upon matrimony; but nothing can be more fallacious than such
a supposition. The marriage act has doubtless promoted regularity and order,
has sometimes restrained folly and prevented misery; but scarcely a shadow of
evidence has yet been produced, that it has at all obstructed judicious
connections, encouraged illicit intercourse, or diminished legal population.
The diminution of marriages in the instance before us, evidently arose from
hence. A surrogate constantly resided in the town. Before the marriage act he
had often no doubt influence sufficient to engage the parties to whom he
granted a license, to grant him in return the privilege of marrying them. But
this was afterward effectually prevented by their being obliged to have the
solemnity performed in the parish to which one of them belonged; hence the
surrogate missed the additional advantage of the marriage see, and the weddings
in the town were immediately diminished but unquestionably they are to be found
in the registers of the neighboring parishes. For taking a vast number and
variety of parishes of every size, situation, and description, it appears that
the aggregate proportion of marriages and burials has been considerably greater
since the marriage act took place than before; which if it be not absolute
demonstration, is at least strong presumptive evidence, that instead of
discouraging matrimony, it has greatly promoted it, and been a powerful check
to licentiousness.

TABLE V. NUMBER OF BAPTISMS, MARRIAGES, AND BURIALS IN 225 PARISHES OF 13
COUNTIES, DURING TWO PERIODS OF 20 YEARS EACH, THE FIRST PERIOD TERMINATING A
LITTLE BEFORE THE MARRIAGE ACT TOOK PLACE, THE SECOND BEGINNING VERY SOON AFTER.
Before. After. Counties. No. Pari. Baptisms Marriage Burials Baptisms Marriage
Burials Bedford 6 1418 354 1312 1613 482 1376 Bucks 11 4494 1007 4157 5430 1399
4562 Cambridge 18 4222 1064 3689 4464 1212 3375 Leicester 7 2273 598 1881 3720
745 2107 Devon 13 11296 5677 14615 14247 6321 16230 Cornwall 16 5532 1528 4892
5686 1683 4643 Hants 25 9242 3395 9698 10775 3768 11818 Hants 6239 2443 7081
7962 3379 7843 Norfolk 39 11722 2644 9306 12234 3671 9727 Wilts 13 5333 1376
4347 6095 1639 4905 Northumberland 23 23164 7485 23774 21815 8108 21254 Durham
16 12708 3399 10208 13867 3870 11250 Worcester 24 6867 1793 5629 9778 2309 6191
Warwick 14 4968 1347 4161 6029 1699 4477 Totals 225 109478 34110 104750 123715
40285 109758 Before. After. Proportions of Marriages to Baptisms and Burials
jointly about 1 to 6 1 to 5 To Baptisms singly about 1 to 3 ^0/100 1 to 3
10/100 To Burials singly about 1 to 3 (...) 1 to 2 (...)

We here see that the ratio of marriages to baptisms and burials jointly, in
the former period, was about as 1 to 6; in the latter nearly as 1 to 5; of
marriages to baptisms alone, in the former period, as 1 to 3 20/105; in the
latter, as 1 to 3 10/100; of marriages to burials alone, in the former period,
as 1 to 3 ^7/100; in the latter, as 1 to 2 7^/100. The fairest conclusion from
this, is, that the wise and judicious regulations of the abovementioned act
have greatly increased the number and proportion of marriages by rendering it
more difficult for any persons to enjoy the reputation of matrimony without
being really and actually married.

A very striking circumstance offers itself in the register of burials. By the
survey of 1781 it appears that the number of maies was 417 fewer than the
females, and yet on an average of the last 10 years, the male burials were
annually about 8 more than the female; and it will be found upon making the
requisite computations that only 1 in more than 40 have annually died of the
females, and almost 1 in 32 of the males; and the same proportion has probably
held throughout the 100 years, as the total of male deaths are to the female
nearly as 14 to 13. What can this prodigious difference be owing to? Some
allowance is doubtless to be made for the great number of female servants who
come principally from the country, at perhaps the most healthy period of human
life, and who by the late survey alone amounted to 375 of the 417 by which the
females exceed the males. But this circumstance will not account for the 5th
part of the disproportion before us.

Both French and English philosophers seem to concur in opinion that women are
naturally longer lived than men. But it may perhaps be doubted whether this be
founded upon evidence sufficiently various and extensive. From mere analogical
reasoning just the contrary might be concluded. Men are a greater number of
years in coming to their full perfection, both in body and mind; and it is a
general law of nature, that by how much longer any animal or vegetable is in
growing, by so much the longer it is in decaying. Men are also of a
constitution more firm and robust; nor are they liable to an equal number and
variety of diseases: On every account therefore they appear fitted for a more
extended duration; and agreeable to this obvious inference, it is a wellknown
and generally acknowledged fact, that some men have lived to a greater age than
even any women have done.

The very ingenious Dr. Heysham of Carlisle has remarked "that the
constitutions of males are fitted for laborious exertions, and that their
muscular and nervous fibers may therefore be supposed to become stiff, rigid,
and incapable of performing the functions necessary to health and life sooner
than those of females, both on account of their original texture and the
friction which must necessarily occur from laborious exercise." But this
reasoning, however plausible, cannot perhaps be admitted; because in country
parishes, where the laborious exertions of the men are beyond comparison the
greatest, the difference respecting the mortality we are speaking of is vastly
the least; and some times likewise much in savor of the male inhabitants; as
is eminently the case in the parish of Brightling, in Sussex; and many other
instances similar to it might easily be produced.

Men, it is true, are sometimes exposed to greater dangers and more numerous
hardships than women; yet excepting soldiers, failors, fishermen, colliers, and
miners, and probably a few manufacturers, this circumstance has a very confined
and trivial operation.

There is one cause still behind universally allowed to operate, and which
alone perhaps is funy adequate to the effect. Men are in general especially in
large and populous towns, more intemperate than women, both in eating and
drinking, and are likewise more commonly chargeable with every other
irregularly and licentiousness of conduct. To these therefore may their greater
mortality be most frequently imputed; and thus this singular circumstance of
register evidence becomes a serious topic of moral admonition.

TABLE VI. NUMBER OF BURIALS IN EACH MONTH AND SEASON, DURING TWO PERIODS OF 20
YEARS EACH, THE FIRST PERIOD BEGINNING WITH 1682, THE SECOND WITH 1761.
First Period. Second Period. Months. Males Fema. Total. Seasons Males Fema.
Total. Seasons January 126 124 250 149 129 278 February 108 98 206 126 119 245
March 116 136 252 708 Winter 128 120 248 771 Winter April 105 102 207 115 134
249 May 129 98 227 134 113 247 June 108 84 192 626 Spring 115 110 225 721
Spring July 90 86 176 113 106 219 August 101 90 191 108 91 199 September 114
123 237 604 Summer 129 133 262 680 Summer October 125 130 255 129 129 258
November 105 94 199 126 135 261 December 107 142 249 703 Autumn 139 112 251 770
Autumn

This table shows the number of deaths, in each month and season for two
periods of 20 years each, the first beginning with year 1682, the second with
1761; and it is wonderful to observe the perfect correspondence, not only
between the mortality of the respective seasons in the two periods, but almost
of the respective months. That season which is most fatal to human life in one
period is exactly so in the other. In this melancholy pre-eminence winter takes
the lead, autumn follows next, then comes spring and summer last of all. The
skilful physician perhaps might deduce from hence many curious, useseful, and
important conclusions; but the most superficial inspector cannot but remark
that the great disadvantage of our situation seems a deficiency of heat. For
besides the distinctions just now made respecting the seasons, it is apparent
that of any two months immediately contiguous to each other, the months of
December and January in each period have the most numerous deaths; July and
August the fewest; the former couple, in the usual course of things, have the
greatest degree of cold, the latter, of heat.

With regard to the great increase of population above demonstrated, we need
not indulge the gloomy idea that it has arisen from the depopulation of the
country around. On the contrary, very few parishes excepted, it has multiplied
its people in full proportion. The increase of the one has perhaps been at once
the cause and the consequence of the increase of the other. Allowing for
extraordinary cases, where ever you have a large and flourishing town, you will
soon have a well cultivated and populous country, and where you have a well
cultivated and populous country, you will soon have a large and flourishing
town; and it is amazing how the opposite apprehension could ever have become so
generally prevalent as it has. Their mutual riches encourage their mutual
industry; their mutual industry supply their mutual wants; the wealth of the
town flows into the country, and the products of the country return into the
town; their communication is eagerly rendered more and more easy by every
possible means; new roads are made, or old ones improved; fens and marshes are
drained waste grounds and commons are enclosed, manured and cultivated; bridges
are built, rivers are navigated canals are cut more hands are employed, and
every quarter becomes at once more populous, more healthy and animated. This in
some measure and with the exception of a few particulars has been the case with
Maidstone and its vicinity for the last 20 or 30 years; but it has been so in
the fullest and amplest degree with respect to more than half the kingdom; and
it may be safely affirmed upon satisfactory evidence, that notwithstanding the
temporary and local checks we have received from the burdens of the present
war. England has multiplied her numbers almost twice as much in the short
period now mentioned, as France has do^e since the beginning of this century;
and if we have but spirit and resolution to carry us through the difficulties
into which we are plunged, so as to secure us a safe and honorable peace, it is
not to be doubted but that our population, and its natural concomitants trade,
wealth, and prosperity, will again advance with as great or greater rapidity
than ever.

TABLE VII. AN ACCURATE SURVEY OF THE INHABITANTS, IN THE TOWN AND PARISH OF
MAIDSTONE, TAKEN IN THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 1782.
Names of the Streets, etc. Boys under 15 Girls under 15 Men above 70 Women
above 70 Men Servants Women Servants Total of Males Total of Females
Inhabitants No. of Houses No. of Families High-str. Mid. Row includ. 139 137 9
6 31 81 414 495 909 173 195 Queen Street 21 34 4 12 4 13 78 99 177 35 35
Pudding-Lane 32 30 2 1 7 3 69 79 148 31 33 Gabriel's-Hill 43 42 1 3 21 20 123
124 247 46 47 Stone-Street 136 149 22 25 28 57 392 499 891 192 204
Knight-Riders-Street 23 51 5 12 3 10 74 158 232 15 18 East-Lane 97 95 10 31 12
26 354 322 676 117 123 Square and Maryland Point 6 11 1 2 0 2 24 26 50 14 15
Week-Street 114 107 13 22 25 70 304 371 675 136 139 In the Meadow 12 19 0 1 0 1
39 46 285 20 21 Earl-Street 23 32 8 15 6 27 100 123 23 42 41 Havock-Lane 13 11
2 4 1 1 31 35 66 15 15 Saint Faith's Green 6 9 7 9 4 9 33 51 84 25 25 Waterside
18 27 3 4 0 0 53 58 111 22 21 Bridge-Street and Bridge 26 15 1 ^ 0 1 57 51 108
26 27 West Borough 67 78 8 11 3 4 161 185 346 73 73 In the Town 776 847 96 101
145 325 2300 2722 5028 982 1037 COUNTRY PART OF THE PARISH.
Names of Places Boys under 15 Girls under 15 Men above 70 Women above 70 Men
Servants Women Servants Total of Males Total of Females Inhabitants No. of
Houses No. of Families Bow } B^^ (...) } B^^^^ (...) Half Oak } 20 14 3 1 8 8
61 49 110 23 24 Lodd^^^^ 15 14 1 0 8 3 34 29 63 11 11 To^^ 28 39 3 2 7 6 81 86
167 35 34 Pen^^^^ Health 21 30 0 3 8 7 46 56 102 14 18 Magin^^^^ 9 9 2 1 0 0 20
17 37 7 8 W^^^^on-Street } Sto^^^ Rock } S^copy Court } Cold Arbor } G^^^^d's
Court } Blue Door } Mo^^ and Park } Sheppy-Street } 51 59 1 2 10 16 115 133 248
43 44 In the Country 144 165 10 9 41 40 357 370 727 133 139 Total 920 1012 106
170 186 365 2663 3092 5755 1115 1176

Persons to a house 5 5 6/1^ To a family, 4 80/10^.

It must here be observed, that in the survey of 1781, were comprehended the
women and children belonging to 4 or 500 soldiers then quartered in the town,
together with all other transient and temporary lodgers. Of the former of these
denominations we have now not any, and the latter are entirely unnoticed. It
may also be remarked, that the time of the year at which this latter
enumeration has been performed, is rather unfavourable for our numbers
appearing to advantage; as some of our people are doubtless absent in different
parts of the circumjacent country, upon harvest-work and other labors of the
season; a few we have unquestionably furnished to the public service of the
kingdom, both in the army and navy; and the peculiar unhealthiness of the last
winter and spring, as well as the general hardship and pressure of the times
must each have somewhat checked our growth. Yet, notwithstanding all these
disadvantages, our inhabitants now amount to 5755, which is 16 more than they
were in March 1781; and after due attention to the several considerations now
suggested, our actual permanent population can scarcely have been less
augmented during the last 18 months, than 100 persons.

To the evidence already adduced, in proof of the extraordinary healthiness of
the town, may be added, from the present survey, the high proportion of
children under 15 and of men and women above 70 years of age, as no unequivocal
testimony of the same pleasing fact. In the city of Chester, the salubrity of
which has with justice been considered as very highly distinguished, the number
of persons in the year 1774 above 70, was about 1 in 23 of the total
population; in Carlisle in the year 1779, in 29; whereas in Maidstone it is so
high as nearly 1 in 20. Again, the ratio of children under 15 in the city of
Chester at the abovementioned period, to the total number of inhabitants, was
about 1 to 3^; in Maidstone it is more than 1 to 3^; a superiority, it may
fairly be presumed, which the diminution of the number between 15 and 70, from
the peculiar circumstances of the times, can by no means deprive us of.

The number of reputed dissenters from the church of England, of every
denomination in the town and parish, if not exactly are very nearly as follows:
those usually styled Presbyterians 209 -- Baptists 41 -- Independents 42 --
Methodists 138 -- Quakers 2 -- In all 437.

N. B. Out of the 1115 Houses contained in the town and parish, there are only
12 empty, and several of those merely for the purpose of being repaired.

FINIS.

