THE Deplorable State OF THE SICK, FROM THE IMPIOUS TREACHERIES OF MANY
Physicians and Surgeons TO THE Patients and their Professions, Represented
(with the obvious Remedies) to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons of Great Britain.

Vt Medicus, Chirurgus fecit quod monitus fuit,
Sed spes fefellit impudentem Audaciam,
Comprehensus namque poe^a^ persolvit Cruce.
Phaedr. l. 3. Fab. 5. LONDON: Printed for JOHN MORPHEW near Stationers' Hall,
MDCCVII. Price 6 d.

A LETTER OF AN Eminent Divine, TO THE DISPENSARY PHYSICIANS.
I Had in my Sermon discoursed, That the Creator of the World had given Reason
to Mankind, to adapt the Governments and Laws to their various Circumstances;
as the Foods and Medicines, which are bestowed on us in the greatest abundance,
have been prepared from Observation and Experience, in the different Climates,
for the Preservation of Life. All the Governments have been and must be
prosperous, when (as all the parts of our Body are designed for the common Life
of the whole) the People shall with Courage defend the Prince, and cheerfully
observe the Laws; and when the Supreme and Inferior Magistrates shall
vigilantly preserve the Properties of the Subjects. The first and the greatest
Property is Life, which demands the Preservation, by the Laws, of the Plenty of
all things necessary to maintain it. As all the Parts of our Body assist the
other, every Subject is obliged to defend one the other, must repel all
Assaults, must demand of the inferior Magistrates their Care of the Public
Welfare. The happiness of Mankind is insur'd to us on these Conditions only,
and are not lost and betrayed but by our own Follies; as our Health, by Luxury
and Excess, and our Life in Diseases by the neglect or unhappy application or
Medicines. It is Impious to expect Miracles to supply our Negligence of our own
Preservation. The Clergy are appointed to act, as the Deputies of the Supreme
Power, to admonish the Prince and the People, to exact the great mutual Duties
of Justice, Obedience, and the Care of the Public Prosperity.

You will be surpised, Gentlemen, how much this Discourse inflamed my
Parishioners, to debate and discover if any Care is taken of the People in
Sickness, it has from them recoyl'd on me, and saved me, as those that heard
it. I could not vi^it any one Family, but I was most sensibly affected. We are
the most neglected, though most oppressed People in the World. The Poor, the
Servants, the meaner Tradesmen are undone in every Sickness. We are cheated for
one Dram and for one Spoonful of the Remedies in a greater degree of Expense,
than the Government formerly did, and now can and must secure to us a Pound and
a Gallon of the best Medicines in the Universe; and then to multiply these
Frauds, we must in every Disease take the oppressive, pernicious Multitude of
the little shamming Doses. In other Houses, Lord have Mercy on us! What do the
Magistrates think, to suffer every Boy setting up the Trade of an Apothecary
(whose Skill has never been examined) and every Vagabond from Foreign Countries
to impose on our Weakness by a Thousand Lies, to undertake all the dangerous
Diseases? Do they see and hear, that many near them are daily killed by their
Ignorance of the Disease, by the Numbers of Medicines, by which only they pay
themselves for their deadly Care and Advice? Are they insensible of all
Humanity, of the Guilt they contract, as Accomplices? The Eternal Union of the
Inhabitants of the Island is gloriously accomplis'd, shall we be wretchedly
heedless of securing the Union of the Soul and Body of every Inhabitant? We
must imitate the excellent Discipline of the Britains of the Northern Part,
encourage Virtue and the Public Spirit, and repel the raging Libertinage and
Contempt of all Order and the Laws destructive to all Societies. Are the
furious Inroads and Devastations and Butcheries of the Borders abolished, and
all the Professions of Religion, the Law and Physic without defense, laid open
to the Invasions of every impudent Pretender, with the Arts only and Abilities
to cheat and delude the People, destitute of the Advice and Defense of the
Magistrates? The Wicked Physicians and Surgeons are the first and Principal
Cause of our Miseries, they basely justify to us their wretched Quackery, when
called in at the Extremity; they vainly labor to mend the Mistakes by contrary
Methods, and they improve the Robbery by appointing the same endless quantities
of the little Doses, many superfluous and neglected, many more than they use in
their own Houses. These two Enormous Crimes (the Physicians and Surgeons have
almost engrossed to themselves) deserve Death. The College and the Company
supported by the Government can only save us. But there are Physicians and
Surgeons more Honest and Learned than our Enemies, who would secure us from
this Robbery and Destruction, and preserve the College and Company to improve
all the Members in the respective Arts and Sincerity to the Patients, they are
both assaulted by the perjured Perfidiousness of many of both the Societies.
Dr. R. swears every day he will damn and destroy it; that there is, and shall
be no other Physician in the Nation but himself. The largest part of the
Physicians delude us fatally, commending the vile Work the Apothecary has
made, design nothing more in the Prescription than his Profit, ruin their own
Profession to gain the prevalent Recommendation, the Preference in the
Apothecaries favor. There is a Surgeon of the same Principles and Morals with
the Bravo Doctor, who breaks his Company, and the Improvements and Subsistence
of his Prentices, that he may be noised as the only Judge and Operator. The
others, by a deadly piece of Work they are now and then preferred to. What will
be the Fate of the miserable English, when the Apothecaries are increased by
two or three Prentices in all the Shops, when the College and Company shall be
deserted, and our Life, and the two Professions shall be destitute of the Care
of the Magistrate?

You know, Gentlemen, I came lately to my Preferment here from the University;
we have the same Usage in Oxford and Cambridge. The Professors are insensible,
that the Faculty is invaded, almost ruined. Do they instruct the Students in
the faithful and learned Practice, to preserve the Patients and the Profession
together? I observe the Outlyers affront the College, refuse to unite with it,
betray it and themselves, and the Sick, to the Apothecaries Encroachments.
Alarmed with these Outrages, I demanded of many of the Apothecaries Physicians,
how long they intended to cultivate and increase the fraudulent and pernicious
Practice? They replied with great Impudence, as long as the People cannot
discover it, as long as we must live by it. We own, that the Gentry and People
are used by us in the most filthy manners. We shall be called Scavengers and
Reformers, if we use them otherwise. We have no other ways to come into
Business, but yielding all the Diseases to the Apothecaries, 'till Danger or
Death appear; we must complement the Choice of us to mend the matter, by
extolling their great Skill and Care, and by writing two or three Guineas a Day
of the small Doses, let the Case be what it will. We will not risque those our
only Fees and Reputation, to save the Kingdom. Many Surgeons assured me, their
Case was the same, and obliged me with the Information of the Remonstrances of
your College, which they said, assert Surgery as well as Physic, sold at the
Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard, to which no Physician or Surgeon had dared to
reply, which will amply instruct you, how great, how many are the Calamities of
the Sick, from our Treacheries to them. The most infamous of both heartily
wish, the Government would chastise and reform us; but who will call on the
Magistrate, who do not know their own Losses, and Pains, and Danger, and are
stupefied by the numberless Forgeries of the Apostate Physicians and Surgeons,
united with the innumerable Apothecaries their Masters, and the Governors of
the Families?

Your College Discourses have no other Design, but the Preservation of the
Royal Family, the Nobility, Gentry and People, by the sincere and learned
Practice. The Dispensary Poem, writ at the Request, and by the Instructions of
the President, and the Majority of the Society, avows the detestable Knavery,
and the most certain greatest Ignorance of the Physicians, as well of the
Medicines, as Diseases. The Surgeons must be in the same Circumstances with you.

On Saturday Morning, a great part of my Parish, of the Church and Dissenters,
filled my Parlour. I observed a Paleness, but a resolved Air in all their
Faces, as in the Allies pushing the French at Ramillies. Their Onset on the
English, who neglect the Laws, their Property and Life, and the perfidious
Physicians and Surgeons, more cruel Enemies than the most raging Tyrant, was as
brave, and will gain the Victory. Their Language, I perceive, was taken from
your Treatises, which they had read, and often seriously debated: The Proofs of
every Article are published in them.

We cry out to you for Justice, and our natural and legal Right, the Punishment
and Reformation of the most impious Practisers, who betray the only possible
Improvement of the young Physicians and Surgeons, who combine with the
Apothecaries to have us forced to take their illegal, unexamin'd, unlicens'd
Advice, by the insufferable Payments for the Medicines; we are compelled to
hazard and lose our Life, employing them from the intolerable Expense, and kill
the Growth of the Knowledge of the two Professions. You informed us from the
Pulpit, that Providence is not, and cannot be deficient in the Provision of the
greatest Plenty of all the Necessaries to preserve Mankind. The Magistrate is
the Steward, and must keep open those Magazines of Bread, the Foods, and all
the other necessary Supports, and invite us to enjoy our Shares of the vast
Abundance. Our Government has formerly appointed the general Medicines of
common and most frequent Use, to be fold for our Relief, which are all of the
cheapest Values: In the last Age, every Family knew all those Medicines, how to
divide or mix them; what were the low Prices of each. This Privilege is now
sacredly preserved in the other Parts of Europe. We now are undone, we are
plundered by the scandalous Exactions of one Hundred Parts more than the just
common Rates. We have together warily examined all the Particulars; we avow,
the Remedies are in the small Portions of their Doses cheaper than Bread, and
the common Nourishments. Our vile Physicians and Surgeons are the Contrivers or
Abettors of the Cheats of the little Doses, instead of the larger Quantities,
which they formerly ordered the Houses to buy, and to divide and mix, and use
in the more easy Cases: we are now pillaged by them in the Proportions of 40,
50, 100 to one. We are forced to explain it to you, by a vulgar, but most
instructive Example. If my Physician or Surgeon advise me to take Old Malaga
Wine, shall they permit me to send for it to the Vintner's, at 2 s. and 6 d.
the Quart, or shall they add a fulsome Syrup to deceive me, to alter the
Color, to make it more nauseous and unwholesome? Contrive with the Vintner to
send it in by his Boys in diminutive Parcels, that the one Quart shall draw
five Pounds out of me? Do not the Fools engage me to stick close to the Vintner
and his Boys, and to command them to advise us? Since we must pay five Guineas
for every Quart of Malaga, we will make them save us all their Fees.

They saw me trembling, I was assured of their Affection, but they rushed on me
with a Rage not to be expressed to you. I paid six Guineas for the Vulgar
Bitter Decoction, sent in the small Glasses, and the Ingredients were
heretofore, and may now be had for one Shilling. The 2 d. I paid 30 l. for
Perle Juleps in 14 Days, when one of them is worth but 8 d. Then the 3 d.
Venice Treacle, Diascordium* Mithridate, are very cheap in the Pound. I paid
two G^^neas every day, in a long Sickness, for the Dram Boles of them and the
small Draught to wash them down. Then a 4th. the common Cordial Powders are not
worth a Farthing a piece. I knew a poor Woman reduced to Beggary, by a Crown
for every one of many of them every day she was sick, 'till a Charitable
Physician made the Cure in a Week, with the Charge of one of them. They all
joined in one Voice and Shout, We are Merchants, we are Distillers, Druggists,
we have in our long Services for our Masters abroad, in all the Parts of
Europe, seen the more honest, and the vastly greater Successes of the
Physicians and Surgeons, and we know the low Rates of many domestic Remedies
lately communicated to us by our faithful Physicians of the Dispensary As God
is the Preserver of Men, the most Soverign Medicines must be most plentiful,
growing in our own Climates, or imported in large Quantities. Our Reason, as
well as the College, supported by all Antiquity, and all the most eminent
Physicians of the two last Centuries, assure us, that the Preparations must be
most facil and ready, rational and simple, not confounded and debased by
Confusions of Ingredients, or corrupted by long pretended Artifices, only to
delude and rob us. But our Physicians and Surgeons, during the Contrivance to
take away our Money, hazard, or take away our Life. They are not able to plead
and defend themselves. Bezoar, the vilely cheap precious Stones, as they call
them, the Leaf Gold, are good for nothing, but being indissolvable in us, they
do all they can to destroy us: they lie unaltered in us, in the room of the
most useful Medicines, we should have in their stead. Beside the Demonstrations
of the College, we know, they are not Medicines, they are not used abroad. How
many Millions recover without them: We import into England but a small Parcel
of Bezoar. You shall hear the greatest Imposture ever wounded your Ears. They
pretend it must be in all the Boles and Juleps; all the Remedies are in the
Bills styled Bezoarti^^. Our Imagination must be tickled by the Bill, to
^^^inguish the Assault on our Money and Life.

I could not support my Abhorrence of a Crime in all its Circumstances, more
abominable than the Plunders on the Road. A Remedy must, and shall be found
out. --

They stopped me with the Acclamations of Victory, when the Enemy runs. We have
the wicked Physicians and Surgeons under our Feet. Our Impeachment of them will
require and deserve your Attention and Patience. Our Government, as in all
Parts of Europe, commanded the College to appoint Medicines for the general
Use. By this Book, the Apothecaries must prepare all the Remedies of their
Shops. They are, as they must be, perfect Medicines, every one fully designed
to answer the several Purposes, without the Delay and Trouble of Mixture, as
far as it is possible to contrive them. The Compound are, and must be, every
one complete in the Kind, as the compound Waters, Elixirs, Confections,
Powders, Pills, Oils, Ointments, Plasters. The Physicians and Surgeons have
their Reward for their Advice and Fidelity to us, as in the Instance of the old
Malaga, and are obliged to preserve to us our Right, not to impose or suffer
any Fraud to be imposed on us. They must report to us the Quantities of each of
these public, and our Remedies to be used. We can mix (as well as in old
England, and all other Nations) the simple, and the compound Waters, the
Spirits and Tinctures. We can divide their Doses, and of the Confections,
Pills, and Powders, etc. with the surest Exactness. How many Remedies are every
day and hour now divided in our Houses, the volatile Spirits, the Laudanums,
the Elixirs, the Rhubarb, Manna, and the purging Salts? Our Abilities are equal
to the Boys in the Shop, and our Cautions to prevent any possible Error more
powerful than of the playful Lads. They are now prescribed by the knavish
Physicians and Surgeons, in Mixtures of very many of them together, only to
disguise them from our Knowledge, and the Price of the whole. They are parcel'd
by their Order into many little shamming Doses, to extort 3 or 4 Guineas a day,
when often we have all of them ready in the Closet, and the greatest Expense of
them cannot be 3 or 4 Shillings. The Government demands, that we shall know the
Mixtures of the 4 or 5 Cordial Juleps, now only used, and the Uses and Doses of
the public Spirits, Tinctures, Confections, Pills, etc. for the common
incidental Disorders of our Children, and Servants* All the Mystery was
invented only to cheat us; we are basely told, that the excellent public
Remedies are good for nothing, unless they play the Changes on them, by mixing
them every hour at all Hazards to blind us, that a Grain or two more or less of
Disacordiun, Crab's-eyes, and Coral, would certainly kill or delay the Recovery.
You must not now (the most God-like and ravishing Charity, and of the least
Expense) bestow a Julep, a Confection, or a Pill, or Powder, on our Servants or
poor Neighbors. They must be left for the Apothecaries to devour by the Rapine
of one Hundred to one, more than we could purchase the Quantities. Our Poor,
have by Tradition, secured a small part of their Property; they run to the Shop
for a Penyworth of Safron, of Cordial-water, of a Powder, of Mithridate. But
their Hearts are broken, they are told they are little worth, if they are not
shuffled with Bezoar, and the other Impostures. I was then permitted to declare
my Resentment, that we must abjure our Religion, and throw up our Commission,
if we do not command, that the Divine Benefactions of the Necessaries of Life
shall be equally distributed, by denouncing from the Pulpits, and by our
Admonitions of the Magistrates of their Guilt, the Ravages of the People, by
the Violation of the Trust we repose in our Physicians and Surgeons, and their
Neglect in supporting the legal Powers of the College and Company, to expose
and punish these Criminals. They shall be compelled to order the excellent
Medicines without Mixture or Division, and to note the Prices. All the Families
will gratefully receive, and soon be Masters of the most gainful Instructions.
We are obliged by the Laws to make good all the Robberies in our Countries,
unless we can apprehend the Robber, and convict him. I and you are guilty of
all these Devastations, if we do not inform our Neighbors, rouse them to join
with the Magistrate to seize the Thieves. While I was speaking, my Friends, I
perceived, had their Breast full: It is nothing, they said, that we are
cheated, and the Poor reduced to Misery; we are hazarded or destroyed in every
Sickness* These Collusive knavish Mixtures are oppressive to our Stomachs and
Blood, often have no Operation for our Relief, because the 8 or 10 perfect
Medicines (which are themselves compositions) do violate and obstruct the just
and necessary Operations of every Ingredient. You will with Difficulty support
your self, when you hear the Injuries we receive from the perfidious Physicians
and Surgeons. A sower, fermenting, roapy, stinking, or at best, sugary and
loathsome Syrup is cast into the Juleps, made by it most ungrateful to the
Stomach, most corruptive of the Blood. The temperate Powders are heated by the
Acrid, these are debased in their turns by the absorbing. The Gentle, and hot,
and active Pills are mixed to make a Dose, when one of the sorts was intended
for the occasion of the Disease or Constitution. All the Admirable Confections,
Powders, Extracts, are jumbled with the corrupted, stinking, sticky Conserves,
and the abhorred Syrups, to make a fulsom, nauseated Bole, which requires the
other condemned Mixture to wash it down; two Collusive Medicines forced at once
to oppress the miserable Patient. Our Nature feels and judges, and in most
Cases abhors the base Medicines. They are rejected with Abhorrence, and thrown
away, and in a Million of Instances, Nature then soon triumphs over the
Disease, assisted by the excellent natural Cordials, and other Remedies of the
Family, or those preserved from the Corruptions of the Mixture. Our eminent
Physicians and Surgeons, who dare not write any one thing but for the
Apothecary's Profit, are by Custom, trained in directing only these; they
cannot appoint any other, they do not know the Virtues and Uses of the
excellent Medicines to be taken by themselves, as the Government, from the
College, appoints.

I imagined, the Discourse was drawing to its Conclusion. But will you, they
went on, receive and believe the greatest Truth in the World, that the
Ignorance of these Physicians and Surgeons, must certainly expose to
Destruction, the Life of the Royal Family, the Nobility, Gentry and People?
When they were faithful to us, and directed us to mix and divide the perfect
public Medicines, or to infuse or decoct many admirable Simples, (as the
Disease or Constitution required, one or two of them together,) they knew, with
the greatest Exactness, if the Water, the Spirit, the Tinctures, the Powder,
Pill, or Confection, were good, or the worst in the World. They would extol
this, and fl^^g away the other, and make us send to such an Apothecary for the
best of his they had lately tasted in another House. But our vain presuming
ignorant Physicians and Surgeons, when they now s^^ or taste their foolish
Mixtures (which they therefore never do) cannot make any Judgment, if any one
of the Ingredients is good. As in the Tumults of the Rabble, their Numbers
secure them from Execution. They do not know one Simple, cannot inform us that
the Rhubarb is rotten, and the Child will die, if he has not better; that these
Flowers, and Seeds, and Roots, are not fit for use. All my House was filled
with the Exclamations. They know nothing of any one Medicine. Dr. R. has been
caught a thousand times in his Blunders, has lost the VVagers he wanted Sense
to avoid. The other Apostate Physicians and Surgeons, are upon the level with
him. They are not made to learn them at the Universities. We know they are
here now engaged in worse Company and Entertainments. The Merchants, Druggists,
Distillers, many other Traders, cried aloud, We will maintain it before the
Parliament, before all Mankind, that without frequently applying each singly to
their Senses, by carefully comparing and detecting the Differences, they shall
never know a Medicine. We cannot arrive to any Skill in our Goods, but by
many, and continual Examinations and Trials.

When the Managers of this Part drew to the Conclusion, many Merchanes
advanced to me with a Confusion and Trouble not to be described. It is from
this Ignorance of our Physicians and Surgeons, that the Apothecaries dare make
the most abhorred sophisticated Medicines. Can you conceive, that it is commonly
said, Mine has good things, and I pity the rest of the City. This I believe
makes very good, and not one besides. They sell several sorts of the higher and
lowest Prices: The VVholesale to a Retaler: The sweepings of the Druggist's
Shop furnish the Materials. Can you conceive, that six of our chief
Apothecaries were accused before the College, for making and vending the most
frequently used Medicines in the ^^^fest manners; the principal Ingredients of
many of them inhumanly detained from the Sick? The Officers of the Company had
injured an Apothecary in the City; he ordered his Friends to buy the Remedies
most usually administered. They were condemned at the Hall by the unanimous
Voice of the Venders of many of them. The Names of the Men and the Medicines
are printed by the College. The Apothecary was the Evidence against them; the
Physicians (which is the intolerable Grievance we now deplore) were not able to
say any thing to the matter. They would, they must have past on any one of
their Patients of the best Quality: Are they not rare Cures of Dr. R's working
with such Tools on Diseases, which are not able to destroy the Sick, when his
Apothecary in Covent Garden, is one of them, and his Apothecary in the City,
has been discovered, and there was a large Collection of their Poisonous
VVares, which were not brought to that Trial? Are not these superexcellent
Physicians and Surgeons, who know not, who care not what they order unto us? As
the Trade and its Poverty increases; as the Emulation and Necessity of gaining
the most they can from the Badness of the Medicines, who shall ensure us, when
the Advisers cannot, that they are not current in the Royal Chamber and the
Nobility, as Well as ours? The Rhubarb Apothecary and his Partners, were by the
Druggist accused before the Commissioners of the public Accounts, for robbing
the late King, by the excessive Prices for the Medicines sold to him for
nothing, and good for nothing, and for the Murders of many Thou sands of the
Army in the first Descent in Ireland. It is printed, that they took the Oaths
of the Criminals themselves, were just neither to the King, nor the vast
Numbers barbarously destroyed.

I had not the Power on my Mind, my Passion made the Reply, The Government
shall not take care of such Monstrous Fools as you. You contrive your own
Destruction, and are angry, if any one endeavors to save you. You will have
the Apothecary come to your House, enter the Chamber of the Sick, when you
should command him to the Still, the Mortar, the Scales and the Measures, to
deliver carefully all the quantities you want, to prevent your being often
exposed, often killed (as the College proves in many Particulars) by the
obvious Errors of the wanton idle Boys. Was ever Madness thus violent and fatal
as Yours? How long a List of the Squires can you make, who send for the Vintner
to the Parlour, make him fill and measure each Glass, order the Numbers they
shall take off, and make the Reckoning of so many Draughts at his own Pleasure
and Occasions? Are you acquainted with the Changelings, who desire the Baker
and the Poulterer to carve and send in the Parcels they have designed for every
Member of the House? There are Nurses not blind and decrepit, who can give the
Glysters, and dress the Blisters, and apply the Melilote, your Friends and
Servants to attend. You have a Physician not far From you, examined and allowed
by the Government, as the Judge on the Circuit, or your Minister, who makes all
the necessary Observations, attends in all the necessary Cases, and appoints
the Divisions and Mixtures, and the just Seasons of administering the Medicines.
Will the Apothecary discourse more copiously, of the most abstruse Causes and
differences of Diseases, of the Reasons and Progress of all the Symptoms, on
all the Energies of every Remedy, and if he is busy in another Place, send his
Journeyman or any one of his Prentices to discourse on the Affairs, nor you nor
they can understand? A notable Writer on their side asserts his own great
Skill, and not of many more, but protests, That the Master and Wardens of the
Company are not able, and are not to be trusted with the Examination of such
Abilities as these. The Man and his Lads furnish the Prattle, do all the
Drudgeries for the Nurses and Footmen, bring the Doses, and run on the Errands,
and present them with Cordials and Gratuities, when in Health, and abundance of
them, when they complain. The Governor of the House must be thrust from the
Chamber, and the Concerns of the Life and Expense, is allowed no freedom of
Speech, or Vote in the Choice of the Physician or Consultation. When the Rout
is begun, and the Ship is sinking, we will have the best General and Pilot of
his Appointment. Though that Life is best, he shall inform the Apothecary the
Methods and Medicines to save the next in course. I assert, that he must not,
will not, is not able to instruct the Invader of his Profession. Do you know
any Art or Trade which is Felo de se? And the General employed only in Rallying
the runaway Troops, can never project or make a glorious Campaign. Your
Physician is a Stranger to the great Design of repelling the Diseases at the
Beginning; and of assisting Nature then in its greatest vigor; does he know
the Remedies then Necessary? No; he rarely or never uses them. But he will
communicate what he knows. No; he must raise so much out of the Disease for the
Ruler of the Affair, who will not prepare with the extraordinary trouble the
appropriate Remedy, when the Waters, etc. lie always ready in the Shop to be
mixed up, and divided in an instant; and if our Specific Medicine demonstrates
the just Application and its Efficacy, the Disease shall vanish, before the
tenth part of the Sum is raised. This is the Duty and Employment of the
Physician and Surgeon preferred, as now in all your Houses, to the Service. And
when the Apothecaries shall by their two or three Prentices have Eight or Ten
Habitations only from one Shop to another, they must then, as usually at this
time, finish as well as begin, and to advance their Reputation, and the Peoples
surest Confidence in them, bring in to commend, extol, and set them off, the
most prepared Knaves and Blockheads of them both. What will you think of that
sort of Physicians and Surgeons, the Men of no Religion or Manners, who ply the
Gentlemen of perpetual Surfeits and their other usual Disorders, who by their
Banter and Atheistical Impudence extinguish in them all Sense of Honor and
Concern for the Public Welfare, use them as their Engines of Noise and
Violence to destroy the College and the Company, which can only (as Merchants
in Consort, as Councils of Courts and Armies) raise the Improvements and
Fidelity of the two Professions, and prompt the Madmen to cry them up, the only
great and all-sufficient Physicians and Surgeons, against the strongest
Evidences of their Reason and Sense.

I saw Floods of Tears gush from the Eyes of many of my Friends, which obliged
me to relieve their Trouble and mollify their Pain. You may be happy, as soon
as you please. I will present you with the greatest Wisdom Mortal Man can
aspire to, the most profitable Invention, its Produce is equal to the Silver
Mines; all our Forefathers were Masters of it, we have lost it by the Foolish
Pursuits of Luxury and Pleasure, and suffered our Inheritance of Understanding
to lie neglecte^^ and wast. Entertain your Physicians and Surgeons, as the
Kings do, in your respective Proportions. You will then engage and subdue them
by the irresistible Powers of their own Interest to render you ten Thousand
Services more than I can enumerate. Suppose your only Son is seized with a
Fever, your Physician then must by all the Visits, to apprehend all the most
Minute and most Important Observations, by his vigilance to lay hold on all the
occasions, by his incessant Perusal of his Authors and his Practice, by his
Judgment more elaborated from the private Councils of the most Eminent
Physicians he will address to, conclude the Cure, if possible, in 3, 4, or 5
days, which Millions of Events attest, and not permit the Disease to escape
him, and run off to 15, 20 days, and acquire daily more violence and danger.
Will not your Surgeon's Interest oblige him to the same faithful Treatment of
all the Tumors and Wounds? They will both instruct you in the Rates and
Divisions of all the Juleps, Powders, Confections, and in every Case save you a
Sum more bulky and affrighting than the Salary. But I crave your sharpest
Attention, they will by their Interest be necessitated to teach and inform you
in the Uses and Applications of all the Medicines, that you may wisely and
safely tamper with all the vulgar Disorders of the Family, and the most Divine
Charity the Relief of your poor Neighbors with your Council, and the Medicines
at no cost, which now destroy and undo them. When the Case is more difficult,
it is your Interest to recommend your Physician and Surgeon to all the
opportunities which shall increase their Knowledge and Experience. How secure
will you make your selves, fortify your Minds with the strongest Confidence of
Success, when you know he has cured 500 of the Disease, which has surpised
you? You must not object, that you must have a burnisht Physician, as Dr. R. or
an impudent all-assuming Surgeon, as C. B. Your Physicians Learning shall not
be glistring Tinsel, as Dr. R. but have all the weight and richness of the
Metal. If all our Knowledge is seeing the differences of Diseases, of their
Symptoms and the Event after the use of the Remedies, the vain Pretenders may
have more Wit and artful Negligence: But yours will have more Art and Success
in proportion to the Numbers of his Patients near him, and the careful Journals
he has entered of the Course of their Voyage. This copious and assiduous
Practice will make your Physician warranted to you from the strictest Education
and Examination at the College, an Hippocrates, Galen, and Sydenham, furnished
with the two necessary Parts of the Mixture, Integrity and Science. As the
Princes and People fearfully depend in a dubious War, on the Art and Courage of
the Generals and Admirals, all the Crowned Heads, and the Knees of the Subjects
prostrate themselves, do and must bow down and bend to the two Professions,
when under the Terror of insulting Diseases. The greatest Honors and Regards
engage the proportioned Zeal and Affection. They are assaulted and worried in
no part of the Universe, as by the deluded, unthinking English. The Rabble only
judge the Merits of the Victory; the Aged, the Wise and observing Gentry are
lost, or dare not appear, and humbly offer their Judgment. The Apothecary, as
the Midwife, is called to all the innumerable safe and natural Labors of the
Distempers, he only s^^es all the Mothers and Children; but the Artist sent for
in the insuperable Difficulties is condemned, they ply their Engines and Waters
at all the Outcries of Fires breaking forth, the other has nothing left to
attempt, but blowing up, and laying the Houses in an Heap of Ruins. The Rabble
are accustomed to the Numbers of Doses and irrational casting them into, and
against the Disease. The Physician is accused of the Death of the Patient, if
he pretends, by Reason, and the Cautions of ruffling the natural Motions by the
numberless Remedies, to seize the just Informations, and prevent the fatal
Effect of any one violently opposing the natural Designs of the Recovery. But,
as the Mob are for sighting instantly, and are well contented, though they are
beaten, if a great many are killed, our wretched People judge only by the
boisterous Management, with the vast Excess of the Random Shots of the
Medicines. If one presumes to give the first and the richest Cordial, the
Prospect of certain Recoveries, will you dare go on as you begin, let Nature
recover it self. Dr. R. and the blustering Surgeon, take away all the hope of
Recovery at first sight. They swear and damn they shall die, and some do so;
but when one does well, we magnisie the Cure, and are infinitely pleased with
the most hazardous Escape. Thus every Fever and Small Pox, though the Kind,
reigning then, may be safe, must have every two Hours, such a Quantity of Boles
and Draughts, (...), as the Apothecaries will have made the Fashion, though we
see in a thousand Instances, many have their Healths restored by ten times
fewer. The People will not see the Dangers they were preserved from, when an
equal Proportion remains on the Table. You shall hear them lament, that though
seven of the House got over the Smallpox by the honest Treatment, they lost
one dear Child, they fear had not all the Remedies could be taken. The
judicious Physician must grievously suffer, and the poor Patients with him,
when profuse and frequent Bleedings, the rudest Vomits, Cupping and Scarifying,
and much Blistering, and bloody Water and Pain shall give the grand Reputation,
as the Vulgar cry up Surgeons from cutting off a Limb, gashing, and letting out
of a deal of Matter, and trepanning the Skull. I have lately been assured by
several Physicians, that no Credit can be acquired by saving the Life of a
Patient, by preventing the deadly Symptoms, by conducting and supporting the
natural Powers. The healthy Entertainment and Feast is rejected, and the Luxury
and Debauchery are the Demonstration of much Respect and Affection: though the
Stomach and the Head terribly suffer* and a dreadful Fever follows the Surfeit.
The Physicians have compelled me to believe them, that their Fame was usually
advanced after the Patients had fallen by the Load of ungrateful oppressive
Doses, the World never knew before: That they lamented from their Souls, the
Calamities of the Sick, when the Dr. is every day driven on by the Apothecary,
and vehemently dragged forward by the Attendants to oppose the Life, by the half
Sheet of Prescriptions in every Visit or many Doses, and to be pleased when the
next Day they remain from the Sleep intervening, or the fortunate Aversion of
the Patient. When we do not comply with the Importunities for the superfluous
Remedies, we must trick the foolish People, with the odd silly Advices of an
Issue on the top of the Head, or a Seton, or going to Bath or Turnbridge, what
ever the Disease is, when there are very many may be used to better purpose
than two Waters only. Should you at any time discover one of the many Deaths,
that you lost your Son by the excessive Dosing, or a little impertinent Whimsey
of distinguishing Advice, and cry out for Justice on the Murderers; you must
be reprimanded, that you do not consult the ancient Gentlemen of the oldest and
wisest Observations, that you cannot see with your own Eyes, that Millions of
Children have saved themselves by the fierce Cries, and beating off, and
spattering out the Boles; that thousands of old Men and Women had protected
their Life to the longest Periods, by the Chamber, and Abstinence, and the
Dread of too many Medicines. But you must, with all your Power, maintain the
Honor and Discipline of the College, which can only, by the mutual
Improvements of the learned and faithful Practice, give you the great Standards
to judge by. You must use your Reason, the Methods the Government has given
you, and not cry out to be helped, like the careless Child, who will be taken
up, when he might have kept his Legs, if he pleased. If the Mirmils, Querpoes,
Bards, and the Vpstarts, have carried the Patrons daily Earnings of two or
three Guineas a Day, too far in most of the Diseases, and you can prove the
Sick were grievously injured, or died by the modern and growing Practice, you
must appeal to the Censors of the College, who have published them as Homicides
and Villans.

All the Company called aloud, we will oppose the Apothecaries, the Origin of
all our Sufferings, and not pay the Bill of two or three Guineas a day, which
we can have in the Quantities for two or three Shillings.

I answered them, you will expose your Folly, and the Apothecary shall come off
victorious in the Trial; he shall have his Bill justified, though he sets down
many Powders daily not worth two Farthings, at 4. s. and 6 d. and shall have
the Cost of the Suit. The Court and the Jury shall denounce your Sentence; we
will never examine the Merit, the Value of any Dose. You shall be cheated and
undone. Is the Bill 30 l. in one Fever? It shall pass, were it 300 l. Is it 200
l. for a Clap? You should pay it, were it 2000 l. If most of the Boles and
Draughts after them, we know are all worth but 2 d. rated now to you at 5 s.
were set down at 5 l. at 50 l. you should be forced to pay it; which, as their
Numbers and their Wants improve, they will swear is the common Reckoning for
them. Do you trouble the Court in a revengeful Prosecution, that all the Money
you can spare for your Health and Life, is wrested and taken from you by the
Apothecary? The Government has appointed, that all these Medicines, prepared in
the Shop, shall be bought in Quantities at the smallest Values, to be easily
mixed and divided by you. Why do you use any Physicians, that are not honest
and just to you, do not inform you of the Provision of all the Necessaries of
Life, your Property, and the obvious Skill of adapting them to the frequent
Occasions? Are you Fools to be governed by the Apothecary? Are you Fools to
suffer him to defraud your Physician? You shall be whip^ with the Rods you
prepare. Begone from the Court, and report to all you know the Decree we make,
that we will not be the College Beadles. The Law has empowered them to restrain
the Apothecaries from Quacking out of their Shops, and can, if you please to
support it, deter and punish their Members, and prevent the Exactions and
Destruction of a wanton Nation, proud of their Laws and Liberties they are
always breaking. I suppose they had the dismal Remembrance of the vast Yearly
Payments, of the Death of their Children, of the Defeats in the Trials with the
Apothecaries; I heard die Shrieks, and Groans, and Gnashing of Teeth, as in the
Old Baily; when the Sentence is pronounced to the Bar full of Criminals.

I must confess to you, I sympathiz'd with them. But all was calm and serene in
a Moment, after I had assured them, that the miserable English should not fall,
as in the sacred History, into the Hands of Thieves, be stripped and wounded to
death by them. The Priest and the Magistrate shall not pass by on the other
side, regardless of their Calamities. You shall be restored to your Property,
the Knowledge of the Prices and Uses of all the public Remedies the Government
has presented to you. The Physicians and Surgeons shall not be ignorant, as
now, if they are honestly or treacherously prepared, and pass, as it may
happen, the vilest Medicine on the Sick, when the Life depends, in the Juncture
of many Circumstances, on the Dose. They shall be compel^'d to learn the great
Variety of the Simples, and not, as now, delude and destroy, with 30 or 40 of
the general Remedies only. They shall not dare to confound these together in an
useless Mass, then to be broken into little Doses, to blind our Knowledge of
the Values, and expose our Life. They shall not, with the most abhorred Perjury,
assault their own Societies, and deliver to the Apothecary's Ignorance, all the
Cases which can only nourish and increase their Knowledge, and by the
Communications, the Stock of Sience of the two Professions. The Sick formerly
were exposed in the Temples, and the Porches of their Houses, to the Views and
Advice of all the Spectators, we are encompassed only with the Impostures of
the Apothecaries, the most wicked Physicians and Surgeons, without the
Knowledge of the Goodness and Virtues of the Medicines, or the different
Circumstances of our Diseases. We will implore the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, to address to the Fountain of Justice for the Visitation of them, and
the most severe Inspection into the State of the Nation, the Health and Life of
the Subjects.

I was almost detered from the Pursuit of my Design, fearing the Nobility and
Gentry would not receive the Information, and the common People boysterously
rage, when assured, that their eminent Physicians and Surgeons, are only the
Setters and Sweetners for the Apothecaries to pilfer them, that they have not
the Learning and Abilities which will preserve them in any one very dangerous
Disease. But then, the College asserts both in many parts of their
Remonstrances, and our most Religious and most Learned K. Charles I. and the
Lords of this Council, and all the Judges of England, did most solemnly avow,
that, without the one Soverein Remedy, the Profession must be more and more
corrupted to the Consumption of all its Virtue and Knowledge. You have tried
many Medicines without Success. Your College, and the Surgeons Company, must
humbly address to her Majesty, who derives all the Royal Virtues from your
great Patron, K. Charles I. You will excuse me, when I urge the Necessity of
saving your Societies, and the Life of the Public, by the Address to her
Majesty in Council, from the most weighty and irrefragable Reasons the College
Discourses have abundantly furnished me with. All the English Gentlemen will
excuse my Confidence, my Presumption, when I assert, that you cannot be
refused, that the College and Company shall be restored to their Dignity and
Power of relieving the most oppressed People. That the Decree must be the same,
which was made by that most Religious, and most Learned Prince. I scorn and
defy all the Objections the deluded English Gentlemen can invent. Are they
more wise than the King? Have they more Honor than the Lords of the Council in
that Reign? Is not the most profound Learning of the Judges, at that time,
admired in this? To come close to my Adversaries, your College demonstrated,
that the Profession of Physic must be destroyed, when the Apothecaries are
suffered to intrude into the Chambers of the Sick, leaving their Station and
Duties of preparing, and carefully delivering the Medicines in the Shop, having
no Reward, but what they contrive out of the Multitude and Dearness of the
Doses. Their Numbers force them to suggest all the Forgeries imaginable, to cry
up that sort of Physicians, who shall fatally deceive the People, support their
most absurd and pernicious Advices, and justify and improve the Profit from
the many and dear Medicines. They must cry down the other sort, who shall
caution them for the future, against the unexamin'd, illiterate Pretenders, and
maintain the Property of the Use of the public Remedies, and preserve their
Knowledge of the small Prices of the most generous Medicines.

His Majesty and the Council, allowed the clearest: and the greatest Truth.

You then proceed to avow; that it is the greatest Folly, that God has not
afflicted Mankind with the Permission of any more deadly Infatuation, than to
take an Apothecaries Judgment, in the tender or furious* Beginning of Diseases,
whose Capacity was never examined, to force him to pay himself what he pleases,
1, 2, 3 l. a Day, by the Number of the Doses, and the fraudulent Prices, when
all the Parts of the Universe have observed, that many severe Diseases pass off
by the Strength of Nature, assisted or not disordered, and that the largest
Part of the Medicines of our own Growth, are, and must be of the lowest Rates.
But that the unhappy People will easily be imposed on by the Impostures of no
Efficacies in the most plentiful, of the few pretended to be dear, being mixed
in every thing they shall take, especially when the perjured Physicians are
ready to vouch all the Articles of the Forgery.

Your College then, with a Generosity never to be paralleled, confessed, that
the Physicians Knowledge of Diseases was almost lost; that by treacherously
commending every Practice of the Apothecaries, they were by degrees, more and
more neglected; that the Disease is broken from the natural Types every day, by
the improper and hourly intruded Remedies, that prescribing in that Confusion
of the genuine and unnatural Symptoms, they can never judge of the Disease:
That their Violations of the Laws of Physic must destroy all the Patients,
unless the natural Vigor is able to oppose them, and perform the Cure.

The Physicians must lose all the Knowledge of Medicines, not able to discern
the best from the most Sophisticate, not commend or reject the Use of them in
the most hazardous Cases, and not distinguish the true Qualites and Virtues, or
judge of the Operations, when they conspire with the Apothecaries to blend
together, with the most fatal Inhumanity to the Sick, the perfect, complete
Remedies, designed to be used in their full Power, unmixed. The Confusion of
them confounds and breaks the Efficacy to be relied on. This must be the great
Art and Mystery of the Practice to kill and obliterate the Peoples Discernment
of their Prices, and their Application of them in the more easy and frequent
Distempers. The Apothecaries will insult the Physician's Ignorance, will
affront them, if they pry into the Secrets of the Shop, and observe the single
unmixed Medicines there, will reject the Prescription, which shall give the
unusual Trouble of Preparation, in the place of the Vulgar, always ready to be
clapped together, will command the Physicians, fearing their Displeasure, never
to examine any Qualities or Virtues of any Simple, or contrive any more
rational Preparation, or bring to the Test, any formerly or lately published.
They will demand in all the Houses they govern, their faithful Assurance, that
they will decry all the Improvements of the Learning in Medicines in the
public Laboratory of the College or their own, and report it Scandalous to
reflect, what Medicines their Patients shall take.

When the Physicians of more cultivated Learning and Experience, shall with
Reluctance betray their Patients, the Apothecaries will select the poor and
necessitous, and daring Impudence of the Novices, who have not had the
Observations of Diseases or Remedies to compare and form a just Judgment of.
These must unite and blast the Physicians of long Practice and Discernment of
the Successes of the various Methods of Cure, whose Instructions and Cautions
can only educate and raise to Perfection the Crude Attempts of the Practice
lately begun. They shall never or after the Destruction of many of the Sick
begin to correct their Errors, and fear there may be more rational ways of
treating the Diseases and better Medicines to be employed.

His Majesty, and the Lords of the Council, and the Judges were pleased to
allow the most necessary Consequences in the Art of Physic, and in all other
Professions, and therefore determined to dissolve the Apothecaries Company, to
appoint the competent Number in the City. The Application was prevented by the
Rebellion breaking forth soon after.

Your College generously imitates your Learned and public Spirited
Predecessors: You have presented to the Nobility and Gentry the boldest
Discovery of the Ignorance of the Physicians in all the Diseases and Medicines.
You assert that the great Enquiries are no more, and by a large variety in the
first and last Pages you endeavor to convince them, that the Profession (and
the Surgeons cannot be secluded,) has no Honor or Conscience, no Design or
Industry, or Ability to procure Health and Life. It will be unpresidented to
admit Dr. R., etc. to enter their Protestation when the Majority of the Society
has included them* and they can plead no Cause of Exception.

I know our Gentlemen are proud of their Wit and Improvements from
Conversation, and fancy that Divinity, Law and Physic are learned by Rote and
by the Ear, and in good Company. Because some useful, many very ridiculous
Inventions have entertained the Age, they imagine, that it excells all the
preceding times. All before us were nothing to us. The French, they say,
conquered the Island in the Reign of our King Henry, V. the Spaniards subdued
us in 88, that the Reformers of our Relion had no Learning, that the Judges and
the Lawyers were not regarded, that they had then no Physic: That we are wiser
than all the World beside, and have more Courage and Bravery, that they would
conquer the French sooner, without any Allies. Though our present Physicians are
not instructed by the Professors in the University, nor by any one ever after
at all wiser than themselves, though they pretend to little Study and Diligence,
value themselves on the general Learning, preliminary only to, and necessary to
enter all the Professions, or are very elaborate in Trifles nothing to their
Purpose, they assume a Character they have no Pretense to, a Grandeur and
Luster to cover the Crimes, of which you accuse them. I am therefore obliged to
deduce the History of Physic from its Original, out of your Books, and the
Comments on them to the almost total Corruption and Death of it in our Age. The
Records are authentic, your Observations most just, that the noisy Admirers of
the Modern Accomplishments shall be forced to confess their Folly and repair
the Weakness of their Understanding.

The first Labors and Industry of Mankind were exercised in discovering the
Fruits, and Grains, and Fountains, the grateful and present Remedies of Hunger
and Thirst, then in discovering the Caverns of Rocks, and building, in
imitation of them, their Securities and Defenses from the Cold and the Ravages
of the Beasts of Prey, till they had learnt from them to assault and destroy
their own kind. The first Surfeits and Pains, and Fevers, Bruises and wounds,
raised their most eager Affections to relieve, and the most unwearied
Solicitudes to find the Medicines, which should be able in the parallel Dangers
to preserve themselves. The Plants they had tasted in their searches after
Food, and had rejected from their Qualities and Virtues more powerfully
affecting the Palate and the Stomach, were instantly demanded and applied. The
natural Cravings and Instincts of the Patients were heard and regarded, the
Aversions and Antipathies were most warily observed and recorded. The
observations of the various Successes were made in the view and Inquest of all
the little Communities, and preserved for the use of Posterity. When the small
Governments increast and multiplied to Kingdoms and Empires, the Medical
Knowledge of preventing and curing Diseases was proportionably extended. The
first most populous Countries were therefore most famous from the Improvements
of Physic, before all the other Arts. Apollo therefore and Aesculapius were
immortalized as the greatest Benefactors, from the great Improvements of the
Science, which preserves Life: they were adored in their Temples, where all the
Healthy and Diseased made their daily Sacrifices for their Protection and
Preservation. Many of the other Deities were neglected, there was no City,
where Aesculapius was not addressed to for his Inspirations and Communications of
the most Sovereign Medicines. This alone was the Profession, which engaged the
most indefatigable Industry of all the Princes of both Sexes, of all the
Nobility, of the most sagacious Populacy, till after many Ages, a great
Magazine of Observations of all Diseases, and their most prevalent Remedies had
been collected, and the Application committed to the assiduous Practisers of
the Science. Can it be doubted, that it was in many Centuries advane'd to the
greatest Height and Honors, when the Patients and Observations innumerable had
made infinite Records of all things injurious to Health, of the unhappy and
most prosperous Events of Millions of Attempts in all the different Diseases
and their Symptoms. They then had from the Dictates of Nature, the good Sense
the English have now lost and cannot recover, to desire in the first Invasions
of the most deadly Enemies, the most celebrated and most prepared Adviser?
Navigation and Commerce communicated from the East and from Egypt to the
Greeks, the Knowledge of the differences of Diseases, the various Methods to
attempt the Recoveries. Hippocrates is not the first Writer of Antiquity, he
records many before him. There were many thousand of Discourses of Diseases,
and Medicines to furnish his admirable Collection, and the most sublime
Philosophy, of the Motions of our Nature, to relieve it self from the Violences
of Diseases, and in the Progress of them, and of the most powerful Succors of
its Allies, the Operations of the Medicines, as many thousand Poets flourished
before Homer, who inflamed his Emulation to surpass them in his Poems, which
have never been imitated or equaled. The most necessary Art was pursued with
the greatest Ardour through many Ages, till Galen in the most eloquent and
learned Volumes, collected the Histories of all the Diseases, which can afflict
us, and almost all the Remedies, which are able to repel them. Our Gentlemen
will rave at my Assertion, but I assert, that the Genius of Antiquity (when
Human Nature was raised to its greatest Elevation, when the Governments were
secured by the most equal and wisest Laws, when the Courage and Arts of
Invasion and Defense, when the Buildings of Magnificence and Use, the
Histories, Poetry, Oratory, Painting, Statuary and Music, and all the other
Entertainments of Life surpass our just Comprehension, as they explode our
pretenses to imitation) could not be wanting or defective in advancing the
Profession of conquering the most deadly and stubborn Diseases to its greatest
Perfection. The Gentlemen, who do not understand me, will pelt me with most
terrible Objections: I must in the first place request them to consider most
sedately and maturely the most important Affair they have ever examined and
refer them to the most instructive Comments on your College Publications. There
are not many Distempers, which are not largely treated of in the Writings of
the Ancients. But they give the most necessary, the infallible Rudiments, the
only firm and solid Foundations, on which alone the Superstructure can be
raised; all the different Symptoms of Diseases our Nature can be afflicted
with, all their necessary Consequences and Events, which will pass off by the
Natural Efforts alone, and which of them require the most tender Treatments or
the most vigorous Oppositions. As the General does not learn to conquer one
Enemy and one Army, to besiege one Fortification only: Nor the Master to
conduct the Ship into one Port, and govern it in the Storms of one Season of
the Year. Had they great Plenty of the Medicines? They were Masters of the
Knowledge of the Qualities and Preparations of all the Plants the Universe
produces. Is a small Pittance pretended to be lately discovered? How vast a
Number of theirs are known only by their Names? their Properties and Uses are
now neglected, banished from the English Enquiries and Practice? Our People
foolishly fond of the sufficiency of the Moderns, will be angry our Physicians
shall be commanded to consult Hippocrates, Diascorides, Galen. They have
possessed, engrost all the immense Wealth of Knowledge in their Treasury. They
are the Originals and Masterpieces, which we must copy after and labor to
imitate. We must obey the immutable Laws of Nature they have published, and
every Deviation from the most perfect is erroneous and absurd, and in the
present Case fatal to Life. They were examined, approved, authorized by all the
Nations in many succeeding Ages; the Diseased must dye, if they cannot be
protected and preserved by them. Shall any one conceit, that the Preparations
of their Medicines were not then the most exquisite? Did they take care of
their Bread and Wine only? Did they exceed us in all the Incentives of Luxury
and Debauchery, and neglect the most potent Preservers and Restorers of Life?
Their Medicines were prepared in the greatest degrees of Perfection, not
enervated or debast by the impudent Fallacy to amuse and defraud the Sick, not
the collusive Prescripts, void of all Virtue and Efficacy to delude, not the
raging and violent, wasting and consuming the Blood and Spirits they pretend to
support. The Patients had all the natural mixture of their Powers and
Operations in the Substance, or in the Extracts, or the admired innumerable
Infusions in their Wines or other Liquors. But the Art, as the Life it defends,
after Maturity declines from its Beauty and Vigor. The Ambition, Emulation,
and rapacious Avarice of Physicians corrupted it. The Diseases, the most
terrible, had been frequently cured, and Life extended to the longest Periods,
but in Pain, in the dreaded Dangers, the solicitude for a greater, for a new
Medicine, more vigorous they fancy in the first Invention, gave the Honors to
all the Innovations, the giddy Desertions from, and the impudent Affronts to
all the established and constant Successes of the general Use. The Grecians and
Romans were assaulted by barbarous Nations they were prevented by their
Calamities, from debasing their Physic by the importunate Demands, and
therefore indefatigable Pursuits of their Physicians, after the endless
Novelties of Preparations. The Prosperity of the Arabians unhappily destroyed
the natural sincere Practice, the Contagion from them spread into Europe. Our
Age suspects, because the Loadstone was lately applied to direct our
Navigation, that the Ancients had no Ships, or Commerce: because Printing was
not long since invented, that they knew not the Art of Writing; that they made
War with Clubs and Stones, for want of our Powder and Artillery. It must be
repeated, as the first and greatest Point in the Controversy, that the Eastern
Nations, the Grecians and the Romans, who excelled the Moderns in all things of
Necessity and Grandeur, has all the most rational Preparations of the Infusions
and Decoctions, all the Extracts, the Artifices of all the Balsams and
Ointments, especially the Externals for all the various Purposes; that they
were able to comprehend the two first and greatest Laws of Medicine, that the
Remedy, whose Qualities and Virtues have been examined, and confim'd by the
Experience of repeated Success, must be given to the Patient without the Load
and Encumbrance of many Ingredients of uncertain, of suspected, of contrary
Qualities, but only to convey the great Specific more pleasantly to the Palate
and Stomach, to bribe the one, and fortify the other, to receive the Remedies
for the whole Body. The other Instance of their Wisdom and Fidelity, demands
our Gratitude and Imitation. As the Fruits must be eaten before they are dead
and rotten; Bread, before it is dry and moldy; Flesh, without Salt, and dried
in the Smoke; when the newly prepared is most agreeable to the Taste, and
Appetite, and Digestion. In this manner, were the Remedies then administered:
the great Specific, which governs the Cure, (by altering and reducing the
observed vicious Intemperatures of the Blood and Spirits) or instantly
powdered, lately extracted, infused, or decocted, the entire unevaporated
Powers were presented to the Sick. But the hot and restless Arabians, with the
parallel Folly of rejecting the noble Models of the Grecian Architecture, 'till
they know the Elements of Marble; the Nature of the Cement, all the Qualities
of the Iron Tools; with the Madness of refusing to sail, to acquire the Wisdom
and Wealth of remote Nations; 'till they have disputed on, and resolved the
Causes of the Winds, and of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, lost the
Substance for the Shadow, heated one another with the never-ceasing Disputes
concerning the Causes and Modes of all the Operations of, and on the Humors of
the Body, when the first are felt and discovered by a thousand Signs, and the
other are obvious to all our Senses. The Churchmen were more early corrupting
in the same manner, Religion and Morality, by their endless Controversies, to
adjust the plainest Truths to the Notions of Plato and Aristotle. But to return
to the Medicines; the Arabians insulted, and affronted all the most faithful
Observations of the great Effects of the most natural and rational
Preparations, and imposed on their Princes, Nobility and People, the most
absurd and sophisticated, desired for their Novelty by the Imagination
debauched by the assumed grater Industry and Penetration of the Impostors.
These could not be stopped in their Career of Riches and Glory, to be acquired
by the new Fashions of Medicines: They strove to outdo one another, vitiating
and destroying the genuine Preparations and Mixtures of the Sovereign Simples,
by their newly discovered simple and compound Waters, and Conserves, and
Syrups. The obvious Frauds of the Craft, prompted and incited their Dillgence,
to invent many Thousand new Waters, and Conserves, and Syrups. To prepare
these, there must be a Legion of Apothecaries, they and the Physicians unite,
in Confederacy, all their Forces, to damn and decry all the applauded Remedies:
The new, though infinite, will not subsist them without Deceit, and the Artifices
of mending the Trade. An Arabian Prince and Physician had his Army pestered
with another Army of Apothecaries, as numerous. He resolved to lessen their
Numbers, by separating the Honest from the Knaves. He appointed an
unintelligible Jargon of insignificant Words, to be published as a Receipt of a
general Remedy; many Thousands undertook to prepare it, were detected busy in
the compounding it, and were discarded. It Is now time to return to Europe, and
England, to observe how we have been, and how we are treated at this time.

France, Spain, Germany, Great Britain, had from the Phenicians first, then the
Greeks and Romans, (beyond their own Discoveries in common with all the other
parts of the World) the Observations of the various Diseases, the Use of the
most natural and rational Medicines, established by Prescription of constant
use. When the Mahometans conquered Constantinople and Greece, the distressed
Nobility and Gentry, and the learned fled for Refuge into Italy, then
barbarous, after its Subjection to the wild Northern Invaders. The Princes, who
received them with the greatest Humanity, had the ample Reward, the
Communication of the Grecian Learing. Printing was at that time invented. Who
is able to express. with what Ardour and indefatigable Industry, all the Parts
of Learning were in that Century cultivated by them? The Britains, the French,
the Germans traveled to Italy, (as the old Philosophers into the East and
Egypt) to collect the inestimable Riches of all Literature from the Professors.
These Merchants returned with the Cargoes of the Wealth of Knowledge of
Philosophy, Physic, Surgery, the Anatomy almost finished by the Ancients,
their Pharmacy of Medicines, which scorns and despises all the Modern
Pretensions to alter or improve it. France first, then Germany, reapt the great
Harvest and Plenty, from the Seed received from the Italians. But the Germans
confined, during the long and frozen Winters, to their Stoves, outdid the
Arabians, worrying all the Minerals, Animals and Plants, into ten Thousand
Preparations of Spirits, Oils, Tinctures and Salts. Their Chemists, heated into
Phrenzies by their Fires, swore every one of their Medicines would cure many
Hundred of Diseases at the first taking, in few Drops, or 3 or 4 Grains. The
Italians and French invade them in their turns, with fierce and numerous Armies
of hard and unintelligible Notions, then with the Atomical Solutions of every
thing, though above the Sense and Reason of Mankind to comprehend. The Mechanics
have since come into the Farce. The People, they imagine, will have the surest
Confidence in their Advice and Medicines, when one sort of the Operators show
the minute indivisible Corpuscles of their sick Humors, and of the Remedies,
and the other undertake every thing by the Laws of Motion, by Measure and
Weight. Great Britain in its Order had, as its Manufacture and Trade, the
Ancient and Modern Learning imported from Abroad. Our famous Universities had
their Professors from Italy; the Court and Nobility, their Physicians from
Italy and France. Our most Learned and Magnanimous King Henry VIII. Established
by Act of Parliament, the College of Physicians: Your Royal College, composed
of Physicians from the two Universities prepared by their Professors, in a
City, which furnishes innumerable Cases of all Diseases, and the surest Methods
of Cure, and most just Observations of the Effects of the Medicines, could not
fail to emulate the Glory of the Universities of Paris, Montpelier, and of
Italy and Germany. The frequent Lectures and Consultations, and Conversations
of so many learned Physicians, improved the Stock of Learning, and the Honors
of the Society. Who can want to be informed, how much our Great Britain has
raised its Fame equal to its Rivals by Dr. Linacre, Caius, Goulston, the
immortal Harvey, Hamey, Glisson, Wharton, Scarborough, Miclethwayte, Prujean,
Bates, Willis, Lower, Sydenham? These Physicians were capable to assist and
instruct one the other; the Writer often enriched with the most valued
Materials, with which he raises the Structure of his Treatises and Fame. The
most difficult Profession in the World cannot be created by the vain ridiculous
Presumptions of any one Impostor. They were then as grave as the Judges, and as
learned as the Bishops; their Modesty equal to the vast Extent of their
Kowledge of all the Languages and Authors. Nothing could escape their early and
indefatigable Pursuits: After the general Learning of the Languages and
Philosophy, necessary to all the Professions, the Professors exacted from them
the Task of perusing carefully Hippocrates, Diascorides, Galen, the Sacred
Oracles of the Art, and compare with them the Comments of the late celebrated
Authors: But our Physician is a Novice, knows not one Disease nor Medicine from
the Books alone, as a thousand Books cannot describe a Face to be certainly
known, nor make the Color, Taste, and strength of any one Wine judged of
without Error. They were therefore introduced into Practice by the Professors
and other Physicians of Experience, prudently observing the present State, the
Symptoms, the Progress, and the Crises of every Disease. They were commanded
to make all the usual Preparations, to examine in their Laboratories, the
Qualities and Virtues of all the Remedies. Common Sense and the Experience and
Usage of Mankind inform us, that all the Arts of Difficulty, and the highest
Importance must be taught by the Master and Instructor. Can there be any
General, Admiral, Merchant, any excellent Artist without this necessary
Education; and the Master is greatly improved, while he is offering his best
prepared Instructions? But how forcible is the Necessity, to revive the
neglected Methods of ripening the knowledge of the Physicians, who are as the
Surgeons, the supreme General, and Judge, the Patient must forfeit his Life
from his Error and want of Conduct?

How many Patients must they destroy, before they begin to suspect, they have
erred in the Judgment of the Course of the Disease, or the just fitness of the
Remedy for the Case and Constitution? But your College solemnly declares, that
the present Physicians, (who never had Professors, nor read the Authors, nor
learnt the Languages, nor ever had any Guide or Director in the first or latest
Practice) know not one Disease or Medicine. A great Number of the most elevated
station of Quality are of the same Mind, and you have all most solemnly
declared it. A Surgeon in Print publishes, that his Art has had no
Improvements, has lost the Knowledge and Use of many the most excellent Methods
and Operations practiced by the Ancients. All the modest Surgeons avow with the
Physicians, the Ignorance of their present Society, and the public, as for
you, are not wanting in confirming the certainty. But our impudent Physicians
and Surgeons pretend to great Sense, to great Cures, and they alone demand to
be excepted from the common and general Suspicions or Accusations. They dread
they are undone, if our People shall be willing to learn (which the Comments on
your Discourses demonstrate) that the strength of the Life designed for old Age
cannot be overcome by every Gentleman's Surfeits and Debauchery, and every one
above the Discretion of a Fool, would remark, how many Fevers and Smallpox,
and the usual incidental Disorders are healed by Nature alone, by Rest,
Abstinence, and the use only of the general Cordials. These are Dr. R. and the
other Physicians Cures, whose great Fidelity and Dexterity are confined to the
crafty magnifying of those high Performances, when the Patient had the good
Fortune to escape the many Neglects, and the many Errors, and the foolish or
vile Medicines they employ. Our most assuming Surgeons are now detected, by the
more modest and qualified, most erroneous in their Judgments, unfortunate in
their Operations, though there are many, they dare not undertake. Foreigners are
sent for, our bold Un^^^takers every Day call out for the Cures they d^^e ^^t
venture to engage. Many of their mighty Cases, as well as the Physicians
Diseases, are every Day conquered by the Care and good Sense, and old tried
Remedies of the Charitable Women.

The Son broke the Palsy of his Tongue, to cry aloud and save the Life of his
Royal Father; shall I or you be silent, and conceal the Assassins of the Royal
Family, the Nobility, Gentry and People and share with them the Guilt of the
Horrid Crimes? Our eminent Physicians and Surgeons are notoriously engaged in
the Conspiracy to destroy them by their own, and the future Ignorance of all
the Physicians and Surgeons, when they betray the College and their Company;
the Lectures, the most instructive Communications, and the great Advances from
the mutual Knowledge of all the Members. The Professors of the Universities are
engaged in the same Designs, not exacting the Study of the best Authors, not
exposing in their Lectures, and private Instructions to their Contempt and
Neglect, the vain and whimsical Presumptions and Falsities of many of the
Modern Scriblers of Hypotheses and new Systemes of Theory and Practice. From
the failure of their Duty, there are many past and Licensed without the first
Language of the Science, which gives all the Terms, and Maxims and Laws, which
govern the Practice of all Diseases; many are suffered without Advice or
Reproof to assault Life in the most secure Cases with Opiates, Mercurials
alone. The College glories in its Success, having abrogated the pernicious
Trade of selling Degrees for Money paid in the place of the Learned Purchase by
the Exchange of the solemn Exercises for the Diploma, a Fraud pernicious to the
Hope and Expectation of the young Students they are obligd' to protect. Your
College has been lately obliged to reject from both, when the Candidates had
not the least pretense to any degree of Merit. Your Examinations have
necessarily abated the Rigor of your Statutes, to comply with the Deficiencies
of the new Physicians. If the Professors are excusable, they will plead; that
the English are mad and will employ a young Physician of inexpressible
Impudence, who swears, he is above and scorns the Professors Assistance, or any
other Councils and Helps of any Physician of long Experience in the World, and
that all the Practicers of great Learning and Observation are Fools to him,
that he can never Kill a Patient, following the new Projects of Diseases, and
the lately fashionable Medicines; that he pretends every Day new Projects of
Diseases, and will give the Remedies in a way peculiar to himself, never
thought of before him. Dr. R. claims the Precedence of this new way of treating
the Patients, when he had past his Time many Years merrily, and had the first
initiating smatterings of Learning, in common with every one beside: T. A. an
Apothecary, who never knew, nor had one good Medicine, the Professor and Leader
of the Youngsters, advised him to drink with the Tutors, and over the Bottle
with them cry down and banter all the Physicians of Judgment and Experience.
Will they call you to their Pupils, or the Gentlemen of the Country use you, if
you allow the Professor and the other Learned Physicians, to be better than
your self? T. A. at the same time, played his part, and assured the Tutor's
easy to be imposed on, and the Gentlemen's Grooms, and that all the other
Doctors were rid out, and they could now have him only in the present
Difficulty. When he was mounted the Stage, it was a pleasant Part to persuade,
that he was the only good Physician of the Age, and had then, all the Knowledge
he would ever pretend to; that he was then above all others, and even then
equal to himself. This I avow to all the English Gentlemen, carries its own
Evidence in all the Employments and Professions of Hazard and Moment. Another
of the more pale and sullen Impudence, shows his Skeleton, is the greatest Dr.
on the Earth the first Year, blasphemes the Professor in all his Companies,
bespatters all the other Physicians, is forced to run away, deludes the
greatest Quality to imagine, the little Sonnets in Latin bespeak a Man able to
allay the most furious Vehemence of Diseases. But can the Physicians, that
drink hard, and these Poets, take all the Understanding from all the Nation?
There is a more potent and latent Cause, which the College in its Remonstrance,
has discovered to us, fully explained in its Commentaries. When King James I.
made the Apothecaries a Company, the greatest part of the Physicians were
Gentlemen of Integrity, possessed of all the Acquisitions of Learning, of
Diseases and Medicines, by the most unwearied Industry and Study, and their
Modesty applying in all Cases of Difficulty to the Physicians, the experienced
Officers of the Art to lead and conduct them, increased their Skill and their
Courage, flushed them with frequent Victories. But Theodore Mayern^, leaving
France (in the unsuccessful War of the Chemists with the prudent and cautions
Physicians, relying on the Remedies, the most safe and efficacious of the
Ancient and New Preparations) comes to our Court, and attacks all the Diseases,
with the Royal Eagles and Dragons of an hundred Colors, and with Medicines,
the Quintessence of Gold. When the Gentlemen and Ladies were terribly afraid
of the violent efforts of the Eagles and Dragons, but could not be easy without
Cheats and Impostures, could expect no Success from their Medicines their
Ancestors and they had taken, and given to the Servants and Neighbors with the
greatest Success, they had Magistrale Waters ordered for them of 150
Ingredients in every one, and Magistrale Syrups of each 200, every Glyster had
some 100, others 200. All the Electuaries, and Juleps, and Pills were
prescribed of 70 or 80 parts, which were each made of the 150. Can a
Prescription of 1 or 2 or 3 chosen Simples affect you like ours, which have the
Virtues of 1500 or 2000 in them? When the Physicians of the new Project to
raise themselves, had made the Nobility and Gentry despise and throw away the
public Remedies, which by order of the Government lay ready for use in the
Shop, (sent for in Quantities and mixed into Juleps, and divided into their
Doses, most easily in all the Houses,) and the Grocers or Druggists, for every
Magistrale Water, and Syrup, Glyster, or Electuary, were forced to take more
Servants, to collect all the Simples, to pick and w^^k and beat them in the
Mortar; the Grocers or Druggists fly to Sir Theodore. What shall we do? Must
we neglect our Spices and Fruits and Drugs, to make only these new
Compositions? We beg, we may leave the Spices and Drugs, and attend to their
Compositions only. As the Soldiers often desert, they know not why, 114 request
to be put into the Charter, when 14 would have served the City, as Apothecaries
at that time, to vend the known general Remedies, appointed by the Government
and the College. They saw with Horror after one Colony of 2 or 3 Prentices
from every Shop, they could not live, if they sold the Magistrale Water, and
Syrups, and Electuaries in Quantities, as all the Medicines at that time, though
they had great Rates for their new Compositions: Your College does not inform
us, who made the first Proposal, that the Dr. and Apothecary s^^uld go snipps
in the Profit of every Dis^ase, 5 or 10 Shillings in ^he Pound, to reward the
Labor of the Thoughts, and the Hand in writing ten times more of the Remedies,
then the Diseased wanted. Th^se the old ^a^den'd Physicians strike up another
Bargain with the A^^thecaries; we will have you, when we are sleepy in the
Afternoon, and will drink and be merry with our Friend^, in the Evening at the
Tavern, or in the Night, visit our Patients for us, and decry and keep out all
the young Physicians. They and their Prentices attend the Sick with great
Diligence, and forward the taking and consumption of the Remedies. But when
more and more Shops are daily opened, they are again at their wits End, and cry
aloud to the Doctor. We are undone, they will not give us a Farthing, for all
our Judgment and Attendance: We are ruined, if you do not help us by
subdividing all the larger Quantities into little Doses, pretend to new dear
Ingredients in them all, that we may take great Rates for each small parcel,
and make 50 l. of a Disease, though the Physic used to be had for one. Now the
Apothecaries are in the Houses, they tell all in the Chamber; we can run more
nimbly to you, than the old Doctor, we have all his Medicines these 200 Years
past, and know all he has studied for, or observed 50 Years together: Believe
me, as able as he is, and pay me 50 l. for every Distemper, I will attend you
without a Fee, and make Visits to you every Day. Your History gives a famous
Instance of a Nobleman entreating your College to spare his Apothecary, (who
was under your Examination, for Killing many of his Customers,) for his civil
Carriage, Honesty and Sufficiency, and attending daily and hourly in his House.
Does not every Inhabitant of Great Britain see the unavoidable Consequences? I
will fly from the horrid Apparition, and represent it in one Breath. The
Apothecaries denounce to the Physicians and Surgeons, in an angry Tone. Now we
can harangue the Masters, Mistresses and Servants as often as we please; we are
your Masters, you must depend on us, you shall betray the People, and your
Professions and Societies to us. You shall always justify our Practices, and
take the blame of the Death to your selves, when we call you in the Extremity,
you shall give to us in the Price and Numbers of the Remedies, all they can
spare in Sickness, even when they have cast off their Prentices and all the
Servants to be d^vour'd by us. You shall order only the Shop-wares we always
have ready, the general Remedies, disguised by Mixture, that the People shall
not know them, and you shall never be able to detect and blame the worst of
them, nor be able to examine publicly our Sh^ps: you shall not pretend to be
wiser than us, to know any Remedy but those we have: We will never pardon your
examining and trying the Preparations you read of, in your private
Laboratories, and pretend to apply a sovereign Remedy, in the ^ice
Circumstances of any Disease or Constitution: When the Time shall come, that
we must have both the Professions, the Eminent of you, who have no Honor and
Conscience shall break in pieces your College and Company, and unite your
strength to raise ours on both But twenty Y^ars were scarce expired, when your
College addressed to King C^arles (...). in Council, who commanded the dangerous
Company to be dissolved, and as many only to be se^tled in the City, who could
provide the necessary public Medicines. After the Rest^ration, many admirable
Discourses were published by Dr. Goddard, Dr. Merett, Dr. B^ook, etc. to alarm
the Nobility and Gentry, to see the terrible Condition they were fallen into.
There was then no Addressing to the Favorite Duke, or the wanton luxurious
Wits, the declared Enemies to all Learning and Virtue. Your vicious Members,
many of them your Presidents, have frustated all your generous Attempts to
relieve the Nation; the lewd Atheists of the Surgeons have broken all the great
Designs of that Company. But the thinking and the suffering Gentlemen cry out,
if the Physicians would unite, if the Surgeons would unite, they can save us
and their Professions: But all the villainous Physicians and Surgeons are
united; they are the major part of both Societies, determined to sacrifice the
Public for their present Glory and Advantages. Since therefore, the weigthty
Cause of the Properties and Life of all the Subjects will be brought before her
Majesty in Council, and Visitors appointed to repel the Violences of the
Apothecaries and their Physicians and Surgeons, and their Allowance of, and
exacting the Observance of 2 or 3 necessary Statutes, will preserve us: I
design to move all my Brethren to solicit the Lords Spiritual, to introduce it
to Her Majesty. I am obliged to collect the irresistible Proofs you produce,
that the Physicians and Surgeons know no more than the common general
Medicines, that they destroy the Sick by the Numbers of the Doses of the worst
of them now almost only advised; that they have not the Knowledge of the
Qualities and Virtues of any of the Specific Medicines, necessary in the great
Cases of Danger, that the People therefore are destroyed by them in the
Diseases, their Nature alone would expel, and cannot be preserved, wanting the
great Assistance or Controulers of the natural Motions in Diseases. You support
me, professing, that the Art is turned into a scandalous Craft, that the
Physicians are Homicides. How shall I be able, in the narrow space I have
confined my self to, that the Gentlemen may see, without much Trouble, that Dr.
R. and the eminent Physicians and Surgeons, can only pretend to the Title of
Witty and Crafty Homicides?

I will therefore recollect and fortify the Articles of Impeachment, and
conclude with the necessary Methods, you must pursue, that the Enemies to the
College, and the Nation, may on the Promise and Prospect of their Reformation,
be pardoned, or receive the Punishments they deserve. In the first Collection
of Laws, the Prohibition of Killing precedes that of Stealing. I am obliged to
invert that order, because the Apothecaries and their Physicians and Surgeons
design only to pilfer from, and strip the Patients; it was in the beginning
Consequential, that the Sick were destroyed; but its now inevitable, the
Artists having been trained up and educated to the customary Practice, and have
not the Knowledge of the Diseases, and the true Medicines to save the Life,
though they most ardently desired it. I will promise for my Flock, and will
engage for my Brethren the Clergy, that they shall call out Thieves in all the
Families, and put them on their Guard, and direct them, to defend themselves.
How adsurd and impious is it to imagine, that Providence has not given us all
the necessary Medicines to preserve us? That the wealthy and prodigal are alone
provided for? The Fields and Gardens, and the large Cargoes of the imported
Simples, oppose and confute the heedless Objectors. The Frauds of Physic, and
all your Publications, demonstrate the great Plenty and Cheapness in all the
Particulars.

The Government will command the Apothecaries to make their Defense, and
clearly prove, (which they dare not undertake) that more than five or six only
do exceed the value of one Penny in the Portion of their Use, and that they are
Richer in their Virtues. Every Family in England was able to support the great
Truth by their Testimony, when their Closets were stored with the Remedies for
themselves, and their generous Charity to all their Neighbors, the same
Remedies, which are now shamed on them under the Cover and Disguise of the more
unwholesome Mixture. When a malignant Fever, or Pestilential threatened the
common Safety, the Munificent Nobility and Gentry, provided for the People the
most powerful Alexipharmicks to arm them against, and expel the Enemy: The
large Quantities of them did not rise to any higher Rate, than that of the now
frequent Doses in every Disease. Do not the Empiricks now draw the People from
the Apothecarses, receive them into their Protection, by the large Elixirs, and
Electuaries, Juleps, sufficient for many Days, equal to the Prices of the
knavish Divisions of the modish Couzenage? In the Fits of their Anger and
Vapors, they cry out, the Physicians shall not lessen the Apothecaries
arbitrary Profit, but they embrace the Advice, and use many of the Domestic
Cordials, the Mixtures and Infusions in the most Cordial Wines, the Patients
call freely for them, and detest the Collusion of the Perle Juleps. They have 3
or 4 of the simple and compound Waters, the best of the Shop, they join them in
all the Varieties of the Juleps; they know, and keep all the most esteemed
Spirits, the vinous, the vola^^tile and acid. They have the Stomachick and
Solutive Tinctures, the Elixir Proprietatis, their Elixir Salutis. They make 20
Composing Draughts from the Bottle of Laudanums, and of the Syrup of Poppies.
They infuse their own Rbubar^ and S^^a, they do^e the purging Syrups, Manna,
Cream of Tartar, and the purging Salt. The best of the Pills, are understood by
them, Venice Treacle, Diascordium, Mithridate, the Goa-stone, the best of the
Oils, and Ointments, and Plasters, are applied to the incidental Disorders.
When they shall be convinced by us, from the College Discoveries, that Bezoar,
Perle, the Leaf-Gold, are injurious, or of no use, we must prepare them to
oppose the only Artifice imaginable, which can be put upon them. The Physicians
and Surgeons, to merit the Patronage and Preferment of the Apothecaries, will
pretend they must direct a large Quantity of the best watered Diamonds, of the
brighest Rubies, of a Chinese Flower, lately imported in the smallest Parcel.
The Magistrates at this time, have no Concern, whether the Poor are starved or
undone in every Disease. Let us have the great Medicines to save our Life, cost
what they will. But their Condition is equally pitiable, and must be releiv'd.
You have demonstrated, that our eminent Physicians and Surgeons have not the
Knowledge of the truly efficacious Medidicines, and they dare not make any
Defense. They have unhappily begun, and proceeded in the English Practice,
which, instead of the one appropriate Remedy, to correct the vicious Humor, and
repel that Disease frequently taken, demands Varieties of several sorts of
Doses, pleasant, and which shall not raise too much of the Patient's Aversion.
What excellent Medicines are these, which are not to offend, tho they pretend
to no Activity and Qualities which shall oppose the Distemper? The Distilled
Waters of almost no Taste, made comfortable to the Stomach, with a small
Addition of a Cordial Water. The Powders are not to molest the Stomach or
Blood, by any kind of Virtues or Operations. The Bezoar is excellent for this
Purpose, which has been often solemnly tried, and detected to have no sort of
Operation, it has been examined by the most careful Trials, and lately before
our Royal Society, and avowed to be indissolvable by any Liquor in the Body of
any Animal. Perle, and the other gritty Powders of that kind, will take away
the Sowreness of an Humor in the Stomach, but cannot operate further. This, and
all the Tribe from Animals, common Sense will inform us (as the Jaw Bone of a
Pike, the Stones in the Head of the Perch, and many other Projects of foolish
and knavish Physicians) may nourish, may affor'd a poor nutritive Jelly, but
cannot rival the Famous Powders of the Earths, adored by Antiquity, and now,
with great Success, advised in malignant Fevers and Pestilences, from the
admirable natural Mixtures of the Salts and Sulphurs. I am obliged therefore,
to challenge Dr. R. and the Physicians and Surgeons, who sham their Patients
with such despicable Wares, to answer the Learned Discourses of the most famous
Physicians of this Age, whose Arguments you report on this Subject. But, they
wound and destroy Life, when the ignorant Practisers have almost nothing to
deal in, hut the distilled Waters, and know none of the great Remedies, which
are most necessary to the respective Diseases Many Ages after the Distillation
of Waters was invented, the judicious and sincere Physicians, with the other
valued Remedies, gave them in Faintings, in the Coldness and Deadness of the
Stomach, cautiously, and with Reserve, as our old English presented a Glass of
Wine after a Journey before Dinner. Our silly or impious Advisers now gives no
other Entertainment or Food to all the Sick, but these only. The small simple
Waters pals away, are liquid and moist, and perform nothing but wetting and
quenching the Thirst, dare not rival the many excellent infusions, but the
Compound and hot Waters burn the Stomach, enter their Blood with all their
Flame, and are the most deadly Medicine in the World, frequently taken (as now)
in all the inflammatory Diseases, in all the young and tender Constitutions,
and in the Rise and State, as well as Declinations. There are no surer Poisons
to destroy the Appetite, make and harden the Obstructions of all the Viscera,
evaporate the Blood to Water and Coldness, or Dryness, and the fatal Empyreum.
Has Dr. R. and the other English Doctors, the Learning and Courage to encounter
the Arguments you produce of the most famous Physicians of Europe, the
judicious Galenists, the acute and most candid Chemists, and justisie 5 or 6
Punches they prescribe all the Winter, as the Bath or Tunbridge Waters in the
Summer, to all the Complainers? Not only the Distillers, but all the Women, who
ply their Alembicks, shall assert, that all the simple cold Waters have only
the distinguishing Tang of the Virtues of the Simple: almost the 100 of them in
the public Receit-Book, are dispis'd and out of use, 3 or 4 only are reserved
as the Vehicles and Deluters of the strong Compound, which are nothing but the
Brandy Spirit, with the burning Oils of the Herbs, which can rise and come
over. You infer most clearly and cogently, that the Spirits, which rise from
all fermented Liquors, are the Oil broken by the Fermentation, that they do
not, cannot differ from the Brandy drawn from Wine. You proceed to demonstrate,
to the Confusion of Dr. R. and the numerous Pretenders, who never thought of,
or learned this most useful Philosophy, that only one sort of Plants can impart
any Oil to the distilled Water, that all the other specific operative
Qualities remain behind, and the deluded Patient must languish and die, when his
Relief is designed from those Virtues. The most judicious common Sense of our
Porters and Carrmen, as well as Gentlemen, prompts them to call for true
Brandy, or the Infusions of the Vsquebaugh and the Ratafies: they abhor the
distilled Waters, which raise a Storm of Wind and Eructations, annoy the Palate
with the unconquerable Oils, many Hours without Respite. We may rescue our
selves from the Infatuations these Physicians and Custom have seized us with,
by experimenting what Nourishment we shall receive from Flesh, or Milk
distilled. If we make the Trials by distilling Imperial or Bohea Tea, or Coffee
prepared by the Fire, the Water from each of them shall be clear, sweet and
pleasant, without one Particle of their Qualities. Does not our Natural Reason
prompt us, to desire for our Support the cooked Chicken, or the Jelly, or
Broth, and by the same Reason implore the Remedy in Substance and Extract, or
the various Differences of Infusions and Decoctions?

If therefore the simple Waters have not greater Virtues, then their scarcely
discernable Qualities, and their fiery Waters from their Brandy and Oils are to
be used only in the pressing Exigences of the Weakness and Coldness, and
Deadness of the Spirits and Blood, as the Surgeons apply the burning Irons to
Mortifications and the cold Death of the Limbs: If the vile Arabian Cookery of
the Medicines in Conserves and Syrups, the most abhorred by the Stomach,
distended and oppressed by their Flatulencies, and after three or four Months
corrupted and fermented, and their Virtues consumed by the Sugar, as Flesh by
the Salts and Pickles, if Dr. R. and our self-admiring Physicians and Surgeons
never knew or used the most rational and efficacious Preparations, they are by
their Negligence and Ignorance, our most cruel Homicides, as your College
remonstrates. The Comments pass over ill few Lines, the Vomitters, Purgers,
Sweaters, which are not many, to be adapted only to the Strength of the
Constitution, and are only to eject the Humors from the Stomach, Bowels and
Pores, if they happen to be duly prepared and ready for the Expulsion; but with
the most commanding Arguments you engage us to regard and admire the six
Classes of the Alterative Medicines (which each comprehend a large Number)
which are to repair the Blood, to remain in it, to become the Constituent Parts
of it, to realter it from the diseased to the healthy State; to make it watery,
if burnt into Dryness, and incapable to circulate, to make it more acid, if
dull and vappid, to restore the natural Oil and Balsam, to unite and fortify
the Crasis of the Parts separating from one the other, by the cementing Earthy
Mixture. After the Demonstration of the new and certain Discovery of the four
Principles of all mixed Bodies, you enumerate the 6 Classes of the wonderful
Medicines, Providence has prepared to restore all the Disorders of every
Disease. Dr. Lock has enacted the Law, which can never be abrogated, that our
Knowledge is Seeing, Tasting, Smelling; that he is an impudent Fool, who
presumes, he knows Tea, or Coffee, or Wine, who never saw the Infusions, nor
had considered the Color, Taste and Scent, and examined the Qualities and
Operations by his Palate and Stomach. You inform us, that the Apothecaries have
prevailed on the Nobility and Gentry, to permit, that the Eyes of the
Physicians and Surgeons to plucked forth, their Tongues pulled out, and their
Hands cut off. By long Usage, Dr. R. and the others have been gelt, made
Eunuchs, after the Manners of the Eastern Empires, that they shall not
propagate and preserve the Race of the Medicines, which will too soon, and
effectually cure the Patients, to the great Trouble and Detriment of the
Apothecaries, gaining the 2 or 3 Guineas a day by the instantaneous Mixture of
the Waters Into Draughts, and the Conserves and Syrups into Boles. What sort of
Gentlemen will hastily object, that they may write them out of the Books, and,
when the Patient have taken them twenty four Hours, come and consider what has
been the Effects and Qualities? If they transcribe the Huddles and Jargons of
the Compositions, they shall never know the Smell, and Taste, and Powers of any
one. But they dare not prescribe more than 3 or 4 Decoctions, the Sweating, the
Bitter, the Pectoral, the Emulsions by Roat and Memory, and almost the same in
every Disease and Constitution, if they vary, it is only from a wild
Imagination, not the Judgment from the Knowledge of the Ingredients. They have
been often chid severely, and whipped for their Wantonness in Variations and
Alterations from the Lessons the Apothecaries have given them; who have loudly
and truly proclaimed in the most public Assemblies, and every hour in the
Chambers, that Dr. R. etc. are guilty of the foolishest Mistakes and Blunders,
when they spell before they know the Letters, when they rashly throw 5 or 6
together, and are not able to conjure or foresee, what consistence, what
Colors, what Tastes, what Confusion will be made. We, they say, are content to
know no more, than the Hackney Doses or vulgar Use, and you shall not assume to
be wiser, than we are. How much the Health and Life of the poor Patients suffer
from the Idleness and Ignorance of the modish Advisers, exacted with so much
Cruelty by their Masters the Apothecaries, will appear to all Mankind, who
shall distinctly consider the Energies and Properties of the six Classes of the
Remedies. They are the Watery, Sweet, Acid, Bitter, Astringent, Acrid. Under
these are a vast Diversity at Energies and Properties comprised. There are many
of the Watery, which have a Mixture of the Qualities of the other, and there is
not one, which is not allayed or improved by one of the other. The Acrids are
in the greatest Degree, or tempered by the Union of the Sweet, or Acid, or
Astringent. The first are able, and will quench the Thirst and the Flames of
Fevers (not fallaciously, as the distilled more Waters, which instantly pass
off without any Impression on the Humors) by altering and correcting the
burning Fermentation. The other will powerfully deterge the Slime of the
Stomach, and revive the Appetite, and corroborate the Digestion. The Astringent
can unite the Parts of the Blood in Malignant Diseases, and with the Acrid
enable it to separate and reject by the known Evacuations the morbid Humors.
The Dyscrasies of the Blood, which specify and distinguish every Disease, must
be remedied by the Antagonist Quality of the Medicines united with it. These
therefore, are the only Medicines, which by the first Intention (Bleeding,
Vomitting, Purging, Sweating, are to be used only on the just Occasions) of
changing the vicious Disorders, must be used often to supply gradually that
Principle and Quality which the Blood wants, to reduce it to the Temperature it
has lost, and must recover, before the Disease is cured. These only can redress
the Diseases of the Head and Nerves, and Spirits, of the Breast, and Bowels,
and Limbs, of the Blood and Viscera, and those peculiar to the Sex. They have
never wanted Success in all the preceding Ages, and at this time, in the Parts
of Europe, where they are used, and in England, by the fortunate Application of
the select Simples prepared or infused (to name only the great and sudden Cure
of the King's Evil in the Treatise of Exercise, when the Shop Doses had lead
the Patient to the Atrophy, and almost Death) from the Records of the Ancient
Practice, in the Memorials, or Tradition of the Nobility and Gentry. Our
Writers have in many Ages swelled their Books to the admired Bulk and Conceit
of the Reader, of their extraordinary Industry, with varied and shuffled
Receipts, a thousand Cordials, and Electuaries, and Pills, etc. (of which Dr.
Willis is a late Instance) which they had never used, whose contrary Qualities
make an intestine War, and break the Powers of one the other, and are detected
by frequent Observation, to have no Operation. Many Physicians, wanting the
Reason and Philosophy, and Experiments and a just Judgment, and to distinguish
themselves by a pretended rigorous Exactness, have appointed the Services and
Stations of the Medicines to one part, to the Head, the Eyes, the Heart, and
the Liver, and Womb, etc. These are commanded by them to attend the Men only,
these the Women in their respective Complaints and Disorders: When the Parts of
the Body, and both the Sexes, are preserved by the Blood and Spirits,
maintained or reduced to the natural State. Besides the Decrees of the most
Eminent Physicians in all Ages, our natural Reason will instruct us, that the
less compounded Preparations are most agreeable, and will have the surest
Efficacies, as by the most simple Diet, the Appetite and Concoction are
preserved, and Health and Life supported. If then, the admired natural
Composition of each Plant makes many of the Watery, Acrid and Hot, many
Astringent, Laxative, the Bitters are some Acid, others Inflaming; what Havoc
shall be made on Life in the nice and various Constitutions? when the Quality
not understood by the Physician, shall confine the Humors in a Pleurisy, and
purge in a Consumption, when the malignant Humors in a Fever, flying off by
the Bowels, shall be detained and driven back into the Blood again. And it is
impossible, it is absurd to imagine, that our Physicians shall ever acquire the
Knowledge of the Conditions of the peccant Humors in the Stomach, in the
Blood, when they know nothing of the Qualities of the Medicines, which correct
them. These alone, are and can be the only Essays and Discoveries of them. The
sedulous Examination of the Qualities and Virtues of the Drugs will banish the
Idleness of the Mode, entertain them with the Observations and Improvements of
the most pleasant and unbounded Philosophy, which examines the Preparations of
the old and new Pharmacy. The most learned and candid Chemists have lately
confessed, that their Chemistry is very poor with the Presumption of the
largest Abundance. All the acid Spirits are almost the same: The Volatile have
almost no Differences; all the Oils are equally burning; in a thousand fixed
Salts there is hardly any Variety; all the Magisteries and Calcinations are a
dead Earth, and good for nothing, all the Alkali Powders are matched by the
Bones calcined.

I will maintain before all the Learned and Unlearned of the Nation, and prove
beyond Contradiction, that if the Physicians and Surgeons have had by the
Apothecaries expelled out of them the Enquiry after, and the Knowledge of the
only saving Medicines, and use in their place only the fallacious shamming
Juleps, and the offensive destructive Sweetmeat of the Conserves and Syrups; or
have lost their Learning by their Idleness and Sottishness, and plying the
Gentlemen's and the Apothecaries over the Bottle, the Setters and Finders of
their Business, that the Differences of Diseases, their Symptoms, and the
natural Attempts of Recovery are equally unknown to them. I shall calm all the
noisie Oppositions, and eradicate all the filly Prepossessions and Prejudices
of the deluded People, when I produce the Confession of your Society, that all
the Patients are, and must be now destroyed by you. They will cover their Face,
and bow down the Head, adore and reward your Discovery, and importuned
Prevention of your Assassination of all the Diseased. Beyond your Attestation,
there are concurrent circumstantial Evidences too strong to be resisted. Dr. R.
and the impudent Monopolizers of all the Skill, swear, that all the Patients
but only their own are murdered. The more modest and learned Physicians
retort, that he was never taught, or studied any part of the Profession, that
he never saw a Dissection, that he knows not the Places or Uses of any part of
the Body, that he never sees but broken pieces of Disease, and never consults
but with the Apothecaries, who manage the 3 or 4 days of his Absence; never
read the Authors who deliver the Laws, and report the History of the Victories
or Defeats, prescribes only the trifling Waters and Powders, and Mineral
Waters to all the Cases. The Surgeon, who has abused his Study, corrupting and
destroying all the Principles of Religion and Virtue, makes his Reputation from
the most easy and obvious Cures, but denounces them insuperable and fatal, to
cover and conceal the perpetual Blunders of his Head and Hand, but is outdone
in the Hospital by the Surgeons he tramples on, plies the Patients with the
same Internals as the Dr. he now copies after, and will not pretend to the
Recovery of more powerful, which have always been communicated to them by the
Physicians, when their Learning, and the Knowledge of the necessary internal
Alteratives to reduce all the Chirurgical Cases made their Assistance thought
of the greatest Use. How shall we be able to pronounce the Sentence in the most
puzling, and the greatest Cause in the World? The People cry out, they were
saved, they had been in the Grave, if the Doctor, Surgeon or Apothecary had not
preserved them, that we are blessed with the best in Europe. It is infallible,
that Nature (as it recovers the Herbs and Plants of the Fields and Gardens by
the Sun, by the Change of the Seasons, by Dews and Rain) by its own Force, with
Rest and Labor, Abstinence, and the regular Use of the Foods, in a short or
longer time does pass off many the most terrible Diseases. The frightful
Convulsions are subdued by the Periods of Age and the Ripening of the Sexes,
when all the Remedies had been baffled. The Plague and Malignant Fevers shall
be attacked by one with the Acids, by others, with the burning Alixipharmicks,
with, and without Blisters, by many, by few or rejected Medicines, by
Physicians and Surgeons of the present Smatterings of Skill, or of none at all,
many of both shall escape and survive. Then it is as infallible, that a knavish
or silly Artist shall spoil the best Work, overset the natural Motions of
Strength, by the Imposture and Consumption of a large Number of the vile
Medicines. A Physician was permitted by a Prince in a Italy, to lay the Wager,
if there were 500 Advisers in the City. He exposed himself muffled for the
Toothache, and had 500 Cures offered to him. But I have known many who have had
from their Physicians the Pain asswag'd by Death. Dr. Sydenham calls aloud to
the People, that our Tampering in the Fevers, Smallpox, etc. destroys more,
than the Rage of War. What must we fear, when not many Years past, only 5
Medicines undertook all the Diseases? Dr. O. has in Print exposed the many
Pairs of Blisters, the sweating Boles and silly Powders and Juleps of Dr. R. as
most absurd and fatal; if the mighty Assurances of his single Abilities do not
support the natural Vigor, as true and presumptuous as the Blank Paper sent to
him from Court, to fill with his own Panegyric and Demands. All the wary
Observers, and the best Judges, the Families who have retained the old, or
acquired the lately revived more sincere and judicious Practice, do avow, that
Millions yearly are killed by the Apothecaries and their Doctors raising the 2
or 3 Guineas a day, or the 25 or 30 Guineas, out of the Medicines in every
Fever, Smallpox and Measles, when in the favorable Seasons, every one
recovers from the prudent Use of the sovereign appropriate Infusions. The now
famous Foreign Physicians are proud of their Kings, who feeble from the Cradle,
and oppressed with Age, are preserved by them, when the Loss of many our Royal
Family are lamented. The dark Mystery must then be exposed to view, as bright
as the Rays of the Sun, in the Parallel of my Ld R -- r turning Quack on
Tower Hill, with the Name of Dr Bendo, when the King had commanded him to leave
the Court. In his printed Invitation he rails bitterly at the College, despises
and pities the Ignorance of all the Doctors, his Brethren, had his Share of the
common polite Learning, had an Apothecary to prompt him behind the Scenes, and
used all Dr. R's Remedies. The Gentlemen and Ladies were much better, by Time,
more regular living by the strong Hope of the Cure, as they lately sensibly
mended by Sweating, after the German had given hi^ Dose to their Waters. How
many Malignant Fevers, and the dangerous Putrid, how many Consumptions,
Convulsions, etc would have escaped, if he had carelessly visited the Sick to
belt them and improve himself, past away his time always merrily, and had never
learnt from his Apothecary the best Preparation or use of any one or the Divine
Alteratives? All the Disease. which afflict Mankind, are varied with the
innumerable Circumstances, are secure or fatal. The secure denounced Morta^ by
him, and to be manageable by himself alone, would have made amends for the
Losses, the Dead do not complain, and the Living would have raised his Fame.
Shall I add to the black List of the Dead, which daily increase more and more,
the English, who resent the Pride and Impudence, and designed Neglects, and the
high Fees for one equal in Value to many Visits, the firm Belief of the
Ignorance of every other Physician living, and on the other side detest, and
abhor, or suspect and dread the Villainies of the Physicians you publish, who
invade every Life for the use of the Apothecary, who prefers them, and
therefore submit to the Chance and Event, are destroyed in the Acute and
Chronical Diseases without Relief, but from the giddy accidental Judgment on
the Cases, or the Impudence of the infinite Empiricks?

What sovereign Remedy can prevent and extinguish all these our Calamities of
the Sick? We must call for that provided by our most Learned Magnanimous King
Henry VIII. and of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, who established, from
the most pressing Inducements, your College and the Company of Surgeons, to
avert the High Displeasure of God, when the Sick shall be exposed to the
Robbery and Destruction of the Traders in the Remedies, of the Apothecaries,
who are to save the Life, and at the same time thrust into the Patient all the
Numbers and Exactions of the Doses, necessary for their own Preservation. I am
not able to represent the vehemence of the Zeal, the sacred Rage of that great
Prince and his Parliament against the execrable Inhumanity, and the impious
Temerity of the Quacks and Apothecaries, intruding their illiterate unexamin'd
Dealings on the Life of the People, in the most difficult and dangerous
Diseases. This the most religious, the most wise and necessary Law was revived
and restored to its Health and Force, by our most learned and pious K. Charles
I. after the most mature Deliberations of his Privy Council, with the Advice of
all the Judges. Our most terrible Enemies frequently present us with the most
important Wisdom and Vigilance. We will appeal to the French King the Grand
Patron of Learning, and of all the Arts and most useful Knowledge. Not to
insist on the Royal Academy of Sciences, that of Painters will to the life
represent the vast Design of the Royal Establishment of your College and the
Company of Surgeons. The Painters meet often in their Academy, compare their
Pieces with the most accomplished Performances there. The fundamental Laws of
the strictest Imitation of Nature in the Lines and Colors, the Qualities and
Mixtures of the Colors are demonstrated, and promulgated. The appointed
Inspectors, and Visitors and Judges of the Excellencies of the Drawings, the
Royal Reward of the most finished Pieces, raise the emulations and sufficiency
of all the Society. Your College (as that of the Surgeons) was erected by the
Acts of Parliament, as the Supreme and only University of Physic. The two
famous Universities can only instruct the Students, in the previous and
preparatory Learning of the Languages and Philosophy. There is only one
Professor, and not many Practicers, the Cases of Diseases are rare, and the
hasty and less frequent Visits of the Patients in the several Distances cannot
afford the accurate Observations. All or the greatest Part of your Society must
be equal or superior to their Professors, because the most Populous City in
the World supplies innumerable varieties of all Diseases; the furious and
impetuous shiftings of the Symptoms may be hourly visited: the mutual
Consultations of the most experienced Physicians will determine the State of
the Disease, and the Method of Cure authorized by infinite Successes. The
Solemn Lectures in the College (and in all the Sciences the great Advancements
have almost only been made from these public Discourses) will reduce to the
most possible certainty, the Methods of treating all Diseases, and the most
assured Qualities, and Virtues, and Preparations of all the Medicines, and will
most awfully, as the Voice of a King, command the Silence and Modesty and
future Industry of Dr. R. and the other impudent Pretenders to the Monopoly of
all Knowledge. Your Treasury of the most useful Philosophy, for the
Preservation of Life will be equal to the rich Importations from all Parts, by
the Royal Society, of the Natural History, the most ravishing entertainment the
Mind is capable of. But you inform the Nation, that your College is approaching
to its Death, destroyed by the Animosities, Refractoriness, and the most
infamous Desertion to its Enemies. Shall not there be a Coroners Inquest to
examine, if it is Felo de se, or if it falls by any external violence? Shall
not VVitnesses be interrogated on both; if Dr. R. has often sworn, he would
sink it, if your Men of no Honor or Conscience, your exposed Mirmils,
Querpoes, and Bards, and their new numerous Associates, have not, with the most
abhorred Perjury, betrayed and exposed all your generous Attempts of the
Society, to preserve the Public and its own Life? Your Publications of their
Villainy, and of Dr. Badger, and Dr. Bernard will convict them, as well as the
Surgeons of no Religion or Conscience, who have, with the same Perjury,
deserted from the defense of their Profession, and the Protection of their
Prentices, to the Apothecaries. The Confusion of Dr. R. and the perfidious
Members will condemn them; when the Evidences shall be collected by the Judge,
that they know not one Simple, nor its Qualities and Virtues and Preparations,
that they cannot discover or warrant the Goodness or Virtues of any one of the
common general Medicines, cannot therefore insure the Success, that they have
sillily squandered away their time, in sweetning and deluding their Companions,
never observed the true Motions of any one Disease, advising only from the
heedless Reports of the Apothecary, they are scandalously delivering their
Profession to.

When Her Majesty in Council shall Graciously receive your Humble Address, and
tenderly commiserate the Calamities of the most injured People in the Universe:
the Decree of the Royal Martyr shall be put in force. The learned and
Honorable Visitors appointed will instantly redress all the deplored
Grievances of the Nation. The Observance of 3 or 4 Statutes confirmed by them
will be rigorously exacted, that the Physicians and Surgeons shall not dare to
rob and destroy the Sick by Blending the complete and perfect now public
Remedies, to blind the Families from their Knowledge of the small Prices, and
great uses in the vulgar incidental Disorders, and contrive the most abject and
Knavish Fallacies of the minute high pris'd Doses: That no Physician or Surgeon
shall ever discourse of the Disease, and resolve the Method of Cure, and
perform the Operations, in the impertinent Intrusions of the Apothecaries, from
their necessary Duties in the Shops, to infatuate the People into the
Imagination, that they are able on the next occasions to supply their Places:
That the mutual Affection and Emulation shall be more religiously observed,
that Dr. R. shall never presume to magnify himself to an immense Bigness,
without the clearest Reasons assigned, of his indefatigable study and Industry,
and of his great Proficiency from the most frequent Consultations with the most
learned and experienced Physicicians: and that the detestable Mirmils shall not
give their Licenses to Practice to every Quack and Apothecary, by extolling
their Skill and Judgment and Success, when run for at the last Gasp, before
their own. As our Kings have almost the Divine Complacence and Honors, when
they see the Magistrates diligent in exciting the Observance of the Laws; the
Visitors will observe the College enforcing the Industry and Sincerity of all
the Members, after the Election of the President ( not by and out of the 8
Elects only) and of the Censors and Committee by the Society yearly, by the
Names written, and delivered, as in the Bank and East India Company: Because
all the Public Calamities, and the Dissolution of the Royal College
prognosticated and dreaded by you, are imputed by you to the Treachery and
Debauchery, and the Passiveness of the President and Censors, and Committees,
who have been bribed to the Neglect of all their Statutes by the Apothecaries
Presents of the Patients to them, or the Terrors of Poverty and Disgrace from
their Resentment.

I, and my Brethren the Clergy, must not look on as indifferent Spectators,
offer up the Prayers of the Congregation, for the Divine Influence on the
illegal and pernicious Quackeries of the Empiricks and Apothecaries. We are
obliged to visit every House, every one of our Flock in Sickness; we must, with
the sharpest Severity, scourge away all the Exchangers of the fallacious Doses
with the Health and Life of the Patients. We must inform them, it is their Duty
to apply to the Physicians, the Divine Laws and our own have appointed; that
their Obligations to the justest Care of the Families will cure the present
Indiffence, Idleness and Debauchery, and Neglect of the necessary Knowledge of
Diseases, from the industrious Perusal of the Authors, and the Enquiry into the
Improvements of all Medicines. We shall then instruct them, how great, how many
will be their Rewards and Advantages, from the most diligent and rational
Adjustment of the few cheap, necessary Remedies, that the constant Physician is
compelled by his own Interest, to communicate to them the Knowledge of the more
easy Diseases, the Values, and the Divisions and Mixtures of all the
Preparations directed by the Government to the Public for their Use. Then we
and they shall (as formerly with the greatest Pleasure) distribute the Divine
Bounty of the excellent public Medicines to the Poor, or more Indigent of the
People, who will not then greedily entertain the Empiricks from all Countries,
when they can receive our Charity of our own more sovereign Preparations.

The Clergy, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Gentry are under the
sacred Obligations with you, to preserve the Honor and Dignity of our two
famous Nurseries of all Learning. We may recover the Zeal of the Officers, by
reviving the Rewards, which their inestimable Services claim from the
Cognizance and Beneficence of the Court, the Nobility and Gentry. The
Universities may be moved by us to correct and reform their Physicians, their
perfidious Enemies, who deliver them up to the illiterate Impostors, by the
Combinations you have so often detected; that they will not suffer our
Out-lying Physicians from them to increase their Numbers and Power, and hasten
the Ruin of this University of Physic, our Laws command them to support. Our
Vigilance and Courage will be animated by the imminent Dangers and Destruction
of all Learning in the Nation, from the impetuous Libertinage, which, in the
late Rebellion, insulted on all the Orders and Professions. Religion now
suffers from the same Causes, which affect you, from the Preferments bestowed
on us by the Atheists, the Lewd and Ignorant, with the same Conditions annexed
of their unmolested Ravages on all Learning and Virtue, their assumed
Sufficiency to determine in Religion, as in Physic, from the trifling
Pamphlets they read in their Mother Tongue.

The Rights of the Christian Church give us Power to admonish the Magistrates
from the Pulpit, to avoid the Guilt, (which is adjudged unpardonable by all the
Divines) exposing knowingly the Life of the People to the endless Increase and
Necessities of the Apothecaries, and other Unlicens'd Undertakers. The Company
will confess (as an Apothecary in Print has) the invincible Reasons for their
speedy Reduction. The perpetual Swarms of their Numbers, from 2 or 3 Prentices
in every Shop, and their filling all the Streets, must, from the numerous
Proofs you assign, threaten or take away the Life of the Royal Family, the
Nobility, Gentry and People.

Before old Laws and Establishments are pulled down, and the Rubbish removed,
we should council them to frame a new and better Model, to make the Draught of
the Fabric, and expose it to the Judgments of the wisest in the Nation. The
Plan of the new Structure is, that the People shall have the liberty to do and
suffer what they please; to gratify the present Rage for Anarchy and
Confusion. They shall be cheated and killed by any one, who shall fall into
that Trade and Employment. The Government has made a triple Contract with your
College and the Company, and imposed an Oath on all the Members to defend the
Professions necessary to preserve the Life of the Subjects. You are obliged to
return your Commssion, and Request to be declared absolved from the sacred
Obligation; that the Societies shall be dissolved, when they have publicly
been declared useless, to be abandoned and demolished, as a Fortress of no
Importance. You may move, that the Committees may examine your Conduct and
Discharge of your Trust, when they consider, what Laws are obsolete or
necessary to be revived. You may both humbly offer to them (the greatest part
of whose Laws, as of the Government and all the Arts are infallible) that the
rash bold Attemps may be allowed in Cases desperate, never seen before, but are
condemned and exploded, when the known Methods received and justly applied,
never failed of Success. The Merchants and other Traders may venture, as
Volunteers of an Army, their own, or the Stocks of their Creditors, in the most
hazardous Projects, new Discoveries and Settlements: But the General will not
betray his assured Victory, and forfeit the Honors of his Wisdom and Conduct.
The two Societies are a part of the Government, their Establishment is in
force; the Consultation will not resolve their Extirpation, if the
Mortification is capable of Cure, if they can be restored to their Health and
Vigor, and the Support or Defense of the whole.

In the mean time, it is your Duty to reserve to the People their Property of
all the Remedies assigned them by the Government and College, to make the
frequent Additions, to amend the Defective from the many Discoveries of the
modern experimental Philosophy, and the late excellent Receit-Books of almost
all the Cities of Europe. But it is impossible for you to attempt or perform it
without the constant Use of your public Laboratory, and the more necessary and
productive Diligence of your private and retired, in imitation of all the most
famous Physicians, and of our most excellent Mr. Boil. You must open the
Stores of your three Dispensaries, to furnish the general Remedies to all the
Families. You must revive the Practice of all Ages, by advising only the
Patients in Charity not too remote from you, that the Sick may hope the surest
Recovery from the same Adviser, observing the Progress of the Diseases and
collecting all the Observations, they shall present to him. You must apply to
the Ld. Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council, who, by their Committee
with yours, resolved, that the Prices should be subscribed in every
Prescription, that the Bills should be sent to the Apothecaries, promising to
deliver them at the Rates assigned. They were assured, that 30 or 40 Shops are
sufficient to prepare and sell all the Medicines in the large Quantities
demanded, the infinite, most facil Divisions being made in the Chambers.
Religion and common Honesty exact your Care of the Sick, to direct your
Patients to those Shops only, 'till the Government and you shall be assured,
that the Medicines (lately condemned in the eminent Shops) are not
sophisticated and wanting all the chiefest Ingredients. The Law has carefully
preserved to you the Right of preparing and disposing of the Medicines, and the
Defense of your Profession requires you to invade the Apothecaries, to deter
them from the most unjust and absurd Invasion of your Practice. Besides, the
Patient cannot be safe without it. If you advise the most proper Medicine, the
Incroaching Apothecary breaks the Heart of all the Sick; It is well enough, a
pretty tolerable Prescript, he could have sent in a better. But if he has a
wretched Physician to bring in, or would set up for the Physician alone, he
changes the Medicines, enrages the Impatient against the Doctor by one of no
Operation, provokes the most Patient by a violent destructive Dose, as you
prove in many Criminals you expose. Your own Interest will solicit you to
barter and communicate your Observations of the improved Preparations, and the
Recoveries of the many lost. But the Specific and Appropriate to each Disease
must be reserved from the People, who are now craving after the endless Changes
and Shiftings from this to the other sorts, and importuning every knavish
Practiser to cheat and destroy them. You will lay before them and the Quacks,
as Edg'd-Tools in the Reach of Children, the most efficacious Qualities of the
Medicines to cast at, with the known Chances and Hazards, every Disease, which
falls in their way. The Surgeons do not publish their Balsams and Tinctures,
and lend their Knives and Instruments for the grand Operations. The French King
did not importune our Dr. Tabor, to reveal the Remedy he gave to the Royal
Princess, and the Nobility of both Sexes. It is the most deadly Poison to kill
the Industry of the Physicians, who would retrieve the Negligence and Losses of
this Age. The Cabinet Counselors, our Generals and Admirals, do not divulge
the Designs they have formed. The Painter does not suffer the Face he draws to
see his manner of mixing or laying on the Colors. The Forbidden Fruits are
most violently coveted. The Fox in the Fable was many Hours eagerly craving the
Food in the Glass, the Tongue could not penetrate. You must assert to your
Profession, the Prerogative truly Royal, the most magnificent Bounties to the
Distressed, from the public Magazine of the general Remedies presented to
them, but you must reserve the most Sovereign for the most Deserving, and you
are above the Fear of being invaded or compelled.

Mr. Boil, in his Treatise of the Usefulness of his experimental Philosophy in
Physic, represents to us the most sublime Character in the inspired History
(He went about doing good,) above the pretended Glories of ambitious Princes,
who have consumed their Life, and Mankind by their Ravages and Conquests. The
Honors and Distinctions of the Subjects in all Governments have no other
Foundation, than being serviceable to the Public, and promoting the common
Prosperity. How great will the Public Gratitude be to you, when your College
shall preserve the Profession the most Learned, and most implored in the
greatest Distresses of Pain and Fear of Death? You restore to the Kingdom its
Right, its Property in all the general Medicines, as a Charity diverted from,
and hid from the Poor, the Pious Donors relieved. You will have the Honors you
demand, from every one, who can comprehend the Value of the almost immense
Benefaction, and will pity and despise the Careless, and the Foolish, Unable to
fathom its Extent and Importance; as the Deity receives the Adorations of the
Philosophers, who incessantly search after the inexpressible Grandeurs and
Beauties of the Universe.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
NEcessary to be Corrected. P. 10. distinguish, read extinguish the Sense of
the. p. 14. safest, r. vilest. p. 16. best, r. lest. p. 19. serves, r. saves.
p. 40. r. Sir Th. p. 41. work, r. wash.


