North East VIEW of the CITY of CARLISLE.
Jas. Lowes Sculp.


THE HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF THE CITY OF CARLISLE, AND ITS VICINITY,

BY WILLIAM HUTCHINSON, ESQUIRE.

CARLISLE: PRINTED BY F. JOLLIE.

M DCC XCVI.

N.W. VIEW of CARLISLE CASTLE, From a Drawing in the Possesion of T.R. Maunsell
Esquire.
James Lowes Sculp.


PLAN of the CITY of CARLISLE and PLACES ADJACENT.
From a Drawing in the Possesion of J. R. Maunsell, Esquire.

map of Carlisle

THE CITY OF CARLISLE.
THE traveller approaching from the south, has the best view of the city,
seated on a fine eminence, gradually emerging from an extensive plain of rich
cultivated land. The waters of the Frith are seen on the one hand, with the
adjacent levells; the back ground of the landscape is beautifully variegated by
the irregular swells of the whole Scotch promontory, extending toward the
Irish sea. The walls strengthened with an arrangement of buttresses at
irregular distances, lies upon one angle to the view; in part, concealing the
houses of the city, and boldly overtoped by the square tower of the castle, and
the august and solemn structure of the cathedral. This view of Carlisle is the
more striking, as there is no adjacent eminence; from which cause the city
looks more majestic, as it crowns so beautiful a plain.

The city is walled round, the fortifications toward Scotland appearing the
most modern; they are formed of better squared stones than several other parts
of the works. The east and south sides are supported by a multitude of
buttresses, which, we presume, have been built up occasionally, to strengthen
the decaying parts of the wall. It is watered by three fine rivers, the Eden on
the north, the Peterill on the east, and Caude on the west. There are three
gates to the city, which, from their different aspects, are called the English,
Irish, and Scotch Gates. On the approach from Penrith, on the south, you enter
the English Gates; on the approach from Wigton, on the south-west, is the Irish
Gate; and the Scotch Gate, to the north, opens upon the bridges. The walls are
embrazured, but without any earth-work. The English Gate is guarded by a very
strong machicolated gate, flanked by circular towers of great strength; the
guns mounted therein in several tiers, would effectually sweep every approach.
This gateway, with its towers and other works, is commonly called the Citadel,
"An oblong with three round bastions." -- PENNANT. -- The ancient entrance into
the city was through the citadel.
and was erected by the order of King Henry VIII. The castle consists of
various works, but being kept up as a garrisoned place, we conceive it
imprudent to describe them minutely. There were several officers appointed to
this fortress, viz. a governor, deputy governor, town-major, engineer,
barrack-master, store-keeper, head gunner, three quarter gunners, and a person
to buy in and deliver out coals and candles to the garrison. For many years,
prior to 1761, the governor of this city was chosen from one of the
representatives in parliament; and most of the subordinate places in the
garrison were given to the freemen of the city, and generally members of the
corporation, so that frequently the chief magistrate was a quarter gunner. --
L. [For a list of the governors see page 595.


The donjon, or great tower, more properly deserves the title of the citadel,
being surrounded by the other works; it is square and very lofty, and the walls
of vast strength and thickness, being constructed agreeably to the old modes of
defense, before the use of cannon: it was strengthened by a draw bridge over a
wide ditch, and defended by modern works; a half moon battery mounted with
cannon, and a very large platform also mounted with cannon, under cover of the
outward wall. The top of the tower being embrazured and lined with turf, and
mounted with large cannon, this part of the fortress could make a good defense,
and sustain a formidable attack. By a well of vast depth constructed within the
great tower, and said to be of Roman work, the supply of water for the garrison
could not be cut off by an enemy. This well is not unlike that in Bambrough
Castle in Northumberland, and has been constructed at the same time the great
tower was built. In the gates of the castle, is still remaining the old
Portcullis: and here are shown the apartments of Mary, Queen of Scots, where
she was lodged some time after her landing at Workington; and after being, for
a little space, entertained with flattering respect, found herself prisoner to
her jealous rival.


In the outer castle is a fine grass plot, a garden and governor's house.

But it will be expected by our readers, that we give a more particular
description of this city, and collect the historical facts relative to it.

The name of Carlisle has been deduced by several authors, from different
etymologies. The British chronicle informs us, this city was built by a British
potentate, called Luel. Leland says, the Irishmen call bale a town, and so
peradventure did the old Scotts: thus might be said that lugabalia sounds
Luel's-town. Lel. Itin. v. vii. p. 48. -- In Leland's Collectaniae, vol. ii. p.
19. Extract from the 14th chapter, of the 1st book of Galfridus, Qui ut
properitate regni usus est, in Aquilonari part Britanniae civitatem
aedificavit, quam de nomine ejus Caer-leil vocant. Leil alias Luel, filius
Bruti. cog. viridis scuti, condidit Caerliel.


The Romans called it Lugovallium, or Luguballum, from its situation on
Severus' wall, and from the troops and people garrisoned there. Ptolemy calls
it Leucopibi, Nennius Caer Lualid. The Saxons retained the old name Luel; the
Welsh writers give it the name of the city of Duballus. Some derive the name
from the ancient British Llu-gyda-gwal, which implies an army by the wall; from
whence it is asserted the Romans framed their appellation of Lugovallium;
others from Lagus, or Lucus, which, in the language of the Celtae and Britains,
signified a tower; and which, with the Roman compound, expressed a tower or
fort upon the wall or vallum: to the Saxon name was added, the word caer, or
city; and from these, Caer Leuel, the present name of Car-lisle, seems to come
by an easy corruption. It is reasonable to apprehend, that in so fine a
situation, on the confluence of three rivers, and the grand estuarie of the
Frith, this place was of some strength and distinction before the coming of the
Romans: it will naturally follow, that the name was given antecedent to the
building of Severus' wall, or the vallum of Hadrian; and we conceive that
Leland points out the most probable etymology. Camden and his editors have
taken great pains on this subject, The Romans and Britains called it Luguvallum
and Luguballium, or Luguballia; the Saxons, as Bede writes, Luel; Ptolemy, as
some think, Lucopibia, (which seems rather to be a corruption of (...) i. e.
white houses, and to be Candida Casa, or Whithorn in Galloway) Nemicus Caer
Lualid; the ridiculous Welsh prophecies, the city of Duballus; we Carlisle; and
the Latins, from the more modern name, Carleolum. For that Luguballia and
Carlisle are the same, is universally agreed by our historians. But as to the
etymology, what pains has our countryman, Leland, taken about it, and at last
he is driven upon this shift, that Ituna might be called Lugas, and that Ballum
came from Vallis, a valley, and so make Luguvallum, as much as a valley upon
the Luge. But to give my conjectures also, I dare affirm, that the vallum and
valia were derived from that famous military vallum of the Romans, which runs
hard by the city. For Antoninus calls Luguvallum ad vallum; and the Picts wall,
which was afterward built on the wall of Severus, is to be seen at Stanwicks,
a small village a little beyond the Eden. It passed the river over against the
castle; where, in the very channel, the remains of it, namely, great stones
appear to this day. Also, Pomponius Mela has told us, that lugus or lucus
signified a tower among the old Celtae, who spoke the same language with the
Britains; for what Antoninus calls lugo augusti, is in him turris augusti; so
that luguvallum, both really is, and signifies a tower or fort upon the wall or
vallum. Upon this foundation, if the French had made their lugdunum signify a
tower upon a hill, and their lucotetia (so the ancients called what we call
lutetia) a beautiful tower; for the words import so much in the British, they
might possibly have been more in the right, than by deriving the latter from
lutum, dirt; and the former from one Lugdus, a fabulous king. As to the present
name, Carlisle, the original of this is plain enough, from the British, caer, a
city; and Lual, Luel, Lugubal, Leil, or Luil, according to the several
appellations, ancient or modern, importing as much as the town or city of Luul,
etc. Mr. Gough's additions are, "Dr. Gale derives it from lle, an army; and
gual, the wall; as lugdunum from llu; and dun, a hill; for Tacitus says, the
Lyonnois called themselves a Roman colony, and part of the army. Lugo Augusti
in mela, is Turris Augusti. The Saxon Chronicle says, that Rufus, after placing
a garrison here, returned into the south, and sent hither Myccle (...), which
Bishop Gibson, in his edition of the Chronicle, had translated a great
multitude of English; but in his Camden, proposes reading (...), q. d.
husbandmen, as better agreeing with the tillage there mentioned, and all the
records ascribe the first improvement of the country to this colony.

In Dr. Todd's MS. we have several quotations, relative to the etymology of the
name, from Itin. Antiron. Ptolemy's Geog, Bid, etc. which are comprised in
what is set forth in the text.




It has been the opinion of several judicious visitants, that the river Eden
has shifted its course and channel since the time of the Romans, and that
formerly it passed nearer to the castle; for it should seem an inconsistent
task for that wise people, to make their work traverse a rapid and broad river,
otherwise than in a direct line. Both Mr. Horsley, and Mr. Warburton join in
this opinion.

It may safely be determined, that the Romans found this a place of some
importance; but that it was, in their time, rather a place of recess after the
toils of warfare were over, than a place of chief strength, appears from the
vicinity of Stanwix, the station in course upon the wall. It is not to be
doubted, but Caer-Luel was fortified, as it lay too near the borders not to be
subject to perils and alarms; but we have no Roman authorities, to denominate
it a regular Roman city or station; as we find those nearest to the wall, on
the south, were Olenacum, now called Old Carlifle, near Wigton; and
Bremetenracum, called old Perith. The words of Camden and his editors are, That
this city flourished in the time of the Romans, appears plainly enough from the
several evidences of antiquity, which they now and then dig up; and from the
frequent mention made of it, by the writers of those times. And even after the
ravages of the Picts and Scots, it retained something of its ancient splendour,
and was accounted a city. That it was a place of strength in the time of the
Romans, is evident; not only from the mention of it, in the accounts they took
of Britain, when they had made it a province of the empire but also from Roman
mounments, and inscriptions that have been some time dug up here; one whereof
is mentioned by Malmsbury, p. 258. to have been discovered in the time of
William Rufus.

Hector Bo^thi^s, if any credit may be given to him, relates, that Voada, Queen
of the Britons, with the assistance of one Colledus, King of the Scotts, and
Caractacus, King of the Picts, once upon a time destroyed the Roman provinces;
and that the Silures joined with them: that, in the engagement, b^^nt
Ca^lessium, the strongest city of the Britons, killing the citizens, and razing
the very foundations. That Maximius, a noble Roman, married her daughter, and
called the neighboring country, West Maria, from his own name; so that, if
this story be true, the foresaid monument may have been erected for him. -- Dr.
TODD'S MS.




We have no authority to determine what was the size or form of this place in
distant antiquity. Leland says in his Itinerary, vol. VII. p. 48. The hole site
of the town, is sore chaungid.q For whereas the streets were, and great
edifices, now be vacant and garden plottes. The cite of Cairluel stondeth in
the forest of Ynglewood. The cite is in compace scant a mile, and is walled
with a right fair and strong wall, ex lapide quadrato subrufo. In diggyng to
make new buildyngs in the town, often times has been, and now alate fownd
diverse foundations of the old cite, as pavimentes of streets, old arches of
doors, coin, stones squared, painted pottes, money hid in pottes, so hold and
mauldid, that when yt was stronly touchid yt went almost to mowlder. Page 49,
In the feldes about Caerluel, in plewhyng has be fownd diverse Cornelines, and
other stonys well entaylid for seals, and in other places of Cumberland in
plewhyng has be fownde brickes conteynyng the prints of antique works.

After the retreat of the Romans, we may naturally conceive, this city would
soon be evacuated by the Britons, and destroyed and laid waste by the northern
nations, who made constant irruptions, and at length extended their rapine and
devastation into the southern, and interior parts of Britain, till repressed by
the coming in of the Saxon allies. It would even be a considerable time after
their introduction, before they could extend their arms to these western parts.
During this period, and in the darkness in which the history of those ages is
involved, we are left to conjecture, that this now flourishing city lay in
ashes and ruin, till ******* Egfrid possessing the diadem of Northumbria,
carried his conquest to the western ocean. The Britons in this mountainous
country, long retained their natural ferocity, and supported their uncivilized
liberty and independance. Egfrid had Cumberland as a tributary province of his
kingdom; and from that period we gain some degree of certainty in the history
of this place. Bid says, that Northumberland and the Picts, Scotts, and
Britons, in the northern parts, were in perfect peace, one with another, in the
year of God 731; and that there was such respect and reverence given to
religion, that persons of the best quality desired to be admitted to the
offices of the church: but not long after this, the Britons or Cumbees, who had
been scattered in these parts ever since the recess of the Roman legions, began
to unite themselves under a government of their own, calling their province or
kingdom, Cumberland, or the land of the Cumbri. -- Dr. TODD'S MS.


The first certain account we have of Carlisle, is in the seventh century of
the Christian era. It appears, that in Egfrid's reign, it became a place of
considerable strength and consequence; he having caused it to be rebuilt, and
fortified with a wall. He is also said, "to have repaired the church, restored
divine worship, and placed in it a college of secular priests." -- GENT. MAG.
1745, p. 674.
Camden says, in 619, Egfrid, King of Northumberland, gave it to the famous St.
Cuthbert, in these words: I have likewise bestowed upon him the city called
Luguballia, with the lands fifteen miles about it, and quotes Symeon Dunelm.
This is a palpable error, for Cuthbert's consecration was in 685. The words of
Symeon are, Et quia illa terra minus sufficiens erat, Lugubaliam que Luel
vocatur, in circuita xv. miliaria habentum in augmentum suscepit; ubi etiam
sanctimonialium congregatione stabilita. Reginam dato habitu religionis
consecravit, et inprofectu divinae servitutis scolas instituit. Vide vol. II.
of Northumberland, p. 150. the grant at length, dated 685, Lel. Col. v. I. p.
369.
Bid says, the citizens carried Cuthbert to see the walls of their city, and a
well of admirable workmanship, built in it by the Romans. Several writers of
St. Cuthbert's life, tell us of that holy man's founding here, A. D. 686, a
convent of monks, a school, and an abbey of nuns; but from Bede's Life of St.
Cuthbert, cap. 27. it seems as if the monastery here, to which Queen Emenburga
retired, was in being before St. Cuthbert's coming to Carlisle.

"In the north-west corner of the Forest of Englewood, stands the ancient city
of Carlisle. It lay waste for the most part of 200 years before the Conquest,
saving a few cottages among the ruins, inhabited by Irish and Scots. After the
Danes had wasted the country with sire and sword, William Rufus returning that
way from Alnwick, when he had made peace with the King of Scotland, seeing the
place to be of strength, convenient to entertain his forces at any time,
against Scotland, commanded the same to be rectified, and to be fortified with
walls and with a castle. This was about the latter end of his reign, but he was
prevented by an untimely death, before he could perform all that which he
intended, for the good of the city: yet he placed there a colony of Dutchmen,
which were shortly thence translated into the Isle of Anglesey, by him or his
next successor, Henry Beauclerk, his brother; and instead of them, a new
regiment of southern men, of Essex, Kent, Middlesex, and other parts of the
realm, were brought to supply their place, and to inhabit the counties of
Northumberland and Westmorland, under the leading of Ranulph de Meschines,
sister's son to Hugh Lupus, or Loup, first Earl of Chester."

TANNER.


After Egfrid's having restored the city, and fortified it with a wall, it
became an appendage to the sea of Lindisfarn, by the royal gift thereof to St.
Cuthbert; and so continued till the year 1130, when King Henry I. constituted
it a separate bishopric. By Dugdales Monasticon, it appears, that in 1082, in
the acts of William Carilepho, bishop of Durham, it was styled part of the
diocese of the bishop of Durham. It is asserted, that in 1066, William the
Conqueror issued his mandate to the inhabitants of Cumberland at large, and of
Carlisle in particular, that they should continue subject to the bishop of
Durham as their diocesian, from whose predecessors they had received
Christianity.

So far we are allowed to speak of this city from the loose records of
antiquity; from the time of the Conquest we have more certainty, and evidence
of undeniable authenticity to guide us. Camden's description of the site of
Carlisle is to this purport, Between the confluence of these rivers (Peteril
and Cauda) the ancient city of Carlisle has a delightful, pleasant situation;
bounded on the north with Eden, on the east with Peteril, and on the west with
Caude; and, besides these natural fences, it is fortified with a strong stone
wall, a castle, and citadel. It is of an oblong form from west to east: to the
west is a pretty large castle, which was built by William the second, and
repaired by King Richard III. as should seem by the arms. The period of time
between the reign of Egfrid, and the coming of the Danes, affords a sufficient
number of years to support a presumption, that this place would greatly improve
in importance and power, before the progress of those ravagers; but the advance
only served to aggrandize its woe; for when those invaders had possessed
themselves of these northern parts, we find Carlisle again smoking in her
ashes: When they had laid waste Northumberland, their violence was suffered to
proceed as far as this city, and lay it in utter ruin; burning the town,
throwing down the walls, and killing man, woman, and child, the inhabitants
being then very numerous. In that state it was left for near 200 years, without
an inhabitant, but some few Irish, who lodged themselves among the ruins. The
very foundations of the city were so buried in the earth, that it is said,
large oaks grew upon them; and this is not only attested by our historians, but
also made out by some discoveries that have been lately made of large unhewn
oak trees buried 10 or 12 feet below ground; one of which was found by Mr.
Robert Jackson, Alderman, in digging for a well; which round timber, can be no
other but some of the old monumental oaks that stood upon the walls, as marks
and witnesses of their utter ruin and destruction. Bid.
Dr. TODD's MS.
and so complete was the destruction, that she lay overwhelmed in her
desolation, till the time of William the Conqueror, when one of his followers
is said to have rebuilt some parts of the city, founded, or restored the
ancient religious society there, and dedicated the house to the honor of the
Blessed Virgin, of which he became the chief: and, in consequence of these
pious works, it was, that the Conqueror issued the foregoing mandate, in which
Carlisle was particularly specified; that this body of religious should be
subject to the episcopal jurisdiction of Durham, as were the adjacent lands of
Northumberland.

King William Rufus But all the ecclesiastical buildings, with the city and
adjacent country, being laid waste in the Danish wars, the city was rebuilt and
fortified by King William Rufus; and Walter, a Norman priest, being made by
that king governor of the city, began a monastery to the honors of the blessed
Virgin Mary, which was finished and endowed by King Henry I. who placed therein
regular canons of St. Austin.

GIBSON's CAME.

Gul. Rufus, Rex Angliae. restauravit Cairleul. -- LEL. COL. vol. I. p. 158.

Ex lib. 7th Hen. Huntington. -- Cairluel civitas a Gul. Rufo rege restaurate,
et ex australibus Angl. partibus illuc habitatores transmissit, anno 3. regni
sui -- Ibid. p. 196.

Ex libro annalium Joannis Bevyr monachus Westmonaster. qui a tempore regni
Inae regis West Saxonum usq. ad annum D. 1306. multorum historias desloravit.
-- Anno D. 1091, Gul. Rufus restaurat civitatem Cairledlensem et ex australibus
Angl. partibus illuc habitatores transmisit. -- Ibid. p. 279.

Ex libro summi altaris Dunelmi. -- Gul. Rufus domum rediens, civitatem quae
Britann. Cairluel, Latin Lugubalia appellatur restauravit, et ex australibus
Angliae partibus illuc habitatores transmisit, et in ea castellum edificavit.
-- Ibid. p. 387.

Anno D. 1094, Rex Gul Rufus reaedificavit civitatem Cairleoli per annos 300
Danica desolatione desolatam. -- Ibid. p. 418.

Anno 1092, His actis, rex in Northumbriam profectus civitatem quae Britan.
Cairluel, Latin Lugubalia vocatur, restauravit, et in ca castellum
aedisicavit. Haee etenim civitas, ut illis in partibus alicae nonnullae, a
Dania Paganis ante ccos annos diruta; et usque ad id tempus mansit deserta. --
Lel. Col v. II. p. 200.

Anno 6. regni sui, Gul Rufus civitatem quae Britannice vocatur Cairleuel,
Latin Lugubalia, restauravit, et in ea castellum condidit. Lelandus. Ducentis
annis post calamitatem a Danis acceptam deserta manfit mevania quae consuete
vocatur man. -- Ibid. p. 229.

1122, Eodem anno Henricus post festum S. Mich. Northumbranas intrans regiones,
ab Eboraco, divertit versus mare occidentale, consideraturus civitatem antiquam
quae lingua Britonum Cairluil dicitur, Latin vero Lugubalia appellatur, quam
data pecunnia castello et turribus praecepit muniri. -- Ibid. p. 357.


having entertained a perfect idea of the importance of this place, on the
western part of the frontier, as he saw Newcastle was on the eastern; and
seeing the infant works of Walter proceeding prosperously, he undertook to
restore the city, and caused many public buildings to be erected; the whole of
which, he directed, should be defended by a complete circumvallation, and a
strong fortress: the care of executing his plan he consigned to Walter, and
under his inspection, it is alleged, the works were carried on. From the
appearance of several parts of the fortifications, one is led to determine,
they are the work of that era; for the Normans brought into this country, some
of the best workmen the island ever possessed, as appears by the remains of
many of the northern castles, whose dates are well ascertained: and there is so
great a similitude of the form and mode of architecture in the great tower of
the castle of Carlisle, that thence, by a common observer, its date may be
ascertained. In the sides of this tower, in several parts, are placed the arms
of England, but these seem to denote no more than the reparations made by the
several sovereigns. Particularly King Richard III.


It is said he first placed here a colony of Flemings, and most probably they
were the artificers who raised the fortifications; for soon after, we read of
the city being restored and walled, with the defense of a fortress added
thereto: we find the Flemings were removed to North Wales, and the isle of
Anglesea, and the king replaced them with a colony of South Britains, men used
to husbandry, and the culture of lands, who should till this part of the forest
of Inglewood, which hitherto had lain in its original state; and teach the
natives the mode of reaping from the natural fertility of their country, the
many comsorts of life; and the progressive treasures to be won by industry; of
which they do not, from any thing mentioned by historians, appear to have
conceived a previous idea. To this colony all the records existing attribute
the first tillage that was known in the fertile plains of Carlisle. Bishop
Gibson, in his edition of Camden, speaking of the evidence touching this matter
in the Saxon Chronicle, says, It has it (...) which at first sight should seem
to be an error for; (...): but in truth, this seems rather to be an error of
the librarian, for (...), and on that supposition the words would imply, that a
great number of husbandmen were sent thither, and not Englishmen; for, before
that time the inhabitants of Carlisle were English: and what follows in the
Saxon Chronicle, (...), strengthens the conjecture, as expressing the errand
upon which they were sent, viz. to cultivate those parts. This was deep policy
in William, as it was introducing a certain employment, which would naturally
call together many settlers; and render his kingdom less subject to annoyances
from a northern enemy, by the increase of population, and consequent strength
of the frontiers. The cultivation introduced by William, had not made so rapid
a progress in the course of seventy years, as to have cleared the neighborhood
of Carlisle of wood; for by the charter of King Henry II. the citizens had the
privilege of taking fuel, and building timber from the Royal Forest of Carlisle.

Camden says, Lugubalia now grown populous, had, as they write, its Earl, or
rather Lord Ralph Meschines, from whence descended the earls of Chester.

After the death of Richard, Earl of Chester, who was drowned with the king's
children, Ranulph Meschines removed to Chester. and was Earl thereof. Presently
after King Henry I. died, and King Stephen usurping the state, gave this county
to David, King of Scots, to procure his aid against King Henry II. right heirs
to the late king, as son to Maud the Empress, daughter and sole heir to Henry
I. But the Scots secretly favored him for his right's sake; and for that he
had made the said Henry Fitz Empress knight at Carlisle. Yet accepting the gift
of the county, whereunto he pretended his own right, before granted to his
ancestors by the Saxon kings, he made his eldest son, Henry Fitz David, Earl of
Huntington and Carlisle; which Henry founded the abbey of Holm Cultram in the
time of King Stephen, his father confirming the grant of the revenues wherewith
he endowed that house, and so his son Malcom, King of Scots, after David. After
Henry Fitz David and King Stephen were dead, King Henry Fitz Empress took
Carlisle and the county from the Scots, and granted to the city the first
liberties I hear of, that they enjoyed after the Conquest. But his charter was
burned by a casual fire that happened in the town, which defaced a great part
of the same, and all the records of antiquity of that place. -- DENTON.

The next person we read of in history, who had the title of Earl of Carlisle,
was Andrew de Harcla, whom King Edward II. for his good services against
Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, and his adherents, and for subduing those who were
CARLISLE CASTLE.

in rebellion, and delivering them prisoners to the king, created him Earl of
Carlisle. The degradation and sentence of Andrew Harcla, Earl of Carlisle, for
high treason, taken from a MS. entitled honor and arms. p. 9. vid. Stow's
Chronicle.

A. D. 1322, et reg. Edw. II. ao. 15. -- About the feast of the purification of
our Lady, Andrew de Herkeley, late made Earl of Carlisle, under color of
peace, found that he would marry Robert Bruise his sister, whereupon the king
reputed him tratour, and caused him to be taken by his trustye frinde, Sir
Antonie de Lucy, who sent him in irons strait to London, where he was judged
before Sir Antonie de Lucy in this manner: he was led to the bar as an
Earl worthily appareled, with his sword girt about him, hosed, booted, and
spurred, etc. unto whom Sir Antonie spoke in this manner: "Sir Andrew, "quoth
he, the king, for thy valiante service, has done thee great honor, and made
thee Earl of Carlisle; since which time, thoue, as a tratour to thy Lord the
King, leddest his people, that should have help him at the battle of
Beighland, away, by the country of Copland, and through the earldom of
Lancaster; by which means our Lord the King was discomfited there of the Scots,
through thy treason and falsenesse, whereas if thoue had come betimes, he
had had the victory: and this treason thou committest for the great some of
gold and silver, that thoue receavest of James Dowglasse, a Scot, the king's
enemy. Our Lord the King will, therefore, that the order of knighthoode, by
the which thou receavest all thine honor and wooreship upon thy body be brought
to naught, and thy state undoone, that other knights of lower degree may after
thee beware, and take example hereafter truly to serve." Then commanded he to
hew his spurs from his heels, then to break his sword over his headde,
which the king had given him to keep and defend his land therewith, when he
made him earl. After this he let uncloath him of his furred tabard, and of his
whoode, of his coat of arms, and also of his girdle, and when this was done,
Sir Antonie said unto him. "Andrew, quoth he, now art thou no knight, but a
knave; and for thy treason, the king will that thou shall be hanged and drawn,
and thy headde smitten offe from thy body, thy bowels taken out of thy body and
burned before thee, and thy body quartered: and thy headde being smitten offe,
afterward to be set upon London bridge, and thy four quarters shall be sent
unto four good towns of England, that all other may beware by thee." Which was
accordingly done.


From the time of his degradation, 15th King Edward III.
the title of Earl of Carlisle was never revived till the Restoration of King
Charles II. when Charles Howard, son of Sir William Howard, in the 13th year of
that reign, was created Lord Dacre of Gilsland, visc. Howard of Morpeth, and
Earl of Carlisle, in reward for his having been highly instrumental in that
happy restoration: in which honors he has been succeeded by his immediate
descendants to this time.

In the wall be iii gates, Bocher (south) gate, Caldew (west) gate, and Richard
(north) gate. The castle being within the town, is in sum part as a closer of
the wall. -- LEL. ITIN. vol. VII. page 48.

The parts of Carlisle castle are particularly mentioned in the report made of
the state of it, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, given in the notes. First,
the Dungeon Tower of the castle, which should be principal part and defense
thereof, and of the town also, on three sides is in decay, that is to say, on
the east and west sides, in length 66 feet, and on the south side, 66 feet, in
decay; and every of the same places so in decay, do contain in thickness 12
feet, and in height 50 feet: so as the same dungeon tower, is not only
unserviceable, but also in daily danger to fall, and to overthrow the rest of
the said tower.

Item, there is a breach in the wall in the outerward, which fell 12th March,
1557 containing in length 69 feet and a half; in thickness, 9 feet, and in
height, with the battlement, 18 feet, through which breach men may easily pass
and repass.

Item, the Captain's Tower, and other principal defense, wants a platform;
and the Vawmer about 44 feet, in breadth 40 feet, and in thickness 8 feet.

Item, three parts of the walls of the innerward is not vawmer: containing, in
length 344 feet, and in thickness 12 feet, and in height 3 feet, with one half
round.

Item, the castle gates are in decay, and needful to be made new.

Item, there is not in the said castle, any storehouse meet for the ordnance
and ammunition; so as the same lies in the town very dangerously for any
sudden enterprise.

Item, there is decayed the glass of two great windows; the one in the great
chamber, and the other in the hall of the said castle.

IN THE CASTLE: Sagars 2, Fawcons 4, all dismounted; Fawconets 2, whereof one
not good; one little pot gun of brass; Demi Bombarders 2, bases double and
single, 12 lacking furniture; Half Stags 39, not serviceable; Bows of Ewe,
none; arrows six score, sheafs in decay: Morrispikes 30, not good; Sagar-shot,
of iron, 58; Sagar shot, of lead, 70.

There is a breach in the town wall, betwixt the castle and Rickardgate,
containing in length 40 feet, and in height, with the battlement, 18 feet,
fallen down in such decay, that men may easily pass and repass through the
same; and at either end of the said breach, 40 feet of the same wall is in
danger of falling, and very needful to be repaired from the foundation.

Item, on the east part of the city, is 120 feet of the Vawmer in decay.

Item, there is a great part of the Vawmer of the new wall unfinished,
containing in length 400 feet, and in height 6 feet.

Item, there is in the same wall, near unto Caldergate, 36 feet in decay, and
very needful to be repaired.

Item, one half-round tower, called Springold Tower, being chief and principal
piece, and defense of two parts of the city, and helping to the castle,
unserviceable and very needful to be repaired.

Item, the vawmering of Calder tower is in decay, and it is very needful to
have a platform thereon.

Item, it is needful that Rickardgate have a new roof, and be covered with
lead, and thereupon a platform, being a meet place for service.

Item, the gates of the city, being of wood, are in decay, and one broken,
which are to be repaired with celerity.

Fawcons of brass 5, all dismounted; Fawconets of brass 4, dismounted; one
small pot gun of brass. Fawcons of iron 2, dismounted also, to serve the warden
in the field. Fowlers 2; Small Serpentine 2; Bases 2, all lacking their
furniture. Hagbuts 13, whereof 12 unserviceable; Harquebusses 30, decayed and
past service. Bows of Ewe 12, Bows of Elm 70, not serviceable; sheafs of arrows
18, in decay. Serpentine Powder one last and a half, both for the city and the
castle; being all placed in the city, because there is no ordnance house in the
castle; Corned Powder, one demi barrel and a half. Hacks and picks 52, worn and
decayed with work; shovels and spades 10 dozen; Quarrel picks 12; cart
furniture for 30 horse draught. Hemp rope 2 coil, small. Sagar-shot of iron 50;
Fawcon shot of iron 50. One Quarrel mill. Waller's hammers 40; Setting chissels
9; Hand-baskets 10 dozen; Gavelocks 5; iron 12 stone; Lantrons 20, in decay.

The great round tower, at the east end of the fort of the citadel, being paved
with stone and sand upon the lead roof, was thereby so overcharged, as that a
great part thereof is fallen to the ground, and is very needful to be repaired;
for that it is the principal of that fort, and stands upon the most danger of
the town.

Item, there be two houses within the said fort, called the Buttery and
Boulting-house, standing within the rampire wall, the roofs and timber whereof
are fallen to the ground, by means of the like being overcharged with earth, so
as the same are both unserviceable.

Item, it is needful to have a platform upon the old gate house tower, being a
requisite place of service.

Item, another platform were needful upon the half-round tower toward the town.

Item, there is the glass of a great window in the hall of the said fort
utterly decayed, by means of a great thunder and hailstones.

Sagars 2, Fawcons 4, of brass, dismounted; Double Bases 3, Single Bases 8;
Small Serpentines 2; Fowlers 2; Murderers 2, all unfurnished; Harquebusses 9,
not serviceable; Half-haggs 14, decayed and past service. Morrispicks 40 not
good. Corned powder 2 demi barrels, whereof 4 of the grained sort. Bows of Ewe
20, not good. Arrows 26 sheafs, in decay. Sagar shot, of iron, 50. -- BRIT.
MUSAE.

A whythyn a quarter of a mile of Cairluel, xx years ago, was taken up pypes
of an old cunduyte.

LEL. ITIN. vol. VII, p. 48.

A list of the men to whose custody the care of the castles in Cumberland was,
for several reigns, committed, taken from a manuscript in the Bodleian Library.

Comitatus Cumbrie et Westmorlandiae et castra in iisdem commissa. ab anno 32o.
Hen. 3^. ad 26m. Edw. 3^.

CUMBRIE.
32 H. 3. John de Baliol, T. R. apud Winds, 29 April, F. m. 7. 39 H. 3. cum
castro Karl. Rob. de Brus, T. R. apud Dunelm. 22 Aug. F. m. 2. 40 H. 3 cum
castro de Karleol, Will. de Fortibus, com. Albemarle, T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Oct.
F. m. 22. 46 H. 3. cum castro de Karl. Eustace de Baliol, T. R. apud Winds 8
Martii, F. m. 15. a o. 2 E. 1. cum castro de Karl. Rob. de Hampton, et mand'est
Ric. de Crepping, T. R. apud Westminster. 7 Oct. F. m. 6. a o. 3 E. 1. castra omnia
et d'inia regis, Ric. de Holebrok, T. R. apud Westminster. 10 Nov. F. m. 4. a o. 5.
E. 1. cum castro de Karl. John de Swinburn, T. R. apud Salop, 27. Oct. F. m. 3.
a o. 6 E. 1. cum castro de Karl. Gilb. de Corewen, T. R. apud Westminster. 25 Oct. F.
m. 2. in schedula. a o. 10 E. 1. cum castro de Karl. Will. de Boyvill, T. R.
apud Dev'nish. 14 April, F. m. 14. a o. 11 E. 1. cum castro de Karl. Rob. de
Brus, comiti. Carrul. T. R. apud Aberconey, 2 Maii, F. m. 17. a o. 23 E. 1.
castrum de Karl. Rob. de Brus, d^o vallis Anandie et mand'est Mich. de Harcla,
T. R. apud Cantuar, 6 Oct. F. m. 5. iu cedula. a o 24 E. 1. castru. de Karl.
Mich. de Harcla, T. R. apud Morpeth, 3 Sept. F. m. 4. a o 25 E. 1. castrum de
Karl. I. Karl. epo T. R. apud Westminster. 13 Oct. F. m. 4. a o. 35 E. 1. castrum de
Karl. Alex. de Bastenthwayt et mand. Will. de Mulcaster, T. R. apud Karl. 26
Martii. F. m. 6. a o. 5 E. 2. cum castro de Karl. John de Castre, et mand'est
Andr. de Harcla, T. R. apud Westminster. 15 Decm. F. m. 13. in cedula. F. dm. comitat
et castr. Andr. de Harcla, T. R. apud Ebor. 25 Jan. F. m. 8. Castrum de Karl.
John de Weston, jun. et mand' est John de Castre, T. R. apud Ebor. 11 Martii.
F. m. 5. Castrum de Karl. Petr. de Gaveston, com. Cornub. T. R. apud Ebor. 31
Martii. F. m. 5. Comitat. Cumbr. et castr. de Karl. Andr. de Harcla, T. R. apud
Winds 15 Oct. F. m. 13. in cedula. a o. 6 E. 2. castr. de Karl. Andr. de
Harcla, T. R. apud Winds 12 Martii. F. m. 6. a o. 7 E. 2. castrum de Karl. I.
Karl. epo T. R. apud Ely. 6 April. P' pte 2'da. m. 16. a o. 9 E. 2. John de
Castre et mand'est Andr. de Harcla, T. R. apud Line. 5 Feb. F. m. 10. a o. 11
E. 2. cum castro de Karl. Andr. de Harcla, et mand'est John de Castre, T. R.
apud Westminster. 8 June, F. m. 1. Castrum de Karl. Joh. de Castre et Will. Dacre, T.
R. apud Westminster. 3 Oct. F. m. 11. Comitat. Cumbr. cum castro de Karl. Anth. de
Lucy, T. R. apud North. 20 Julii, F. m. 15. Idem comitat. cum castr. Karl.
Andr. de Harcla, et mand'est T. R. apud Ebor. 1 Apr. F. m. 5. a o. 16. E. 2.
cum castro de Karl. Anth. de Lucy, et mand'est Andr. de Harcla, T. R. apud
Pontemfractum, 11 Feb. F. m. 11. Castrum et honor de Egremont, Anth. de Lucy,
et mand'est Rob. de Legburn, T. R. apud Cowyk, 10 Junii F. m. 5. Comitat.
Cumbr. Hen. de Malton, T. R. apud Ebor. 3 Julii, F. m. 2. a o. 17 E. 2. castr.
de Karl. Anth. de Lucy, T. R. apud Cowyk, 3 Julii, F. m. 28. a o. 18 E. 2. Hug.
de Louthre, et mand'est Henr. de Malton, T. R. apud Henle, 24 Martii, F. m. 5.
Rob. le Brun, et mand. est Hug. de Louthre, T. R. apud bellum towin regis 18
Apr. F. m. 4. a o. 1 E. 3. Petro Tilliol, et mand'est Rob. Brus, T. R. apud
Westminster. 4 Feb F. m. 24. Castrum de Karl. Anth. de Lucy, T. R. apud Westminster. 10
Feb. F. m. 28. a o. 2 E. 3. castrum de Karl. Anth. de Lucy, T. R. apud, Northn.
20 Maii. P. pte. 1 m. 5. a o. 4 E. 3. Rad. de Dacre, et mand'est Petro Tilliol,
T. R. apud Westminster. 5 Dec. F. m. 13. Castrum de Karl, Ranulpho de Dacre, et mand'
est Petro Tyliol. T. R. apud Westminster. 10 December. F. m. 12. a o. 10 E. 3. cum
castro de Karl. et mand'est. Ran. de Dacre, quoth comitat liberet John de Glanton,
9d castrum (c^) T. R. apud Berewyk sup Twede, 27 Jan. F. m. 22. a o. 12 E. 3.
cum castro de Karl. Rolland de Vaux, ot mand'est Ric. de Denton, T. R. apud
Westminster. 8 Feb. F. m. 34. Idem comitat. et castr. Anth. de Lucy, T. R. apud Turri
Land. 12 Maii, F. m. 25. a o. 13 E. 3. castrum de Karl. John epo Karl. et
mand'est Anth. de Lucy, I custode, apud Berkhampstede, 20 Junii, F. m. w. a o.
15 E. 3. Hug. de Morriceby, et mand'est Anth. de Lucy, T. R. apud Staunford, 15
Nov. F. m. 5. a o. 17 E. 3. castrum de Karl. John epo Karliol, et mand'est
exec. testam. Anth. de Lucy, T. R. apud Westminster. 25 Junii, F. m. 22. a o. 18. E.
3. castr. de Karl. I Karli. epo T. R. apud Turri in London. 24 Martii, F. m.
30. Comitat. Cumbriae. Hug. de Morriceby, T. R. apud Melford, 4 Nov. F. m. 11.
a o. 19 E. 3. castr. de Karl. Hug. de Morriceby, T. R. apud Turr. Land. 8 Sept.
F. m. 12. Idem castr. Thom. de Lucy, T. R. apud Westminster. 18 Oct. F. m. 10.
Comitat. Cumbriae Thom* de Lucy, T. R. apud Mortlek, 5 Nov. F. m. 6. a o. 24
Ed. 3. Ric. de Denton, et mand'est Thom. de Lucy, T. R. apud Weston, 16 April.
F. pte 1a m. 42. Ric. de Denton, T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Oct. F. pte 1a m. 14.
Castrum de Karliol, Ric. de Denton, T. R. apud Westminster. 16 April F. m. 41. a o.
25 E. 3. cum castro Karliol, Hug. de Louther, T. R. apud Westminster. 30 Nov. F. m.
11. a o. 26. E. 3. Hug. de Louthre, T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Nov. F. m. 5. Ex MS.
Bodl. No. 4197, vol. lv. p. 15.


The citadel, as it is said, was erected in the reign of King Henry VIII.; and
it is surprising that the whole castle and fortifications should so soon fall
into such decay, as to be in the state represented by that report, in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth. It appears thereby, that the works consisted of a donjon,
whose walls are twelve feet in thickness, an inward and outward ward; the walls
of the outward ward, nine feet in thickness, and eighteen feet in height; and
the walls of the inner ward, twelve feet, having a half moon bastion. A tower,
called the Captain's Tower. Two gates, one to each ward. In the castle a great
chamber and a hall, but no storehouse for ammunition. In the walls of the town,
three gate-way towers, a semicircular bastion, called Springold Tower: and add
to these, the citadel. But besides those mentioned in the report, the walls
were garnished with several square towers, particularly a tower at the western
sally port, and a tower called the Tile Tower, of particular strength.

Before we quit the subject of the castle, we must remark the beautiful and
extensive prospect which you command from the great tower. The foreground is
formed of level meads, washed by Eden; in one part, insulated by a separation
of the river. This plot is ornamented by two fine stone bridges, one of four,
the other of nine arches, the great passage toward Scotland. The hanging banks
are crowded with the village and church of Stanwix, and the distant ground
filled with the mountains of Bewcastle. To the south, you command the plains
toward Penrith, shut in on either hand by a vast chain of mountains; over
which Cross-fell and Skiddaw are distinctly seen, greatly eminent. To the east,
a varied tract of cultivated country, scattered over with villages and hamlets,
mingling beautifully with woodlands on the extensive landscape: the distant
horizon formed by the heights of Northumberland. To the west, the Frith spreads
out its The DEANEY from the CITYWALL..

S.W.VIEW of the FRATRY.

CARLISLE.

N.W.VIEW of the CATHEDRAL.

N.E.VIEW of the CASTLE.

GATE of the CASTLE.

shining expanse of waters, margined on this hand by a cultivated tract, on the
other by the Scotch coast, where Creffel, and a chain of mountains extend
toward the ocean.

The parts of the CATHEDRAL now remaining, show, that the old structure when it
was entire, was a noble and solemn edisice. The body of the cathedral church is
of an older building than the quyer; and yt is as a filial derived from St.
Oswald's fast by Pontfret. Lel. Itin. vol. VII. page. 48. -- but since his
days, it has undergone great change, as will be shown in the sequel. The
present edifice consists of the east limb of the cross, being the chancel, and
the cross aile or transept, with the tower: the greatest part of the west limb
of the cross, having been pulled down in the civil wars, 1641: with the
materials they erected a guardhouse at every gate of the city, and one in the
marketplace; and two batteries in the castle. The circular arches and massive
round columns, whose shafts are only fourteen feet two inches high, and
circumference full seven and a half, Pennant.
which remain of the west limb and transept, are of the heaviest order of the
Saxon architecture; and at the first sight, testify the different ages in which
this part and the chancel were erected: indeed the architecture denotes an
earlier era than the time of William Rufus, and probably here is a part of the
work of the age of St. Cuthbert: but there is no corroborating evidence to
attend the mode of building, which might prove so ancient a date. The west end
is said to have been, in length, 135 feet from the cross aile, of which 43 feet
remains, it being dismembered of 92 feet. It is not in our power to determine
how often this church was restored; it is evident that the Danes laid this city
in ashes, and that King William Rufus, under his trusty nominee Walter, The
Magna Bait. has it, that D. King of Scotland, built a great part of this
cathedral.
restored the city and the public buildings: but so early as the reign of King
Henry H. the city was laid waste by the Scots, and the public records were
burnt, which most probably, agreeable to the custom of those days, were
deposited in the archieves of the ecclesiastics: conceiving this to be the
fact, then we must admit of some considerable change in this sacred edifice;
for in 1292, we are told, an accidental fire consumed the church, with half of
the city, to the number of 1300 houses, as far as the north gate. In the reign
of King Edward III. it was rebuilt by contributions. The editor of Camden's
words are, Almost in the middle of the city, stands the cathedral church; the
upper part, whereof (being newer) is a curious piece of workmanship, built by
King Henry VIII. but the lower is much more ancient. -- The lower west part is
the parochial church, and as old as St. Cuthbert; or as Walter, who came in
with the Conqueror, was a commander in his army, rebuilt the city, founded a
priory, and turning religious, became, himself, the first prior of it. The
chancel was built by contributions, about the year 1350, and the belfrey was
raised, and the bells placed in it, at the charge of William de Strickland,
bishop in the year 1401. The expression used by this learned editor, is so
indefinite, that we own we are not able to determine, whether he meant to imply
that King Henry VIII, built the present chancel. By a writer in the Gentleman's
Magazine 1745, p. 674, it is said, on the 14th Richard II. near 1500 houses
were destroyed, with the cathedral, and suburbs, by an accidental fire; and he
adds, this account is taken from the Magna Britannia Antiqua et Nova. If this
account has any foundation, the last conflagration happened forty A Ground Plan
of the CATHEDRAL CHURCH of CARLISLE.

A The Bishop's Throne. B The Pulpit. C The Governor's Seat. D The Mayor's do.
E The Litany Desk. F The Reading Desks. G The Bishop's Stall. H The Dean's do.
I The Prebendaries' Stalls. K The Entrance, above which is the Organ. L The
place where the Bells are rung. M The place where the Legend of St. Anthony is
painted. N The place where the Legend of St. Augustine is painted. O The Clock.
P The Doors, the south one of which opened into the Cloisters. 1. Bishop
Strickland's Tomb. 2. Unknown, but supposed to be Bp. Welton's. 3. Unknown, but
supposed to be Bp. Appleby's. 4. Bishop Robinson's Monument. 5. Unknown. 6.
Unknown. 7. Bishop Smith's Gravestone. 8. His Lady's. 9. Bishop Law's
Monument. 10. Bishop Bell's Gravestone. 11. Bishop Barrow's Tomb. 12. Mr.
Tomlinson's Monument. 13. Mrs. Benson's Monument. 14. Mrs. Saunderson's. 15.
Rev. Mr. Thompson's. 16. Unknown. 17. Rev. Archdeacon Fleming's. 18. Bishop
Fleming's. 19. His Lady's. 20. Miss Senhouse's. 21. Mrs. Dacre's. 22. Sir Those.
Skelton's Tomb formerly was here. 23. Dean Wilson's Monument. 24. Unknown. 25.
Unknown. 26. St. Catharine's Chapel.

years after the Restoration made in the preceding reign; but it was ten years
before Bishop Strickland raised the belfrey, which would have been an useless
work, when the church was in ruins. These contradictions and ambiguities, we
are at present obliged to leave unsolved.

The choir is 137 feet in length, and, with the side ailes, 71 feet broad: the
cross aile or transept is 28 feet broad, so that the length of the church, when
entire, was exactly 300 feet within. The choir is of fine Gothic architecture,
with light columns, remarkably beautiful. The stalls are garnished with
tabernacle work; (the organ is placed at the cross screen, which contains but a
narrow and low entrance, and is a great injury to this fine edifice.) By late
repairs it is greatly embellished, being wainscotted with oak, from the stalls
round the whole east end of the choir, in a simple style, after the old order.
The open gates leading into the side ailes, are old and much broken, but show
excellent light Tracery work, finely ornamented. The bishop's throne is not
magnificent, but yet elegant and stately. The breadth of the choir and ailes
being 71 feet, corresponds well with the height, which to the center of the
ceiling is 75 feet. The roof was originally lined or vaulted with wood, painted
and ornamented with arms and devices of the several patrons and contributors to
the work; with the arms of France and England, were those of the Piercys,
Lucys, Warrens, and Mowbrays. The old wood lining remains in the cross aile,
and shows what was the former figure, and the ornaments of the choir: but the
outward roof and wood ceiling of the choir having gone greatly to decay, when
repairs were made, in 1764 the ceiling was stuccoed, in the form of a groined
vault, which is a great advantage to its appearance. The whole expense amounted
to 1300l. toward which, Dean Bolton contributed 50l.; Bishop Lyttleton 100l.
and the Countess Dowager Gower, 200l.; the rest was made up by the Dean and
Chapter.
The east window is large, being 48 feet in height, and 30 in breadth,
ornamented with fine pilasters: but it has no cast of solemnity, by means of a
border of colored glass thrown round it, of yellow, red, and green, which
looks gaudy. The official duties of marriages, christenings, churchings, and
funerals, are performed in the parish church, the ordinary duties of the
Sabbath, and prayers twice a day through the year in the choir. On the burial
of any of the members of the choir, the corpse is carried into that part of the
church. The cathedral and parish church are both under one roof. It has a
stately steeple with a ring of eight bells, which are rung on all public
occasions. The consistory or spiritual court is kept in part of the church. In
the abbey, contiguous to the church, and in which properly the church stands,
are several venerable buildings, such as the deanery, sratery, head school,
cloisters, porter's lodge, etc. -- L.




In the ailes on each side, are some strange legendary paintings of the history
of St. Anthony, St. Cuthbert, and St. Augustine: one represents the saint
visited by an unclean spirit, who tempts him in a most indecent manner. Pennant.
Above every picture is a distich relative to the subject.

To give the reader an idea of these strange compositions, we have transcribed
the legends of St. Anthony, St. Cuthbert, and St. Austine.

LEGEND OF ST. ANTHONY.
1
Of Anton story who list to here
In Egypt was he bornt as doyth aper
2
Her is he babtyd Anton they him call
great lands and renttes to him does fawl
3
As scoler to the kyrk here is he gayn
To here the sermontt and aftyr itt hes tayn
4
Here geyffith he to the kyrk boith land and rent
To leve in povert is his intent
5
Here in Agelso to oon aulde man he wentt
To learn perfeccion is his intent
6
Here makyth he breder as men of relig'
And techyth them virtue to leve in pr secco'
7
Here to the wyldernes as armet geon he
and thus temptyth him covytice with oon gold dyshie
8
The sprytt of fornycacon to hy' her does apper
and thus he chastith his body with thorn and brer
9
The devil thus hat hy' wounded with lance and staf
And levyth hy' for deyd lyyng at his cayf
10
Here Crist haith him helyd the devil he dot away
And comfortyd his confessor deyd as he lay
11
Here comands he yis bests and ffast away ya fly
Ye bor hy' obbays and with hy' bydeds he
12
Here makyth he a well and water haith uptayne
and comfortyd his breder thyrst was nere slain
13
Here comandith he best to make hy' a cayf
and thus he berys Paulyn and lay hy' ingraf
14
Thus walkid he over the slode water does hy' no der
Theodor hy' se and dar not cu' hy' nere
15
Here departith anton to hevyn his saul is gone
Betwixt his two breder in wilder's though alone
16
Here in wilderns they bery him that no man should him know
For so he commanded syne hom first ya draw
17
Thus levyth he i wilderness xxii year and more
Without any company bot the wild boore.
LEGEND OF ST. CUTHBERT.
1
Her Cuthbert was forbid layks and plays
As S Bid in his story says
2
Her the angel did him........ le........
And made his sore to........
3
Her saw he Myda....... sowl up go
to hevyn blyss with angels two
4
Her to him and his palfray
God send him fude in his jornay
5
........... Melross..............
..............................
6
The angel he did as gest refreshe
With met and drynk and his fete weshe
7
Her noble told him with he must de
and after yt he........... should be
8
Her to his breder two....... eke
he preached godys word myld and mek
9
Her stude he nakyd in ye see
to all David psalms said had he
10
He was gydyd by ye egle fre
And fed with ye delfyne as ye see
11
Fresh water god send out of ye ston
to him in farn i he for in...... on
12
Consecrate bishop yai made hy' her
off lyndisfarne both far and nere
13
Her by prayers sendys out farne glad
and with angel lads his house in......
14
To this child god grace..... he
Through his prayers...... as ye may se
15
Bishop two yerys when he had beyn
lyndisfarne he died both holy and clean
16
The crowys yt did his house unthek
is for sull law fell at his fete
17
xj year after yt beryd was he
yai fand him hole as red may ye.
LEGEND OF ST. AUSTINE.
1
Her fader and modr of sanct Austyne
First put him her to learn doctrine
2
Her taught he gramor and rethorike
Emongys all doctors non was hy' like
3
Her promysid he with his mother to abide
Bot he left her weeping and stal the tide.
(grace dedit)
4
thus taught he at rome the sevyn science
yr was great prece till his presence
5
Her preached Ambrose and often tymys previd
Quoth tra' occidr wych Austine mevid
6
Her ponciane him tald ye lysse off Sanct Anto'
And to Elypius he stonyshed said thus onone
Quoth pattimr surgu't in docti et celu' rapiu't
Et nos cu' doctrinis nostris in in ferere dem'gt
7
Her sore weeping for his great syn
He went to morn a garth with in
8
Her wepying and walyng as he lay
Suddenly a voce thus herd he say
Toll lege l'olle lege
9
No word for tothwark her might he say
But wrate to the pepil for him to pray
10
Her of Sanct Ambrose cristynid was
The great doctor Austine through Gods grace
Te deum laudamus Te deu' consitemur
11
Her deyd his mother called monica
As yai war returnyng in to Africa
12
Her was he sacred pressed and usyd
Of valery the bishop thoffe he refusyt
13
Her after......................
His....... religion as ye may see
14
Her fortunate the herityk concludit he
Informyng the lawys of maneche
15
Consecrate Bishop was this doctor
By all the cuntre with great honor
16
Es is woma' come to hy' for confolacion
She saw him with the trinite in meditacion
17
When he complyn had said and come to luke
he was full eleyn out of is knafys buke
Penitet me tibi ostendisse librum.
18
They beried his body with deligence
her in his auyn kyrk of Yponece
19
Her lied-brand the king of Luberdy
him translate fro sardyne to Pavye
20
They shrynyd his banes solemnly
In sanct Peter kyrk thus at Pavye
21
This prior he bad soon do evynsang her
And helyd him that was sek three yer
22
Her be aperyd unto these men three
And bad yam go to........ yt hale.

Legend of St. Anthony.



Legend of St. Austin.



The cross aile from north to south, is 124 feet; in the center is a tower, in
height 127 feet, which originally supported a spire of lead, thirteen or
fourteen feet high, which being gone greatly to decay, was totally removed soon
after the Restoration.

The pillars of the choir are clustered, and in excellent proportion; the
arches are pointed; in the inner mouldings of the capitals, are figures and
flowers in pierced work, of light carving, and the inside of the arches are
prettily ornamented. Two galleries run above the side ailes, but with windows
only in the upper: that in the east end has a magnificent simplicity.

When the choir was rebuilt in the reign of King Edward III. indulgences were
issued, the common and most effectual claim of assistance; which were of forty
days penance to such laity, as should, by money, materials, or labor,
contribute to this pious work: and the bishop's register abounds with letters
patent, and orders for the purpose.

At the west end of the church, is a large plain altar tomb, called the Blue
stone; This blue stone, at the north end of the transept, is the tomb of Prior
Simon Senhouse.
on this the tenants of the dean and chapter, by certain tenures, were obliged
to pay their rents. -- PENNANT.

Several parts of the abbey were enlarged or improved by Prior Gondibour, who
occurs in 1484; the initial letters of his name appearing in several parts. In
the vestry is preserved an old oak aumery or chest, with an inscription in the
old English letter. -- See the Plate, p. 598.

Prior Senhouse, who occurs in 1507, repaired the square tower within this
priory; and on the beams of the middle room are inscribed many sentences, with
a moral maxim often used by him, Loath to offend. He was an extraordinary
character for meekness in disposition. -- In old deeds and other writings, he
styled himself "Simon, by the patience of God, prior," etc. -- He caused to be
painted the lives of St. Anthony and others, in the isles of the Cathedral, and
likewise the ceiling of the square tower in the priory; from which are copied
the following rude verses.

Simon Senus prior whose fowll God have mercy
Soli Dei honor et Gloria Deo Gracian
Remember man ye great pre-emynence
Geven unto ye by God omnipotente
Between ye and angels is lytill difference
And all thing erthly to the obediente
By the bird and beist under ye fyrmament
Bay what excuse may thou lay or find
Thus you art maid by God so excellent
Butte that you aughtestte again to hy' be kind
Simon Senus setto yis Roof and Sealope here
To the intent within this place they shall have prayers every day in the year
Lose Good and thy prince and you neydis no^ dreid thy enimys.



Prior Slay built the west gate house, and in a fillet round the arch, in the
side toward the court, in an excellent character of raised letters is cut,
Grate pro anima Existopheri Slay Prioris, qui primus hoc opus fieri incipit, A.
D. 1528.

The door with its ornaments, on the south side of the choir, near the bishop's
throne; and also the throne was the work of Prior Haythwaite, about the year
1480, his name having been on the backside of it: and the opposite door with
its ornaments, is supposed to have been erected by Prior Senhouse, about the
year 1500, by the sentence inscribed thereon, "Vulnera quinque dei sint
medicina mei," which was that prior's common adage. The tabernacle work in the
quire was done at the expense of Bishop Strickland, who came to the sea, A. D.
1400.

There were two chapels, and two chantries, founded within this church; the
chapel of St. Catharine was founded by John de Capella, a citizen of Carlisle,
which he endowed with certain burgage houses, some lands and rents. In 1366,
there being an unjust detention of the rights of this chapel, Bishop Appleby
gave notice for restitution in ten days, under pain of excommunication by bell,
book, and candle. This chapel was on the south side of the church.

The chapel of St. Alban in 1356, was on inquiry, found not to have been
consecrated, and thenceforth divine offices and sepulture were prohibited to be
longer performed therein: this appears by an entry in Bishop Welton's register.
On the dissolution, King Edward VI. granted the lands and tenements
appertaining to this chantry, unto Thomas Dalston and William Denton.

Bishop Whelpdale founded a chantry, and endowed it with 200l. for holy
offices, for the souls of Sir Thomas Skeleton, Knt. and Mr. John Glaston.

There was a chantry of the holy cross, but who was the founder, and when it
was endowed, is not known; King Edward VI. granted the lands and tenements
thereto belonging, in Carlisle and Kirklinton, to Hen. Tanner and Tho. Bucher.
For the other religious foundations, the reader is referred to the Eccl.
Survey, 26th K. Hen. VIII.


In the middle of the choir, is a monument of Bishop Bell, with his effigies in
his pontificals in brass; and an inscription on a marginal fillet of brass. --
See the plate. -- He departed this life, A. D. 1496. Bishop William Barrow was
buried in St. Catharine's chapel; he died at Rose Castle, A. D. 1429. Bishop
John Best was also buried here; he departed this life, A. D. 1560. Bishop Henry
Robinson was also buried in this church. There is this remarkable entry in the
parish register of Dalston, that he died at Rose Castle, on the 19th day of
June, 1616, about three o'clock in the afternoon, and was buried in this
cathedral, the same evening about eleven o'clock. In taking down the old
hangings and ornaments of the high altar to make the late repairs, at the north
corner was discovered, a brass plate finely engraven, which had been put up to
his memory. The bishop is there represented in his pontisicals, kneeling before
one church in ruins, and another lately or newly erected: upon the former is
inscribed, Invenit destructum, reliquit extructum et instructum: on the latter,
Intravit per ostium, per mansit fidelis, recessit beatus. The devices on the
plate are whimsical and grotesque.

Under the engraving, Henrico Robinsono Carleolensi S. S. Theol. Doctori,
collegii reginae Oxoniae praeposito providissimo, tandemq. hujus Ecclesiae per
annos 18. Episcopo vigilantissimo. 13 Calend Julii, anno apartu virginis, 1616,
aetat suae 64 pie in Domino obdormienti.

Bernardus Robinsonus frater ac haeres hoc qualecunq. MNHMEION, amoris
testimonium collocavit. "Non sibi, sed Patriae, praeluxit Lampadis instar,
"Deperdens oleam, non operam, Ille suam:
"In minimis fide Servo, majoribus apto,
"Maxima nunc Domini gaudia adire dutur." The original was put up in the chapel
of Queen's College, in gratitude for his great benefactions to that society:
this copy was placed here by his brother. -- The date of the epitaph varies
from the register which we have examined, we think the register the most
authentic. -- THE EDITORS.



Bishop Richard Senhouse was interred here. -- He died, A. D. 1626, by a fall
from his horse.

Bishop Thomas Smith died at Rose-Castle, and was interred in this church: the
following inscription is upon his tomb: -- D. S.
Thomas Smith, S T. P.
Hujus Ecclesiae primum Canonicus,
Dein Decanus, tandemq. Episcopus,
Placide hic in Domino requiescit
Vixit Annos LXXXVII.
Obiit duodecimo die Aprilis
Anno Christi
MDCCII.


Sir George Fleming, bishop of this diocese, died at Rose-Castle, 1747, and was
interred in the south aile. Here is deposited till a general Resurrection
whatever was mortal of
The Right Reverend Father in God
Sir George Fleming Baronet late Lord Bishop of Carlisle
whose regretted dissolution was July 2. 1747.



In a letter from Mr. G. Smith, in the Gentleman's Magazine, 1749, we have an
account of part of a monumental inscription, found below the bishop's throne.
In a succeeding number of the magazine, two readings are given of this
inscription: the first, Hic jacet Eva quonda uxor Willi fill Rogeri: this is
subscribed with the signature of Z, etc.

The second is marked with the known signature of that learned antiquary, Mr.
Pegg; Hic jacet Ema quonda uxor Williclmi filii Rogerii.


(...)

There is no attempt to explain what person was here interred; it is possible
the tomb was made antecedent to the building of the throne.

The whole of this noble edifice is of red freestone, ornamented with pilasters
and pointed arches. There have been some statues on the eastern turrets, but
they are mutilated, and gone greatly to decay.

No circumstances are come to our knowledge, touching the religious foundations
here, before, or in the time of St. Cuthbert, other than the mention made of
them by ancient writers; probably they did exist as several persons speaking of
St. Cuthbert's life, tell us he founded, A. D. 686, a convent of monks, a
school, and an abbey of nuns: but from Bede's Life of that saint, chap. xvii.
it appears the nunnery here, to which Queen Emenburga retired, was existing
before St. Cuthbert's visiting Carlisle. Mr. Denton's account of these
religious foundations is to the following effect: --

When the city was replenished with people, for to maintain better policy in
the same; and to inform the people, instead of a nunnery which had been there
before, and which William Rufus had translated thence, and established at
Ainstaplighe; or rather in recompense for the lands to that nunnery belonging,
had In the 81st year of his Age, and the 13th of his Consecration.
A Prelate
who by gradual and well merited Advancements
having passed through every Dignity to the Episcopal
supported that
with an amiable Assemblage of Graces and Virtues:
which eminently formed in his Character
The courteous Gentleman and the Pious Christian;
and rendered him a shining Ornament
to his Species, his Nation, his Order.
His Deportment
in all human Relations and Positions
was squared by the Rules of Morality and Religion,
under the constant Direction of a consummate Prudence;
whilst his Equanimity
amidst all Events and Occurrences
in an inviolable Adherence to the golden Medium
made him easy to himself and agreeable to others,
and had its Reward
In a cheerful Life, a serene old Age, a composed Death.
His excellent Pattern
Was a continual Lesson of Goodness and Wisdom,
and remains in his ever reverable Memory
an illustrious Object of Praise and Imitation.
founded another at Ainstaplighe, endowing the same with other revenues there.
King Henry I. founded a college of secular priests in the second year of his
reign, and made Athwald his confessor or chaplain, (prior of St. Botophs) first
prior of Carlisle, dedicating the church to the honor of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, and endowed them with the tithes of the churches then founded in the
Forest of Englewood; but being hindered by the tumults and troubles of his time,
he could not perfect all things before the 33d year of his reign, and then
stricken with grief for the loss of his children, that were drowned coming from
Normandy, by the counsel of the Prior Athelwold; and to appease God for his
sins, as he thought, he erected a bishop's see at Carlisle, and made the said
Athelwald, first bishop thereof, whom the Archbishop of York named Thurstan,
did consecrate in the year 1133: and in his stead, another chaplain of the said
King Henry, named Walter, was made the second prior of that house, who, a
little before his election, had taken upon him, by the king's license, a
religious habit, viz. of a regular canon there, which order of canons the king
and bishop Athelwold had placed in that house, banishing the secular priests
immediately upon his consecration. The said Walter gave to the church of
Carlisle for ever in pure alms, his lands in Lynstock, Richardby, Crosby,
Little Crosby, Walby, Brunskeugh, Carleton, Little Carleton, and the wood; and
the churches or rectories of St. Cuthbert in Carlisle and Staynwings, which the
king had given him; and the same gift was confirmed unto them both by the king
and bishop Athelwold.

The rectory of St. Cuthbert's in Carlisle, was founded by the former
inhabitants of Carlisle before the Danes overthrew the city, and by them
dedicated to the honor of St. Cuthbert of Duresm, who of ancient times was
lord of the same for fifteen miles about Carlisle. At the first foundation of
the church every citizen offered a piece of money, which was a coin of brass
then current, which they buried under the foundation of the church steeple
there as was found to be true at the late re-edifying of St. Cuthbert's
steeple, A. D. ****, for when they took up the foundation of the old steeple,
they found well near a bushel of that money.

After the said priors, Athelwold and Walter, succeeded John, who gave
Watercroft in Flimby, to the Lord of Workington, son of Gospatrick; and after
John, Bartholomew, who, in the time of Bishop Hugh, confirmed Orton in
Westmorland to the prior of Coneyshead. After him Radulph was prior, who
confirmed the impropriation of the rectory of Burgh to the abbey of Holm
Cultram, in the time of Walter, bishop of Carlisle. -- After Radulph these were
priors successively: Robert Morvill, Adam Felton, Alanus, Galfridus, John de
Horncastle, John de Penrith, William Dalston, Robert Edenhall, Thomas Hoton,
Thomas Barnaby, Thomas Hathwaite, Thomas Gudybour, Simon Senhouse, Christopher
Slay, Lancelot Salkeld, last prior and first dean.

After King Henry VIII. had changed the priory into a deanery and cathedral
church of a new foundation, The new foundation charter is dated 8th May, 1542,
33d King Henry VIII.
at the suppression of abbeys, adding thereunto, for their better maintenance
the revenues of the dissolved priory of Wetheral, a cell of St. Mary's abbey
York, dedicating the church to the honor of the holy and and indivisible
Trinity. After Salkeld succeeded in the deanery as follows: -- 1 Lancelot
Salkeld last prior and first dean. L. Salkeld was deprived on King Edward's
accession to the throne, and was succeeded by Smith. When Edward died, and Mary
came to the crown, Salkeld was restored, 1553: but he was a second time
deprived, A. D. 1559, and again succeeded by Smith, who held it to his death,
1577.
2 Sir Thomas Smith, A. D. 1547, died 12 Aug. 1571. 3 Sir John Wooley, Knt.
inst. 11 Octr. 1577, died 1595. 4 Christopher Perkins, inst. 1596, died 1622.
-- So far DENTON. 5 Francis White, inst. 1622, made bishop of Carlisle, 1626. 6
William Paterson, inst. 1626, made dean of Exeter, 1629. 7 Thomas Comber, inst.
1630, died 1653. 8 Guy Carleton, inst. 1660, made bishop of Bristol, 1671. 9
Thomas Smith, inst. 1671, made bishop of Carlisle, 1684. 10 Thomas Musgrave,
This Thomas Musgrave was fifth son of Sir Philip Musgrave of Hartley, cast.
com. Westminster Bart. He first married Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Harrison of
Allerthorpe, com. ebor. Knt. -- His second wife was Ann, daughter of Sir Robert
Cradock of Richmond, com. ebor. Kut.
inst. 1684, died 1686. 11 William Graham, inst. 1686, made dean of Wells,
1704. 12 Francis Atterbury, inst. 1704, made dean of C. C. Oxon, 1711. 13
George Smalridge, inst. 1711, made dean C. C. Oxon, 1713, 14 Thomas Gibbon,
inst. 1713, died 1716. 15 Thomas Tullie, inst. 1716 died 1726. 16 George
Fleming, inst. 1727, made bishop of Carlisle, 1734. 17 Robert Bolton, inst.
1734, died 1764. 18 Charles Tarrent, D. D. inst. 1764, made Dean of
Peterborough. 19 Thomas Wilson, D. D. inst. 1764, died 1778, 20 Thomas Percy,
D. D. inst. 1778, made Bishop of Dromore, 1782. 21 Jeffrey Ekins, D. D. inst.
1782, died, 1792. 22 Isaac Milner, D. D. inst. 1792.


The priory wanted not for relics of saints, for Waldeive the son of
Gospatrick, Earl of Dunbar, brought from Jerusalem and Constantinople, a bone
of St. Paul, and another of St. John Baptist, two stones of Christ's sepulcher,
and part of the holy cross, which he gave to the priory, together with a
mansion near St. Cuthbert's church, where, at that time, stood an ancient
building, called Arthur's chamber, taken to be part of the mansion house of
King Arthur, the son of Uter Pendragon of memorable note, for his worthiness in
the time of ancient Kings. Waldeive also gave other ancient buildings, called
Lions Yards, often remembered in the history of Arthur, written by a monk; the
ruins whereof are still to be seen, as it is thought at Ravenglass, distant
from Carlisle, according to that author, fifty miles, placed near the sea; and,
not without reason, thought therefore to be the same, -- DENTON's MS.

Mr. Denton's account of the money found in rebuilding the sleeple of St.
Cuthbert's church, is rendered uncertain by some late discoveries; and it is
most probable it was a concealed treasure, intended to be secured against the
Danes, or some other ravagers: for when the foundations were making for the
present new edifice, and the workmen had gone below the foundations of the old
church, they discovered the remains of a still more ancient erection, and took
up several pieces of broken sculpture; among the rest the figure of a nun with
her veil or hood, well cut and in good preservation, which we saw in the garden
of George Mounsey, Esquire. of Carlisle; so that it should seem the old nunnery
stood there. This sculpture is now lost. -- In Mr. Mounsey's, and other gardens
adjoining, many foundations of houses, fragments of pottery, quantities of
oak-wood, human bones, etc. have been dug up at various times. This ground is
upon the east side of English street, and called the Grey-Friars; and up the
west side, adjoining the walls, from St. Cuthbert's church to the jail, is
called the Black-Friars; and similar things have been dug up here also: a few
years ago, in making a drain from a house here toward the walls, the top of an
arch was discerned; some of the stones being removed, we discovered a spacious
arched room, one side of which rested upon the walls, in height 15 feet, in
breadth 12 feet, and in length about 30 feet; the end was narrower and lower,
and supposed to have been connected with other similar rooms, but the
partitions built up. There were four funnels went upright to the foot-path of
the walls, but covered at the top with slags, and iron grates in the funnels.
On the opposite side, between two of the arches, a horizontal funnel, about two
feet wide and three feet high, went toward the city: this was searched a
considerable way, till the person was entangled with rubbish which choked it
up: beneath this passage, the floor was flagged and walled in about 18 inches
high on each side, and a conduit went through the city walls on the opposite
side of the vault; this was opened by removing the earth on the out side, about
four feet deep, and let out a great quantity of water which was lodged in the
vault. Proceeding to remove the wet rubbish which was collected, the workmen
were interrupted by the gunner of the castle, who assumed a higher power than
Mr. Mead, the store keeper, at whose instance the search was making; and the
place was immediately shut up and never since opened. We have accurate drawings
and measurements, which we have deferred laying before the public till a full
investigation of this mysterious place be made: we are confident there are many
other such kind of vaults in the neighborhood.

THE EDITORS.
It seems that Walter's foundation was entirely a new one, and not a revival of
St. Cuthbert's institution; for, in Tanner we find Here was a house of Gray, or
Franciscan friars, Lel. Itin. vol. VII. p. 48. and in the catalogue of the
friars of this order, under the custody of Newcastle.
before A. D. 1390; Dodsworth MS. Coll. in Bibl. Bodl. vol. XCIX. p. 40.
and also a house of Black friars, Lel. Itin. vol. VII. p. 48.
founded here 53d Henry III. Mon. Angl. I. 654. -- TANNER'S NOTES.


Walter, the Norman, laid the foundation of the priory, which he dedicated to
the Blessed Virgin: it is said he became the head of the society which he had
instituted; but authors of great authenticity, speak of his work as being
incomplete at the time of his death; and that King Henry I. in the second year
of his reign, took it under his patronage, finished it, and endowed it, A. D.
1101, and therein placed regular canons of the order of St. Augustine,
appointing Athelwald his confessor and chaplain the first prior.
Notwithstanding Denton's account, we are convinced there was a succession of
thirty priors after Athelwald, before the time of the dissolution. Athelwald
afterward being made bishop of this diocese, was succeeded in the priory by
Walter, another chaplain of the kings', who had taken upon him the regular
habit; and being a rigorous disciplinarian, he banished all the secular priests
from that religious house. PRIORS.
1 Athelwald made first bishop of the sea. 2. Walter -- he gave to this house
his lands in Lynstock, Richardby, Crosby, Little Crosby, Walby, Brunskew,
Carleton, and the wood; and the churches and rectories of St. Cuthbert in
Carlisle and Stainwiggs, which he had of the king's gift. They were afterward
confirmed. 3. John -- 4. Bartholomew. -- He and the convent confirmed the
appropriation of the church of Orton, in Westmorland, to the priory of
Conished. 5. Ralph. -- He and the convent confirmed the appropriation of the
church of Burgh upon Sands to the abbey of Holm Cultram. 6. Robert de Morvill.
7. Adam de Helton. 8. Allan. 9. John Halton -- consecrated bishop, 1292. 10.
John de Kendal. 11. Robert. 12. Adam de Warthwic. -- He was in contention with
the bishop, and in 1300 at his visitation, articles were exhibited against him.
Warthwic being old and infirm, resigned in 1304, with a pension of 20 marks,
issuing out of Langwathby tithes. 13. William de Hautwyssel -- resigned after
four years. 14. Robert de Helperton -- continued prior about 17 years. 15.
Simon de Hautwyssel. 16. William de Hastworth, 1325. 17. John de Kirby. 18.
Galfrid Prior. 19. John de Horncastle, 1352. -- In his time inquiry was made by
the bishop of the convent's appropriate churches; and certified them
accordingly. The convent had four visitations whilst this prior presided. A. D.
1376, he resigned by reason of age and infirmities. 20. Richard de Ridale. --
This prior had leave of absence, the bishop nominating a guardian during the
interval. 21. John de Penrith, contentious and discordant. -- A. D. 1381, he
resigned. 22. William de Dalston. -- He was notorious for refusing to swear
canonical obedience to the bishop, on account of the priory being of royal
foundation; and being excommunicated by the bishop for the contempt, he
appealed to the temporal court. The royal mandate issued to stay these
proceedings, and in order to get quit of so contentious a prior, he was
preferred, and the whole abated. 23. Robert de Edenhall, 1386. 24. Thomas de
Heton. 25. Thomas Elye. -- He built New Layth's Grainge, near Carlisle. -- His
name is inscribed on the edifice, and remains legible. 26. Thomas Barnaby,
1433. 27. Thomas de Haithwaite. 28. Thomas Gondibour. -- He was a great
benefactor to the priory, and enlarged and improved the buildings about the
abbey. 29. Simon Senhouse. -- He was of the house of Seascales, and occurs
prior in 1507. 30. Christopher Slay, A. D. 1532. -- He resigned with a pension
of 25l. per ann. being old and infirm. 31. Lancelot Salkeld the last prior. --
He surrendered the priory to the king, 9th Jan. 1538.

The original possessions of this priory were very considerable; but the
foundation of the sea succeeding so immediately almost to that of the priory,
there is no possibility of distinguishing them at this time. King Henry I. when
he had The priory seems to have been restored before the placing of the
bishopric here, in A. D. 1133, for William, Bishop of Winchester, who is a
witness to a grant of King Henry I. to the canons here (as in Mon. Angl. v. 11,
-- 73. died A. D. 1128.) Fordon in Scotich. edit. Henrne, p. 862. says this
bishopric was not erected till the time of King Henry II. and that, till then,
it was part of the diocese of Glasgow; but this is not the only mistake he has
made in his account of our English affairs.

Lel. Itin. v. vii. p. 48. The priory of Toberelory, in the county of Down in
Ireland, was a cell to this house, as Dugd. Bar. 1. 451.


established the bishop's see here, made this church a cathedral: but it is
observable, this was the only Episcopal chapter in England of the order of St.
Austin. The revenues of the bishopric were valued, 26th King Hen. VIII. at
577l. in the whole, and 531l. 4s. 11d. clear. The priory was dissolved, Jan.
9th, A. D. 1540, by K. Hen. VIII. who shortly after, founded here, a dean, 4
canons or prebendaries, 8 minor canous, a sub deacon, 4 lay-clerks or singing
men, a master of grammar, 6 choiresters, a master of the choiresters, 6
almsmen, 1 verger, 2 sextons, etc. and granted them the site of the priory, and
the greatest part of the revenues of it. In this new foundation, the church is
called, The Church of the holy and undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

Vide in Mon. Angl. tom. ii. p. 73, 74, 75, duas chartas Hen. II. pro ceclesii,
de novo castello, Niweburna, Wercheorda, Colebrugge, Wittengeham et Rodeberia.
Aliam chartam donationes recit. et confirm cartam Edw. I. de advoe. Eccle. de
Soureby: cartam Edw. II. donationem Joan. de Curceio recitantem et confirmantem.

In cl. Rymeri Conventionum, etc. vol. vii. p. 104.

In Prynne's Papal Usurpations, vol. iii. p. 39. pat. 1. Hen. III. m. 3. dorso.
-- Ibid, p. 409, de decimis Forestae de Inglewood, ex plac. parl. 18th Edw. I.
n. 34. -- Ibid, 673, claus 24th Edw. I. m. 4. de venatione in dicta Foresta. --
Ibid, p. 1192, pat. 35, Edw. I. m. 17. de advoc. Eccle. de Somerby.

In Godwini libro de praesulibus Angliae, p. 2. p. 143, Episcoporum
Carleolensium catalogum, etc.

In Willis' Survey of Cathedral Churches, vol. i. p. 284, an account of the
building of the church, and the endowment of the bishopric, dean and chapter;
a catalogue of the bishops, deans, and prebends.

In his History of Abbeys, vol. i. p. 229, the names of the priors.

In le Neves Fasti, p. 332, etc. an account of the bishops, deans, archdeacons,
and prebendaries.

The year books, 1st Edw. III. fol. 166.

Notitiam Ecclesiae Conventualis, S. Mariae de Carliol, per Hugonem Todd, S. T.
P. et hujus Ecclesiae Canonicum MS.

Seriem priorum Carliolensium etc. in volum nic Collectaniorum meorum notat, J.
T. p. 686.

De antiquis libertatibus, possessionibus, etc. Episcopatus et prioratus
Carliolensis.

Fin. 2d Hen. 3. m. 9. pro ten. manner. de Salghill; -- Claus. 3d Hen. 3. m. 11.
pat. 7. Hen. 3. m. 2. pro advoc. Eccle. de Pemed. -- Fin. 11th Hen. 3. m. 6.
claus. 12. Hen. 3. m. 14. cart. 14. Hen. 3. m. 4. pro Soka de Horncastle, Vide
Camden's Brit. p. 478. edit. 1695.
pro feriis apud Horncastle (Linc.) et Meleburn (Derb.) -- Ibid, m. 7. de
reddit in Salkeld. -- Ibid, m. 10. pro Dalston. -- Ibid, m. 11. de Horncastro.
-- Cart. 15. Perhaps this should be Cart. 18. Edw. 1. n. 54.
Hen. 3: m. 7. -- Cart. 19. Hen. 3. m. 3. -- Cart. 22. Hen. 3. m. 2. -- Cart.
36. Hen. 3. m. 11. -- Cart. 53. Hen. 3. m. 7. -- Cart. 55. Hen. 3. m. 9. et 10.

Pat. 3. Edw. 1 m. 26. et 32. Plac. in com. Cumbr. 6. Edw. 1. rot. 1. de
commune pastur in Seburham: Rot. 3. pro viii. bovatis terrae in Blencairn: Pat.
10 Edw. 1. m. le priori et Eccle. Carliol. Amerciandis D. marc. eo quod
elegerunt epise. fine licent regis. -- Cart. 18. Edw. 1. n. 26, 27. pro
confirm. composit. inter episc. et prior et conv. super divisione terrarum
ecclesiarum nemorum, etc. ad eccle. Carliol spectantium. -- Ibid, n. 39. pro
lib. war. in Dalston et Linstock (Cumb.) Fintenmie (Westminster.) Horncastle (Line.)
-- Ibid, n. 40. pro ecclesia de Rothbury. -- Ibid, m. 54. pro eccle. de
Werkworth, Colebrugge, Wittingham, Rodeburia, de novo castro super Tynam et de
Newburn. Pat. 20 Edw. 1. m. de aquaducta ad molendinum suum juxta castrum de
Roos. -- Cart. 20 Edw. 1. m. 66 pro stauro sedi episcopali relinquendo, seil
libros in Theologia et jure canonico, civ. boves xvi afros etc. Cart. 22 Edw.
1. n. 34. pro terris in suburbiis Carliol et Dalston. Pat. 22 Edw. 1. m. pro
libertat. in Foresta de Inglewood. -- Pat. 23 Edw. 1. m. -- Pat. 21 Edw. 1. p.
2. m. -- Pat. 29 Edw. 1. m. pro appropriat eccl de Dalston -- Pat. 31. Edw. 1.
m. pro ecclesiis de Rothbury et S. Mariae Carliol appropriandis. -- Pat. 32
Edw. 1. m. -- Pat 33. Edw. 1. m. -- Pat. 35. Edw. 1. m. -- Cart. 35. Edw. 1. n.
44 et 35.

Pat. 1. Edw. 2. m. 22. pro ecclesia de Braumura. -- Pat 2. Edw. 2. p. 2. m. 3.
pro eccle de Sourby approprianda. -- Pat. 5. Edw. 2. p. 1. m. 22. vol. 23. --
Pat. 7. Edw. 2 m. 4. pro eccl. de Rothbury approprianda. -- Cart. 8. Edw. 2 n.
25. -- Pat. 8. Edw. 2. p. 1. m. 17. de eccle. de Horncaster cum capella
approprianda. -- Cart. 11. Edw. 2. n. 74 et 76. pro de afforrestatione manner et
bosci de Dalston et aliis libertatibus. -- Cart. 12. Edw. 2. n. 17. pro
libertatibus apud Horncastle. -- Pat. 12. Edw. 2. p. 1. m. 18. vel. 19. -- Pat.
15. Edw. 2. p. 1. m. 25. confirm. excantb. decimarum inter episcopum et priorem.

Escaet. 3. Edw. 3. n. 34. -- Claus. 3. Edw. 3. m. 12 et 22. -- Claus. 4. Edw.
3. m. 31. petit parl. 4. Edw. 3. m. 19. n. 68. 89. Rec. in Scacc. Trin. rot.
pat. 5. Edw. 3. p. 1. m. 8 et 9. pro confirmatione-libertatum amplissimar et
decimarum de terris assertis in Foresta de Inglewood. -- Claus. 5. Edw. 3. p.
1. m. 57. -- Claus. 6. Edw. 3. m. -- Cart. 6. Edw. 3. n. 30. pro eccl. de
Aldingham cum capella de Salkeld approprianda. -- Claus. 7. Edw. 3. p. 2. m. 6.
de decimis extra parochial in Foresta de Inglewood. -- Cart. 7. Edw. 3. n. 29.
-- Pat. 8. Edw. 3. p. 1. m. pro eccl. de Routhbiry. -- Ibid, p. 2. m. 17. vel.
18. pro eccl. de (...) Rec. in Scacc. 8. Edw. 3. mic. -- Cart. 9. Edw. 3. n.
29. pro D...... terris in regno Scotiae episcopus concessis. -- Pat. 9. Edw. 3.
p. 1. m. 18. vel. 19. -- Pat. 10. Edw. 3. p. 1. m. 26. vel. 27. quod episc.
possit kernellare mansum suum de la Ros. -- Pat. 15. Edw. 3. p. 1. m. 48. --
Cart. 19 Edw. 3. n. 3. -- Pat. 20. Edw. 3. p. 2. m. 3. vel. 4. -- Pat. 29. Edw.
3. p. 2. m. pro kernellando manso de la Rose. -- Rec. in Scacc. 29. Edw. 3.
Pasc. et Trin. rot. -- Pat. 31. Edw. 3. p. 3. m. 8. vel. 9. pro clargatione
parci de........ Pat. 39. Edw. 3. p. 1. m. 13. pro. ten. in Carliol, Caldicote,
Carleton, Burstaw, etc -- Pat. 44. Edw. 3. p. m. 21. pro ten. in Huntercomb.

Pat. 4. Rich. 2. p. 1. m. 8. pro eccle. de Routhbiry approprianda. -- Pat. 11.
Rich. 2. p. 2. m. 34. Pat. 20. Rich. 2. p. 1. m. quod tenentes episcopatus per
quinque annos pro focali et haybote possint in Foresta de Inglewood succidere
merciam, ruscariam et juncos. -- Pat. 22. Rich. 2. p. 1. m. 36.

Pat. 4. Hen. 4. p. 1. m. 7. pro eccl. de Horncastle approprianda. -- Pat. 5.
Hen. 4. p. 1. m. 8. de hospitio episc. extra banam novi Templi London.

Pat. 16. Hen. 6. p. 2. m. 14. de ecclesia de Kirkland. approprianda. -- Pat.
21. Hen. 6. p. 2. m. 23. pro ecclesiis de Caldbeck et Rothbury (north)
appropriandis. -- Cart. 25, etc. Hen. 6. n. 18. pro bonis felonum, etc. -- Rec.
in Seacc. 26. Hen. 6. Hill. rot. 5 -- Pat. 27. Hen. 6. p. 1. m. 9.

Pat. 7. Edw. 4. p. 1. m. 11. -- Pat. 8. Edw. 4. p. 1. m. 22. pro ten. et eccl.
St. Andraae et commun pastur in Thuresby. -- Escheat 16. Edw. 4. n. -- Pat. 17.
Edw. 4. p. 1. m. 16. pro hospitali S. Nicolai.

Pat. 33. Hen. 8. p. 9. (6 Maii) pro dotatione decani et capituli Karliol.

Pat. 4. et 5. Phil. et Mary, p. 13. (7. Mart.) pro advocatione quatuor
prebend. in eccl. Cath. -- Pat. 5. et 6. Phil. et Mar. p. 4. (14 Nov.) pro
advoc ecclesiarum. -- TANNER's NOT. p. 73, 74, 75.


The property of the prior and bishop were so blended and mingled, that several
contentions and disputes arose, touching them; till Gallo the Pope's legate, at
their mutual petition, made partition of their lands. The castle of Linstock,
in the parish of Stanwix, the capital house of the barony of that name, was for
a long series of years, the only palace of the bishops of Carlisle; and in
1293. Johannes Romanus, Archbishop of York, was entertained there, whilst he
visited this diocese. The priory was dissolved 9th of Jan. 1540, and the
revenues were then valued at 418l. 3s. 4d. ob. 9. according to Dugdale; and
481l. 8s. 1d. Speed. There were cloisters appertaining to this religious house,
and also a chapter house, which the dissolute mob, under Cromwell, destroyed:
part of the seats, or stalls, of the cloister remain.

THE EPISCOPAL SEE OFCARLISLE Carlisle Monasterium Canonicorum dedicat. B.
Mariae.

Walterus Presbyter Normannus, Quem Rex W. Rufus praefecerat urbi Carleolensi
caepit inchoare monasterium in honorem. B. Mariae quo in ipso principio morte
sublato, Hen. I. rex praedictum monasterium prefecit canonicosque regulares
introduxit, deditque monasterio 6 ecclesias, viz. Newcastle, Newburn,
Warkeware, Robern, Wickingham, et Corbridge fecitu; Adelwaldum confessorem suum
primum priorem.

Carlisle Episcopatus et Ecclesia Cath.

Hen. primus rex in episcopalem sedem evexit et Adelwaldum confessorem priore
in primum episcopum fecit ann. 1133. 34 Hen. I. tuncque consecratus eboraci. --
LEL. COL. vol. I. p. 121.

Anno 33. reg. sui Henricus fecit novum episcopatum apud Carluel. -- Ibid. p.
197.

Anno D. 1132 et reg. Henr. I. 22. facta est nova seeds episcop. apud Caerluil
cui designatus est episcopus Ethelwolphus prior St. Ofwald. -- Ibid. p. 419.

Anno MCXXX. Fecit rex novum episcopatum apud Caerluil, et dedit illud Aiulpho
priori S. Oswaldi. (regis xxx.) -- Ibid. vol. II. p. 203.

The Possessions granted to this Church were many: --
The churches of Newcastle upon Tyne and Newburn, Wertheord, Coleburge,
Wittingham, and Rothbury, given by K. Hen. I. also a fishery in Eden, and a
mill. The King of Scotland gave lands in Hathelwisel. Waldieve, son of
Gospatrick -- The church of Espatric, with a carucate of land there. -- A house
in Carlisle. -- The church of Crosby, with a carucate of land there, with all
tithes belonging to that church as far as Alne Water. -- The chapel of St.
Nicholas upon the sea, with its lands, etc. Alan, son of Waldieve. -- Little
Crosby -- The church, and a sixth part of the town of Yreby. Waldieve, son of
Alan. -- Great Crosby. Ranulph de Lyndesey. -- Lands in Arthureth and Lorton,
with a mill. Gospatric, son of Orm -- The church of Cauldebeck, with the
hospital -- Lands nigh Flemingby. Radulph Engaine. -- All Hemyeby with the
mill. William Engaine. -- Four saltworks between Brugh and Drumbogh -- Land in
Scadbotes -- A house in Carlisle. Hugh de Morvil. -- 32 acres in Mebrune, with
the meadow at the head of the corn-land, with the crops and common of pasture.
John Morvil. -- Lands in Crekestot and Tympaurin. Uchtred, and Adam his heir.
-- Lands called Fithvemie. Ranulph, son of Walter. -- Lands in Stainton and two
houses. Theobald de Dacre. -- Lands in Tympaurin. Gilbert Aclugh. -- Lands in
Tympaurin and Carlisle. Halth de Malchael and Eva his wife. -- Lands in
Crackenthorp. Humphrey Malchael. -- Third of the church of Lowther. Adam
Aculgh. -- Lands in Tympaurin. Robert de Vaulo. -- Lands in Hottone, the church
there and common of pasture. William, Dean of Carlisle. -- House and lands at
Carlisle. Adam, son of Uchtred. -- Lands in Tallentyre. K. Hen. III. -- The
manor of Dalston, with the advowson of the church; and that the bishops,
priors, and canons, shall have thol and theme, infangthief and utfangthief; and
that they, and all their men, shall be free from passage, pontage, lestage,
stallage, carriage, works of castles, houses, walls, ditches, bridges,
pavements, ponds, enclosures of parks, and all other works; suits of shires,
wapentacks, hundreds, tythings, aids of sheriffs, view of frankpledge, fines,
amerciaments, juries and assizes, to have the goods of felons and fugitives,
amerciaments, and forfeitures. K. Edw. III. -- All tithes issuing out of Assart
lands in the forest of Inglewood. -- The church of Adyngham, with the chapel of
Salkeld, and the church of Sourby, in consequence of the burning of their
houses and churches, and other depredations committed by the Scots.
DECANATUS KARLIOL.
P. Nich. val. K. Edw. II. K. Hen. VIII. Portio prioris Karliol in ecclesia Bea
Mariae. 20 0 0 5 0 0 Portio epi eadem 9 9 0 3 0 0 Episcopatus Karliol valet in
spiritual et temporal p. ann. clare L 531 4 11 h Prioratus beat Mariae Karl.
valet clare p. ann. spirit. et temporal 418 3 43 f Cantaria sci Roche in eccl.
parochial beat Mariae Karl. 2 14 0 Cantaria sci Crucis in eccl. parochial
predict. 3 19 0 Cantaria sci Katharine virginis in eccl. paroch. predict. 3 2 8
Cantaria sci Albani infra civitat Karl. 2 10 4 Prioratus beat Mariae Magdel.
de Lanercost valet in spirit. et temp. 77 11 11 Summa totalis decan. Karl. L
740 2 4 30 10 0 1187 13 5 hr

P. Nich, val

Taxatio bonorum temporalium dni Karl. et religios omnium ejusdem facto anno
dni MCC et nonag. secunda, per magistros petrum de insula archidiac: Exon. et
Adamu de Aston rectorem eccles. de Beckenham, gerentes in hac part Ebor.
Dunelm. et dicti Karl. dioc. vices venerab. patrum dominorum J. dei gratia
Wynton et O. Lincoln eporum executor negotii terrae sanctae a sede apostolica
deputator quoad decimam duo E. illustri regi angl. in subsidium terrae sanctae
concessam.

K. Edw. II.

P. Nich. val.
Epus Karl. habet L 126 7 7 Abbas de Heppe habet 46 13 4 Priorissa de
Ermyngthwait 10 0 0 Prior de Lanercost habet 74 12 6 h Prior de Wederhale habet
52 17 6 Abbas de Holm Cultram habet 206 5 10 Prior Karl. habet 96 19 0 Summa
totalis bonorum temp. 613 15 9 h Sum. tot. om. bon. spirit. et temp. 3171 5 7 h
K. Edw. II.
Temp. epi Carl. 20 0 0 Temp. ab. de H. 2 0 0 Pr. de Er non taxantur quia sunt
destructa. De Lanercost non tax. prop. eadem causam. Prioris de Wederhall 4 0 0
Abb. de Holme 40 0 0 Pr. Karl. 20 0 0 86 0 0 480 19 0

SP'UAL P'TINENT DICT. EP'OPAT.
L s. d. Ep'opatus Karliol. -- Johes Kyte ep'us ejusd'm epo'patus h'et Rectoria
de Dalston que valet p. am. coibus annis in prec. granor. decimal agn. et lan.
deo. cu. vitul. deo. 30 13 0 Idem ep'us h'et gran. deo. de Stane Wykys
Com'sdaile et Brownelston q. val. coibs annis. 0 40 0 Idem ep'us habet gran.
deo. de Lynstoke, Richardby, et Bankende infra pochia. de Stane Wykys predict.
q. valent communibus ais. 6 10 0 Idem ep'us habet grana et fen. decimal pochie
de Aspatryke que val. coibus annis 23 11 8 Idem ep'us h'et gran. decimal pochie
de Crosby que valet. communibs. annis 4 13 4 Idem ep'us hab't Rectoria de
Penrethe que valt. communibs annis 33 6 8 Idem ep'us h'et Rectoriam de Newton
que valet communibs annis 6 13 4 Idem ep'us habet in pensionibus communibs.
annis infra epopat. predict. 15 9 4 Idem ep'us h'et in senagijs ibm coibs annis
9 13 0 Idem ep'us hab't in proficuis et feod. p'bacom testamentor, et figillor.
infra dioc. su. coibs ais. 6 0 0 Idem ep'us habet in vacaciorbs. ecclesia.
communibs. annis 0 40 0 Idem ep'us hab't in visitacionibs, de triennio in
trienniu xl. q. valt. p. an 13 6 8 Idem ep'us habet dimid. decim. novi castri
infra com. Northumbr. q. valet p. ann. coibus annis 10 10 0 Idem ep'us habet
Rectoria de Warkeworthe in com. Northumbr. q. valet coibus annis 47 3 4 Idem
episcopus habet Rector. de Newborn in com. Northumbr. predict q. valt. coibus
ais. 22 19 4 Idem ep'us habet p. pencion exeunt Abbathie de Tynemouthe in com.
p'dict coibus annis 0 6 8 Idem ep'us habet Rectoria de Horncastre cio. inj.
capella eia. annexis in com. Lincoln. que valet communibs. annis 28 6 8 Idem
ep'us habet Rectoria de Melbone et Chaleston in com. Darbie que val. p. ann. 45
0 0 Sm Sp'ual. 308 3 0 Temporal et tinet dict. ep'opat. Idem ep'us habet Domino
de Dalston infra com. Cumbo. q. valet. p. anno. 65 11 3 Idem ep'us habet unu
Molendinu granaticu ibm que valet communibs. annis 8 0 0 Idem ep'us h'et
p'quisita certar curia. ibm que valet communibs. annis 0 20 0 Idem ep'us h'et
in Relevijs ibm coibs annis 0 14 4 Idem ep'us habet in terr. Dm'cal p'tin man.
ij S. de Roos que valet p. ann. 28 16 0 Idem ep'us habet Dominico de Lynstoke
et Crosby in D'co com. Cumbo. que valt. p. anno. 17 4 7 Idem episcopus habet
unu. Molendinu. ibm. que valet coibs annis 0 40 0 Idem ep'us h'et in p'quisita
cert. Cur. ibm communibs. annis 0 5 0 Idem episcopus h'et certas terr. et ten.
in Aspatrik que valet p. ann. 5 13 0 Idem ep'us habet certas terr. in Penrethe
que valet p. ann. 7 3 6 Idem ep'us habet certas terr. in Peteelwray in com.
Cumbr. p'dict q. val. p. ann. 0 3 4 Idem ep'us habet manerio de Bewleyen in
com. Westm'land que val. p. ann. 8 16 0 Idem ep'us h'et div'sas terr. et ten.
in Colly, in com. Westm'land p'dict que valt. p. ais. 3 3 0 Idem ep'us habet
unu ten. in Haltewresselle in com. Northumbrie q. val. p. ann 0 4 0 Idem ep'us
habet Dominiu. de Horncastre in com. Lincoln que valet p. ann. 100 0 23 h Idem
ep'us h'et in p'sicuis p'quisita cur. ibm. que valet coibs annis 3 19 0 Idem
ep'us habet dico'sas terr. et Redd. in com. Myddellsex ext. Temple Bar,
London vocat Karlelle rent que valet p. ann. 16 4 0 Sm temporal, L 268 17 11 h
Sm tot. valoris t'm. sp'ual q'm. tem. 577 0 11 h de quibs Resolut. reddit. et
Pent. In redditu resolut, dno regi p. quad'm feod firm. exeunt de p'des man'io
de Roos et p'ke annuatim 0 56 10 Et in quad'm pension solut. priori. Karlij pro
ukmenby annuatim solut. 0 2 6 Et in cons. pension solut. epo Dunelm. p.
Newcasteel et Warkworth annuatim 20 0 0 Solucoes ffeod. -- Et in resolut nyos
decan. p. leviacoe senag. et pens. et alljs dict epo'pat p'tin viz. Henri VII.
Colyer cap. nus. Leonardus Langholm, cap. nuf. Thomas Ellerton, cap. nus. et
Leonardus Lowther, cap. nus. in feod. annuatim ejusdem solut. canr cr. no^ deb.
ex. Et in feodo solut annuatim Henr. comiti Cumbr. Generali Senescallo terr. 0
40 0 Et in feod. annuatim solut. Henr. comiti Cumbr. constabul. castri de Roos
cancel q. no' deb. ex Et in feod. annuatim solut. Johi Barnefield
subsenescallo cur. 0 53 4 Et in feod. Cristofer Denton ball. de Roos annuatim
solut. 0 40 0 Et in feod. Georgio Bewlye clev. recepto firm, terr. p'dict
solut. ann. tim. 0 53 4 Et in feod. Joh'm Heton ball. apud Penrethe annuat
solut. 0 6 8 Et in feod. Thome Glevok ball. apud calleo gayte solut. annuatim 0
2 0 Et in feod. Will'mo Nycholson ball. de Lynstok, annuat. solut. 0 10 0 Et in
feod. Will'mo Caldebek ballio de Aspatryk annuat. folut. 0 6 8 Et in feod.
annuatim solut. dno Hassey gen'ali senescallo apud Hornecastre 6 13 4 Et in
feod. annuatim solut. Thome Nayller ball. ibidem apud Horncastre p'd't 0 53 4
Et in feod. ann. tim. solut. Richardo Veins subballico ibm. 0 26 8 Resolut.
peno Rector de Melborne com. Darbie Et in pension resolut. priori et conventu
de Breden exeunt Rector de Melborne in com. Darbie annuatim solut. 0 31 4 Sm
oim deduct. p'dcas L 45 16 0 Et rem. 531 4 11 h P'ORATUS B'TE MARIE KARLIOL
INFRA DECANATUS KARLIJ.
Spual p'tinent dict p'orat. Crist. Slay prior ejusdem p'orat h'et Rectoria
p'ochie Sancte Marie Karlij que valet p. annu. coibs annis in garbis et fen.
decial circa Karlioln. 13 0 8 Idem p'or habet decias garbar et feni foresti de
Inglewod eid. Rector p'tinet q. val. coibs annis 14 0 0 Idem p'ior habet decias
garbar et feni foreste de Westwarde eid. Rector p'tinent q. vals. coibs ais. 4
0 0 Idem prior habet decias ageistament de Plumpton eid. Rector p'tinent que
valet coibus ais 3 6 0 Idem p'or habet et ageistament de Westward eid. Rector
p'tinent que valet coibs annis 0 13 4 Idem prior h'et decias lani et agnor.
totius p'ochie p'dict que valet coibs annis 12 13 4 Idem prior habet et as albe
et pullor. apium lini et Canobi cu. aliis minut. decis et oblaconibus dict.
Rector p'tinent que valent coibus annis 15 0 0 Idem prior habet Rector p'ochie
Sancti Cuthberti Karlii que vals. coibus ais. in garbis et sen. decial in
p'cell. 16 0 0 Idem prior h'et in garbis et feni decial villar. de Carleton,
Botchartby, et Briscoe q. vals. coibs ais. 4 6 8 Idem prior habet decias garbar
et feni de Blackhaull et Blakehallwod q. val. coibs ais. 0 40 0 Idem prior
habet decial lani et agnor tocius p'ochie p'dee q. valet coibus annis 0 32 0
Idem p'or habet et as Lini albe pullor. ap'n et Canobi cu. aliis minut. decis
et oblaconibs dict. Rector p'tinentibus que valent coibus ais. 11 6 8 Idem p'or
habet rectoria p'ochial de Hayton que valet communibs. annis 3 2 0 Idem p'or
habet rectoria ecclie. de Cumrew que valet communibs annis 3 2 0 Idem prior
habet rectoria ecclie p'ochial de Cumgwhitton que valet p. ann. 4 6 8 Idem
prior habet rectoria de Roclyf que val. communibs annis. 3 13 4 Idem prior
habet rectoria ecclie p'ochial de Crosby-Cannoby que valet coibs annis 13 6 8
Idem prior habet rectoria ecclie. p'ochial de Ireby que val. p. ann. 15 7 8
Idem prior habet rectoria de Sebergham q. val. p. ann. 9 10 0 Idem prior habet
firm. ecclie p'ochial de Camerton, que val. p, ann. 8 0 0 Idem p'or habet
rectoria de Kyrkland que val. communibs annis 21 0 0 Idem p'or habet decias
garbar. de Edynhall et Dolphonby que val. coibs annis 3 6 8 Idem p'or h'et
grana. decial de Langwathby que val. coibs annis 9 0 0 Idem prior habet
rectoria de Bastenthwait que val. p. ann. 11 0 0 Idem p'or habet rectoria de
Sourbye que valet p. ann. 16 0 0 Idem prior habet rectoria de Adyngham que
valet. coibs annis 13 10 0 Idem prior habet rectoria de Thurysbye que valet.
coibs annis 6 13 4 Idem prior habet gran. decial villar de Cargo, Staynton,
Howghton, et Terryby, q. val. per ann. 7 3 4 Idem prior habet in pension
ecclie. p'ochial de Wygton annuatim 6 0 0 Idem prior habet in pension ecclie.
p'ochial de Ucmanby annuatim 0 2 6 Idem prior habet in pension ecclie.
parochial de Lowthie annuatim 0 26 8 Idem prior habet in pension ecclie.
p'ochial de Castlecarrock annuatim 0 2 0 Idem prior habet in oblaco'ibus oblat.
in trunco b'te Marie Karlij que val coibs annis 7 2 0 Idem prior habet in
oblacoibs. oblat. eustodis relig'ar. et fab'ce fi'l'r. per estimacoes coibs
ais. 15 0 0 Idem prior habet grana. decial medietat. p'ochie Sancti Nicholai
novi castri sup. Tyna que val communibs. annis. 10 10 0 Idem prior habet grana.
deciat totius p'ochie de Whityngham in com. Northumbr. que val. coibs ais. 24 0
0 Idem prior habet grana. decial totius p'ochie de Corkbridge in dict. com. que
valet. coibs annis. 24 18 8 Sm Sp'ual. L332 5 10 Temporalia p'tinet. dict.
p'orat. Idem prior habet sitam suu. unacu. Gardinis et cimitarijs infra
p'cintro ejusdem p'orat. quar. gardinar. due dimittunt. ad firma. et red p.
ann. 0 4 0 Idem prior habet grangia. de Newbigginge cu. 40 acris terr. arrabil
40 acris p'ti. toti. them acris pastur. in parco eid'm adjacen. in manibs.
ejusdem p'oratus q. valet. p. ann. coibus annis. 5 10 0 Idem prior habet
grangia. de Herribye una cu. 40 acris terr. arrabil, 24 acris p'ti., 52 acris
pastur. in manibus ejusdem prioratus q. valet. coibus annis. 5 0 0 Idem prior
habet grangia. de Newlathes una cu. 42 acris terr. arrabilis, 16 acris p'ti. 32
acris pastur. in manibus ejusdem p'oratus que valt. communibs. annis. 4 0 0
Idem prior habet terr. et tenementa in Carlton cu. molendinu ejusdem que valt.
coibus ais. 22 14 10h Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in magna et p'va Briscoe
in conv. Cumbr. q. valent annu. 11 10 11 Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in
Petrellwray q. valent. p. ann. 8 15 6 Idem prior habet unu. molendinu.
granaticu. subter Muros civitat Karlii que val. coibs ais. 5 6 8 Idem prior
habet unu. molendinu. granaticu. p'pe man'iu. et grang. pe Herribye q. val.
coibs ais. 0 26 8 Idem prior habet certas terr. et ten. in Blenkayrne in com.
p'dco. que val. annuatim 0 49 4 Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in Skaylinge que
valent. annuatim 0 33 4 Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in Little Salkeld que
valent p. ann. 4 0 0 Idem prior habet terras et ten. in Edynhalle et
Langwathbye que valet. p. ann. 0 14 8 Idem prior habet terras et ten. in Derem
q. valent annuatim 0 28 0 Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in Seton que valent
annuatim 0 20 0 Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in Brayton que valent annuatim 0
26 8 Idem prior habet terr. et tenementa in Isakby que valent. ann. 0 2 0 Idem
prior habet terr. et ten. in Talentyre que valent. annuatim 0 2 0 Idem prior
habet terr. et ten. in Newbye sup. Moram que valent p. ann. 0 30 0 Idem prior
habet terr. et ten. in Brownelston que valent annuatim 0 20 0 Idem prior habet
terr. et ten. in Lorton que valent annuatim 5 2 4 Idem prior habet terr. et
ten. in Allerthwayte que valent p. annu. 4 14 0 Idem prior habet terr. et ten.
in Saburgh'm q. valent p. ann. 5 16 2 Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in
Langholme que valent annuatim 5 19 6 Idem prior habet terr. et ten. Facen. in
com. Westm'land in div'ut villis viz. Staynton, Moderbye, Guypes, et
Crosbygarret que valent p. annu. 0 32 5 h Idem prior habet terr. et ten. infra
civitatem Karlij et subter muros ejusd'm situat. et jacen. que valent annuatim
10 0 0 Idem prior habet terr. et tenementa jacen. in Caldecootes et
Caldcootbank, Werye Holme coteris q. in locis p'pe civitatem p'dict. que valent
annuatim 10 0 0 Idem prior habet diversos reddit sive firma jacen. in div'sis
Hamlett in Westm'land, Cumbreland et Gylleysland que valent annuatim 4 11 0
Idem prior habet terr. et ten. in Crosby-Cannonby que valent p. ann. 5 2 4 Idem
prior habet terr. et ten. infra dominiu. de Sowerby que valent annuatim 0 5 0
Idem prior habet terr. et ten. jacen. in comitatu. Northumbrie vis in
Novocastro sup. Tynham Corribrig. et Haltwissle que valent. p. ann. 8 19 8 Idem
prior habet in ffynii et p'quisit. curiar. suar. annuatim 0 40 0 Sm temporal L
150 2 3 Sm tot. valoris t'm sp'ual q'm temporal 482 8 1 de quibs. Resolut.
Reddit. In redditu resolut. d'no regi p. terr. et ten. in Langholme annuatim
solut. 0 20 0 Et in confimili redditu. solut. dicto. d'no reg. p. le strande
annuatim 0 0 2 Et in cons. solut. d'co d'no regi. p. terr. et ten. nostris in
Saburgh'm annuat. 0 17 8 Et in cons. solut. d'co d'no regi p. ten. nostro in
quo manet Nicholaus Smalhorne annuatim 0 0 20 Et solut. d'no de Uldaille p.
terr nostris in Bagray annuatim 0 12 0 Et solut. Thome Blan'hasset p. Penyfeld
annuatim 0 3 0 Et solut. domino regi. p. le King rig. juxta Swinsley annuatim 0
6 0 Et solut. domino de Sowreby p. ten. ib'm annuatim 0 6 8 Et solut. epifcopo
Karlij p. terr. in Brownelstayne annuatim 0 8 4 Et solut. Abbati de Holme
Colt'm p. le Deipdrawght annuatim 0 2 0 Et solut. d'no de Kyrkbryde p. terr. in
Dokuray annuatim 0 4 0 Et solut. d'no de Musgrayff p. terr. in Crosbygarret
annuatim 0 4 0 Et solut. d'co d'no de Musgraiff p. terr. in Grype annuatim 0 4
0 Et solut. d'no de Newbye sup. moram annu. trio. 0 10 0 Et solut. p. le
Mylnholme annuatim 0 6 8 Et solut. comiti. Northw'br. p. terr. et tenement. in
villa et territoria de Corkbrig annu. jacen. in Northw'bria 0 4 7 Et solut.
p'ori Sanct. Bege p. quod'm ten. infra Karl'm annuatim 0 2 0 Et in cons. solut.
d'no regi p. quad'm in clausura vocat raper lees am. 0 5 4 Et solut. cioibs.
Karlij p. novo redditu annuatim 0 5 0 Et solut. heredibs. Thome Blan'hasset
annuatim 0 0 12 Et solut. custodibs. luminis Sancte Marie eccle. Sancti
Cuthberti per composic'oem ann. can. q. ut sup. Et solut. heredibs. Thome Colte
annuatim 0 6 8 Et solut. heredibs. Henrici Tanterelle et Rob'rti Sparcy
annuatim 0 0 4 Et solut. presbitero cantarie Sancte Katherine infra ecc'tiam
p'ochialem Sancte Marie Karlij p quod'm ten. annuatim 0 6 0 Et solut. comiti.
Northu'brie p. tenement in Caldbek annuatim 0 0 6 Et solut. ep'o Karlij p.
terr. in Comersdaile annuatim 0 2 0 Et solut. domino de Sourbye p. terr. ib'm
annuatim 0 5 0 Et solut. d'no regi p. diversas liberis firmis jacen. in parvis
hamlett annuatim 0 16 4 Et solut. ep'o Karlij p. terr. et tenement. quond'm
Joh'es de capella annuatim 0 17 11 h Et solut. eidem ep'o p. ten. in Caldogayte
annuatim 0 2 2 h Et solut. dict. d'no regi p. terr. et ten. quond'm Gylbert.
Growte annuatim 0 26 7 h Et solut. Johanni Coldaile p. Sprye, Flat, Knockdon,
Wald, et aliis minut. redd. ann. 0 0 10 Et solut. p. le Courtehouse Garthe
annuatim 0 0 8 Et solut. cioibs. Karlij pro tribus tenement. et p'pe Fossam
castri annuatim 0 0 18 Et solut. ciobs. p'dict. p. div'sas tenement. jacen. in
le Market. sede annuatim 0 5 8 Et solut. heredibs. Thome Blan'hasset p. qd'
ten. p'pe Fossam castri Karlij annuatim 0 4 3 Et solut. heredibs. Joh'is
Boosted de Penrethe p. le bear place annuatim 0 3 0 Et solut. heredibs. Thome
Beachamp p. quod'm ten. annuatim 0 0 18 Pensiones annuat. solvend. In pension.
solut. vicario de Edynhall per composicion. annuatim 0 53 4 Et solut. ep'o
Dunelmien p. pensionibs. eccliar. in North'bria annuatim 28 0 0 Et solut.
vicario de Adingh'm per composicionem annuatim 0 13 4 Et solut. vicario de
Kyrkland per composicionem annuatim 0 6 8 Solucoes fact. p. curis ordinarijs.
In solut. d'no ep'o Carlij p. subsidio ecclie. cathedralis Karlij p'dict in
quolibs. tertio anno solvend. et nu'c in tribus equis porconibs dividet. unde
annuatim. 0 2 4 Et solut. d'co d'no episcopo p. subsidijs cccliar. de Sowrebye
et Adyngh'm, Sil'r in tercio 8s. 8d. quolibs. anno solvend. et dividend. ut
sup. unde. annuatim 0 2 103 f Et solut. eld'm episcopo p. subsidio ecclie.
Sancti Cuthberti ut 8s. sup. in Was consimiles parts divsi. unde annuatim sol.
0 2 8 Et solut p. senagio ejusdem ecclie. annuatim folvend. 0 4 0 Elemosina per
ordinacoes five ffnnda'coes dat. annuatim. In elemosina per ordina'coes Henrici
regis p'mi fundator n'ri et Matildis regine dat. annuat. p aibs. ipsor. et
successor suor. 3 0 2 Et solut. p. ordina'coem bone memory Will'mi Strykland
Karlij e'pi dat. in elemosina p. solemp'm obitu p. ipso annuatim celehrato 0 20
0 Et in elemosina p. ordina'coes dict. Will'mi imp'pm observand. dat. p'sbiter.
celebrantibs. p. anima ipsius annuatim 0 30 6 canc. p'dict. causa. Et in
elemosina p. ordina'coes bone memory Marmaduci Lumleye Karlij e'pi dat. annu.
p. lumine quodo de cera continue accenso coram venerabilissimo sacr'ment in
ecclia. nostra eucaristie et imp'pm. duratur. 0 40 0 Et in elemosina p.
ordina'coes bone memory Gylberti Wylton Karlij epifcopi pro solemp'm obitu p.
eo celebrat. et prisbitis celebrantibs. p. co annuatim canc. causa. p'dict. Et
in elemosina p. ordina'coes Edwardi nuper regis uytl dat. tribs. bidelles
annuat. q'olibs. capient per septimanam ixd. sic in toto. 5 17 0 Et in
elemosina p. ordina'coes dict. d'ni regis dat. p'obitis celebrantibs p. anima
ipsius et Elisabethe consort. sue et aiabus omi. successor. suor. annuatim
canc. causa. p'dict. Et in elemosina p. ordina'coes domini Gilberti Ogle d'ni
Ogle dat. annuat. p. obitu p. eo celebrand. canc. causa. p'dict. Feodo annuat.
solvend. In feodo solut. Johanni Thomson gen'all n'ro ballivo annuatim 3 6 8 In
feodo solut. Nicholas Scot balliu villar. de Carlton Brysco et Petelwray
annuatim 0 40 0 In feodo solut. Henr. comiti Cumbr. gen'ali senescallo n'ro
annuatim 0 26 8 In feodo solut. receptor. sp'ualiu gen'ali infra p'ochiam S'cte
Marie Karlij annuatim 0 26 8 In feodo Rico' Baruys senescallo n'ro in div'sis
curijs infra comitat. Cumbr. annuatim 0 26 8 Sm o'im deduct p'dear. L 64 4 8 f
Et rem. 418 3 43 f Xma. inde 41 16 4 f

Cantaria S'ce Roche in Ecclie. p'ochial B'te Marie Karlij infra Decanat.
p'dict.
Willielm. Myers cli'cus cantarista ejusd'm habet unu. ten. jacen. in via
Ryeharby insra civitatem Karlij in tenura Willmi Calvert. que valet. p. annu. 0
12 0 Idem Will'mus habet unu. ten. in via Bochardi infra p'dict civitatem in
tenura Ri'ci Blan'hasset q. val. p. ann. 0 13 0 Idem Will'mus habet unu. ten.
infra p'dict. civitate in tenura Nicholaij Goldsmythe cli'ci q. val. p. ann. 0
15 0 Idem Wilhelmus habet unu. ten. in via piscator infra dict. civitatem in
tenura Edwardi Calvert q. val. p annu. 0 10 0 Idem Will'mus habet unu. ten. in
Fynklestreete infra dict. civitat. q. val. p. ann. 0 4 0 Idem Will'mus habet
unu. ten infra civitat. p'd'eam in tenura Joh'is Leighe que val. p. ann. 0 0 10
Sm L 0 54 10 de quibs Resolut. reddit. In redditu. resolut. priori Karlij
annuatim 0 0 10 Et rem. 54s. -- Xma inde 5s. 4d. 3 f ex. Cantaria Sancti Cruc.
in Ecclia. p'ochial Sancte m' Karlij infra Decanat, p'dict.
Robertus don Clericus cantarista ejusd'm habet quoa. tenement. certis terris
in Kyekelyston in Cowpland que valent communibs annis. 0 53 0 Idem Robertus
habet cert. terr. jacen. in Uprightby Field juxta Karliol que val. p. ann. 0 6
0 Idem Robertus habet cert. terr. et tenement. jacent. et infra civitatem
Karlij in qu'd Venella vocat. Frankyshvenelle que valent. coibus annis. 0 20 0
Sm 79s. -- Xma inde 7s. 10d. 3 f ex. Cantaria.
Thomas Lamson habet unu. ten. in via Abbathie infra civitatem Karlij tenura
Joh'is Kyrkeland que valet. p. annu. 0 4 0 Idem Thomas habet certas terr. in
via castri infra ejusdem civitate q. val. p. ann. 0 10 0 Idem Thomas habet de
domo in tenura Johis Barnefield in via castri p. manu. p'or Karlij p. ann. 0 6
0 Idem Thomas habet tres ten. sup. Baxter Raw que valt. p. ann. 0 22 0 Idem
Thomas habet unu. ten. infra ejusdem civitatem in tenura Edwardi Musgrave
milit. p. ann. 0 13 4 Idem Thomas habet unu. ten. in tenura Thome Sowrell infra
dict. civitat. que valt. p. ann. 0 4 0 Idem Thomas habet unu. ten. in tenura
Joh'is Barber q. valet. p. annu. 0 3 4 Sm valor. 62s. 8d. -- Xma inde 6s. 3d. f
Cantaria S'ci Albini infra civitatem Karlij.
Hugo Barker cli'cus cantarista ejusdem habet unu. terr. in tenura Joh'is
Thomson jacen. infra civitatem que val coibus annis. 0 13 4 Idem Hugo habet
unu. ten in tenura Rob'ti Monk jac. infra dict. civitatem que valet. coibus
annis. 0 10 0 Idem Hugo habet unu. ten. in tenura Joh'is Rich'rdson que valet.
communibs. annis. 0 4 0 Idem Hugo habet unu. ten. in tenura Joh'is Donkep infra
ejusd'm civitatem jacen. que valt. p. annu. 0 3 0 Idem Hugo habet unu.
tenement. in tenura Henrici Wilson que valt. communibs annis. 0 2 0 Idem Hugo
habet unu. ten. jacen. infra ejusdem civitatem in tenura Henrici Nanson. q.
val. coibs annis 0 10 0 Idem Hugo habet unu. ten. jac. ib'm in tenura Thome
Falder q. val. coibus annis. 0 8 0 Idem Hugo habet unu ten. jacen. ib'm in
tenura Leonardi Banes que val. p. annu. 0 2 0 Sm tot. valoris L 0 52 4 de
quibs. Reddit. resolut. -- In redditu. resolut. civibus civitat. Karlij
annuatim 0 2 0 Et rem. L 0 50 4 -- Xma. 5a. halsp. ECCLE. SURVEY, 26th K. Henry
VIII.



was instituted and founded by King Henry I. in the year 1133, two and thirty
years after the foundation of the priory. By the gift of Egfrid, Carlisle
became a member of the sea of Lindisfarne, and followed the translation of that
bishopric to Chester, and finally to Durham. The cause alleged for
dismembering Carlisle, and constituting there a separate see, was on account of
the distance from Durham, then the seat of the episcopacy, and the
consequential delays of episcopal duties there. According to Camden, the monks
of Durham looked upon this act of the sovereign, as a grievous infringement of
their ancient rights and privileges; but from the abject disposition of mind,
peculiar to that age, they avoided pointing the accusation where it was due,
and alleged that when Ralph, bishop of Durham was banished, and the church had
none to protect it, certain bishops joined Carlisle and Tiviotdale to their
diocese. It is observable this is the only Episcopal chapter in England, of the
order of St. Austin. -- TANNER.

King Henry constituted Ethelwald, or as he is some times called, Adeluph, then
prior there, the first bishop of this new see: and the church of St. Mary then
became a cathedral church.

EPISCOPUS I.
IN the distant age in which the first Bishop of Carlisle arose, little can be
gathered of the virtues of memorable actions of men, though even thus eminent:
this obscurity is greatest in a country which was almost a constant scene of
military exploits, depredations, and bloodshed. Carlisle, though a chief
barrier against the Scots, suffered many changes of fortune, and the life of
its bishop was frequently disturbed and full of trouble. From such causes,
there is but little historic matter handed down to us, personally relative to
this prelate, and several of his immediate successors. We find him indeed busy
in one ecclesiastical matter, in which he was immediately adversary to the will
of his sovereign. He was one of the electors of Henry Murdac, abbot of
Fountanis to be archbishop of York. The king's displeasure was such at this
transaction, that he denounced vengeance against all those who were concerned
in it: but such was this prelate's contempt of the sovereign's menaces and
self-confidence, that he received Murdac as his metropolitan, when he came to
visit David King of Scotland, then resident in this city. Pryn. vol. I. p. 521.
He departed this life, A. D. 1155, Though some learned persons have affirmed,
that before the settlement of Mortmain, 7th King Edward I. impropriations were
very rare in England; yet this bishop, who died above an hundred years before
the enacting that law, confirmed the churches of Wetheral and Warwick, St.
Michael, and St. Lawrence, Appleby, Kirby Stephen, Ormeshead, Morland,
Clibburn, Bromfield, Croglin, and the hermitage of St. Andrew, in the parish of
Kirkland, to the abbot and convent of St. Mary's, York; with this single
proviso, that the said abbot and convent should allow such a portion to the
officiating minister, as thereby he may be decently maintained, and be able to
pay his synodals.


and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS II.
BERNARD, of whom we know little but his episcopal acts. -- In 1169, he
dedicated the church of St. Mary Magdalene of Lanercost. He remained bishop of
Carlisle to the time of his death, which happened, A. D. 1186. From the long
continued vacancy of the sea, it appears evidently, that it was in a sad
unsettled state, and full of discord and troubles, as well as meanly revenued;
for, by the register of Wetheral, it is shown that King Henry II. being present
at Carlisle, tendered the bishopric to Paulinus de Leedes, and (as such was
even an early influence in the ecclesiastical affairs) offered to augment the
income with 300 marks out of the churches of Bambrough and Scarbrough, with the
chapel of Tickhill, and two manors adjacent to Carlisle: but even with such
augmentations Paulinus refused it. In 1188, the temporalties continuing in the
king's hand, the following particulars, amongst others, were brought into
account at the treasury: for oil for the sacrament at Easter two terms, and
carrying the same from London to Carlisle, 14l. In work of the greater altarand
avement in the church of St. Mary, Carlisle, 27s. 9d. In work of dormitory of
the canons, 22l. 19s. 2d.


It continued vacant to the beginning of the 13th century, and King John gave
the revenues of the bishopric to support the archbishop of Sclavonia. In 1203,
the Pope intermeddled with the income of the sea, granting it to the archbishop
of Regula, who was obliged to abandon his own, and was destitute of support.
This act of the papal authority was confirmed by the king. The continued
vacancy let in a flood of enormities among the religious here. The canons
publicly announced their contempt of the papal authority, and the censures of
his legate: in defiance of all the interdicts and sentences denounced to the
contrary, they persisted in celebrating divine services, and all holy offices
of the sacraments: but their arrogance and impropieties did not cease there;
they swore fealty to the king of Scots, an avowed enemy to the crown of
England, and one in open opposition to the authority of the holy see. In
consequence of these licentious acts, they set up an interdicted and
excommunicated clerk for their bishop, contrary to the will of their lawful
sovereign, and the pope's legate; and seizing the revenues of the bishopric,
applied them according to their own will. Enormities like these were to be
corrected with the severest measures. The council of King Henry III. applied to
Pope Honorius III. totally to remove these offensive canons, and place prebends
in their room; to augment the revenues of the sea, which were so small that no
able and loyal person would accept of the bishopric, and to displace the
person who had been thus obtruded, to the episcopacy. Reverendo Domino ac patri
in Christo charissimo honorio Dei gratia summo pontifici, Henricus eadem gratia
rex Angliae, etc. salutem et debitam cum omni honor et subjectione
reverentiam. Noverit sancta paternitas vestra, quod canonici Carlcolensis
ecclesiae, faventes et adhaerentes regi Scotiae et aliis adversariis et
inimicis vestris et nostris; procurantes quantum in ipsis est ex haeredationem
nostram, spreta penitus authoritate vestra, et sedis apostolicae legati; in
locis interdictis et excommunicatis irreverenter et impudenter et contumaciter
divina celebrare non verentes praedicto etiam regi Scotia, inimico Romanae
ecclesiae et nostro, interdicto et excommunicato, urbem Carliolensem hostilite
occupanti, seipsos subsiderunt, et ipsum in patronem et dominum acceperunt, et
fidelitatem ei fecerunt. Ita etiam quod in praejudicium juris nostri ac
ecclesiae eboracensis, ad instantiam dicti regis Scotiae inimici nostri,
quendam clericum suum interdictum et excommunicatum elegerunt sibi in Episcopum
et pastorem cum etiam praedicta ecclesia Carliolensis sita sit in confinio
regni Scotiae, maxim expederit tranquilitati et paci nostrae et regni nostri,
quod tale ibi constitueretur caput, et talia membra, per quos nobis et regno
nostro utiliter et essicaciter provideri et adversariis nostri facultas nocendi
possit recludi; paternitati vestrae devote supplicamus, quatenus consulentes
nobis et regno nostro statum ecclesiae praedictae in melius commutare velitis
amoreatis (si placet) funditus ab cadem praedictos scismalicos et
excommunicatos. Cum enim ipsi in multis abundent, episcopus ita hactenus
egestate asslictus est et inopia, quod vix habet ubi caput suum reclinet, et
non invenitur aliquiis qui in aliquio nobis utilis esse, poterit aut
necessarus, qui episcopatum illum recipere voluerit. Scientes procerto; quod
not poterit nobis melius provideri in partibus illis, prout de concilio
sidelium et magnatum nostrorum evidenter intelleximus, quam si praedicti
scismatici et excommunicati penitus amoveantur, et loco little qui dicuntur
regulares (cum sint propes irregulares et ecclesiae Romanae inimici et
inobedientes) constituantur praebendarii, qui Romanae ecclesiae, obedientes, et
nobis et concilio sint prudentes, et in auxilio essicaces; ut little paera a
consimili delicto alios deterreat: Et super hiis voluntatem vestram charissimo
amico nostro domino legato significare velitis. Et quia nondum habuimus
sigillum, has literas sigillo comitis Willielmi Marescalli rectoris nostri et
regni nostri sigillavimus. (...) este eodem comite apud Wynton 26th dei
Aprilis. -- RYMER, vol. I. p. 219.


In consequence of which application, the Legate Gallo, at the pope's command,
and with the sovereign's assent, constituted Hugh bishop of this diocese; he
being at that time abbot of Belieu; and the canons were banished.

EPISCOPUS III.
HUGH, abbot of Belieu, the elect of Gallo the legate, came to this see when
distracted with the offenses of the clergy; yet we do not find that religion
was the least abbetted by this prelate: the manners of the religious were not
improved, or the errors of those under him reformed; nay, he seemed even
doubtful of his own authority, when in the grant made by him to the convent of
St. Mary's in York, A. D. 1220, he styles himself, "Hugo dei gratia
Karleolensis ecclesiae vocatus sacerdos;" so the register of Wetheral shows. He
had the favor of his sovereign, and was one of his sureties, in the treaty
entered into with Alexander, King of Scotland. Rymer, vol. I. p. 240.
The pope was petitioned to assist in the restoration of the churches of
Penrith, Newcastle, Rothbury, Corbridge, and Whittingham, to the sea; and in
the king's letters on this occasion, he styles him, "Fidelis noster, cui multo
tenemur debito" -- "ac sanctae Romanae ecclesiae devotissimus." Pryn. vol. II.
p. 375.
There cannot be a more certain channel for obtaining the true history of any
man's life, than the writings of cotemporaries and neighbors; by such, this
prelate so much devoted to the church, as he is styled by the king, is accused
of alienating the possessions of the sea; nay, of making fraudulent
distributions thereof; and the chronicle of Lanercost passes this dreadful
sentence on his untimely death. That by the just judgment of God he perished
miserably, at the abbey of le Forte, in Burgundy, as he was returning from
Rome. Even if this is the language of truth, it is not that of charity; and
shocks the reader, when he perceives it comes from the records of the
scriptores of a religious house: -- there is a rancour in it that gives a
jealousy, some latent cause had dictated the severe asseveration; and we find
by the register of Holm Cultram, that about the year 1220, this bishop of
Carlisle caused the convent of Lanercost to relinquish a reserved rent, issuing
out of the church of Burgh upon Sands, as not having been obtained by canonical
rules. If such a cause dictated the rancorous condemnation and judgment, what
detestation ought we not to hold these impious men in.

We do not find that the episcopacy of this place was to be better filled by
the successor of Hugh, whose want of learning gave him even a name of
disgraceful distinction, that of Malclerk.

EPISCOPUS IV.
WALTER was consecrated, A. D. 1223. -- He appears in history, before his
episcopacy, in an unpromising character, the friend and intimate counselor of
the base King John; his ambassador to Rome against the dissident barons; and
the instigator of those projects which rendered that sovereign's memory
detestable for ever; Pryn. vol. iii. p. 29.
yet we find him promoted by King Henry III. to this see, enriched by the grant
of the manor of Dalston: to this, in 1232, by the king's charter, was added,
the office of treasurer of the exchequer of England; with power of executing
that duty, by deputy of his own nomination. But Walter held this distinguished
office but a very short time, though his charter contained an appointment for
life; he was discharged in a disgraceful manner without any cause assigned; his
grants, the instruments of his office, were ordered to be cancelled, and he was
fined 100l the king appointing Peter de Rival his successor; and commanded S.
de Segrave, his justiciar, to put him in possession of the treasury, in case
Walter refused to deliver the keys, and all things belonging thereto, by
inventory and view, and testimony of true men. The affections and frowns of
princes are so fluctuating and uncertain, and their causes so frequently arise
from the secret influence of villains, who sport with their sovereign's
weaknesses, that we should not from thence deduce the character of any man;
this reverse of fortune, some attribute to the intrigues of Peter, Bishop of
Winchester, who had great influence with the king. Walter would have repaired
to Rome for redress, but having got on board a vessel at Dover, he was arrested
by the officers of the crown, and brought on shore. The Bishop of London was a
spectator of this outrage, and immediately pronounced a sentence of
excommunication against those concerned in this arrest: and so earnestly did he
engage in this business, that he hasted to Hereford where the king held his
court, and with the assistance of several bishops there present, renewed his
sentence. Matt. Paris, 384.
But it was not long before Walter was restored to royal favor, being a
suitable instrument for the times, in the power of his prince. A. D. 1123.
He was a chief instrument in the contract entered into between the king and
the Earl of Winchester's daughter. We find his name among the witnesses to the
king's ratification of the great charter: and such confidence was at length
placed in him, that he was appointed spiritual tutor to Prince Edward, A. D.
1249. He was joined in commission with the Archbishop of York and William de
Cantelupe, as lords justices of the realm in the king's absence. This is the
last public character we find him in; and in 1246 he resigned his bishopric,
and became one of the order of preaching friars at Oxford, where he died, A. D.
1248. He had the wardship of Walter, son of Odard de Wigton (a child of two
months) and with him the manors of Wigton, Melmerby, Stainton on Eden,
Blackhall, and Warwick.

In 1245, he had the following license to make a will: -- "Rex omnibu^ etc.
salutem. sciatis quod testamentum quod W. Karliolensis episcopus condidit vel
conditurus est quocunque tempore et quocunque loco tam de bladis in terra quam
de wardis et firmis, et omnibus suis mobilibus pro nobis et heredibus nostris
gratum habemus et acceptum, et illud concedimus et confirmimus. prohibentes ne
aliquis balleriae noster vel haeredum nostrorum quae idem episcopus reliquerit
ad executionem testamenti sul saciendum manum mittat, vel in aliquo se inde
intromittat, vel aliquo modo testamentum illud impediat; quietum testamentum
suum, quam executores testamenti sui cepimus in protectiouemet desensionem
nostram et haeredum nostrorum. In cujus rei, etc." -- PRYN. vol. ii p. 636.




EPISCOPUS V.
SYLVESTER DE EVERDON was his successor, being advanced from the archdeaconry
of Chester, 9th November, 1246.

He protected the rights of his bishopric with ardour, and in his political
character, was highly respectable: he opposed the innovations and encroachments
the crown attempted against the privileges of the church; particularly in that
of the election of bishops; Pryn. vol. ii. p. 795. has this remarkable speech
of the king to this prelate. "Et te, Sylvester Carleolensis, qui dni lambens
cancellariam clericorum meorum clericulus extitisti, qualiter postpositis
multis Theologis et personis reverendis te in episcopatum sublegavi."
and was one of the prelates, who, in the presence of the king, pronounced the
anathema with bell, book, and candle, against those who infringed the liberties
of England. Cum. Burt. p. 233.
He died in 1255, by a fall from his horse; His soul had on one side, a bishop
clothed in his pontificals; and on the reverse, the figure of the Blessed
Virgin with our Savior in her arms, with this motto. "Te rogo, virgo, dei, sis
vigil erga mei."
and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS VI.
THOMAS DE VETRIPONTE, of the house of the earls of Westmorland, on the 5th
Nov. 1255; but of him we have no account further, than that he departed this
life in the month of October next, after his consecration, and was immediately
succeeded by

EPISCOPUS VII.
ROBERT DE CHAUNCY on the 12th of February, 1258, he being advanced to this see
from the archdeaconry of Bath. He fell into an unhappy opposition to the
sherift of Cumberland, which occasioned his representing to the lord chancellor
on the accession of King Edward I. that the bishop had forbidden his tenants to
make their fealty to the king. The bishop soon vilified the false
representation, and showed that he had requested the sheriff, by message, to
receive their fealty; and made an avowal for himself and his tenants, that they
were ready to give every assurance of their duty and fidelity to his majesty.
The bishop's character seems to be discovered by his taking occasion, on the
application of the abbot of Holm Cultram, who had suffered a distress by the
sheriff for the dues of the crown, more through resentment than the necessity
of the case, to pronounce a sentence of excommunication against him, which was
revoked by the operation of a writ of prohibition. On his death

EPISCOPUS VIII.
RALPH IRTON succeeded to the sea, A. D. 1280, He was elected by the prior and
convent; but it being alleged they had proceeded therein, contrary to the
ordinary rules of their privilege, they were attached to answer the king
therein: under the papal authority the dispute was terminated, by conferring
the bishopric on the person elected, by Bull, dated 5th April, A. D. 1280; the
holy see claming to have a provisionary power therein; and with which King
Edward I. acquiesced. Rymer and Pryn.


Ralph was of a Cumberland family, and was advanced to this see from the abbacy
of Guisburne in Cleveland. He was a steady maintainer of the rights of his
church, and supported a suit against Sir Michael de Harcla, by which, A. D.
1281, he recovered the manor and church of Dalston. He was also party in a suit
for tithes of new cultured lands, within the forest of Inglewood, claimed to be
granted to the church of Carlisle by King Henry I. who enfeoffed the same, "per
quoddam Cornu Eburneum;" This horn is fully treated of among the antiquities of
Carlisle in the Archaeologia.

"Radulphus episcopus Karleolensis petit versus priorem ecclesiae Karleolensis
decimas duarum placiarum terrae de novo assartarum in foresta de Inglewood,
quarum una vocatur Lynthwaite et alia Kyrthwaite, quae sunt infra limits
parochiae suae du Aspatric. Et super hoc similiter venit mag. Henricus de
Burton parsana de Thursby, et easdem decimas clamat ut pertinentes ad ecclesiam
suam. Et prior venit et dicit, quod Henricus rex vetus concessit Deo et
ecclesiae suae beatae Mariae Karliolensi omnes decimas de omnibus terras quas
in culturam redigerent infra forestam, et inde eos feossavit per quoddam cornu
eburneum, quod dedit ecclesiae suae praedictae. Et Willielmus Inge qui sequitur
pro rege dicit, quod decimae praedictae pertinent ad regem, et non ad alium,
quia sunt infra bundas forestae de Inglewood; et quod in foresta sua praedicta
potest villas aedisicare, ecclesias construere, terras assartarc, et ecclesias
illas cum decimis terrarum illarum pro voluntate sua cuicumque voluerit
confer. Et quia dominus rex super praemissis vult certiorari, ut uni cui
quique tribuatur quod suum assignetur, etc. Et certificent regem ad proximum
parliamentum." -- Cokes 4. Infl. 307.

"The Cornu Eburneum they have yet in the cathedral of Carlisle, a symbol, very
probably, of some of King Henry I's grants to the priory; but in none of those
grants, of which any copy is now extant, do those tithes appear. The ceremony
of investiture with a horn, or other like symbol, is very ancient, and was in
use before there were any written charters. We read of Ulf a Danish prince, who
gave all his lands to the church of York, and the form of the endowment was
this; he brought the horn out of which he usually drank, and before the high
altar, kneeling devoutly, drank the wine, and by that ceremony enfeossed the
church with all his lands and revenues.

King Canute, another Dane, gave lands at Pusey in Berkshire, to the family of
that name there, with a horn solemnly delivered as a confirmation of the grant;
which horn, it is said, is still there to be seen.

So King Edward the confessor, granted to Nigel the huntsman, an hide of land,
called Derehide; and a wood, called Halewood, with the custody of the forest of
Bernewood, to hold of the king, to him and his heirs, by one horn, which is the
charter of the said forest.

So that, not the Danes only, but the English Saxons also, were acquainted with
this ancient custom. Thus Ingulphus, abbot of Crowland, who lived in the time
of William the Conqueror, acquaints us that it continued down to his time. He
tells us that many estates were granted by word only, without writing, as by
delivery of a sword, an helmet, a horn or cup, or such like; but this mode, he
says, in after times was changed.

Ulf's horn at York, when the reformation began in King Edward the VI's. time,
was swept away amongst other costly ornaments, and sold to a goldsmith, who
took away from it the tippings of gold wherewith it was adorned, and the gold
chain which was affixed to it. fAfter which time the horn itself, out in ivory,
of an Octagon form, came into the hands of General Fairfax; who being a lover
of antiquities, preserved it during the confusions of the civil wars; whose
memory is deservedly honored for other generous actions of this nature; such
as allowing Mr. Dodsworth, the antiquarian, a yearly salary to preserve the
inscriptions in churches, the giving his valuable manuscripts to the university
of Oxford, and his preserving the public library there, as he did the cathedral
at York from being spoiled and defaced after the surrender of the city. And he
dying in 1671, this horn came into the possession of his next kinsman, Lord
Fairfax, who ornamented it anew, and restored it to its ancient repository,
where it now remains a noble monument of modern as well as ancient piety. --
ARCUAEOLOGIA, 168.


but the grants given in evidence not extending to such tithes, either
expressly or by implication, the right was adjudged to the king, and he
afterward granted the same to the prior and convent, as beforementioned.

This bishop was in great confidence with his sovereign, and received several
marks of his royal favor. He was joined in commission with the bishop of
Caithness, to collect tenths within the kingdom of Scotland. He was one of the
king's most confidential commissioners, for adjusting the claims to the crown
of Scotland, on the 13th of June and 14th of August, 1291. He appears a witness
to the king's claim of right to the kingdom of Scotland, on the death of Queen
Margaret, which was subscribed at Norham, on the 12th of May, 1291. Rymer.
He was one of the plenipotentiaries empowered to contract Prince Edward with
the beforementioned princess; and was an active agent in many other of the
most important state transactions of his time. Notwithstanding his coming to
the sea, in the singular manner he did, we do not discover that he ever
betrayed any undue influence of the holy see, or any sinister attempts to
aggrandize the papal authority in this country, by acts which could infringe
the rights of his sovereign, or the people, through any undue extention of the
authority of Rome here In March 1291-2, be suffered great fatigue in his
journey from London, in deep snow, where he had been to attend parliament; he
reached Linstock, where reposing himself after a little refreshment, a blood
vessel broke and suffocated him in his sleep. He was succeeded by.

EPISCOPUS IX.
JOHN HALTON, who was a busy man in spiritual, as well as secular concerns. He
was one of the canons of Carlisle, and probably of the same political
principles with his predecessor, as we see him succeeding that prelate, in the
commission for determining the claims to the crown of Scotland; and he was
present in November 1292, when sentence was given for John Baliol, and he did
homage for his kingdom. Pryn.
In 1294, he was emissary of King Edward to the court of Scotland, and had
letters of safe conduct for his journey. By the pope's authority he was the
collector of tenths in the Scotch diocese. He entertained the king and his
train at his castle of Rose for a considerable time. He was governor of the
castle of Carlisle, A. D. 1302, and had the custody of the Scotch hostages and
prisoners. He was joined in commission with the archbishop of York from the
holy see, A. D. 1305, to pronounce sentence of excommunication, by bell, book,
and candle, against Robert Brus, Earl of Carrick, for the murder of John Cumyn
in the church of Dumfries. In the year following, he was one in the commission
to absolve all persons for their offenses against King Edward's enemies in
Scotland, wounding the clergy and spoiling their churches. Pryn.
He was petitioner to the pope for the canonization of Sir Thomas de Cantelupe,
late bishop of Hereford. In 1308, he was summoned to attend the coronation of
King Edward II. He was shut up in Carlisle by the blockade formed by Edward
Bruce's forces in 1314, and obliged to appear by proxy in the parliament at
Westminster. In 1318, in recompense of the many and great services and
sufferings of the now aged bishop of Carlisle, King Edward II. addressed the
pope for the appropriation of the church of Horncastle, in the diocese of
Lincoln (being in the patronage of the said bishop) to his own use, and to
annex the same for ever to the bishopric of Carlisle; that he and his
successors, during the ravages of the neighboring enemy, may have a place of
refuge, and out of the profits of the church, may be able to support
themselves. Some years before this, the king had granted his own royal license,
insignificant as it seems, without a confirmation from Rome, for the said
appropriation; and in the same year, the bishop himself desires one of the
cardinals to make the same intercession to the pope; as also, for a remission
of the pension paid to the papal see, out of the rectory. -- REO. HALTON.
He was one of the plenipotentiaries of the king, in the treaty of peace with
Robert Brus, in 1320, which is the last public capacity, out of his episcopal
office, in which we find him on record. He departed this life, A. D. 1324, and
was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS X.
JOHN ROSS, 1325, who was imposed upon this see, by the arbitrary disposition
of the pope, contrary to the election of the chapter, who had nominated William
de Ermya, canon of York; and which election had received royal confirmation.

He was of a refractory and contentious disposition; and though not employed in
a political capacity, had business enough upon his hands, in his disputes and
litigatious with his clergy. He disturbed the prior and convent in the
enjoyment of their revenue, seized their tents and other effects, and
interfered with their appropriate churches, insomuch that they were obliged to
appeal to the sea of Rome; from whence a delegation was sent to the prior of
Durham, to hear and determine the complaint. As he was avaricious and
refractory, so was he malevolent and revengeful; for taking advantage of some
slight omission, in the prior of Carlisle not paying up certain tenths, or
other dues, he pronounced sentence of excommunication; the dreadful scourge
which was put into the hands of such men, by the powers of the church. -- He
died at Rose Castle, A. D. 1332. The sea was immediately supplied by

EPISCOPUS XI.
JOHN KIRBY, prior of Carlisle, being elected and confirmed, 8th of May, 1332.
He came to this episcopacy in a most unhappy era, both in regard to the public
troubles and agitations in the state, and the litigious and unhappy disposition
of the clergy. He was continually subject to alarms from the Scots, in
consequence of the king of England's unfortunate expeditions and unsuccessful
arms; and, added to this, he had gained the contempt and hatred of that people
before the advancement to the sea: so that, it is said, his ordinations were
held in very distant quarters of the kingdom, and he was frequently out of this
diocese; and to render his life still more distressful, he was involved in
innumerable suits with his clergy. Soon after followed a demand for a provision
for one of the king's clerks. "Edwardus Dei gratia, etc. venerabili in Christo
patro Johanni eadem gratia Episcopi Karliole^si salutem. Cum vos ratione novae
creationis vestrae teneamini ^num de clericis nostris, quem vobis
nominaverimus, in quandam annua pe^sione sustinere, donec eidem clerico nostro
de beneficio ecclesiastico per vos suerit provisum; ac nos, promotionem dicti
clerici nostri Phillippi de la mare de Weston, suis meritis exigentibus,
assectantes, ipsum ad hoc vobis duximus nominandum: vobis mandamus rogando,
quatenus eidem clerico ^ostro talem pensionem a vobis annuatim recipiendam quae
dantem dec^at at recipiendam fortuis obligari debeat concede velitis: liter^s
vestras patentes, sigillo vestro signatas, eidem Phillippo inde habere
sacientes. Et quod inde ad hunc rogatum nostrum duxeritis faciendum nobis per
latorem praesentium rescribatis. Test meipso apud Westminster 12. die Sep.
anno regni nostri sexto. -- REG. KIRKBY.

It does not appear what return was made to this writ, nor any other of the
like nature either before or after in this diocese. Yet such claim seems to be
well founded. For notwithstanding the St. 1st. K. Ed. 3. c. 10. whereby "the
king grants that from henceforth he will no more such things desire but where
he ought" -- yet by the common law, the king as founder of archbishopricks
bishoprics and many other religious houses, had a corodyor pension in the
several foundations; a corody for his valets who attended him, and a pension
for a chaplain, such as he should specially recommend, till the respective
possessor should promote him to a competent benefice.




In 1337, he was beset by ruffians as he passed through Penrith, who would have
assassinated him; and in the fray several of his retinue were wounded. K. Reg.
In the month of October, his palace of Rose Castle was burnt by the Scots, and
the adjacent country swept of its cattle and flocks, the crops destroyed, and
the whole adjoining lands laid waste. Chron. Laner.
He had great trouble in the collection of tenths: he suffered a severe
sentence from the court at York, upon his refusing an established vicar to St.
Mary's in Carlisle. He was a defaulter in the payment of a large sum to the
pope, for tenths in Lincolnshire, for which he suffered suspension and
excommunication: but in 1343, we find him again acting in the public capacity
of commissioner with Richard, bishop of Durham, and others, to treat with the
Scots, touching the settlement of peace and commerce. In 1348, he was appointed
to attend the princess, Joan, to Alphonsus, king of Castisle, her contracted
confort, for which he was allowed five merks a day, as board wages, out of the
king's exchequer. -- He departed this life, A. D. 1352. He was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XII.
GILBERT WELTON, a person consecrated by the arbitrary authority of the sea of
Rome, contrary to an election made by the chapter (under the royal license and
confirmation) of the prior of Carlisle, John de Horncastle; but the king was
pleased to revoke those powers, in compliance with the dictates of the holy
see, and to confirm the consecration of Gilbert.

He was one of the commissioners appointed by the king to treat for the ransom
of David, king of Scotland, and for the establishment of peace between the two
nations. In 1359, he was joined with Thomas de Lucy as wardens of the western
marches; and in the succeeding years, was one of the commissioners in the
memorable treaties for acknowledging David king of the Scotch dominions, and
for making a renunciation of King Edward's claim of sovereignty over the crown
of Scotland. -- He died in the latter end of the year 1362, and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XIII.
THOMAS APPLEBY, who, under the king's license, was elected by the prior and
convent out of their own canons; but by an interposition of the papal authority
the election was annulled, and he came to the sea by provision from the holy
see, 18th of January, 1363.

He appears in several commissions of great moment, and was joined with several
men of high rank in the wardenship of the west marches: and shortly before his
death, he was in the commission for proclaiming on the borders, the articles of
a truce concluded with France and Scotland. His particular character is not
delivered down to us; he appears to have been peaceful with his clergy, and
steady in his loyalty. -- He departed this life, A. D. 1395. The chapter, with
the usual license, proceeded to an election for a successor, and they
accordingly chose one William Strickland; but here the pope showed an absolute
disapprobation, and refused to consecrate him; and, of his own nomination,
placed in this see

EPISCOPUS XIV.
ROBERT REED, A. D. 1396, who was translated to Chichester in the course of the
same year, and was succeeded in Carlisle by

EPISCOPUS XV.
THOMAS MERKS. -- We have no evidence before us, whether he was the nominee of
the chapter, or otherwise: he was one of the monks of Westminster, and a great
adherent to the unhappy monarch, Richard II. in whose will he was named an
executor. The history of that particular era is not wanted to show the reader
from what principles he stood an advocate in parliament for the deposed king:
his attachment was so warm, and his temper so regardless of every thing but
truth, that in the first sessions under King Henry IV. he pronounced the
severest condemnations on the measures and the men, by which the revolution had
been effected; and even treated the reigning prince with that derogation and
contempt, that he was committed for high treason, and deprived of his
bishopric. Tyndal, Rymer.
On the 23d of January, A. D. 1400, the king consented he should be removed
from the Tower to Westminster. This relaxation of offended majesty was soon
after followed by a permission, under letters patent, to obtain from the pope,
in benefices of the court of Rome, appointments of the yearly amount of an
hundred merks; but episcopacy was excepted. In 1404, we find him get
institution to the rectory of Todenham in Gloucestershire. The king made his
petition to the holy see, that the bishopric of Carlisle might be supplied by
the consecration of

EPISCOPUS XVI.
WILLIAM STRICKLAND, who, in 1363, had been rejected by his holiness; and who
now came to this see, 24th of August, 1400. It cannot be doubted, from the
channel by which he had his advancement, that he was a strict adherent to the
interests of the reigning prince; and accordingly we find his name among the
prelates who subscribed the act of succession, and assurance of the crown of
England, to the sons of King Henry. We also find him in the commission issued
for the arrest and imprisonment of all persons, professing their
dissatisfaction in the then settlement of the crown; and who, to encourage
faction and disorder, caused it to be reported, that King Richard II. lately
deposed and dead, was still living within the dominions of Scotland, by means
of which evil reports, the late adherents of that monarch were spirited up to
tumult and rebellion. In fact, this was a commission of persecution: the family
of the unhappy monarch deposed, had considerable interests and connections of
blood in the northern parts, and also much power; so that this commission was
sent forth as a scourge at once to repress and humble them; and also to put
them in the power of the minions of a court, whose interests on such occasions,
may well be devised, and whose use of such an instrument is known. -- Bishop
Strickland departed this life on the 30th day of August, A. D. 1419, after
having held the sea near twenty years. He was interred in the cathedral of
Carlisle, his monument and effigies being in the north aile. He was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XVII.
ROGER WHELPDALE, of a Cumberland family, a man (allowed by all writers) of
great learning. He had his education in Baliol College, Oxford, where he gained
a fellowship; he removed into Queen's College, where he was made provost; and
on the 12th of October, 1419, he was elected bishop of this diocese, having
previously obtained the provision of the sea of Rome in his favor, his
election followed of course.

As bishop of Carlisle, we do not find him an active character in church or
state. The dispositions made by his will were to pious uses; and his writings,
though not numerous, were well received in the age he appeared in. -- He died
in January, A. D. 1422, and was succeeded by the translation of

EPISCOPUS XVIII.
WILLIAM BARROW from the sea of Bangor, by the sole authority of Rome. He was
doctor of Canon Law, and chancellor of the university of Oxford.

We have few materials from whence to deduce his character, whilst he held this
bishopric; we find him named in the commission, for entering into a truce with
the Scots, at Hawden Stank; Rymer.
and in 1429, he appears among the bishops who protested against Cardinal
Beaufort's executing the office of prelate of the garter at Windsor on St.
George's day, in right of his bishopric at Winchester. -- He departed this
life on the 24th day of September, A. D. 1429, at his Castle of Rose, and was
buried in the cathedral of Carlisle. His successor was

EPISCOPUS XIX.
MARMADUKE LUMLEY, who had election by the chapter, but for want of the pope's
consent, had not restitution of the temporal rights of the sea till the 15th of
April, 1431. He was one of the noble family of Lumley in the county of Durham.

He suffered great injuries and losses by the depredations committed by the
Scots repeatedly within his diocese; insomuch, that it is said, he was
straitened to support his episcopal dignity. In the year 1431, upon allegation
by the king's sergeants and attorney general that such archbishops and bishops
of England, as had heretofore accepted of the cardinals that were thereupon
deprived of their prelacies here, and praying that the like judgment might be
given for the king in the present case of Henry Beaufort bishop of Winchester,
the bishops and other lords of parliament unanimously agreed that the ancient
rights of the crown in this case ought to be maintained and preserved: but
forasmuch as the said cardinal was nearly related to his majesty, that the
cardinal should be fairly heard, and that till this should be done, search
should be made in the records of the kingdom. The different of the bishop of
Carlisle is entered on the foot of the record thus: the bishop of Carlisle
differed in his answer from the rest, and held, that until the coming of the
cardinal nothing at all ought to be done in the affair.
In 1435, he was one of the commissioners to treat with the delegates of
Scotland. In 1449, he was translated to the sea of Lincoln, by virtue of the
pope's provision.

EPISCOPUS XX.
NICHOLAS CLOSE, the king's chaplain, and archdeacon of Colchester, succeeded
to this bishopric: he had been chancellor of the university of Cambridge, and
there had the degree conferred on him of doctor of divinity. He had gained the
esteem of his sovereign, by his excellent conduct in the treaty of peace,
concluded with the king of Scots, the year before his advancement to the
episcopacy, in which transaction he was joined in commission with the lord
privy seal, the lord treasurer, and comptroller of the household, and others.
He was a commissioner to examine into the conduct of the wardens of the
marches, and conservators of the truce; that their irregularities and offenses
might be punished. Rymer.
In the succeeding year, 1452, he was one in the commission for receiving the
homage of James, Earl of Douglas, and others of the Scotch nobility, who should
make application for that purpose. In the same year he was translated to
Litchfield, but departed this life in the month of November, possessed of the
accustomed provisionary instrument.

EPISCOPUS XXI.
WILLIAM PERCY succeeded to the sea. We know nothing of his political or
episcopal character; he was son of the Earl of Northumberland, and was for some
time chancellor of the university of Cambridge. He departed this life in the
year 1462. The profits of the bishopric, during the vacancy of the sea, were
granted by King Edward IV. to Doctor John Kingscott, in part satisfaction of a
royal debt, with the specious countenance of a reward for singular services:
and soon after, he was consecrated bishop of the sea, before he could either be
reimbursed the debt, or receive a gratuity out of the revenues.

EPISCOPUS XXII.
JOHN KINGSCOTT came in by the election of the convent, with the royal assent
and papal confirmation, notwithstanding any sinister views there might be in
his being put into the receipt of the revenue origiginally. But he did not live
to enjoy the dignity long, departing this life, A. D. 1463, and leaving his
exalted station without any memorable or characteristic events. The king was
not dilatory in appropriating the profits of the bishopric, granting the
temporalties to Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick and Salisbury. The chapter
proceeded to an election, and by the provision of the holy see,

EPISCOPUS XXIII.
RICHARD SCROOP was advanced to this bishopric, A. D. 1464, and enjoyed it
four years; departing this life 16th of May, 1468. -- He was one of those
prelates, whose episcopacy furnishes the historian with nothing more than the
dates of consecration and exit.

EPISCOPUS XXIV,
EDWARD STOREY succeeded to the sea, by the election of the chapter, with the
other confirming powers, A. D. 1468. He was a man of a liberal and benevolent
spirit, and was one in whom commissions of great trust were reposed. His
munificence was singular, though the bishopric of Carlisle seems to retain the
fewest distinguishing marks of it. He bestowed considerable possessions on
Pembroke Hall in Cambridge. He was a liberal benefactor to the church of Ely.
He founded, at Chichester, a free school, one of his most distinguished acts of
charity. He augmented the revenue of the sea of Chichester, with valuable gifts
in lands; and the dean and chapter there had considerable donations. The most
mistaken appropriation his benevolence dictated to him, and which from his
opulence took place, was building the new cross in the marketplace of
Chichester, and giving to the corporation there an estate for its repairs and
perpetual maintenance In 1471, we see him named among the prelates who took an
oath of fealty to Edward, then Prince of Wales. Rymer.
He was a commissioner in several of the treaties with the Scotch, and
particularly in that of the marriage of the Princess Cecily, second daughter of
the king. He was translated to the sea of Chichester in the year 1477, where he
died and was interred. By the ordonance of the holy see, he was succeeded in
the bishopric of Carlisle by

EPISCOPUS XXV.
RICHARD BELL prior of Durham, who received the temporalties of this see, 24th
of April 1478. Though he possessed this bishopric to the time of his death,
which happened in 1496, in the course of eighteen years we collect nothing
singular in his life. Whilst he was prior of Durham he was in several royal
commissions of treaty with the powers of Scotland; but his name, during his
episcopacy, has not occured to me in any record of moment.

EPISCOPUS XXVI.
WILLIAM SEVER, his successor, was abbot of St. Mary's in York. He had his
education at Oxford, and seems to be derived from mean parentage from the place
of his birth, a village near the city of Durham. Shinclisse.
He was made bishop of Carlisle, A. D. 1496, and by royal license held his
abbacy in commendam. He was in commission to treat about the marriage of the
Princess Margaret, daughter of King Henry VII. with James, King of Scotland. In
the year 1497, he was in the general treaty with James of Scotland; and in
1499, he was one of the conservators of the truce, signed and sworn to by both
the sovereigns. He was translated to Durham, A. D, 1502, and succeeded in this
bishopric by

EPISCOPUS XXVII.
ROGER LEYBURN, who was consecrated 1st of September, 1503. He is one of the
vacant characters in our history, departing this life, A. D. 1507. He was of a
Westmorland family, had his education at Cambridge, was master of Pembroke
Hall, and some time archdeacon and chancellor of Durham.

EPISCOPUS XXVIII.
JOHN PENNY was his successor in 1508, and he died in 1520. He had his
education in Lincoln college, Oxford; was abbot of Leicester, and bishop of
Bangor, from whence he was translated; the pope's bull bearing date at Rome,
the 21st day of September. We now advance to a busy and significant character
in his successor.

EPISCOPUS XXIX.
JOHN KYTE, who was a man of distinguished parts; though his parentage is not
handed down to us, or the nature and place of his education, yet he figured in
the offices of the church, in an age when many great characters flourished,
without any other advantages than great powers of genius and servility of
principles. In the reign of King Henry VII. he was ambassador to Spain: he was
also subdean of the royal chapel; and in the year 1513, he was made archbishop
of Armagh in Ireland. The influence of Cardinal Wolsey obtained him many
dignities; and he was devoted to his service in return; he consulted our bishop
on his most momentous concerns, and conversed with him on matters of the
highest nature with the greatest familiarity. In the melancholy reverse of his
fortune, the friendship was not broken, and the cardinal received his support
from the bishop's hands. S. W. Cavend. Memoirs.
In 1521, Bishop Kyte, on his installation at Carlisle, resigned the
archbishopric of Avmagh, and took the titular bishopric of Thebes in Greece.
The sees amounted to 1790 ducats.
He was one of the commissioners of King Henry VIII. to treat for a cessation
of hostilities with Scotland, and in 1526, he was one of the plenepotentiaries
for establishing peace with King James V. In the year 1529, we find his name
among those who signed their approbation of the king's scruples concerning his
marriage; and acquiescing with the vices and enormities of that monster of
impiety and arrogance. Launched so far in the intrigues of a corrupt court, we
see his name mixed with those minions, who servilely courted the king's smiles
with the forfeiture of virtue. He was one of the four bishops who addressed
Pope Clement, the seventh, in the matter of the king's divorce: but in the
latter years of his life, after the cardinal was removed, and the political
countenance of the court changed, he was wavering in his principles. He was a
strong opposer of Cranmer, and the rising spirit of reformation; and in that
department, was a public adherent to the archbishopric of York. -- He died in
London, 29th of June, 1537, and was buried at Stepney. HIS EPITAPH.
Under this stone closyde and marmorale
Lies John Kytte Londoner Natysse;
Encreasyng in virtues, rose to high estate,
In the fourth Edwards chapel by his young lysse
Since which, the seventh Henrys service primatisse
Proceeding still in virtuous officace
To be in savor with this our kings grase.
With wit endowed, chosen to be legate
Sent into Spain, where he right joyfully
Combyned Princes in peace most amate
In Greece Archbishop elected worthelv;
And last at Carlyel rulyng Pastorally,
Keeping nobyl Household with great hospitality.
One Thousand fyve hundred thirty and sevyn.
Invyterate with pastoral carys, consumyd with age
The nine tenth of Jun reconyd full evyn
Pass to Heaven from worldly pylgrimage
Of whose soul good pepul of cherite
Pray as ye would be prayed for, for thus must ye lie.
Jesu mersy, Lady help. -- WEAVERS MONUMENT, p. 539.



EPISCOPUS XXX.
ROBERT ALDRIDGE succeeded to the sea, A. D. 1537. As he lived in a busy age,
and was present to many great changes in church and state, one should expect
from a man of so great a character, as to his learning, one whom Erasmus called
in his early years, "blanda eloquentiae Juvenis," a poet and orator of more
than ordinary note, that he would have been a shining figure in the multiform
business of this part of Henry's reign: but we may judge from his constantly
holding the appointments he had, that he temporized with the vereing measures
of the prince; and like the notorious, though perhaps, imaginary character of
the vicar of Bray, still keeping the saddle, let the object of the pursuit be
what it might. The servility that strikes the idea, when one conceives such a
character, in the time of this monarch, ininspires aversion. It may be a harsh
sentence, but it proceeds from a fact, that produces large and natural
inferences. Let us attend to his progress in life. Buckinghamshire was the
place of his birth, and he received his education at Eaton, till the year 1507,
when he was appointed a scholar of King's college, Cambridge. He was once
proctor of that university; and from thence he became master, fellow, and
provost of Eaton. About the year 1529, he was made bachelor of divinity at
Oxford, and the following year took up his doctor's degree. Soon after, he was
appointed archdeacon of Colchester; and in the year 1537, was installed a canon
at Windsor, and made register of the order of the garter. He was an opposer of
Cranmer, and adhered to the Romish profession of faith; indeed, in the work
called the Bishop's Book, containing the godly and pious institution of a
christian, it is said he joined with that archbishop; but touching the doctrine
of the seven sacraments, his opinion was immediately opposite: and he promoted
the act of 31st King Henry VIII. touching the six articles, contrary to every
effort of Cranmer. -- He departed this life, 1555, and was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XXXI.
OWEN OGLETHORP; who, by the inconsistencies in his public actions, seems to
have been a very weak man. He received the temporalties of this bishopric in
the month of October, in the year 1556; but the pope's confirmatory bull did
not arrive till the month of January following. He was born at a small village,
near Tadcaster, in the county of York, of inferior parents, and had his
education in Magdalene College, Oxford. In the year 1531, he was proctor of the
university, and soon after was entered bachelor of divinity. In the year 1535,
he was chosen president of the college; and in 1551, had the distinguished
office of vice chancellor. He was made a canon, and soon after dean, of the
royal chapel at Windsor; and in the first year of Queen Mary's reign, he was
appointed secretary to the order of the garter: this was a year of great honor
to him, for in it he held the presidency of Magdalene College, the rectories of
Newington and Hassely, in Oxfordshire; together with the deanery of Windsor. In
1554, he was one of the appointed disputants in the controversy with Cranmer,
Latimer, and Rydley; and showed himself a most inveterate adversary to the
principles of reformation, and even to that humane rule, toleration. In 1558,
we see him acting in the inconsistent character I intimated; for, during the
vacancy of the sea of Canterbury, when all the bishops had refused to officiate
in the coronation of Queen Elizabeth: he only, the lowest of the tribe, the
bitterest in the measures against reformists, and the interests of the
protestant church; he only could be found to place the crown on the head of
that illustrious princess: the lords of the council, willing that the ceremony
should have every outward dignity, sent for all the pontifical robes, and
ensigns of high office, used by the archbishop on that solemn occasion, that
our prelate might be duly habited for the occasion. It is not to be
reconciled, how Oglethorpe could be influenced to this office; the character of
the princess, and her sentiments in religious matter, were no secrets; and the
bishop's faith and sentiments were publicly avouched: the inconsistency is not
to be reconciled, but by the discovery of those influences and private springs
of the state, which are long since locked up in the impenetrable regions of
oblivion. How must he have been shocked and confounded, whilst the ceremony was
performing, by the command of the queen not to elevate the consecrated host, in
the celebration of mass, usual in this solemnity, " because she liked it not.
Wood, with a voice of commiseration, would palliate the error with his pity:
For the fact, when he saw the issue of the matter, and both himself and the
whole tribe of his secret order deprived, the churches holy laws, and faith
against the conditions of her consecration, and acception into that royal
office violated, he fore repented him all the days of his life, which were, for
that special cause, both short and wearisome.

In the first parliament he gave his vote against the bills for restitution of
first fruits, for restoring the supremacy, exchange of bishops lands, and
uniformity of the common prayer. He would willingly, by his adherence to his
old partisans, have recovered a reputation he had lost, by being a tool to the
prevailing party; and, by his unsteadiness, he dropped to the ground between the
two. The council fined him 250l. for non-attendance at Sewel's challenge in
disputation, A. D. 1559, as her majesty had commanded; and shortly after he was
deprived of his bishopric, worth 268l.

His death was sudden, but the cause uncertain; the popular report was, that it
happened in an apoplexy. He was privately buried at St. Dunstan's in the west.
By his will, he ordered the foundation of a school and hospital, at Tadcaster,
with an ample endowment.

EPISCOPUS XXXII.
JOHN BEST who succeeded to the bishopric, was a man of a different cast, of
the true reformists principles; and one who had lived obscurely during the
reign of Quen Mary, to conceal himself from the rage and intemperate zeal that
distinguished that short, but unhappy period. He was born in the northern parts
of Yorkshire, of parents of a low station, and had his education in the
university of Oxford. He was consecrated, A. D. 1560, when he was 48 years of
age. The unsettled and turbulent estate of the north was such, that he was
obliged to have a commission to arm himself and dependants within his
bishopric, against the tumultuous and enraged populace. He was one of those
who was created doctor in divinity by Doctor Humphreys, the queen's professor
at Oxford, at a private convention in London; and he subscribed the Saxon
homilies. The following letter is preserved in Strype, p. 256, it is curious.
-- 9th April, 1567. -- To Archbishop Parker

"I have a commendam of a parish, called Rumald Church. It will expire within a
year or less. The advowson of the same is ordered to be sold to gentlemen of
this country at unreasonable sums of money. So that it is apparent the revenues
thereof are like to come into the temporal mens' hands, and the cure into some
unlearned ass's, as many others are like to do in these parts, unless your
Grace be a good stay therein. For this cause, and for that, my charge here in
the queen's service does daily increase; and also, that in time of wars I have
no refuge left to sly unto but only this; I am compelled to be a suitor to your
Grace, for the renewing of my commendam for the time of my life. In doing
whereof your Grace shall both stay the covetous gripe that has the advowson
for his prey, the unlearned ass from the cure, where I have now a learned
preacher, and bind me as I am otherwise most bound to serve and pray for your
Grace's long continuance in honor and godliness; your Grace's poor brother to
command, -- JOANNES CARLIOLENSIS.


-- He died 22d of May, 1570, and was interred in this cathedral.

EPISCOPUS XXXIII.
RICHARD BARNES was his successor. From this period of time, the business and
importance of bishops in secular affairs declined: in their spiritual powers
they were so reduced, that only within their respective bishoprics, they held
the authorities consistent with the ancient rules of the common law, without
the superlative aid of the sea of Rome; so that, from this era the history of
our prelates becomes little more than personal. Bishop Barnes was born in the
county of Lancaster, and educated in Brazen Nose College, Oxford, where he took
a degree of master of arts, and was elected a fellow. He had a degree of
bachelor of divinity at Cambridge, was chancellor of the cathedral at York, and
residentiary canon there for the prebendary of Loughton. In 1567, he was
eonsecrated suffragan bishop of Nottingham; and in 1570, was consecrated bishop
of Carlisle. By Rymer, it appears, so soon as he was possessed of the church of
Rumaldkirk, he should vacate Stokesley, which he held with his bishopric,
together with Stonegrave. In 1577, he was translated to the sea of Durham where
he died. -- He was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XXXIV.
JOHN MEYE, who was consecrated bishop of this see, A. D. 1577. In 1560, he was
master of Catharine Hall, and 1570, was vice chancellor of Cambridge. He is
marked by some writers as being intemperately anxious after worldly wealth.
That he attempted to obtain from the chapter some beneficial leases for
relations. Dr. Todd.
Under pretense that Rose Castle was held by the warden of the marches, in
these times of eminent hazard from the Scots, he endeavored to obtain, in
commendam, the living of Darfield, as a place of retreat and security. Strype.
-- The annexed note is extracted from the Dalston register. February 15th,
1697. -- Reverendus in Christo, Johannes Mey, divina providentia Episcopus
Carliolensis, hora octava matutina decimi quinti diei Februarii mortem
oppetiit; et hora octava vespertina ejusdem die Carliolensi in ecclesia
sepultus suit; cujus justa celebrantur die sequente Dalstonii.


EPISCOPUS XXXV.
HENRY ROBINSON, his successor, was born in the city of Carlisle, and was
educated in Queen's College, Oxford, where he had a fellowship, and had an
excellent reputation for learning and piety. Whilst he was master of arts, in
1576, he was chosen principal of Edmund hall, and in 1581, he was made provost
of Queens, in which office he exerted himself in the reformation of certain
innovations and improprieties, which had crept in by the negligence of his
predecessors; he saw the college return to its former splendour and
significance; and in eighteen years attendance, brought it back to its once
flourishing state. He was consecrated bishop of Carlisle, in 1598, having
enjoyed the degree of doctor in divinity for eight years. -- He died at Rose
Castle, the 19th day of June, 1616, as it is supposed, of the plague, as he was
interred a few hours after his exit. -- His successor

EPISCOPUS XXXVI.
ROBERT SNOWDEN, was a Nottinghamshire man by birth: he was consecrated bishop
of Carlisle, in November 1616. Before this advancement, he was prebendary of
Southwell. He departed this life in London, in the spring of the year 1621, and
was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XXXVII.
RICHARD MILBURNE, a native of Gilsland, who was translated from St. Davids' to
the sea of Chester, in September 1621. He was vicar of Sevenoak in Kent;
sometime dean of Rochester, and from thence was advanced to the bishopric of
St. Davids'. He left 600l. for the endowment of an hospital and school, and
departed this life, A. D. 1624. There is a single sermon of his extant, on the
subject of the imposition of hands, preached and published whilst he was vicar
of Sevenoak. -- His successor

EPISCOPUS XXXVIII.
RICHARD SENHOUSE was a native of Cumberland, of the Netherhall family, and
came to the sea in June 1624. He was a student in Trinity College, Cambridge,
was elected a fellow of St. Johns', and in 1622, obtained a degree of doctor of
divinity. He had his promotion from the crown; for, from a chaplainship in the
Bedford family, he became chaplain to Prince Charles, and afterward to King
James, who appointed him to the deanery of Gloucester, and from thence to this
bishopric. -- He died by a fall from his horse, in May 1626, and was interred
in the cathedral of Carlisle.

EPISCOPUS XXXIX.
FRANCIS WHITE succeeded to the sea in December 1626. From a state of obscurity
we see him emerging to fame, by the zeal with which he preached against the
church of Rome, and by his book against Fisher. From the ruins of the ancient
church, arose innumerable sectaries; the great stock was hewn down, and from
the roots issued a multitude of ungrafted shoots, bearing unprofitable fruit;
among others, the Arminian principles were introduced: this bishop even taught
them on the solemn festival of Christmas, in the chapel-royal, in the hearing
of his sovereign, and soon after was translated to the sea of Norwich: so
formidable was the growth of innovations in religion, and arminianism in
particular, that they occasioned a parliamentary inquiry. From his fervor
against the papists, he was employed by the king, as a spy upon the conduct of
the countess of Denbeigh, who was much inclined to listen to the rules of that
faith; to reward him for his assiduity in that duty, he first was made dean of
Carlisle, and then appointed to the bishopric. He did not stop at Norwich, but
was advanced to the sea of Ely in 1631, and departed this life six years
afterward. Upon his translation to Norwich, he was succeeded in the sea of
Carlisle by

EPISCOPUS XL.
BARNABY POTTER, who, in those days of division and new devices in the sacred
temple, arose to significance by his zeal as a puritanical preacher. He was
born in the county of Westmorland, within the barony of Kendal, was a student
in Queen's College, Oxford, where he held a fellowship. In 1615, he took his
degree in divinity, and was elected provost after he had distinguished himself
in Devonshire by his puritanical doctrines. He was one of the king's chaplains,
and was consecrated bishop of this see in March 1628, and died in the year 1641.

EPISCOPUS XLI.
JAMES USHER his successor in the bishopric of Carlisle, was a man of deep
erudition, and a zealous protestant, without bigotry and fanaticism, too much
the lincture of the age. He held the revenues of this bishopric, in commendam,
by the grant of King Charles I. as a compensation for his great sufferings in
his archbishopric of Armagh in Ireland, by the commotions in that kingdom. He
was, by birth, an Irishman, and had his education in the university of Dublin.
He was promoted to the bishopric of Mead in 1620, and four years afterward
was advanced to the archbishopric. With difficulty, and a parsimonious hand,
he subsisted on the revenues of our see, diminished and exhausted as they were
by the armies of England and Scotland, alternately quartering in this county;
at length the seizure which was made by parliament on all the lands of bishops,
brought him to great distress. In consideration of his eminent character, his
learning and virtuous zeal, he had a pension of 400l. a year granted to him, by
parliamentary order, but it was paid very ill, insomuch that he never received
it above once or twice.

He died in March 1655 at the countess of Peterborough's, at Rygate, Surry, in
the 76th year of his age: Cromwell, from what principle it cannot be divined,
not agreeable to his character, from some sinister view or private influence,
ordered him to be buried at the public charge, in Westminster abbey; to defray
the expense of which, he gave a draft upon the treasury for 200l. And this he
did out of an honorable respect to the memory of so learned a champion of the
Protestant cause, as the archbishop was, so say our authors, Nicholson and
Burn. But he was a wretch whose soul could not be touched with such sentiments;
hypocrisy, or some low and selfish view entitled him to display this honor and
pomp, at the interment of a man, whom he and his creatures had starved to
death; inconsistent and abominable are the two contrarieties. Cromwell
gave-directions that the bishop's library should not be sold without his
consent; but it was plundered of many of the valuable manuscripts; the soldiers
took many choice books at a price of their own making, and in the confusion
which then distracted the state, the collection was mutilated and greatly
prejudiced. The books which escaped the hands of ruffians were given by King
Charles II. to the college of Dublin. -- On the restoration of King Charles II.
this see was supplied by

EPISCOPUS XLII.
RICHARD STERN was elected, a person of little note by birth. He had his
education in Cambridge, was master of Jesus College, and took the degree of
doctor in divinity. He was domestic chaplain to archbishop Laud, and attended
on the scaffold at his execution. He was a prisoner in the tower with several
others, upon a complaint made by Cromwell, who was then one of the burgesses of
Cambridge, that they had conveyed the college plate for the king's relief at
York: from this cause he was dispossessed of his several appointments, and
lived in obscurity till the restoration. In 1664 he was translated to York, and
died there in 1683. The character given of him by bishop Burnet, we think ought
to receive great credit from the known integrity of the writer; and he
intimates that he was a sour, ill-tempered man, and was chiefly studious of
measures to enrich his family: he was particularly attached to the court and
servile in adopting the measures then moved in; that he was zealous in the
affairs of the duke of York, and was strongly suspected of popery. Nicholson
and Burn have attempted to rescue his character by the publication of a letter
which they say was written from York to his successor at Carlisle; but is
anonymous, and if it is from the hand of any person of note, it was as easy to
subscribe the name, to give it weight and authority, as to publish the
sentences to give him a superficial character. He was greatly respected, and
generally lamented. All the clergy commemorate his sweet condescensions, his
free communications, faithful counsels, exemplary temperance, cheerful
hospitality, and bountiful charity; such is this epistolary panegyric; and
which is only equalled by his monumental inscription. Bishop Burnet must have
been basely inveterate or deceived. Hic spe futurae gloriae situs est
Richardus Stern, Mansfeldiae honestis parentibus ortus.
Tria apud Cantabrigienses collegia certatim
Ipsum cum superbia arripiunt et jactant suum
Sanctae et individuae Trinitatis scholarem,
Corporis Christi socium, Jesu tandem praefectum meritissimum
Gulielmo Cantuariensi martyri a sacris in fatali pegmate restitit.
Ansus et ipse inter pessimos esse bonus, et vel cum illo commori.
Postea honesto consilio nobili formandae juventuti operam dedit,
Ne de effent qui deo et regi, cum licuerit, rite servirent.
Quo tandem reduce (etiam cum apologia et prece) rogatur
Ut Carleolensis esse episcopus non de dignaretur.
Et non illi, magis quam soli, diu latere licuit.
In humili illa provincia satis constitit summum meruisset
Ad primatum igitur Ebor; ut plena, splenderet gloria, electus est*
In utroque ita se geffit, ut deo prius quam sibi prospiceret.
Ecclesias spoliatas olim de suo vel dotavit vel ditavit amplius.
Non antiquis ecclesiae patribus impar suisset, si coaevus.
Omnis in illo enituit quae antistitem deceat et ornet virtus;
Gravitas Sanctitas Charitas, rerum omnium scientia:
In utraque sortuna par animi firmitas et constantia;
Aequissimus ubique vitae tenor, regiminis justitia et moderatio;
In sexto supra octogesimum anno corpus erectum,
Oris dignitas, oculorum vigor auriumque amini praesentia.
Nec ulla in sonectute foex, sed ad hue flos prudentiae.
Satis probarunt quid mensa possit, et vita fobria.
Obiit, Jan. 18. Salutis, 1683. Obiit, Jan. 18. Aetatis suae, 87.

But pursuing our authors, we find them speak of him in language not so very
full of praise, on the following occasion. His successor settling at
Rose-Castle the only remaining habitable house then belonging to the sea; and
finding even this in a most miserable condition, a great part of it having been
burnt by the Scots in the late rebellion, and the chapel (which was the only
repair bishop Stern pretended to, notwithstanding what is said in the
flattering epitaph abovementioned, although he had received the immense
advantages of coming to the sea, when all the leases were either totally or
near expired) being so ill done that it was necessary to take it entirely down,
the bishop thought it expedient to proceed against his metropolitan and
immediate predecessor for dilapidations. Whereupon the archbishop made a tender
of 400l. for repairing the chapel, and pleaded the act of oblivion and
indemnity (12 cap. 2. c. 12) in bar of all other dilapidations. The court of
delegates adjudged the said tender sufficient for repairing the said chapel,
and that all the other dilapidations were covered by the said act, and so
dismissed the cause with costs on either side. The bishop being thus totally
defeated of all aid from his rich predecessor (the expenses of the law suit
having cost him more than 400l.) set about the repairs himself. If in this
single instance bishop Burnet's character of the prelate is so sufficiently
justified, how might we expect it to be corroborated by his more private
history.

EPISCOPUS XLIII.
EDWARD RAINBOW came to the sea in 1664. He was born at Bilton in the county of
Lincoln, 1608, being the son of the parish priest there. He was educated at
Westminster school, and was a student in Corpus Christi College Oxford. He
obtained a fellowship in Magdalen College Cambridge, where he was tutor to
several eminent pupils, among whom were the sons of lords, Suffolk and
Daincourt. In the year 1642, he was elected master of Magdalen, and took his
degree of doctor of divinity: but he was soon after deprived of his mastership
for refusing to sign a protestation against the king. In 1652, he obtained the
living of Chesterfield in Essex; and in 1659, the Earl of Warwick presented him
to the valuable living of Benefield, in the county of Northampton. He was
restored to his mastership and made dean of Peterborough soon after K.
Charles's restoration, and in the year 1662, he was made vice chancellor of the
university of Cambridge. Three sermons only are extant of his works. -- One
preached at St. Paul's Cross, 28th September, 1634, entitled, "Labor forbidden
and commanded" -- Another at the funeral of Susannah, Countess of Suffolk, 13th
May, 1649, Eccl. vii. 1. -- A third, at the funeral of Ann, Countess Dowager of
Pembroke and Montgomery, at Appleby in Westmorland, 14th April, 1676, Prove.
xiv. 1. -- N. and B.


He departed this life in the 76 year of his age, in the month of March, 1684,
and was interred at the parish church of Dalston. He was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XLIV.
THOMAS SMITH born at Whitewall, in Westmorland. He had his education at
Appleby free school, and was a student in Queen's College Oxford. He was a man,
though deeply read in the learning of his age, of consummate modesty, and
humble expectations. In the early part of life, in the university he had the
degree of master of arts and held a fellowship. He was a well reputed tutor,
and had many eminent pupils. Whilst the king was resident at Oxford, he was
appointed preacher at Christ-church; and at St. Mary's, he preached before the
Parliament. In the succeeding confusions in church and state, he retired to the
north and lived in great privacy. On the restoration he was created bachelor of
divinity, and soon after, by diploma, had a doctor's degree given him by the
university of Oxford.

He was one of those who were fortunate enough to be in the sovereign's
remembrance, for (multitudes were neglected) and was made one of his chaplains
in ordinary: in November, 1660, he was nominated to a prebend in this church. A
prebend in the cathedral of Durham, in a few months, was offered to him by
bishop Cosins, and there he had conceived his preferments in the church were to
rest; for at a considerable expense he repaired the house in the college at
Durham, in a manner consistent with an idea that it would be the place of his
residence for life.

In 1671, he was appointed dean of Carlisle, and in 1684, on the recommendation
of K. Charles, he was elected to this see. He died at Rose-Castle, on the 12th
of April, 1702, and was buried in this cathedral. The dean's house was left by
his predecessor in the same ruinous condition the rebellious times had brought
it into; but was now mostly, from the ground, built at his own expense.

The altar of the cathedral had his offering of a large set of double gilt
communion plate; and his praises were addressed to God on an handsome new
organ, given by him to the choir.

In School, his wife died at Rose, and was buried in the cathedral at Carlisle, a
little below the rails of the communion table, and over her grave is a fair
marble stone, upon which is cut -- D. S.
Hic intus jacet
Anna Smith
R. P. D. D. Thomae Carliolensis Episcopi conjux charissima:
Quae sincera erga deum pietate,
Indefessa erga pauper es Liberalitate,
Et singulari erga Omnes
Morum Candore et Benevolentia,
Posteris praeluxit
Magnum Christianae virtutis exemplar.
Vixit annos LXVII.
Obiit sexto die Octobris anno Christi MDCXCVIII.
Et hic requiescit in Domino.


The Sums expended by this good Bishop in public Buildings and Charities.
The school and master's house at Appleby, and cloisters there L 626 The poor
and school at Asby L 100 Toward building St. Pauls' L 150 New library at
Queen's College L 100 More to the said college L 500 Other colleges and chapels
L 50 Prebendal house at Durham and organ L 300 Building deanery house at
Carlisle L 600 Organ at Carlisle, 220l. communion plate, 100l. L 320 Prebendal
house at Carlisle L 50 Altering house and building stables at Rose L 300 New
tower there and court walls L 167 School at Dalston, 30l. -- Tenement there,
80l. L 110 Courthouse at Dalston L 50 Library and register-office at Carlisle
L 120 To the dean and chapter L 100 Pigeon cote at Rose L 53 To the several
parishes in the diocese, by his will L 230 School at Carlisle L 500 Vicarage of
Penrith L 500 Vicarage of Dalston L 300 Total, L 5226


EPISCOPUS XLV.
WILLIAM NICHOLSON, his successor, was born at Orton near Carlisle, being the
son of the rector of that parish. He was a student in Queen's college Oxford,
where in 1678, having taken the degree of master of arts, he was elected to a
fellowship. In 1681, he was made a prebendary of this church by bishop Rainbow,
and had the vicarage of Torpenhow: and in the year following he was made
archdeacon of Carlisle. In the year 1702, he was consecrated, at Lambeth,
bishop of this see; a promotion said to be obtained by the interest of the
Musgraves of Edenhall: an assertion injurious to his great learning, his high
merit, and connections in life, from whence his promotion was derived.

He found some difficulties from the imperfection of the instruments, in
granting institution to doctor Francis Atterbury, to the deanery of Carlisle;
which by the queen's special command were obviated: but it is probable this
imbittered their minds against each other, for on the bishop's interposition as
visitor under the statute of K. Henry VIII, for appeasing certain contests
which had arisen between the dean and the chapter; at the dean's instigation,
doctor Todd protested against his right of visitation, insisting on the
invalidity of that statute, and that in the crown only was vested that
privilege: There was an early grudge between them; for Dr. Attorbury had
written against our bishop's English Historical Library, touching convocations.
things run so high that Todd was suspended and excommunicated, and the dispute
produced such serious consequences, as to promote a law for confirming the
statute of K. Henry VIII. In the year 1715, he was made Lord Almoner; in 1718,
was translated to Londonderry, in Ireland, and died suddenly, 1726, before his
removal to the archbishopric of Cashell, for which translation the instruments
were made out.

He was a celebrated writer, in his works discovering an excellent and almost
universal genius. In the year 1678, the secretary of state, Sir Joseph
Williamson, sent him to Leipsic to acquire a knowledge of the Dutch and other
continental languages. At the instance of the professor there, he translated
out of the English into Latin, Hook's Essay on the Motion of the Earth from the
Sun's Parallax. In the year 1680, he published the three first volumes of the
English Atlas, comprehending an account of Poland, Denmark, Norway, Iceland,
and Germany. In the year 1685, he wrote two short accounts of the inscriptions
on the Bewcastle monument, and font at Bridekirk in this county; published in
the philosophical transactions. In 1696 he published the first part of his
English historical library, the second part appearing the next year; and in
1699 it was completed in the third part. In 1702 he published one for Scotland,
and in 1724 one also for Ireland. In 1705 he published the Border Laws. In 1713
he wrote a preface to doctor Chamberlain's book on the Lord's prayer. In 1717
were published in octavo, a collection of papers which had appeared in the
Daily Courant, and other periodical prints. In 1719 he wrote a preface to the
third edition of doctor Wilkin's Leges Anglo-Saxonicae. He was the author of
many sermons which appeared from the press, and left several manuscripts to the
dean and chapter of Carlisle, touching this diocese. On his translation he was
succeeded in this bishopric by

EPISCOPUS XLVI.
SAMUEL BRADFORD, who was consecrated in June, 1718. He was translated to
Rochester in 1723, where he died, and was interred in Westminster abbey. He was
prebendary of Westminster, rector of Marybourn, in Middlesex, and master of
Bennet College Cambridge. Ex adverso sepultus est Samuel Bradford, S. T. P.
Sanctae Mariae de Arcubus Londini diu Rector.
Collegii corporis Christi apud cantabrigiensas aliquando custos.
Episcopus primo Carliolensis, deinde Rossensis hujus que
Ecclesiae et honoratissimi ordinis de Balneo
Decanus
Concionator suit dum per valetudinem licuit assiduus;
Tam moribus quam praeceptis
Gravis, venerabilis, sanctus;
Cumquae in caeteris vitae officiis
Tum in munere praecipue pastorali
Prudens simplex integer.
Animi constantia tam aequabilitam feliciter temperate,
Ut vix iratus, perturbatus haud unquam sucrit.
Christianum charitatem et libertatem civilem
Ubique paratus asserere et promovere
Quae pie, quae benevole, quae misericorditer,
In occulto secerit (et fecit multa)
Praeful humillimua, humanissimus,
Et vere Evangelicus
Ille suo revelabit tempore,
Qui in occulto visa palam remunerabit.
Obiit 17 die Maii, Ann. Dom. 1731.
Suae que Aetatis 79.



EPISCOPUS XLVII.
JOHN WAUGH who came to this see in the year 1723, was born at Appleby in
Westmorland, where he obtained his first rudiments, he was student in Queen's
college Oxford, and there held a fellowship. He was in succeeding years dean of
Gloucester, prebendary of Lincoln, and rector of St. Peter's, Cornhill, London.
He died in Queensquare, Westminster, in October, 1734, and was interred at St.
Peter's beforementioned.

EPISCOPUS XLVIII.
GEORGE FLEMING of the Rydal family, succeeded to this bishopric: he died at
Rose-Castle, 1747, in the 81st year of his age, and was interred in this
cathedral. He was a student in Edmund-hall, Oxford, where he took the degree of
master of arts; he was domestic chaplain to bishop Smith, and by him was
presented to the living of Aspatrick, and afterward to a prebend in this
church. In 1705 he was appointed to the archdeaconry, by bishop Nicholson; and
in 1727, he was made dean. He was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS XLIX.
RICHARD OSBALDISTON, of Hunmandby in Yorkshire, who was consecrated in 1747.
He had his education at Cambridge, and was dean of York. In 1762, he was
translated to the sea of London, and two years afterward departed this life.
By his translation he made room for a prelate here; of whom no greater
panegyric could be pronounced, than that now before us. He was of a noble,
generous, and humane disposition, a friend to all mankind, and never had an
enemy.

EPICOPUS L.
CHARLES LYTTLETON, of Hagley in Worcestershire, third son of Sir Thomas
Lyttleton. He had his first rudiments at Eton, and completed his studies at
University College, Oxford. He was intended for the bar, and accordingly was
entered in the temple, and took the gown; but either the excellent virtues
mentioned by his panegyrists, proved so incompatible with that profession; or
on account of a real tenderness of constitution, which could not endure the
heavy and laborious applications of mind which it required, he was obliged to
quit the law: he returned to Oxford and entered into holy orders. He had the
rectory of Alve church, Worcestershire, in 1742. He was one of the chaplains in
ordinary to King George II. and in the year 1748, he was made dean of Exeter.
He enjoyed this bishopric but six years, dying A. D. 1768, at his house in
London. -- He was interred at Hagley. An excellent character is given of this
prelate by Dr. Mills, dean of Exeter, in his address to the society of
antiquaries, on his succeeding him as president.


EPISCOPUS LI.
EDMUND LAW, D. D. succeeded to the sea in 1768. -- He was born in the parish
of Cartmel in Lancashire, in the year 1703. His father, who was a clergyman,
held a small chapel in that neighborhood; but the family had been situated at
Askham, in the county of Westmorland. He was educated for some time at Cartmel
school, afterward at the free grammar school at Kendal; from which he went,
very well instructed in the learning of grammar schools, to St. John's College
in Cambridge.

Soon after taking his first degree, he was elected fellow of Christ's College
in that university. During his residence in which college, he became known to
the public by a translation of Archbishop King's Essay upon the Origin of Evil,
with copious notes; in which many metaphysical subjects, curious and
interesting in their own nature, are treated of with great ingenuity, learning,
and novelty. To this work was prefixed, under the name of a Preliminary
Dissertation, a very valuable piece, written by the Rev. Mr. Gay of Sidney
College. Our bishop always spoke of this gentleman in terms of the greatest
respect. In the Bible, and in the writings of Mr. Lock, no man, he used to
say, was so well versed.

He also, whilst at Christ-College, undertook and went through a very laborious
part, in preparing for the press, an edition of Stephen's Thesaurus. His
acquaintance, during his first residence in the university, was principally
with Dr. Waterland, the learned master of Magdalen College; Dr. Jortin, a name
known to every scholar; and Dr. Tailor, the editor of Demosthenes.

In the year 1737, he was presented by the university to the living of
Graystock, in the county of Cumberland, a rectory of about 300l. a year. The
advowson of this benefice belonged to the family of Howards of Graystock, but
devolved to the university for this turn, by virtue of an act of parliament,
which transfers to these two bodies the nomination to such benefices as
appertain, at the time of the vacancy, to the patronage of a Roman Catholic.
The right, however, of the university was contested; and it was not till after
a lawsuit of two years continuance, that Mr. Law was settled in his living.
Soon after this, he married Mary, the daughter of John Christian, Esquire. of
Unerigg, in the county of Cumberland; a lady, whose character is remembered
with tenderness and esteem by all who knew her.

In 1743, he was promoted by Sir George Fleming, bishop of Carlisle, to the
archdeaconry of that diocese; and in 1746, went from Graystock to reside at
Salkeld, a pleasant village upon the banks of the river Eden, the rectory of
which is annexed to the archdeaconry. Mr. Law was not one of those who lose and
forget themselves in the country. During his residence at Salkeld, he published
Considerations on the Theory of Religion: to which were subjoined, Reflections
on the Life and Character of Christ; and an appendix concerning the use of the
words Soul and Spirit in holy Scripture, and the state of the dead there
described.

Dr. Keen held at this time, with the bishopric of Chester, the mastership of
Peterhouse in Cambridge. Desiring to leave the university, he procured Dr. Law
to be elected to succeed him in that station. This took place in the year 1756;
in which year Dr. Law resigned his archdeaconry in favor of Mr. Air, a
brother-in-law of Dr. Keen. Two years before this, he had proceeded to his
degree of doctor in divinity; in his public exercise for which, he defended the
doctrine of what is usually called the "sleep of the soul."

About the year 1760, he was appointed head librarian of the university; a
situation which, as it procured an easy and quick access to books, was
peculiarly agreeable to his taste and habits. Some time after this, he was also
appointed casuistical professor. In the year 1762, he suffered an irreparable
loss by the death of his wife; a loss in itself every way afflicting, and
rendered more so by the situation of his family, which then consisted of eleven
children, many of them very young. Some years afterward, he received several
preferments, which were rather honorable expressions of regard from his
friends, than of much advantage to his fortune.

By Dr. Cornwallis, then bishop of Litchfield, afterward archbishop of
Canterbury, who had been his pupil at Christ College, he was appointed to the
archdeaconry of Staffordshire, and to a prebend in the church of Litchfield. By
his old acquaintance, Dr. Green, bishop of Lincoln, he was made a prebendary of
that church. But in the year 1767, by the intervention of the duke of
Newcastle, to whose interest, in the memorable contest for the high stewardship
of the university, he had adhered in opposition to some temptations, he
obtained a stall in the church of Durham. The year after this, the duke of
Grafton, who had a short time before been elected chancellor of the university,
recommended the master of Peterhouse to his majesty for the bishopric of
Carlisle. This recommendation was made, not only without solicitation on his
part or that of his friends, but without his knowledge, until the duke's
intention in his favor was signified to him by the archbishop.

In or about the year 1777, our bishop gave to the public a handsome edition,
in three volumes quarto, of the Works of Mr. Lock, with a Life of the Author,
and a preface. Mr. Locke's writings and character he held in the highest
esteem, and seems to have drawn from them many of his own principles: he was a
disciple of that school. About the same time he published a tract, which
engaged some attention in the controversy concerning subscription; and he
published new editions of his two principal works, with considerable additions,
and some alterations. Besides the works already mentioned, he published, in
1734, or 1735, a very ingenious Inquiry into the Ideas of Space, Time, etc. in
which he combats the opinions of Dr. Clarke and his adherents on these subjects.

Dr. Law held the sea of Carlisle almost nineteen years; during which time he
twice, only, omitted spending the summer months in his diocese at the bishop's
residence at Rose Castle; a situation with which he was much pleased, not only
on account of the natural beauty of the place, but because it restored him to
the country, in which he had spent the best part of his life. In the year 1787,
he paid this visit in a state of great weakness and exhaustion; and died at
Rose about a month after his arrival there, on the 14th day of August, and in
the 84th year of his age.

The life of Dr. Law was a life of incessant reading, and thought, almost
entirely directed to metaphysical and religious inquires; but the tenet by
which his name and writings are principally distinguished, is "that Jesus
Christ, at his second coming, will, by an act of his power, restore to life and
consciousness the dead of the human species, who, by their own nature, and
without this interposition, would remain in the state of insensibility, to
which the death brought upon mankind by the sin of Adam had reduced them." He
interpreted literally that saying of St. Paul, 1 Cor. XV. 21. As by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. This opinion had no other
effect upon his own mind than to increase his reverence for Christianity, and
for its divine Founder. He retained it, as he did his other speculative
opinions, without laying, as many are wont to do, an extravagant stress upon
their importance, and without pretending to more certainty than the subject
allowed of. No man formed his own conclusions with more freedom, or treated
those of others with greater candor and equity. He never quarrelled with any
person for differing from him, or considered that difference as a sufficient
reason for questioning any man's sincerity, or judging meanly of his
understanding. He was zealously attached to religious liberty, because he
thought that it leads to truth; yet from his heart he loved peace. But he did
not perceive any repugnancy in these two things. There was nothing in his
elevation to his bishopric which he spoke of with more pleasure, than its
being a proof that decent freedom of inquiry was not discouraged.

He was a man of great softness of manners, and of the mildest and most
tranquil disposition. His voice was never raised above its ordinary pitch. His
countenance seemed never to have been ruffled; it preserved the same kind and
composed aspect, truly indicating the calmness and benignity of his temper. He
had an utter dislike of large and mixed companies. Next to his books his chief
satisfaction was in the serious conversation of a literary companion, or in the
company of a few friends. In this sort of society he would open his mind with
great unreservedness, and with a peculiar turn and sprightliness of expression.
His person was low, but well formed; his complexion fair and delicate. Except
occasional interruptions by the gout, he had for the greatest part of his life
enjoyed good health; and when not confined by that distemper, was full of
motion and activity. About nine years before his death, he was greatly
enfeebled by a severe attack of the gout in his stomach; and a short time after
that, lost the use of one of his legs. Notwithstanding his fondness for
exercise, he resigned himself to this change, not only without complaint, but
without any sensible diminution of his cheerfulness and good humor. His fault
(for we are not writing a panegyric) was the general fault of retired and
studious characters, too great a degree of inaction and facility in his public
station. The modesty, or rather bashfulness of his nature, together with an
extreme unwillingness to give pain, rendered him sometimes less firm and
efficient in the administration of authority than was requisite. But it is the
condition of human mortality. There is an opposition between some virtues which
seldom permits them to subsist together in perfection We owe our grateful
acknowledgements to the Rev. William Paley, our late Chancellor, for the above
account of Bishop Law; a copy of which he also transmitted to the Encyclopaedia
Britannia. -- THE EDITORS.


The bishop was interred with due solemnity in his cathedral church, in which a
handsome monument is erected to his memory, bearing the following inscription:
-- Columnae hujus sepultus est ad pedem
EDMUNDUS LAW, S. T. P.
per XIX fere annos hujusce ecclesiae Episcopus.
In evangelica veritate exquirenda,
et vindicanda,
ad extremum usque senectutem
operam navavit indefessam.
Quo autem studio et affectu veritatem,
codem et libertatem Christianam coluit;
Religionem simplicem et incorruptam,
nisi salva liberate,
stare non posse arbitratus.
Obiit Aug. XIV. MDCCLXXXVII.
Aetat. LXXXIV.


EPISCOPUS LII.
JOHN DOUGLAS, D. D. succeeded to the sea in 1787: a man well known ^n the
literary world. In 1791, he was translated to the sea of Salisbury; is
chancellor of the Order of the Garter; a trustee of the British Museum, a
vice president of the Antiquarian Society, and F. R. S. -- He was succeeded by

EPISCOPUS LIII.
The honorable EDWARD, V. VERNON, D. D. canon of C. C. Oxford.

Out of the dissolved priory, King Henry VIII. by letters patent, bearing date,
May 8th, 1542, founded the body corporate of a DEAN and four PREBENDARIES; and
two years afterward, this body corporate received the royal grant, to vest in
them the possessions of the dissolved house of monks. The manors of Newbiggin,
Newlaithes, Ellerton, Calcottoys, Botchergate, hospital of St. Nicholas,
Henderbye, Sebergham, Lorton, Isakeby, alias Prior Hall, Newbiggin in
Allerdale, Crosby in Allerby, alias Crosby-Canonby, Allerthwait, and Little
Salkeld, in the county of Cumberland: and the manor of Corbridge in the county
of Northumberland; together with the possessions in 126 other different places
by name: all late belonging to the priory of Carlisle. Also he grants to them
(late belonging to the said priory) the rectories and advowsons of the churches
of St. Mary's and St. Cuthbert's in Carlisle, Sowreby, Adyngham, Kirkland,
Thuresby, Begliokirke, Sebergham, Ireby, Canaby, Camerton, Hutton, Castle
Carrock, Cumwhitton, Cumrew, Edenhall, Rocliffe, a moiety of the rectory of
Stanwix, and the rectories and churches of Whyttingham and Corbridge, and a
moiety of the rectories of Newcastle upon Tyne. Also pensions out of the
following churches: Hakemonby 2s. 6d. Hutton in the Forest 2s. Ullerby 6. 8d.
Castle Carrock 2s. Aketon 40s. Thuresby 13s. 4d. Buecastle 6s. 8d. Whittingham
8l. Lowther 26s. 8d. Also the advowsons and donations of all the churches of
St. Catharine, St. Cross, and St. Rock in the cathedral church of Carlisle, and
St. Alban in the city of Carlisle, and of St. Mary of Skeleton. The revenues of
the priory of Wetheral, paying to the crown for the whole, 82l. 11s. 9d. s.
yearly, by way of tenths; and reserving to be paid by them, 3b. per annum to
the chantry of the hospital of St. Catharine in Custlegate, 46s. 8d. to the
chaplain of the hospital of St. Nicholas, and 5l. 17s. to the three poor Bedes
men there, 2s. 4d. a subsidy to the bishop, and 6l. to the curate of St. Mary's
of Carlisle, 6s. 8d. to two priests to hear confessions in the same church, 4l.
to the chaplain of the chapel of St. Mary's of Hascot, 20s. for the composition
to the vicar of Lazonby, 5l. 6s. 8d. to the curate of St. Cuthbert's, Carlisle,
2s. 10d. 3 far. to the bishop for a subsidy to the churches of Sowerby and
Adyngham, 4s. to the bishop for synodals, 13s. 4d. to the vicar of Adyngham,
6s. 8d. to the vicar of Kirkland by composition, 53s. 4d. to the vicar of
Edenhall, 8l. to the bishop of Durham out of the moiety of the rectory of
Newcastle, 8l. out of the rectory of Whittingham, and 12l. to the bishop of
Durham out of the rectory of Corbridge, and the sea of 3l. to the collector of
the rents of the late priory or cell of Wetherall.

The advowson and collation of all the four prebends were given to the bishop
by the charter of Philip and Mary, dated 7th of March, in the 4th and 5th of
their reign.


-- For the list of Deans see page 606.

The Succession of Chancellors, Vicars General, and Officials, Archdeacons, and
Prebendaries.
CHANCELLORS, VICARS GENERAL, AND OFFICIALS.
A. D. 1220 -- Andrew de Kirbythore, vic. genesis A. D. 1311 -- Adam de Appleby,
offic. constituted by Bishop Halton, when he fled from the Scots. A. D. 1311 --
The prior and William Gosford, vic. genesis The bishop called to the general
council of Vienna. A. D. 1314 -- Adam de Appleby, vic. genesis A. D. 1335 --
Thomas de Halton, vic. genesis Robert de Southayke, official. A. D. 1342 -- John
de Stoketon, offic. by patent A. D. 1353 -- Abbot of Holm Cultram, vic. genesis A.
D. 1354 -- Nich. de Whitby, offic. A. D. 1355 -- Adam de Caldbeck, offic. A. D.
1363 -- Prior of Carlisle, John de Appleby, and Adam de Caldbeck, vic genesis A.
D. 1373 -- William de Bowness, offic. A. D. 1379 -- William del Hall, offic. A.
D. 1397 -- Richard Pyttes, vic. genesis Bishops registers deficient for 150 years.
A. D. 1543 -- Nicholas Williamson, offic. A. D. 1552 -- Henry Dethick* L. L. B.
chancellor. A. D. 1569 -- Geo. Scott chancellor, 1570 made vic. genesis and offic.
-- Since this time the offices have been united. A. D. 1576 -- Thomas Burton,
L. L. B. cha. vic. genesis and offic. A. D. 1577 -- Thomas Hammond, L. L. B. chan.
etc. A. D. 1586 -- Hen. Dethick, A. M. and L. L. B. appointed for life -- This
appointment was confirmed by the chapter as all succeeding ones were. A. D.
1597 -- Henry Dethick, L. L. B. A. D. 1615 -- Henry Woodward. A. D. 1622 --
Isaac Single, A. M. -- Here is a vacancy during the time that episcopacy was
dissolved. A. D. 1661 -- Robert Lowther. A. D. 1666 -- Henry Marshall. He was
vicar of Stanwix, and was murdered at his own door. A. D. 1667 -- Rowland
Nichols, A. M. A. D. 1683 -- Thomas Tullie, A. M. A. D. 1727 -- John Waugh, A.
M. A. D. 1765 -- Richard Burn, L. L. D. A. D. 1785 -- William Paley, A. M. A.
D. 1795 -- Jos. D. Carlyle, B. D.
ARCHDEACONS. In the Reigns of King Henry II. Richard I. John, and Henry III.
-- Gervase de Lowther.
A. D. 1230 -- Robert. A. D. 1233 -- Peter de Ross. A. D. 1293 -- Richard. A.
D. 1302 -- Peter de Insula. A. D. 1311 -- Gilbert de Halton. A. D. 1320 --
William Karliol A. D. 1323 -- William de Kendale. A. D. 1354 -- Richard de
Arthureth. A. D. 1363 -- William de Rothbury. A. D. 1364 -- John de Appleby. A.
D. 1548 -- George Nevill. A. D. 1567 -- Edward Threlkeld, L. L. D. A. D. 1588
-- Henry Dethick. A. D. 1597 -- Richard Pickington. A. D. 1599 -- Dr. Giles
Robinson A. D. 1602 -- Nicholas Dean, A. M. A. D. 1622 -- Isaac Singleton,
ditto. A. D. 1660 -- Lewis West. A. D. 1667 -- John Peachil, D. D. A. D. 1668
-- Tho. Musgrave, A. M. A. D. 1682 -- William Nicholson, ditto. A. D. 1702 --
Joseph Fisher. A. D. 1705 -- Geo. Fleming, A. M. A. D. 1734 -- Wm. Fleming,
ditto. A. D. 1743 -- Edmund Law, ditto. A. D. 1756 -- Venn Air, ditto. A. D.
1777 -- John Law, A. M. A. D. 1782 -- William Paley, ditto.
PREBENDARIES OF THE FIRST STALL.
A. D. 1542 -- William Florens, monk. A. D. 1549 -- Hugh Sewel, D. D. A. D.
1585 -- Edmund Bunnie, D. D. A. D. 1617 -- Richard Snowden. A. D. 1619 --
Lancelot Dawes, A. M. A. D. 1660 -- Thomas Smith, D. D. A. D. 1661 -- Thomas
Conon, B. D. A. D. 1668 -- William Sill, A. M. A. D. 1681 -- Wm. Nicholson,
ditto. A. D. 1702 -- John Atkinson, ditto. A. D. 1733 -- Edward Birk^t, ditto.
A. D. 1768 -- John Waugh, ditto. A. D. 1777 -- James Stephen Lushington, ditto.
A. D. 1785 -- George Law, ditto.
PREBENDARIES OF THE SECOND STALL.
A. D. 1542 -- Edward Lossi. A. D. 1546 -- William Paroye, D. D. A. D. 1552 --
John Emanuel Tremelius. A. D. 1552 -- Edwin Sands. A. D. 1554 -- Edward
Mitchell, L. L. B. A. D. 1566 -- John Maybray. A. D. 1568 -- Thomas Tookie. A.
D. 1574 -- John Barnes. A. D. 1577 -- Thomas Fairfax. A. D. 1595 -- John Meyes,
L. L. B. A. D. 1596 -- William Meye, A. M. A. D. 1600 -- Thomas Fairfax. A. D.
1640 -- Frederick Tunstall, A. M. A. D. 1660 -- Arthur Savage, ditto. A. D.
1700 -- George Fleming, ditto. A. D. 1727 -- John Waugh. ditto. A. D. 1765 --
Robert Wardale, ditto. A. D. 1773 -- John Law, ditto. A. D. 1782 -- Joseph
Hudson, D. D.
OF THE THIRD STALL.
A. D. 1542 -- Bernard Kirkbride. A. D. 1564 -- Gregory Scott, A. M. A. D. 1576
-- Thomas Burton, L. L. B. A. D. 1577 -- Anthony Walkwood. A. D. 1612 --
Bernard Robinson. A. D. 1637 -- Lewis West, A. M. A. D. 1667 -- John Peachill,
B. D. A. D. 1669 -- Thomas Musgrave. A. D. 1676 -- John Ardrey, A. M. A. D.
1684 -- Thomas ^ullie, ditto. A. D. 1716 -- Thomas Benson, ditto. A. D. 1727 --
Richard Holme, ditto. A. D. 1738 -- William Fleming, ditto. A. D. 1743 --
Thomas Wilson, ditto. A. D. 1764 -- Roger Baldwin, ditto.
OF THE FOURTH STALL.
A. D. 1542 -- Richard Brandling, monk. A. D. 1570 -- Arthur Key. A. D. 1575 --
Thomas Burton, S. L. D. A. D. 1576 -- George Hour. A. D. 1582 -- Edward
Hansley. A. D. 1584 -- Edward Mayplate. A. D. 1624 -- John Fletcher, B. D. A.
D. 1632 -- William Dodding. A. M. A. D. 1637 -- Richard Smith, B. D. A. D. 1643
-- Henry Hutton, A. M. A. D. 1660 -- George Buchanan, A. M. A. D. 1666 -- Henry
Marshal, ditto. A. D. 1667 -- Jeremy Nelson, ditto. A. D. 1685 -- Hugh Todd,
ditto. A. D. 1720 -- Thomas Tullie, L. L. D. A. D. 1742 -- Erasmus Head, A. M.
A. D. 1763 -- Joseph Amphlet, L. L. D. A. D. 1780 -- William Paley, A. M A. D.
1795 -- William Sheepshanks, ditto.
The city of Carlisle is divided into two parishes. The parish of St. Mary's,
or which the cathedral is the parochial church; It comprehends Scotch-street,
Fisher-street, Castle-street, and Abbey-street, within the city; Caldewgate,
Cumbersdale, Richardgate, Newtown, and Newby without.
the city and principal parts of both parishes are within that liberty, which
is known by the name of the manor of the soccage of Carlisle. In the notes is
the boundaries. By virtue of a commission issued from the court of exchequer,
1610; the boundaries were thus certified by the commissioners. Beginning at the
south side of the river Eden over against Etterby, and there leaving the same
river, it extends southwards by Wearihome unto Dowbeck-sike the lands on the
right hand being the inheritance of Mr. Briscoe; from thence it extends
eastwards against bishops lands to the river of Caldew or Caldew-bridge; where
crossing over the same bridge against Caldewgate, it extends up the river
against the abbey lands and Denton-holme, until it comes to a parcel of
Denton-Holme, lying on the west side of Caldew, containing about nine acres of
land, where it leaves the river and incloseth the same parcel of land, on the
west side thereof, on the river side against the south west corner of the
Walk-miln closes; and so crossing over the river and leaving the same, it
extends southwards toward Curreck, by the west side of the fields of
Blackall, Curreck and Uprightby; and so about the same fields to a cross way of
the west end of Uprightby town; and so southwards by the high way to Crunybeck,
which falls into the river of Petrell, and there leaving the same way, it
extends down the same beck to Petrell; and from it turns northwards down
the same river to the south east corner of Paradise, where, crossing the river
and leaving it, it goes down a small miln water on the south side of Paradise,
and incloseth the same at Gallows bridge; from whence, crossing over the high
way it incloseth part of the Spittle Crook lying on the south side of Petrell;
and so extends still down Petrell to the foot thereof, where the same falls
into Eden; from thence up over the said river of Eden to the foot of a beck
falling thereunto against Kynnyholme, and so up the same beck on the west side
of Richardby to the north-west corner of Stanwix grounds; then leaving the same
beck it extends northwards to the highway leading from Carlisle to Tirraby;
and so crossing over the same way, it passes on the north side of
Horsemanfield to the north west corner thereof, and from thence extends
southwards to a highway dividing Horsemanfield and the west part of Stanwix;
and so crossing the same way, it extends on the west side of Stanwix to the
river of Eden, and from thence down the same river to Etterby, where it first
began.




The parish of St. Cuthbert's is the other division of this city. The church
becoming ruinous, was rebuilt in 1778, on a new and handsome plan, neatly
vaulted, pewed, galleried, and well lighted: it has a square steeple or tower,
with a dome, and covered with lead, but no ring of bells. The income is but
small, yet having had several augmentations, lands have been lately purchased
and added thereto, of the yearly value of forty pounds. It comprehends English
street within the city, and Botchardgate, Carleton, Brisco, Uprightby, Harraby,
and Blackhill without.


In this parish is the chapelry of Wrea; its antiquity cannot be ascertained
further back than the reign of King Edward II, In 1319, Bishop Halton allowed a
chaplain there, on condition that he resided within his chapelry. It consists
of the village of Wrea, which consist of twenty-one families, containing sixty
males and fifty-four females. A. D. 1739, the chapel was consecrated by Bishop
Fleming; and by augmentations lands have been purchased, so that the curate's
income amounts to about 20l. a year, with a good house upon the lands. In the
act of consecration, the nomination of a curate is reserved to the dean and
chapter; but hitherto they have been appointed by the vestry men. In 1728
Philip Robinson -- 1731 David Graham -- 1733 John Parker -- 1738 Joseph Parker,
who was a celebrated schoolmaster. -- Mr. Gascoin.

We extract the following account of a relation of this family, from a
newspaper, dated September the 3d, A. D. 1733.




Woodside, the seat of John Losh, Esquire. "On Thursday last died at Gordon Castle
of the small pox, in the 26th year of his age, the Rev. Mr. William Losh,
senior, Taberder of Queen's College Oxford, and chaplain to her grace the
duchess of Gordon. He was a gentleman of the brightest parts, and had made
great advances in all the branches of polite and solid learning that could well
be expected at his years. He was blessed with so sweet and humane a disposition,
that the common accidents of life gave him no lasting disquiet, nor interrupted
that universal benevolence, which, with him, diffused itself in a
proportionable scale of duty from the whole body of mankind to the meanest
stranger. This benign disposition made him the constant advocate of the rights
and privileges of the human species, in opposition to tyranny and oppression;
these he maintained, upon all occasions, with a warmth and spirit which well
became a British subject. He had many good qualities, but was eminent for
piety; and as he drew from religion an unbroken peace of mind, a solid
satisfaction, and an unsurmountable courage; in return, he cultivated religion
in the province assigned to him with indefatigable industry, and a zeal
undaunted, but such as was founded on scripture, and supported by reason.

"With all these endowments, he lived the agreeable companion of the ingenious,
the faithful friend of the virtuous, and the brother of the truly religious, as
well as the terror of the hypocrite, the superstitious and the profane. He was
bright at all times, but he shone in the pulpit, when he pleaded the cause of
truth, with such a strength of reason, and such a flow of eloquence, that his
hearers were at once convinced and charmed.

"He died in the very spring of his age, and but in the blossom of his virtues,
yet he discovered enough to make it evident, that had he lived to show himself
in the rising stages of life, his great and uncommon endowments would have
rendered him dear to the polite, the learned, and the religious; and his death
would have been as justly regretted by the public, as it is at present by those
who had the happiness of knowing him."


adjoining this chapelry, the residence of his forefathers for many
generations, is a handsome house and elegantly furnished: his extensive estate
is in high cultivation. We owe him our grateful acknowledgements for the
annexed plate which he has favored us with.

There are two manors within this parish, viz. the manor of Botchardgate, or
prior lordship, belonging to the dean and chapter, and the manor of Blackhall.

Botchardby, villa Bochardi, was the inheritance of one Bocharda Fleming, one
of those that first peopled Carlisle; he had a grange there for the provision
of his house at Carlisle; and when the Flemings went to Anglesea in Wales, he
left that patrimony to Guy the forester, with his daughter Isold. To this Guy
the hunter, King Henry I. confirmed Bochardby, to hold the same by cornage,
paying yearly 6s. 2d. cornage silver to the king. It is gildable and vicontiel,
and gives aid with Combquinton to the sheriff, yearly 4s. 4d. torn silver. It
lineally descended in the issue male unto William, the son of Otho or Odan, son
of Ralph, son of Guido the hunter, de Bochardby. This William lived in the time
of King John, and held then the manor of him. Then William de Bochardby, and
Adam de Bochardby, descended of younger brothers, held parts of the same. In
the 12th year of King Henry III. Radulph, the son of William de Bochardby
entered to the seigniory; his sisters, Alice, Pavy, and Agnes, were his heirs:
Alice and Agnes gave their parts to Jacoline le Blond of Carlisle, and Pavy her
part to Adam Leges her son, and to William, son of Irco. The five daughters of
Jacoline did inherit, viz. Sunimote, Johan, Matild, Juhan, and Marriotte. --
Bochard. -- Guido Venator, and I sold his wife. -- Ralph, son of Guy. -- Odo,
son of Ralph. -- William, son of Odo. -- Ralph, son of William. -- Walter. --
Adam. -- Robert Parving. -- Adam Parving, 3d Richard II. -- Robert Parving. --
William Stapleton. -- William Stapleton. -- Margaret Stapleton. -- Musgrave. --
Tho. Birkbeck. -- DENTON's MS.

Blackhall or Blackhill, commonly called Blackhell, is the name of the town and
manor, so called of old, before it was inhabited; being a black heathy ground,
part of the ancient forest of Englewood, and given by Henry I. to Odard de
Logis, baron of Wigton, and citizen of Carlisle, after the Flemings were thence
translated: Odard first builded there and planted habitations, holding part in
demesne, and the residue in service; some free, which he granted forth to be
holden freely; others in bondage and villanage, some both persons and land,
some land only let to free men, persons, in that age, called Drenges; and the
tenure, in law, is called, "Drengagium notandum est eos omnes eorum
antecessores, qui Drengorum class erant, vel per Drengagium tenure, sua
incoluisse patrimonia ante adventum Normanorum. -- SPELMAN.

Blackhill, thus made a manor by Odardus and his posterity, descended by his
issue male, according to the pedigree of Wigton, until the time of Edward III.
when Margaret de Wigton, sole daughter and heir of Sir John de Wigton, Knt.
(last issue male of the eldest son of that house) to defend her birthright,
was glad to divide away the manors of Blackhill, Melmerby, and Stainton, to
Robert Parving, the king's sergeant at law, for her strength at the common law;
the rectory of Wigton to the Abbey Holme, for the civil law; and Wigton itself
to the Lord Anthony Lucy, for his help in the country, because her mother,
Idyonysa Lovelot, was bitterly taxed of incontinency, at the instance of Sir
Richard Kirkbride, next heir male apparent to the land. But Margaret de Wigton
reserved an estate, in all things but the rectory, to the heirs of her body,
and died without issue. Therefore Blackhill fell to Sir Robert Parving, who
married dame Catharine, the sister of the said Kirkbride, to Adam Parving,
alias Peacock, the son of John Peacock, who married Johan, one of the daughters
and coheirs of the said Sir Robert Parving. After Adam, it descended in the
blood of the Parvings some few descents, until Margaret, the wife of Thomas
Boyt, and William Boyt his son, descended of the said Johan, and Matild Walker,
the daughter of Alice Atwood and Thomas Whitlockman, son and heir of Margaret
Pape, daughters and heirs of Eme, wife of John Scaleby, the other daughter and
heir of the said Robert Parving, sold the same to William Stapleton, and
Marriotte his wife, of whom the Lord Dacre purchased it. -- DENTON's MS.

By the descendants of Lord Dacre, it was sold to Sir Christopher Musgrave,
Bart. grandfather of the present owner, Sir John C. Musgrave, Bart.

In the parish of St. Mary is the manor of Caldcoates, alias Harrington House.
It was Gilbert Camterelles, A. D. 1371, who left it to Julian his wife: she
conveyed it to John Semen, and Isabel his wife, whose son, Thomas Semen, 26th
Henry VI. sold it to Richard Coldale of Carlisle, merchant, from whom it
descended as follows; and from this Coldale, has got the name of
Coldale-Hall: -- John Coldale, son of Richard. -- Richard, son of John. --
John, son of Richard. -- John -- Richard, son of John. -- Elianor, daughter and
heir of Richard, carried the inheritance, by marriage, to Robert Briscoe, son
and heir of Leo. Briscoe, second son of Richard Briscoe of Crofton. -- George
Briscoe, son and heir of Elianor and Robert, conveyed it to Henry Sibson, D. D.
rector of Bewcastle. -- Mary, daughter and heir of Henry Sibson, married Henry
Dacre of Lanercost, who, conveyed it to Arthur Forster of Stonegarthside. --
Nicholas Forster, son of Arthur. -- John Forster, cousin and heir of Arthur,
recovered it at law from Hen. Forster, second son of Arthur. In the year School,
Thomas, Earl of Sussex, in consideration of 36 years ancient sinable rent,
granted to the tenants, 48 in number, a discharge from fines and dry multure,
with the wood upon their tenements; but reserving the ancient rent, suit of
court, Moor Farm, and Greenhew; with liberty to alienate their tenements
without license of the lord, giving notice thereof within 40 days; paying only
a penny sine on death or alienation, and to the steward for an alienation,
fourpence: and for surrender and copy thereof, 6d; and inrolment 4d. and 2d. to
the bailiff upon every descent or alienation; and about the same time the
common was divided and granted in see to the tenants without any rent reserved,
the lord having 150 acres for his share in land, which is now called Blackhill
Park, and is the inheritance of Mr. Wardale of Carlisle.


-- Milbourn's Add. to Denton.

We come in course to speak of the city of Carlisle: It consists of several
streets, the chief of which are spacious, noble, and well built. -- For their
names, etc. see the plan annexed.

This city had many royal grants, and great privileges: the first that is
pointed out, is that of King Henry II. which was burnt by the devastations made
by the Scots, and is recited and confirmed by the charter of King Henry III. It
does not appear when the first incorporation of the burgesses took place, or
what was the original constitution. In the charter of King Henry III. we have
these words, Et quod similiter habent Gildain mercatoriam liberam, ita quod
nihil inde respondeant aliquibus; etc. Nos omnes libertates illas et
consuetudinos praefatis civibus nostris concedimus et hac carta nostra
confirmanus pro nobis et haeredibus nostris; volentes, quod omnibus praedictis
libertatibus et consuetudinibus de caetera gaudeant et utantur, libere, quiet,
been et in pace; et integre, in perpetuum, cum omnibus aliis libertatibus et
liberis consuetudinibus ad praedictam villam Carlioli pertinentibus.

By this charter the citizens were exempted from the payment of toll, passage,
pontage, and all customs belonging to the king; with the privilege of having
wood for fuel, and for their erections within the forest of Carlisle.

Great part of the city having again suffered by accidental fire, the records
were a second time destroyed. King Edward I. in the 21st year of his reign, by
charter, dated the 23d day of June, recites the grant of King Henry III. from
the inrollment of it in his chancery, and stating that it had been lost by
fire, confirmed it verbatim. In consequence of his Scotch expeditions, he
resided frequently at Carlisle, and seems to have entertained a particular
regard for the place, by his honoring the city with the assembly of his
parliament in the 35th year of his reign; who made their residence there, from
the 20th day of January to Palm Sunday following. The memorable acts of this
parliament give no small luster to our annals.

King Edward III. also seems to have entertained a special affection and favor
toward the citizens; and in order to secure to the burgesses their privileges,
he caused an inquisition to be taken, whereon he should found his charter of
confirmation, which bears date the 7th of February, in the 22d year of his
reign of England, and 13th of France. Therein it is recited, that it having
been found by inquisition taken by his commissioners, Richard de Denton and
John de Harrington, and returned into his chancery, that the citizens,
habuerunt et habere consueverunt a tempore quo non existit memoria, had, and
were used to have, the privileges therein set forth, for time immemorial, on
the petition of the citizens; ac etiam cives civitatis praedicta nobis
supplicaverunt, ut sibi dictas libertates, quietantias, consuetudines et
proficua per chartam nostram confirmare velimus. And in consideration of its
being in the frontier of Scotland, and well situated for the refuge and desence
of the inhabitants of the adjacent territories, against the frequent incursions
of the Scots: and also, in commiseration of the late dreadful mortality of the
plague, and the frequent devastations made by the northern enemy, he granted to
them the following privileges, Quod ipsi et eorum haeredes et successores,
cives civitatis praedide, in perpetuum habeant returnam brevium omnium
nostrorum et summonitionum de scaccario et aliorum brevium quorumcunque; ac
etiam duos mercatus singulis septimanis, videlicet diebus Mercurii et Sabbati;
et unam feriam quolibet anno per sex decim dies duraturam, viz. in die
assumptionis Bea^ae Mariae et per 15 dies proxime sequentes: nec non unam
gildam et liberam electionem majoris et ballivorum civitatis praedictae infra
eandem civitatem; et duos coronatores ibidem; ac emendas assisae panis, vini,
et cervisiae fractae; fureas, infangtheos ac etiam placita coronae teneant, et
omnia quae ad officium vicecomitis et coronatoris pertinent, in eadem civitate
facient et exercient; ac catalla felonium et fugitivorum dampnatorum, in eadem
civitate habeant; et de omnibus finibus et amerciamentis, comitatibus et sectis
comitatuum, et Wapentak, sint quieti; placitaque frisciae forciae de libero
tenemento infra civitatem illam, si querela illa infra quadraginto dies post
disseisinam factam fuerit attachiata, teneant. etiamque quod ballivi civitatis
ejusdem implacitare possint coram ipsis breve nostrum de recto patens, ac breve
de recto clausum, secundum consuetudinem civitatis praedictae; et habeant
cognitiones omnium placitorum praedictorum: nec non quod dicti cives et
haeredis et successores sui habeant communam pasturae, ad omnimoda averia, omni
tempore anni, super moram nostram, et ibidem turbas fodere et abducere licite:
etiam quod quilibet liber homo pleguis alterius esse potest ad primam curiam in
placitis transgressionum, conventionum, et debitorum: quod civis praedicti
quieti sint perpetutum regnum nostrum Angliae de thelonio, pontagio, passagio,
lastagio, kaiagio, cariagio, muragio, et stallagio, de quibus cunque rebus et
mercionibus suis: et etiam quod idem cives habeant locum vocatum le Battle
holme, pro mercato et seriis suis; ac tenementa sua in eadem civitate legare
possint: et quod habeant molendinum dictae civitatis, etc. piscariam, nostram
in aqua de Eden, ac thelonium intrisicum et forinsicum vocatum. Burgh toll, et
firmas mensuras, Gabelgeld, et minutas frimas ejusdem civitatis, ut parcellum
frimae civitatis illius; prout ipsi cives dictas libertates et quietantius
habere, et molendinum piscariam pasturam fossman et locum cum pertinentiis
tenere debent, ipsique cives et antecessores et praedecessores sui a tempore,
cujus contrarium memoria non existit semper, etc.

By the recitals of this grant it seems, that preceding it, and even for time
immemorial, the city had been governed by a mayor, bailiffs, and coroners; but
when this body politic had its commencement, there is no evidence that we have
yet met with.

King Richard II. in the 5th year of his reign, granted them a confirmatory
charter.

In consequence of the spoil and devastation, made by the armies of Margaret,
Queen of England, and Henry Duke of Exeter her adherent, the city obtained from
King Edward IV. a relaxation of one half of the fee-farm rent of eighty pounds
yearly, paid to the crown; and also gained a grant of the king's fisheries of
Carlisle, in some records called the Sheriff's Net; in others, under the
denomination of the fishery of Frith Net, in the water of Eden.

The rights and privileges of the city were confirmed by several charters of
King Henry VII. 3d year of his reign; King Henry VIII. 1st, King Edward VI.
5th, Queen Elizabeth, and King James I. 2d.

King Charles I. in the 13th year of his reign, confirmed the preceding grants
of privileges, reforming only the election of mayors, bailiffs, and coroners:
this body corporate then, consisting of a mayor, eleven aldermen, two bailiffs,
two coroners, and twenty-four capital citizens or common council, were ordered
to proceed to election in the following manner: The mayor, aldermen, bailiffs,
and twenty-four capiral citizens, or the major part of them, in Guild Hall
assembled, on the Monday next after Michaelmas-day, shall have power to choose
annually one of the aldermen to be mayor; and in case of an equality, the mayor
to have a casting vote; and the mayor so chosen shall be sworn into his office
by the last mayor, if he be living; otherwise by the aldermen or major part of
them; and shall continue therein 'till another shall be chosen and sworn. In
like manner, the two bailiffs and two coroners, annually shall be chosen and
sworn. A body corporate and polite, by the name of the mayor, aldermen,
bailiff's, and citizens of the city of Carlisle; to have a common seal.

On the death of an alderman, the mayor and surviving aldermen, or the major
part of them, in Guildhall assembled, shall choose another who shall be sworn by
the mayor and continue for life.

Capital citizen dying, or for just cause removed by the mayor and aldermen,
they shall choose and swear another.

Mayor chosen and refusing to act, shall pay a fine not exceeding 20l. one of
the 24 citizens chosen alderman refusing, 10l. Bailiff, 5l. citizen 5l.

The recorder to be chosen by the whole corporate body, to continue during
pleasure.

Town Clerk so to be chosen.

A sword bearer and three sergeants at mace to execute process. -- The sword
bearer and one sergeant chosen by the new mayor, the other two by the remaining
part of the body corporate.

The corporate body may make bylaws, to be enforced by corporal or pecuniary
penalties.

The mayor, recorder, and two senior aldermen to be justices of the peace.

The mayor clerk of the market, with power to execute the office by deputy.




This city sends members to parliament, who are elected by the free burgesses,
about seven hundred in number. According to Prynne, the first members for
Carlisle were called in the thirtieth year of the reign of King Edward I. but
Nicholson and Burn give the names of members in the parliament of the 23d of
that reign. Prynne brevia parl. rediviva p. 194.

Cumbria. Karliol civitas anno. 30 Edw. I. Edw. II. -- 12, 4, 5, 7, 8, ap.
Spald, 12, 19, 20. 3 ap. Stanhope. Edw. III. -- 1, 2. ap. Wig. 2. ap. ^b. 6,
ap. West 6, ap. Eb. 7, 2, 11. ap. West. 11, 12, ap. Walton, 12, 14, 14. ap
Herewy^. 15. ap. Woodst. 17, 21, 22, 24, 26, 29, 31, 33, 34, 34, 36 37, 38, 39,
42, 43 45, 46, 47, 50. Rich. II. -- 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, twice 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15,
20, 21. Hen. IV. -- 1, 3. 8. Hen. VI. -- 1, 3, 5, 20, 25, 27, 28, 29, 33, per
ind. 28 per ind. Edw. IV. -- 6, per ind. 12 per ind. -- In all 82.


BURGESSES FOR THE CITY OF CARLISLE. King Edward I.
23 Robert de Grenesdale -- Andrew de Seller. 30 Henry le Spencer -- Andrew
Sergeant. 33 Robert de Grenesdale -- Alan de Grenesdale. 34 Alan de Grenesdale
-- *************
King Edward II.
1 Andrew Sergeant -- Richard de Hubrickby 2 William Fitz Inting -- Robert
Grenesdale. 4 John de Crostone -- William Fitz Henry. 5 Alan de Grenesdale --
William Fitz Peter. -- Alan de Grenesdale -- William de Taillour. 7 Robert
Grenesdale -- John Winton. 8 Robert Grenesdale -- Bernard Lecatour. 12 Robert
Grenesdale -- Bernard Poulter. -- Robert Grenesdale -- Richard Fitz Ivo. 15
John de Wilton -- Thomas de Calston. 20 John Fleming -- Nicholas le Despencer.
King Edward. III.
1 John Fleming -- Robert de Grenesdale. -- Alan de Grenesdale -- John de
Capella. -- Robert de Grenesdale -- Alan de Grenesdale. -- John de Haverington
-- Simon de Sandford. 2 Robert Grenesdale -- John de Harding. 4 John
Haverington -- Robert de Grundon. 6 John Haverington -- Simon Sandford. 7 John
Fleming -- Adam Crofton. 8 John de Pickering -- Henry Pepir. -- John Fleming --
Adam Crofton. 9 Thomas Hardull -- Thomas Friskington. -- John de Exlington --
Thomas Northsell. 11 Thomas de Pardishow -- Giles de Orreton. -- John de Denton
-- Adam Brighton. 12 Thomas de Pardishow -- Giles de Orreton. -- John de
Exlington -- Thomas de Bardgit. -- Robert Grenesdale -- William Fitz Ivo. --
Thomas Baron -- Thomas de Tressington. 14 John Fleming -- Adam Crofton. --
William Fitz Henry -- Henry le Spencer. 15 Thomas Hargil -- John Fleming. 17
John Chapel -- William Chapel. 21 Adam Crofton -- Robert Tebay. 22 Adam Crofton
-- Thomas Appleby. 24 Robert Tebay -- John de Haghton. 29 William Arture --
Thomas Stanley. 31 Thomas Alaynby -- William Spencer. 34 John de Thorneton --
Adam de Aglionby. 36 William Arthureth -- William Spencer. 37 Adam Halden --
William Spencer. 38 William Arthureth -- Richard Loudon. 39 Richard Orfeur --
William Clifton. 42 Adam Aglionby -- William de Clifford. 43 William Arthureth
-- John de Waverton. 45 John de Whitlawe -- 46 William Raughton -- William
Carlisle. 47 Thoms Tayleur -- Richard Denton. 50 Richard Denton -- John de
Burgh. 51 Richard Denton -- John de Brugh.
King Richard II.
2 Robert Carlisle -- John Levington. 3 Robert Carlisle -- Parker. 6 William
Osmunderlaw -- John Skeleton. 7 Richard Loudon -- John de Appleby. -- Stephen de
Carlisle -- Thomas Bolton. 8 Richard Loudon -- John Blennerhasset. 9 William
Aglionby -- John Gernot. 10 Adam de Denton -- Robert de Bristow. 11 Robert de
Carlisle -- William Aglionby. 12 John de Corkeley -- Nicholas Leveston. 13 Adam
de Kirkbride. -- 15 John Monceaux -- Robert Bristow. 16 John Roddesdale -- John
de Wek. 18 John de Brugham -- John Monceaux. 20 John Helton -- John Brugham. 21
Robert Bristow -- John Bristow.
King Henry IV.
1 John Helton -- Robert Bristowe. 3 Thomas Bolton -- Robert Bristowe. 8 Thomas
de Darle -- William Mulcastre.
King Henry V.
1 Robert de Carlisle -- Ralph Blennerhasset. 2 Robert de Carlisle -- William
Cardoyll. 3 Robert Lancastre -- William Bell. 5 Robert Carlisle -- William de
Cardoyll. 9 William Manchestre -- John Thompson.
King Henry VI.
1 Robert Cardoyll -- Richard Gray 6 John Helton -- William de Camberton. 8
Thomas Derwent -- Adam Haverington. 9 Everard Barwick -- Robert Clerk. 11
Richard Briskow -- Richard Bawleke. 13 Richard Northing -- Nicholas Thompson.
14 Richard Thornburgh -- Rowland Wherton. 15 Robert Mason -- Thomas Marescall.
20 John Blennerhasset -- William Buckler. 25 Thomas Stanlaw -- George Walton.
27 Robert Carlisle -- Richard Alanson. 28 Richard Chatterley -- Thomas
Chatterley. 29 Richard Alanson -- Alured Maleverer. 31 John Skeleton -- Rowland
Vaux. 33 John Bear -- Thomas Derwent. 38 Richard Beverley -- Thomas Ruckin.
King Edward IV.
7 Henry Denton -- Richard George. 12 Robert Skeleton -- John Coldale.
King Henry VIII.
33 William Stapleton --
King Edward VI.
1 Edward Aglionby -- Thomas Dalston. 6 Edward Aglionby -- John Dudley.
Queen Mary.
1 John Aglionby -- Simon Bristowe. Robert Whitley -- Richard Mynsho.
Philip and Mary.
1 Richard Whitley -- Richard Mynsho. 2 William Middleton -- William Ward. 4
Richard Asheton -- Robert Dalton.
Queen Elizabeth.
1 Richard Asheton -- William Mulcastre. 5 Richard Asheton -- William
Mulcastre. 13 Robert Bows -- Christopher Musgrave. 14 Thomas Pattinson --
Thomas ^allentyre. 27 Edward Aglionby -- Thomas Blennerhasset. 28 Henry
M'William -- Thomas Blennerhasset. 31 Henry Scroope -- John Dalston. 35 Henry
Scroope -- Edward Aglionby. 39 Henry Scroope -- Thomas Stamford. 43 Henry
Scroope -- John Dudley.
King James I.
1 Thomas Blennerhasset -- William Barwick. 12 Henry Fane -- 18 Henry Fane --
George Butler. 21 Henry Fane -- Edward Aghonby.
King Charles I.
1 Henry Fane. -- Edward Aglionby. -- Henry Vane -- Richard Graham. 3 Richard
Barwick. -- Richard Graham. 15 William Dalston. -- Richard Barwick. 16 William
Dalston. -- Richard Barwick. 1655 Col. Tho. Filchie. -- 1657 Col. George
Downing. -- 1659 Col. Geo. Downing. -- Tho. Craister, Esquire.
King Charles II.
12 William Briscoe -- Jeremy Tolhur. 13 Philip Howard -- Christopher Musgrave.
31 Philip Howard -- Christopher Musgrave. 32 Edward, Lord Morpeth -- Christ.
Musgrave.
King James II.
1 Christopher Musgrave -- James Graham.
King William.
1 Christopher Musgrave -- Jeremy Bubb. 2 Jeremy Bubb -- Christopher Musgrave.
-- William Lowther -- -- James Lowther -- 7 William Howard -- James Lowther. 10
William Howard -- James Lowther. 12 Philip Howard -- James Lowther. 13 Philip
Howard -- James Lowther.
Queen Anne.
1 Christopher Musgrave -- Thomas Stanwix. 4 Thomas Stanwix -- James Montague.
7 Thomas Stanwix -- James Montague. 9 Thomas Stanwix -- James Montague. 12
Christopher Musgrave -- Thomas Stanwix.
King George I.
1 Thomas Stanwix -- William Strickland. -- Henry Aglionby -- 8 James Bateman
-- Henry Aglionby.
King George II.
1 Charles Howard -- John Hylton. 7 Charles Howard -- John Hylton. 14 Charles
Howard -- John Hylton. -- -- John Stanwix. 21 Charles Howard -- John Stanwix.
28 Charles Howard -- John Stanwix.
King George III.
1 Raby Vane -- Henry Curwen. 8 Lord Edw. Bentinck -- George Musgrave. 15
Fletcher Norton -- Anthony Storer -- Walter Stanhope -- 1780 Earl of Surry --
William Lowther, Esquire. 1784 Earl of Surry -- Edward Norton, Esquire. 1786 J.
Christian, Esquire. on Earl of Surry's translation to the peerage. 1787 Rowland
Stephenson, Esquire. on E. Norton's death. 1790 J. C. Curwen, Esquire. -- Wilson
Braddyll, Esquire. 1796 J.C. Curwen, Esquire. -- Sir F. Fletcher Vane, Bt.



In the reign of King Henry VI. assizes began to be held in the city of
Carlisle, for the county of Cumberland, by virtue of a special act, made in the
14th year of that king.

There was an ancient hospital without the gates of the city, dedicated to St.
Nicholas, and said to be of royal foundation, though by what sovereign is not
known; it was instituted for the reception of thirteen lepers, of both sexes.
In the year 1180, it was endowed with a moiety of the tithes of Little Bampton,
by Adam, son of Robert, on condition that it should constantly receive two
almsmen from thence. In the year 1336, the master brought a prohibition against
the bishop to prevent his visitation, on an allegation of the hospital being a
royal foundation. In 1371, the master, brethren, and sisters, lodged a
complaint, that the house was defrauded of a great part of its revenues, on
which the bishop issued a monition, with the terrors of the greater
excommunication, against all persons who detained the corn, or other dues
appertaining to this hospital. It was granted to the prior and convent of the
cathedral church here, 17th K. Edward IV. and afterward 33d Henry VIII. made
part of the endowment of the dean and chapter, under whom the site of the
hospital is now held by lease. Vide Registrum brevium Tit. Prohibitiones, sol.
405.

Pat. 21. Edw. 1. m. Rex recuperat advoc. hujus hosp. versus Episc. Carliol et
dedit custodi quasdam decimas extra parochiales in Foresta de Englewood.

Pat. 15. Edw. 3. p. 1. m. 48. (Examplar. Statutorum) Escheat 31. Edw. 3. n.
53. Inquis de Travis Garbarum eid. pertinentibus ab antiquo. Pat. 42. Edw. 3.
p. 1. m. 8.

Pat. 5. King Henry 4. p. m. Orig. 17. Edw. 4. rot. 18. pat. 17. Edw. 4. p. 1.
m. 26. -- TANNER's NOT. NOTES.




There was a house of Gray or Franciscan Friars in Carlisle, before the year
1390; but what was the endowment, or who was the founder, is not pointed out by
any historian. Lel. Col. v. 7. p. 48. And in the catalogues of the frieries of
this order, under the custody of Newcastle.

DODSWORTH's MS. Collec. in Bibl. Bodl. v. 99. so. 40.




There was also here, a house of Black Friars, founded before the 53d King
Henry III. Tanner.
touching whom, we remain as much in the dark, as we are relative to the other.
Mon. Angl. 1. 654.
All that Leland says of these two monasteries is, There is in the town, a
chapel of St. Albane, and also within the walls ii houses of freres, blake and
gray.

The chief pieces of antiquity which have been discovered here, or are yet
preserved, are the following: --

The Triclinium of Roman work spoken of by Malmsbury, a spacious hall for
public festivals, is now so perfectly destroyed, as not even to have left the
site, or one memorial where it stood, remaining. In Leland's Collectania, vol.
II. p. 257. it is mentioned, Lel. Col. v. 2. p. 257. In aliquibus tamen
parietum ruinis qui semiruti remansere, videas mira Romanorum artificia. Ut est
in Lugubalia civitate triclinium lapideis fornicibus concamertum, quod nulla
unquam tempestatum contumelia, quin etiam nec appositis lignis et succensis
valuit labe factari, Cumberland vocatur regio, et Cumbri vocantur homines;
scripturaque legitur in front triclimi Marii victoriae. Quod quid sit haesito,
nis^ forte pars Cumbrorum olim his locis insiderit cum fuissent a Mario Italia
pulsi.

Ex Prolog. lib. 3. de gestis Pontificum Anglorum.
from its admirable construction, and strong arched work of stone, it had
endured all the casualties of many ages. The inscription, said to be cut on the
front of this building, has exercised the attention of antiquaries. -- Camden's
words are, On the front of it was this inscription, Marti victoriae: some will
have this Marius to be Arnagus, the Britain; others, the Marius who was saluted
emperor in opposition to Gallienus; and is said to have been so very strong,
that authors tell us, he had only nerves and no veins in his fingers: yet I
have heard that some copies have it, not Marii victoriae, but Marti victori,
which latter may probably be favored by some, as seeming to come nearer the
truth. As no vestige remains of this piece of antiquity, we must rest contented
with the uncertainty, in which Camden and his editor have left us, relative to
it.

Other two Roman remains are mentioned by Camden, which he says he saw here;
one in the house of Thomas Aglionby, near the citadel, but not ancient.

DIIS MANIBV SMARCITROIANI AVGVSTINIANITVMTA CIENDVMCVRAVIT AFEL AMMILVSIMA
CONIVX KARISS.
To which was joined the effigies of an armed horseman with a lance. The other
in the garden of Thomas Middleton, in a large and beautiful character.

LEGVI VIC.P.F G.P.RF.
These inscriptions have long been removed, and it is not now known, whether
they are yet preserved, or where they are now deposited.

The following inscription is on a stone, two feet five inches long, twelve
feet broad at one end, and nine at the other, and was found in digging Mr.
Benson's cellar, in the year 1744, six feet under ground From the Gentleman's
Magazine, 1749. -- G. SMITH.


The reading of this inscription was given in a succeeding Magazine, under the
known signature of the learned antiquary, Mr. Pegg: I read (it) thus, Deor de
Torci Mil. and explain it, Deor, or perhaps, Theor de Torci Knt. De Forcy or
Forci, was one of the great men that came into England with William the
Conqueror, (see the Roll of Battle Abbey) and the family continued here,
flourishing long after.

From the Manuscripts of the late ROGER GALE, Esquire. -- Extract of a Letter from
Mr. THOMAS ROUTH.

Last week in digging a pit, to receive the water of a drain, from a cellar in
the gardens of Jerome Tully, Esquire. in this city, at the depth of between three
and four yards, was found a Roman fibula and a medal, and likewise two oaken
pieces of the joining timber of a house, which appeared to have been burnt. The
head on the medal is of Trajan, the letters left round it IANOAVG.....PM the
others defaced. On the reverse, is the emperor seated on a pile of arms, with a
trophy erected before him, the legible letters being S.P.Q.R. OPTI..... in the
exergue S.C. The earth, nigh as far as they dug, is all forced, which is the
reason that few or no pieces of antiquity are met with here, except they dig to
a considerable depth.

CARLISLE, April 13th, 1743.

Extract of a Letter from Mr. RICHARD GOODMAN, Keeper of Carlisle Goal, dated
22d of July, 1728.

The figure of a crescent I here send you, is sufficient to let you see what it
is. It is of copper, found in digging a cellar opposite to the Bush-Inn here.
It lay about nine feet deep: as I looked upon it to be a choice piece of
antiquity, I have procured the original for you: I take it to be a symbol of
Isis, and also wore by other gods. The shank or stem, by which it was stuck
into the figure or standard is very strong, and has a hole for a pin to fasten
it; from which shank, arises a ring on the backside, which is also very strong,
and will take in a man's finger. I presume it might be to fasten some parts of
the garb or for what other use, I beg your thoughts.

Extract from Mr. GALE's Answer.

As for the brass plate you sent me, it seems to be nothing but an ornament
belonging to the trappings of a horse, and might have hung before his breast,
by the ring on the backside of it. The hole through the shank has been for
fastening a drop or pendant to it, as a further ornament.

In opening a gravel pit lately, on the side of a hill, in the parish of
Stanwix, just without the suburbs of Carlisle, a stratum of bones were
discovered, at about a yard below the surface, lying about a foot thick in most
parts, and stretching the whole length of the pit, which I apprehend to be near
twenty feet. I examined the spot, and found diverse fragments of Roman pottery
ware, Elegant specimens, and some of the bones were exhibited.
intermixed with the bones. They are, I think, the bones of horses, and might,
perhaps, have been buried after an engagement between the Romans and Picts; but
it is not so easy to account for the fragments of pottery, etc. which were
found in great numbers intermixed with them.

N. B. The Picts Wall ran within less than half a mile of the spot where these
bones were found. -- Dated Dec. 18th, 1765, (signed) C. LYTTLETON.

In the Archaeologia, is published accounts of stone hatchets found at
Carlisle, with a learned treatise thereon; and to which we refer the curious
reader.

If we may presume to offer our sentiments on these subjects, after the learned
antiquaries have so elaborately expatiated thereon, without the appearance of
arrogance and presumption, we would suggest, that the bones mentioned by the
bishop, mixed with the fragments of the patarae, were the remains of sacrifice:
when the ordinary receptacle was cleaned out, this has been the general
repository. If these were the remains of animals slain in battle, the mixture
is not to be reconciled; and it was more than such occasion would have required
to clear them from the bones of men slain at the same time. The learned
inquirer did not discover any remains of broken trapping, studings, or
ornaments of horses, or men accoutrements. The hammers, or stone hatchets, seem
very unfit for weapons of warfare, unweildy, and uncouth: if they had been in
use in battle, some testimony would have been given of them; and they would not
have been totally disused, one might presume, at the coming of the Romans, but
would have been exhibited as trophies, or otherwise as testimonies of the
valor of British heroes, the ancstors of those who appeared armed against the
invaders, in the most sacred cause of war, the defense of liberty, and their
country; and the maintenance of the established religion. We have received no
account of such weapons then in use. As domestic utensils, it is not probable
they would have been secreted with such care, or deposited with such solemnity,
as even to support the head of the deceased owner in the sepulcher. Could we
imagine the friends of any personage, who was to be interred with the funeral
pomp of a tumulus, would busy themselves with giving the deceased labourer his
beetle with him, for the regions of death We humbly conceive this was a sacred
implement in the possession of the heathen priest, with which he prepared the
sacrifice: we have innumerable relations, of the abhorrence the ancients had,
of their sacred things and places being polluted by strangers; and thence we
trace the cause of these flints being concealed. All degrees of religious, in
remote ages, took great precaution to bury, with the consecrated minister, the
instruments of his office, and that was followed in the practice of the ancient
Romish church. The sacred securis of the British priest, was the first emblem
of his function, and the properest ornament to be placed with his remains in
the tomb. The remnants of British priests were driven into Scotland by the arms
of Rome; there they longest retained their ancient rites and religion, and
there those instruments of the ancient priesthood have been most frequently
found. The altar, No. 1. in our plate of antiquities, found in digging the
Grapes-inn cellar, appears never to have been finished two and three are the
sculptures upon its sides.

No. 9, 10, and 11, were dug out lately: also No. 14. which is iron; these are
in the possession of the Rev. D. Carlisle: they are described by H. Rook, Esquire.
in the Archaeologia.

No. 13. was found built in the back of a chimney in rebuilding the house of
Edward Nevinson, Esquire. two years ago, who presented it to us.

No. 15, is a gold fibula, same size as the engraving; it was found at old
Penrith after our description of that station was printed. Its weight is 14
dwts. 12 grains, is about three sixteenths of an inch thick, has the
representations of six griffins cut out on one side, and on the other is five
quadrupeds, and a place left where the sixth was intended to be cut, as is
evident from the place being a little hollowed out. These appear to represent
bears: it probably belonged to one of the Warwick family. It is in the
possession of Mr. Sanderson of Plumpton.

FROM HORSLEY's BRITANNIA ROMANA, Page 266.

No. 41. This and the next are yet remaining at Carlisle in the late Brigadier
Stanwix's garden. I have given the draught of this chiefly for the sake of the
patera, which has a peculiar handle. On the other side is the common
praesericulum. But there are no letters on any part of it. -- No. vii. in our
plate.

No. 42. Legio sexta victrix pia fidelis genio populi Romani secit. -- Camden
says this was in the garden of Thomas Middleton, but it is now in the same
garden with the altar, number 41; and he justly observes, that it is in a large
and beautiful character. Mr. Gordon makes the last line G. P. P. F. but Camden
reads G. P. R. F. adding that he leaves the interpretation to others. And as
upon a strict examination, I find these really are the letters, I think they
may be read Genio populi Romani secit. The emperor himself may be the person
intended, who often had the compliment paid him of being the genius of his
people, and this is frequent upon the imperial coins after Gallienus -- No.
vii^. in our plate.




Carlisle, from its situation, was continually subject to the distress of
warsare, in the several irruptions of the Scots; and frequently was taken from
the English. The border wars were prosecuted with a degree of ferocity and
savage barbarity, disgraceful to humanity, and horrid in history.

Among the various incidents in the history of Carlisle, the following are the
most material.

So soon, after the fortifications were constructed, as the beginning of the
reign of King Stephen, David King of Scotland, in the first year of his reign,
entered into England, and took possession of this city. Stephen, on receiving
the news, is said to have exclaimed, "Quae dolose cepit victoriose recipiam;"
but this weak prince, so far from performing what he boasted, made a cession of
the whole county to the Scots. David Rex Scotiae 1o anno regni Stephani dolo se
cepit Caerluil et novum castellum. Quo audito dixit Steph. rex. Quae dolose
cepit victoriose recipiam. -- LEL. COL. v. 1. p. 391.

Scotus retinuit Cairluel concessione Stephani. -- Ibid. v. 1. p. 198.

Caerloil vero retinuit Scottus concessione regis Stephani. -- Ibid. vol. 2. p.
305.




In the year 1138, King David of Scotland, made this city the place of his
retreat, after his dreadful overthrow at the battle of the Standard. And here
he received Alberic the pope's legate, by whose influence, all the women
captives were brought to Carlisle and set at liberty. He obtained from the
Scotch leaders, a solemn promise, that in future incursions, they would spare
the churches, and with hold their swords from the aged, from women and infants:
an injunction which humanity dictated, but which the savage customs of the
contending nations had not admitted into the modes of warfare.

Henry, eldest son of the empress Maud, came to David at Carlisle, attended by
the great barons of the western parts of England, and received the order of
knighthood with much pomp and ceremony; the young prince then taking an oath,
that on his accession to the crown of England, he would confirm to David and
his son, their English possessions: but such are the oaths of princes! Henry no
sooner grasped the scepter, than he demanded of the Scotch regency, restitution
of Cumberland: and in 1158, the two monarchs had an interview in this city; but
much dissension arose, and the claim of the English monarch was not complied
with. In the 3d year of Henry the II, the King of Scotts had the earldom of
Lancastre in his hands, the cite of Cairluel, Bamburgh Castle and Newcastel.
-- LEL. COL. Vol. 1. p. 471.
The English obtained and held quiet possession, till after the accession of
William the Lion, who succeeded Malcome on the throne of Scotland: he, in the
year 1173, made a fruitless assault upon Carlisle; but in the ensuing year,
returning with an army of 80,000 men, he commenced a regular siege, the city
being defended by Robert de Vaux; after laying before it some time, the Scotch
forces formed a blockade, to give liberty for withdrawing part of the army, to
ravage and waste the adjacent country: the garrison were reduced to great
distress for want of provision, and came to a conditional capitulation, that if
they did not receive succors from the English before Michaelmas, they would
surrender the place; but the succeeding events prevented the capitulation being
carried into effect, and William's being made prisoner at Alnwick, put an end
to the disasters of the war. The greatest part of the city suffered by fire in
this reign, and the records and charters were destroyed. Interea Gulielmus Rex
Scottorum obsedit Carleolum, quod Robertus de Walls in custodia habuit, et
dimissa part exercitus sui, perambulavit Northumbriam, terram Regis et
Baronium fuorum devastans; et cepit Castellum de Lidel et castellum de Burgo,
de Appelbi, de Wereword et Yieboth, quod Odonellus de Winframville tenuit, et
postea rediit ad obsidionem Carleoli etc. -- LEL. COL. v. 2. p. 207.


In the reign of King John, Alexander, King of Scotland, entered England, and
besieging Carlisle, took it: but he could not reduce the castle, which remained
in the hands of the English. Alexander King of Scotts sun to K. William did
enter ynto England and did much deposite to K. John. Alexander assegid Cairluel
and took it. -- Ibid. vol. 1. p. 535.


King Henry III. made Robert de Veteripont, governor of this castle and city.

The city suffered greatly by an accidental fire in the year 1292, in which
conflagration, great part of the cathedral was destroyed, and all the records
which the city and convent had procured to be renewed, were also burnt, In the
chronicle of Lanercost, is a full account of the dreadful devastations made by
this fire.

In 1296, the Scots entered the western march, and having laid the country
waste as they approached Carlisle, they burnt the suburbs, and attempted to
take the city by storm; but the inhabitants made so brave a defense, even the
women mounting the walls, discharging stones, boiling water, and other things
on the assailants, that they abandoned their enterprise, and retreated to their
own country.

By an entry in the old register book of the abbey, it appears that on the 4th
June, 32d King Edward I. half the city was burnt down, as far as the gate of
Richardby.

King Edward I. resided here from the 30th of January, in the 35th year of his
reign, to the 28th of June, when he proceeded on his last expedition toward
Scotland, and died in his camp at Brugh on Sands.

In the 9th year of the reign of King Edward II. Robert Brus, King of Scotland,
on his incursion laid waste the country as far as Allerdale and Coupland in
this county: he besieged Carlisle in a regular form, by engines and other
warlike modes, for ten days, and at length was obliged to withdraw his troops
in great precipitation, leaving behind them most of their instruments of war.
They were hotly pursued by the English; and two of the Scottish leaders, John
de Moravia and Sir Robert Bardolph, were taken prisoners, and afterward
ransomed.

In the 15th year of King Edward II. Andrew Harcla, Earl of Carlisle, was
seized in the castle, and suffered as a traitor. This action was so gallant,
that it appears worth repeating here: the earl was publicly proclaimed a
traitor, by the king's command, Anthony, Lord Lucy, was sent to apprehend him.
Having dispersed his party in the city to prevent suspicion, Lord Lucy, with a
few attendants, entered the castle, as having business with the earl: his
principal associates in this enterprise, were Sir Hugh de Louther, Sir Richard
de Denton, and Sir Hugh de Morriceby, with four esquires in arms: the party, to
whom the design was communicated, had signals appointed to them for their
conduct in the business; and as the knights passed each gate, a number of men
halted, as if carelessly loitering for want of immediate employment; but with
an intention to guard the pass, prevent escapes, and to be at hand to lend
their aid if occasion required. The four chiefs, with their esquires, passed
into the innermost, and most secure parts of the castle, even through the great
hall, to the earl's private apartment; where, finding him sitting in an
unsuspicious manner, Lord Lucy accosted him, requiring him to surrender or
defend himself; a cry of treason immediately echoed through the castle, and the
keeper of the inner gate prepared to shut it, but was instantly slain by Sir
Richard Denton. The watchword being given, the parties formed into bodies,
took possession of the gates and avenues, and the earl, with the whole
garrison, surrendered without further bloodshed. The chief prisoner was put
into safe durance till the king's pleasure relative to him should be known.

In the eleventh year of King Edward III. the Scots laid siege to the city of
Carlisle, On John Baliol's doing homage to K. Edw. III. the Scotts having 7
countes in their band can to Cairluel and brent the suberbes of it. -- LEL.
COL. v. 1. p. 541.
and burnt the suburbs with the hospital of St. Leonards; but the city held out.

Sir William Douglas of Lochmaben was kept in irons in the castle; (an uncommon
act of severity toward a prisoner of war) but he was esteemed so enterprizing
and dangerous an enemy by King Edward III. that this was done at his special
command.

In the year 1345, Penrith and Carlisle were burnt by the Scots, under the
command of Sir William Douglas. A body of the Scotch forces, headed by Sir
Alexander Strachan, detached for foraging, were intercepted; and Sir Alexander
was slain by Sir Robert Ogle, who ran him through the body with his lance.
Bishop Kirby, the eleventh bishop of this diocese, signalized himself in this
rencounter; for being dismounted, and in imminent danger of being made a
prisoner; he fought with uncommon bravery, recovered his horse, and by his
valor and animating exhortations, he spirited up his party, rallied them
frequently, and brought them again to the sight, to which the victory was
deservedly attributed.

In the sixth year of the reign of King Richard II. the Scots sent forth a
plundering band, who ravaged the forest of Inglewood, sacked Penrith at the
time of the fair, and returned with a vast booty; having gained, as
Hollingshead says, a drove of 40,000 head of cattle.

In the 29th year of King Henry VIII's reign, during Aske's rebellion, Carlisle
was besieged by 8000 men, under the command of Musgrave and Tilby, partisans in
that affair, but they were repulsed by the garrison; and as they were retiring,
were intercepted by the Duke of Norfolk and his troops, who took all the
leaders prisoners, except Musgrave; those, with about seventy others, he
ordered to immediate execution, and hung them on the city walls.

In the 40th and 41st years of Queen Eilzabeth's reign, this place suffered a
dreadful visitation by the plague, in which their died 1196 persons, being
computed to be one third of the whole inhabitants. It also raged in the
adjacent country with a great mortality, as was mentioned when we spoke of
Salkeld and Penrith: for the relief of the diseased poor, contributions were
raised for the city, to the amount of 209l. 9s. 10d.

In the twentieth year of the reign of King Charles I. A. D. 1644, this place
was surrendered to the parliament forces commanded by Lesley, having sustained
a siege and blockade from the 9th of October to June following; during which,
the distress of the garrison and inhabitants was so great, that the flesh of
horses, dogs, and rats were eaten. Bread was so totally exhausted, that
hemp seed was substituted, so long as any was found in the place. Great
assistance was given by the country, when provisions could be thrown in, to the
amount in value of 463l. 10s. procured by private subscriptions. On surrender,
honorable terms of capitulation were obtained, both for the military with
honors of war, as also for the inhabitants their liberties and properties.

A coinage of silver pieces of three shillings value took place in the castle
during the siege, from the plate of the inhabitants, sent in for that purpose.
They are become very scarce, and bear a considerable price with the curious.

The last hostile acts, of which Carlisle was the scene, were those in the
Scotch rebellion, 1745. It surrendered to the chevalier on the 14th of
November, who lay before it with his whole army. The gazette account of this
event, said that for seven days before, neither the officers nor the common men
of the garrison got scarce an hour's rest, being perpetually under alarms; that
many were so sick through their great fatigue, that being out of all hopes of
speedy relief, they absolutely refused to hold out any longer, and multitudes
went off every hour over the walls; some of whom fell into the hands of the
rebels, till the officers of several companies were at last left with three or
four men; so that the mayor and corporation determined to hang out a white flag
(though contrary to the opinion and protestation of Colonel Durand) and made
the best terms they could get for themselves: that the colonel was thereupon
obliged to abandon the castle, not having above seventy invalids in his whole
corpse, and most of them unfit for service: the rebels threatening, in case of
refusal, to sack and destroy the whole town with fire and sword." For the
stations and routs of the rebels, see the plate of encampment, page 430. -- A
Tullibarden's approach. -- B Pretender's approach. -- C Duke of Perth's attack.
-- D Duke of Cumberland's batteries. -- Blackhall and Moorhouse, the
Pretender's quarters. -- The rebels routs into Scotland, by Roweliff and
Grinsdale.
The town raised 2000l. to save the houses from being plundered.



His Royal Highness, the late Duke of Cumberland, was in person before Carlisle
in the month of December following, and planned the attack. On the 27th of that
month his troops opened a battery of six eighteen pounders, against the four
gun battery of the castle, his Highness putting the match to the first gun; and
here he narrowly escaped a cannon shot from the enemy, falling within a yard of
him. On the 29th the rebels displayed a flag of truce, and on the thirtieth
they accepted the concise terms offered them by his Highness. All the terms his
Royal Highness will, or can grant to the rebel garrison of Carlisle, are, that
they shall not be put to the sword, but be reserved for the king's pleasure. Of
the Manchester regiment that surrendered prisoners, there were one colonel,
five captains, six lieutenants, seven ensigns, one adjutant, and ninety-three
non-commissioned officers, drummers and private men. Of the Scotch, the
governor, one surgeon, six captains, seven lieutenants, and three ensigns, with
256 non-commissioned officers, drummers and private men. Of those who said they
were in the French service, three officers, one sergeant, and four private men.
There was one extraordinary prisoner, the Rev. James Cappock, a Lancashire man,
made bishop of Carlisle, by the chevalier, on his first entry. The annexed view
is taken from the place where the duke of Cumberland battered the castle, from
an original drawing in the collection of Thomas Ridgate Maunsell, Esquire. to whom
we are obliged for this plate: his father was a captain in the duke of
Montague's ordnance regiment of foot, and commanded the artillery at the siege.
-- THE EDITORS.


The tillage land here bears good crops of wheat, rye, barley, and oats. The
meadows are rich, some lands letting from 4l. to 5l. an acre, and upwards. The
sheep and cattle are much superior to the more hilly parts; as a spirit of
improving the breed, and obtaining better fleeced sheep is appearing, to the
great improvement of the country. The chief manufactory of Carlisle, is in
printed cottons, of which there are four very large works, carried to high
excellence and perfection, which bring yearly 24,000l. in duties to the crown;
supporting a vast multitude of industrious people, of all ages and sexes; much
of the pencil work being executed by girls. It is a sight the traveller should
not omit, and the generosity of the proprietors is singular, for they give
permission to show every branch of the manufactory, from the shop where the
block-cutters carve the pattern, to the dressing house and calender. There are
several manufactories of checks, calicoes, muslins, and fancy goods: also, an
extensive cotton-spinning manufactory, "Saw at Mr. Bernard Berton's a pleasing
sight of 12 little girls spinning at once at a horizontal wheel, which set
twelve bobbings in motion; yet so contrived that should any accident happen to
one, the motion of that might be stopped without any impediment to the others.

"At Mr. Custs I was favored with the sight of a sine head of father
Huddleston, in black with a large band and long gray hair, with an uplifted
crucifix in his hand, probably taken in the attitude in which he lulled the
soul of the departing K Cha. II." -- PENNANT.


a soap boilery, several tallow-chandlers, tanners, skinners, and curriers.
Carlisle is likewise noted for making hats, whips, and fish-hooks. -- For
further particulars see the succeeding pages.

The market of Carlisle is supplied abundantly; the mutton and beef are of
excellent flavor; wild-fowl abounds, and there is a profusion and variety of
fish exposed here to sale, not to be excelled in any market in Britain: the
salmon and trout are incomparable; the river fish, and those of the lakes, are
peculiar and abundant. In a few words, the man of epicurean appetite, who would
study the indulgence of his palate, may find in this market a variety of
dainties, not to be so generally enjoyed in any other part of England.

THE MODERN STATE OF THE CITY OF CARLISLE. We confess our obligations to Mr. R.
Longrigg, a native of this city, for this account of the modern state of
Carlisle.

THE EDITORS.

The city of Carlisle (the origin of which is lost in the uncertainties of
antiquity) stands upon a pleasing eminence, which having every way a gradual
descent, the town is easily kept clean, without the aid of a common shore.
Being a frontier town toward Scotland, it is fortified with a wall and citadel
now in ruins, and a castle kept still in some sort of repair. Whilst South and
North Britain had each their respective king, and the inhabitants of the two
kingdoms lived in habits of enmity with each other, Carlisle, exposed to the
calamities of war, was often sacked, and its citizens plundered and murdered.
Dismal times to live in! The accession of the Stuart family to the crown of
England somewhat abated national animosities and miseries; and the union, by
conferring reciprocal privileges, and opening a free intercourse between the
two countries, has obliterated invidious distinctions, and convinced the people
on both sides the Tweed, that their vicinity to each other should have induced
their ancestors, always to cultivate habits of amity and friendship with their
neighbors.

From the wall, which may be ascended in different parts by flights of steps,
the eye is entertained with a beautiful and extensive landscape, and
imperceptibly led into several distant counties, whilst Scotland and
Solway-Frith And the adjacent mountains, some of whose summits touch the clouds.
do not a little contribute to enliven the enchanting scene. The city is
surrounded with three rivers, Petteril on the south, Eden on the east and
north, and Caude on the west, whose meandering streams are seen in many places
at a great distance. -- A garrison was formerly kept here; but there has been
none for the last thirty years. The military who may be stationed in the town
for a time, are quartered upon the public houses in the city and suburbs.
Carlisle has still a governor and deputy governor, whose places are only sine
cures. A town major, engineer, barrack master, store-keeper, head-gunner, three
quarter-gunners, etc. When the governor of this city happened to be one of its
representatives in parliament, the subordinate places in the garrison were
given to freemen, (but generally to such as were in the corporation) so that
frequently the chief magistrate was a quarter-gunner at the same time. Thus was
the invalid, worn out in the service of his king and country, too frequently
overlooked in the disposition of this appointment.

Carlisle being a bishop's see, has a cathedral, in which are performed the
cathedral service; in the same edifice is performed the parochial service of
St. Mary's: and in a part of it the chancellor of the diocese holds the
consistory court. As this religious edifice is the chief ornament of the city,
a short description of it may, perhaps, not be deemed improper.

The choir of this venerable pile is the most magnificent part of the building.
It has a stately steeple, with a ring of eight bells, the roof is covered with
lead, and being considerably higher than the other buildings in the city, has a
very sine effect when viewed as a distant object. This noble edifice being
partly of Gothic and partly of Saxon architecture, offers what is worthy the
inspection of the architect and antiquarian. Contiguous to the cathedral is an
extensive churchyard, (the principal burying ground) surrounded with a wall
seven feet high, in the inside of which is a row of lofty plane trees, whose
branches overhang a part of the adjacent street and form a shade, under which
is a fine paved walk much resorted to. Within the precincts of the abbey,
besides the cathedral, there are several venerable buildings, which (except the
prebends' houses) show marks of antiquity.

St. Cuthbert's, the other parish church in Carlisle, is a modern edifice,
rebuilt in the year 1778, upon the site of the old church, but without any kind
of external or internal ornament. It has a square steeple or tower, but so
confined as not to admit of a ring of bells; so that the parishioners are
called together to their devotion by the weak tinklings of the old bell, which
was not exchanged for one of a louder tone. The steeple is decorated with a
dome covered with lead; from which a fane projects, havthe year in which the
church was rebuilt cut in it.

Besides these two churches, there are in Carlisle, three Protestant dissenting
meeting houses, Dr. Robert Henry was called and ordained to preach to the
Presbyterian congregation in Fisher-street, Carlisle, in November 1748, and
continued with them 12 years; and on the 13th of August, he became pastor of a
dissenting congregation in Berwick upon Tweed.
one Quaker, and one Methodist meeting house; Wesley's connection.

The public buildings are, the Town Hall, Moot hall, and Council Chamger,
conspicuously situated in the center of the city; and to which you ascend by a
slight of broad steps from the promenade. Above the entrance are placed the
arms of the corporation. Here are held the criminal and Nisi Prius courts of
Assize for the county; the Quarter Sessions, the Mayor's Court, the election
for members to represent the city in parliament, etc. The records and writings
belonging to the corporation, the freemen's admissions, etc. are kept in
detached offices belonging to the same building. It is to be lamented that the
houses under the Moot-hall are the private property of different persons: to
purchase these would require a deal of money. The funds of the corporation are
not competent for this; therefore, there are little hopes of ever seeing this
edifice become an ornament to the city, by being rebuilt upon a more useful and
elegant plan.
The council chamger is ornamented with a cupola and clock. The Guild Hall, in
which the free trades hold their meetings, is situate at the head of
Fisher-street; and though it has the appearance of antiquity, is but a very
mean structure FREE TRADES.] Merchants, Tanners, Tailors, Skinners, Smiths,
Weavers, Shoemakers, Butchers. -- The trades hold their annual meetings upon
Ascension-day.
The Market-cross stands at the south end of the promenade, and opposite to the
town hall. It seems to be a modern edifice, has a neat appearance, but without
any cover: it has the corporation arms cut upon it; underneath which was
sculptured, but of late years defaced, a lion with its paw upon a large folio,
alluding either to magna charta or the city charter. The guard-house,
contiguous to the butcher-market, is a very great nuisance, and hurts the view
of the principal streets; and what renders it still more so is, the corporation
have granted leases, and built houses adjoining to it, perhaps, upon the royal
property. Near the English-gate are charity houses, built by the corporation,
in which decayed freemen, or the widows of those deceased, are allowed to live
gratis. In Carlisle there is one endowed school. Rev. Mr. Faucet, head master.
-- Rev. Mr. Pattison under master.
There is also a charity school for clothing and educating the daughters of
poor freemen. Mrs. Carlyle, mistress of the charity school. -- The girls are
taught to read, knit, and sew.


The corporation of this city consists of a recorder, twelve aldermen, and
twenty-four common councilmen. Present recorder, T. Garforth, Esquire. -- John
Barnes, attorney at law, deputy town clerk.
One of the aldermen is annually chosen mayor, and the other annual place-men
are chosen out of the common council. The subordinate officers are three
sergeants at mace, five bedals, or town scavengers. The sergeants and bedals
wear the corporation livery, and their places are generally for life. The
sergeants act as bailiffs in processes before the mayor's court, and to them is
committed the execution of summons and writs of arrest for debt issued by it.
The office of the bedals is to keep the streets clean, and to put in execution
the punishment awarded to offenders within the mayor's jurisdiction. The
liberties of the corporation extend a few yards without the city walls, and are
ascertained by what is called the Freelidge stone, with their arms sculptured
upon it. It may also be proper to observe, that the public and private
buildings belonging to the body corporate, have the name of the mayor by whom,
and the year in which each edifice was erected, sculptured on some conspicuous
part, so that the traveller's eye often catches these words, "Erected by --
Esquire. Mayor," even upon a mean edifice.

Carlisle, about the beginning of the present century, exhibited no marks of
modern convenience and elegance. The buildings, mostly of wood, clay, and
laths, bespoke the poverty and bad taste of the inhabitants. The gabels fronted
the streets, the doors were generally in the center, and many of the houses had
porches which projected two or three yards into the street, doubtless for
warmness. The front door was arched, or Gothic, formed to correspond with the
gabel; and the diminutive windows, which gave light to the inner apartments,
were very improperly placed, but of the same order. The most of the houses did
not exceed the height of one story, and were chiefly covered with thatch. Those
of two stories had the upper rooms inlaid with strong oak, and unceiled below.
The lanes and avenues, ^ven the church road, were not paved: and in many places
entirely covered with weeds and underwood. The streets, not often trod upon,
were, in many parts of them, green with grass.
The doors were of oak, very strong and clumsy, put together with large wood
pins, a part of which projected an inch or two from the door. These pins were
many in number, and sometimes placed in figures romanticly irregular. Houses
were not then painted either within or without; this being only a modern
improvement. The streets, though spacious, were paved with large stones, and
the center part or causeway, rose to a considerable height. The fronts from the
houses were paved in the same manner, the consequence of which was, that the
kennels or gutters were deep trenches, and stone bridges were placed in many
different parts, for the convenience of passing from one side of the street to
the other. These gutters were the reservoirs of all kinds of filth, which when
a sudden heavy rain happened, by stopping the conduit of the bridges, inundated
the streets so, as to render them impassable on foot.

The shambles, which stood in the market place, were private property, and
being built entirely of wood and covered with different kinds of slate, gave
them a very grotesque and antique appearance. At the north end of the shambles
was a well, over which was a building placed upon pillars, called Carnaby's
Folly. On the front of each side of this building was the fish market: the
Folly and the shambles have been lately taken down, the latter having been
purchased, at a great price, by the corporation. The former was their own
property. For this the corporation deserve the thanks of the inhabitants of
Carlisle, as the shambles, by occupying a great part of one of the principal
streets of the city, were a public nuisance.

Little more than half a century ago, the inhabitants of Carlisle carried on no
foreign commerce. -- Their trade consisted in that of a good weekly market, two
annual fairs, and two extraordinary well attended statutes, for hiring
servants. The annual fairs in this city, formerly drew together numbers of
people from many parts of England and Scotland. The business for the whole year
was settled at these meetings; as in many places the intercourse between town
and town, or man and man, was not yet carried on by way of port carriers, and
other public conveyances. The assize and public diversions contributed greatly
to draw together the neighboring gentry. Though there was very little trade
and commerce in this city, yet the inhabitants did not seem to know the want of
it. The necessaries of life were uncommonly cheap, and the chief part of their
wearing apparel was of their own spinning. -- Pride and luxury in eating,
drinking, furniture and dress, had not yet made their entrance within the city
walls; industry and hospitality were the prominent features of the people. The
victuallers brewed their own ale, of a good quality, and sold it for threepence
a quart, full measure. And (such was the custom of the place) seldom did a
company call for the second pot, without the landlord or landlady presenting
them with the fare of the house to relish their liquor. Spirituous liquors were
very seldom made use of: though the inhabitants were not opulent, yet many of
them had considerable property, and for the most part under a good tenure. The
principal part of the houses in Carlisle are freehold; a few are leasehold
under the dean and chapter, and the corporation; and a sew under the king.


The town, at the time we are speaking of, was not very populous, and therefore
the office of mayor, or chief magistrate, was considered to be of great
consequence. He seldom appeared in public without the rod of justice, and had
always one of the sergeants to attend him. The baleful seeds of party were not
then sown among the inhabitants, a friendly and neighbourly intercourse
pervaded the whole city. All the ancient customs were kept up with harmony and
festivity, and man united to man by love and good fellowship, circumstanced as
the inhabitants were, living in the center of a rich and well cultivated
country, it is no wonder if their minds were free. In ages prior to this era,
they had been exposed to one continued scene of warfare. Under this hazardous
situation, it may reasonably be supposed that, their contentions could not lead
them to dive much into the mysteries and fluctuations attendant upon a trading
intercourse. And suppose they had been in affluent circumstances, it cannot be
imagined they would have expended their money in building. Having been so long
accustomed to the calamities incident to war, they wished for nothing more than
to enjoy that tranquillity, they and their ancestors had been so long strangers
to.

This city continued in the situation abovementioned, without any material
alteration either in respect to trade or improvement in building, till the
rebellion in 1745. Soon after this period, a company of Hamburgh merchants
fixed upon Carlisle as a proper place to carry on an extensive woolen
manufactory. This manufactory was carried on to a very great extent in broad
and plain cloths. All the disserent branches of the business, from the sheep
shearing to the finishing the pieces, were performed. And as most of the work
was done in various parts of the country, the parishes were little affected by
an increase of paupers; the purvey then seldom exceeding twenty or thirty in a
year. This was the mode of collecting the poor rate at that time, and for long
after.
The distance from Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, Scotland, and those parts of the
two kingdoms enriched with the staple commodity, was a very inconsiderable
object to this company of adventurers. To facilitate this undertaking, two
gentlemen (brothers) of the name of Dewlicher, were sent over from the
continent to superintend the work. This manufactory was of great importance to
the inhabitants of Carlisle and the country around. It brought from various
parts of the three kingdoms many workmen in the different branches of the
woolen trade. People, to the distance of twenty miles from the city were
employed, and every loom that could be got was engaged. The most sanguine hopes
were entertained, that the undertaking would answer the end proposed: and never
were two men engaged in any business more carressed by all ranks of people,
than the Dewlichers were. A few years after this manufactory was established,
the elder brother died, who had taken the most active part of the business upon
himself; and who, from its flourishing state during his life, seemed to be
every way competent to so great a trust. The younger brother had, sometime
prior to the death of the elder, made a very imprudent connection by marriage
with the house keeper to the family. Her maiden name was Johnson.
This woman was weak and ambitious, and by her was the ruin of this once
flourishing manufactory brought about. Having the ascendancy over her credulous
husband, she persuaded him to dismiss most of the old workmen, who were
overseers, from their employment: these men having been bred to the business,
were capable of conduting the different branches of it. In their places, the
relations and acquaintances of the new mistress were substituted, people that
knew nothing of the matter. Things soon began to wear a different aspect; the
workmen were much dissatisfied with their new masters; quarrels and complaints
daily increased, and a very little time put a finishing hand to the whole
undertaking: for, by mismanagement on the part of the new foremen, and by the
negligence and extravagance of the superintendant and his wife, the company was
declared insolvent: and as no person or company would come forward as
successors, Carlisle, in a very little time, was reduced to the state it was in
at the commencement of this manufactory. All the stock in trade, as wool, yarn,
cloth, etc. and all the implements of the work, were sold by auction, at
scarcely a fourth part of the value.
The failure of this company was severely felt by many in Carlisle and the
neighborhood; for, as nothing was carried forward as a substitute to employ
the industrious poor, those who had been employed in the work were driven to
travel with their families to different parts to seek for employment; and for
many months nothing but distress appeared around Carlisle for several miles.
Mr. Dewlicher, for many years after, concealed himself in some part of
Scotland. Some length of time after the failure of the company, he once
ventured, in an obscure manner, into the city, and called late in the evening
at the Wool^ pack-inn, a house much resorted to by the workmen. The landlady's
name who then kept the inn, was Mary Carlyle. This hospitable widow entertained
him for several days; and taking pity on his indigent circumstances, she, at
his departure, put something handsome into his pocket. He never was, after
this, seen or heard of in or about Carlisle.




During the period we are speaking of, provisions of all kinds were very cheap,
Oats, about 2s Carlisle bushel. -- Barley, 3s. 4d. do. -- Black and white rye,
7s. do. -- These two last kinds of grain were the principal bread of the
inhabitants. Wheat and potatoes were but little cultivated in the
neighborhood. -- Butcher meat and fish seldom exceeded one penny farthing per
pound; and the former was sold by hand, no weights or scales were then in use*
Butter, 2d halfpenny per lb. -- Eggs, ten a penny. -- Poultry very cheap. --
Game of all kinds were sent weekly from hence to Newcastle, by packs, during
the season. -- Carlisle bushel is three Winchester.


and most of the people's apparel continued to be of their own spinning. Very
little improvement had taken place in building, and the streets continued in
the same situation. Manure was at this time of so little value, that the
corporation gave a man forty shillings a year, and a new cart occasionally, to
take it away once a-week. All the goods which came to this place from
Newcastle, were conveyed chiefly upon pack-horses; the roads were impassable
the greatest part of the season for any other conveyance. No public works were
carried on, except a small manufactory for linen by an Alderman Cook, and a
whip manufactory, under the firm of Brown and company, which employed a few
paupers. Whips and fish-hooks were the two chief articles in trade Carlisle was
noted for. Brown's whips. -- Ford's fish-hooks.
Great quantit es of coarse linen yarn were weekly exposed in this market for
sale, chiefly from the borders and Scotland, where the people grew their own
flax, and spun it. This yarn was principally purchased by country weavers, or
by people commissioned to buy and send it to manufacturing towns. Those who did
not grow their own flax, bought it undressed of the shopkeepers in the city,
and slax dressers went about the country, from village to village, and house to
house, to dress it.


Little increase in population had hitherto taken place. A few foot soldiers
and artillery men kept garrison, and these were quartered chiefly upon the
public. Carlisle, at this time, kept up the appearance of a formidable place:
centries were stationed at every gate, at the commanding-officer's house, the
castle, etc. and the gates were shut, and locked every night with much military
parade; morning and evening guns were fired as a signal when to open and shut
the garrison gates, and pieces of ordnance were placed upon the turrets,
situated in different parts of the fortification.

The publicans still continued to brew their own ale, and most of them made
their own malt. British spirits, viz. Brandy, Gin, Cinnamon, and Anniseed
Waters, were now so plenty and cheap, that there was scarcely a gingerbread
stall but sold them.
It had been a custom for many years backward, for the corporation to demand
multure, by compelling the victuallers to grind the malt at their mills. This
began to be felt as an oppression; and to remove the grievance, and save the
multure, many of them provided small hand mills of their own. The corporation,
irritated at this breach of what they deemed their right, refused to grant
licenses to the refractory innkeepers. The public, however, would not comply,
but brought an action at law, to compel them to show upon what grounds so
intolerable and arbitrary a custom rested. The action was determined in favor
of the victuallers; and this became a heavy stroke to the corporation revenue.
This action, which was tried at York, besides the loss of their mulcture, was
attended with a heavy expense to the body corporate. It seems the corporation
did not keep a horse, a bull, and a boar, to substantiate their right to
compulsive multure. This, the lord bishop of the diocese, and the dean and
chapter of Carlisle, always perform at their service mills.


About the year 1750, the trade of Carlisle began to have a different
appearance. A manufactory of coarse linen cloth, called Osnaburghs was
established: The late aldermen, Richard and William Hodgson, were the
proprietors of this Osnaburgh manufactory.
this kind of work can be wrought by women and boys at the loom. About the same
time, there arose a new woolen manufactory, chiefly womens' wear, the
proprietor of which was a George Blamire. From the time of the Dewlichers, the
woolen business had been almost entirely neglected in Carlisle; the little
which was done this way, was by three brothers of the name of Machrell, from
Yorkshire. Blamire's manufactory was of short duration; and after his time,
except what was done by the Machrells, and by one Thorpe, and this to no great
amount, the business was no more pursued by any other adventurer.

At the period we are speaking of, the military road between Carlisle and
Newcastle was begun. Prior to this date, this road from the city was by the
English gate, and Warwick bridge; but now the route was changed, and travelers
go by the Scotch-gate. The new road was planned near four miles more to the
north than the old one. The badness of the road had hitherto been a great
hindrance to the conveyance of merchant goods from Newcastle to this place and
Whitehaven: and Dumfries, from this circumstance only, had greatly the
advantage: but when this turnpike was completed, then the case was much altered
for the better. Large carts and wagons were soon introduced, and nothing was
now wanting but a sufficient loading from Carlisle: this want was in some sort
supplied by people buying upon commission, and others upon their own account,
and sending off large quantities of butter and bacon for the London market. It
was now that provisions began to rise in price, the butchers to sell their meat
by weight, and the country frugal house-wise to throw aside her old pound
stone, substituting in its place, the standard of sixteen ounces for weighing
her butter. Every article of life increased in value: in the mean time the face
of the country began to wear a more cultivated aspect. John Holmes, Esquire. who
had estates in different parts of the county, This gentleman kept in his own
hand, and improved, the following valuable estates: Braken, or Brakenhill,
Barrockside, Barrockfield, Barronling, Durdar, Ragmire, Brackenhow, Holmhill,
all in the neighborhood of Carlisle; beside^ a very large track of ground in
Abbey Holme. Butter, before this time, was generally 20 or 22 ounces to the
pound.
was a gentleman of a persevering spirit, in making trial of the several modes
of agriculture: no part of husbandry was lost in him for the sake of expense,
or procuring men used to agricultural improvements. Mr. Holmes' laudable spirit
opened the eyes of the country in general, and every succeeding year added
something to the former, to the advantage of the industrious husbandman. It has
already been observed, that manure was of little value; that what the streets
of Carlisle assorded was conveyed away by a person who had an annual salary: it
now became an article of value, and the produce of the streets was generally
put up to let along with the corporation lands. This article now constitutes a
part of the corporation revenue, being let, communibus annis, for upwards of
50l.


The county and city tolls were a part of the corporation revenue. The number
of black cattle which came into England from Ireland and Scotland, by the way
of Cumberland, and mostly by Carlisle, greatly increased the value of the toll;
but as the collecting of it was attended with trouble and danger, the drovers
endeavoring to evade this toll as an imposition, it also underwent a trial at
law, in which the drovers were defeated, on the grounds that the barrier
fortress was still maintained: but as the collecting of this toll from these
refractory people, is still attended with difficulty; the person who undertakes
the whole farm from the corporation, generally lets it out in parcells to
different people, who live most contiguous to the places where the droves take
their departure out of the county.

At this period, manufactories of linen and cotton began rapidly to increase in
Carlisle; and this increase in the branches of spinning and weaving brought
many Scotch and Irish weavers, with their families, to reside in the city and
its environs. The population of the city had increased very little for forty or
fifty years prior to the establishment of these manufactories. The bleaching of
yarn was a consequent of these manufactories, and it went on very prosperously.
Carlisle is a place very well adapted for carrying on the linen and cotton
manufactories to a very great extent. The progress of improvement advanced with
rapid steps. Every year houses were rebuilt upon a more elegant plan, and also
many new ones. The grass which disfigured the streets, lanes, and avenues,
began daily to disappear.

In the year 1756, a brewery commenced in the suburbs of the city, without the
Irish Gates, under the firm of Atkinson and Co. But the inhabitants of Carlisle
and the neighborhood, having been long accustomed to home brewed ale, did not
relish this factory drink, so that it was sometime before this public brewery
met with much encouragement: though after a few years' trial the prejudice was
entirely removed, and the success of the undertaking has sufficiently proved
its utility, and fully answered the end the company had in view. The many new
manufactories now begun, and the increase of population attendant on them
raised the purvey. But as this did not then seem grievous to the ancient
inhabitants, I only mention it as a prelude to what afterward became a severe
burden. Not long after, the streets of the city, and that part of the
liberties without the walls, were paved upon a new plan. This alteration for
the better (to the great credit of the corporation) removed many intolerable
nuisances. And the inhabitants of the suburbs, and that part of the suburbs
which came under the direction of the surveyor of the highways, were also put
under a proper regulation. Richardgate felt the good effects of this
alteration; being exposed to inundations from the overflowing of the river
Eden, it now felt only in part what formerly was almost general.

In the year 1758, were brought here a number of French prisoners from
Edinburgh castle. These were soon followed by the regular troops of Thurot's
squadron, captured by the brave captain Elliot; and about three or four hundred
more were sent to Carlisle, from Launceston in Cornwall. All these prisoners,
except Thurot's regulars, were upon their parole of honor. As each of these
prisoners had seven shillings a week regularly paid them, this caused a deal of
money to be expended. The French prisoners were soon after followed by the
Westmorland militia; and as the inhabitants of that county were much prejudiced
against a military life, they entered into a voluntary subscription to allow
their balloted men, or substitutes, an additional sum to the king's pay, so
that many of the privates had from one to three shillings per day. Two
companies of invalids kept garrison in the castle; The militia kept an
officer's guard at Cromwell's Green-house.
and did also duty as sentinels at the several gates. Such a number of men in
the city, and so well circumstanced as to money, greatly benefited the place.
The consequence of this influx of wealth was, the introduction of more
expensive modes of living. Now four wheeled carriages began to run from the
different inns. Dr. Waugh, Dean of Worcester, a coach and four horses; Major
Farrer kept a single horse chaise; Mr. Dobinson a single horse chaise; General
Stanwix, a coach and sour horses, when the family was in town, which was but
seldom. These were all the private carriages kept in the city at this time.
To this period, 1759, there had not been any public conveyance for travelers
in post chaise from this city. Hitherto balls and assemblies had been kept in a
room at the castle; and when any gave a ball it was chiefly at the Bush Inn:
but now an assembly room is built, and finished for that purpose, in a plain
and neat manner.

The year 1761 saw new works established. A company from Newcastle begun the
calico printing business, which has been progressively carried on ever since,
and affords employment to many hundreds of men, women, and children. This was
followed by an extensive manufactory, carried on by the ingenious Bernard
Barton, whose premature death deprived the public of the abilities of an able
and enterprising tradesman. These public works employed a great deal of good
land about the city, so that the value of ground, either in the selling price
or in letting, rose considerably: and the increase of population, owing to
these causes, may reasonably be supposed to occasion an equal rise in every
other article bought and sold.

As the year 1761 was an era of real advantage to Carlisle, both with respect
to the prospect of an increasing commerce and the further progress of politics;
the reader, we hope, will not deem it improper, that we are a little more
particular. The printing or stamping of Calico was introduced here about this
period. Gentlemen from Newcastle and its vicinity, under the firm of Scot,
Lamb, and Co. were the first establishers of this branch of trade, in the
environs of Carlisle. And as the Calico business has been the principal means
of increasing the population of the city, it is sufficient to remark that the
flourishing advances of this manufactory induced others to form themselves into
companies to begin and carry on the same business. Some of them were men
unacquainted with commerce; for in former times a country Esquire. would have
thought it a degradation of his rank, to have his name entered with any company
in a manufacturing or mercantile line. Time has removed this prejudice, and men
are convinced that trade enriches, in particular, those engaged in it, and the
public in general. Common day labor for men not bred to any mechanic trade,
and lint or two spinning for women in indigent circumstances, was all the
employment that could be obtained. Eight pence or ten pence a day, without
victuals, was as much as a labourer could earn, and a woman must have worked
very hard at her wheel to make a shilling a week, The employment for children
was winding pirns for weavers or twisting whips, for which they had only about
eight pence per week, and generally worked sixteen hours out of the twentyfour.

The establishment of the calico manufactory greatly altered the case. The work
in the green or bleachyard found employment for men and stout boys. Apprentices
were taken to the several branches of the work, viz. Drawers, Cutters, and
Calico printers, at a genteel weekly allowance, and their wages increased as
they advanced in their servitude. Little boys were employed as tearing boys to
the printers. Women had tables set out for them to pencil the colors into the
pieces. Every table employed three or four female children; and even the
youngest boys and girls could make near two shillings per week. Such
encouragement brought numbers of families out of the country into the city and
suburbs, and so great was the change, that a common labourer, who probably,
with his wife's assistance, did not make above eight shillings weekly, could,
by having his family fixed in the manner represented, easily earn twenty or
thirty shillings a week. Nay, such was the infatuation of the young men, or
desire of great wages, that many who had served an apprenticeship to a mechanic
trade, bound themselves a new to the stampery; and even those that were married
followed the same steps, persuaded that this manufactory would give the whole
family bread. People of property reaped their advantage from this increase of
population, as land and houses increased in value.

The several manufactories began to thrive much beyond the most sanguine
expectation. People in trade, with little to begin with, acquired fortunes
which enabled them to live in a much more splendid style than formerly. The
town rapidly improved, and the land around increased in value, far beyond what
could have been foreseen. The advantages, however, were balanced by some
inconveniences: people of property, who tasted not the sweets of a thriving
trade, began to feel the disadvantages which arose from the increase of
population. Before the year 1761, the poor rates were not felt by those who
paid them: forty purveys in a year was the annual collection. This was the mode
pursued, and the inhabitants acted in the office of collecting by rotation. But
the increase of manufactories invited numbers of strangers here for bread. The
town was soon filled with Scotch and Irish families; and as these people had no
place to return to, in case of indigence and sickness, they became a great
burden upon the ancient inhabitants. This was not the only grievance; the mode
of collection was very irregular, being still by the old rate. New improvements
did not pay any kind of proportion, nor did the manufacturers, though those
were the only people that throve by this increase of trade, and the cause which
brought these strangers to the city, pay any kind of rate for their valuable
stocks in trade. This caused a general murmur amongst the ancient inhabitants,
and a redress was loudly called for. A pound rate was thought to be the most
equitable mode, and after many vestry meetings it was finally agreed to. All
this time, neither the parish of St. Mary, or St. Cuthbert, had a common
workhouse: the poor were either let out, or paid out, in their own houses. The
parish of St. Mary seeing the disadvantage which arose from this mode of
providing for the poor, entered into a subscription to build a workhouse; the
good effects of which have been felt by the inhabitants, as well as by the poor
that receive the benefit.

The chief part of the manufactoring business before the year 1761, consisted
of a few check and Osnaburg looms, and about a dozen of looms employed in
weaving very fine linen. But after the establishment of the manufactory of
printed or stamped calicoes, cotton looms were set up. The stamperies had
before this, been supplied with cottons from Lancashire, at an extraordinary
expense in carriage; but now machinery for carding, roving, and spinning of
cotton, is erected in different places in the neighborhood of the city, and
they purchase their cottons at a cheaper rate. This machinery employs a great
number of men and women, of old and young. Buildings, particularly in the
environs, have amazingly increased, and so has every trade in proportion. -- We
shall now only paticularize the different employments: --

At present there are four printfields which employ about one thousand people,
and pay above 20,000l. annually to the revenue. Their firms are Messrs. Lamb,
Scot, Forster, and Co. -- Messrs. Losh and Co. Messrs. Mitchell, Ellwood, and
Co -- Messrs. Donald, Carrick, Shaw, and Co. -- Messrs. Wood and Co. who
employs above two hundred people in spinning of cotton. -- Messrs. Forsters
have the most extensive manufactory in the north of England, in all the
branches from the raw materials to the finishing of checks, calicoes, muslins,
and all kinds of fancy work. -- Messrs. Fergusons are next in extent in similar
articles. -- Messrs. Langcake, McWilliam, and Co. manufacturers in similar
articles. -- Messrs. Stoddards, ditto -- Mr. Thomas Pearson, ditto. -- Mr.
Nixon, ditto. -- Messrs. Wilson and Co. muslins. -- Besides the brewery
previously mentioned, a few years after another was established near it, now
under the firm of Messrs. Pattrickson and Co. and lately Mr. Daniel Pattinson
erected another; these three breweries pay above 6000l. duty annually; and just
now there is another erected by Mr. Haugh. -- There is a soapry under the firm
of Messrs. Barker and Langcake, which pays about 1500l. duty annually; when
thereto is added the duties upon candles, leather, licenses, and other things
under the excise, Carlisle pays above 100,000l. annual revenue. -- Besides
these public works, there are many others on a smaller scale; and all the
common trades are carried on to great perfection.

The late Mr. Forster and sons established a bank here, and Mr. Wilson another,
which is of great service to trade.

WAGES, within these twelve months, have rose, much owing to the advance in all
the necessaries of life. -- Calico printers make from one and a half, to two
guineas per week; carpenters, joiners, masons, and bricklayers here 2s. 6d. per
day; laborers, from 1s. to 1s. 8d.; weavers earn from 10s. to 1l. 1s. per
week, according to their abilities; and the same with all the other trades. --
For the former rate of wages, provisions, etc. see our account of Brampton,
being nearly the same, vol. I. page 131.

FRIENDLY SOCIETIES were established here about twenty years ago, and are now
seven for men and three for women; consisting of about twelve hundred members.
A number of gentlemen are joined to these societies, which add much to their
respectability, and strengthens their funds: their allowance to sick and old
members is in proportion to their funds; and members or their relatives are
genteely buried at the society's expense. -- There are two masonic societies
consisting of a number of respectable people.

Average Prices of provisions, etc. at Carlisle Market in 1793, taken six
market days successively, from Sept. 14th to Oct. 19th inclusive. Prices of
Grain and other Provisions in Carlisle Market, Nov. 1796. L. s. d. L. s. d.
Wheat per bushel Average prices of grain in Cumberland and Westmorland, as
returned from the treasury, September 7th, 14th, and 21st, 1793. -- Wheat,
Carlisle bushel, which is three Winchester bushels, 19s. 10d. halspenny. --
Rye, 15^. 7d. 3 farthings. -- Barley, 11s. 11d. -- Oats, 8s. 6d. -- Beans, 14s.
10d. halspenny. -- In 1795, and part of 1796, this market, with all others in
Great Britain, experienced a very remarkable rise in the price of provisions,
and particularly grain; so much so, that on July 25th, 1795, the average of
wheat was 45s. per bushel, rye 30s. barley 20s. and oats 12s. -- These prices
continued for many market days.
0 17 11 1 6 0 Rye do. 0 14 6 0 17 0 Barley do. 0 11 5 0 13 6 Oats do. 0 7 10 0
8 9 Beans do. 0 18 0 Malt do. 0 17 0 0 18 0 Flour per stone 0 2 1 0 2 10
Oat-meal do. 0 1 11 0 2 2 Barley-meal do. 0 1 4 0 1 5 Rye-meal do. 0 1 5 0 1 6
Butchers meat p lb 0 0 4 0 0 5 Cumberland old milk cheese p. lb. 0 0 2 0 0 3
Butter per. lb. (16 oz.) 0 0 9 0 0 9 Salmon do. 0 0 3 out of season. New milk
p. quart 0 0 1 0 0 1 Old do. do. 0 0 0 0 0 0 Potatoes p. hoop (six quarts. 0 0
2 0 0 3 Turnips do. 0 0 1 0 0 2 Small beer, p. gall. 0 0 2 0 0 2 A chicken 0 0
7 0 0 8 A duck 0 0 8 0 0 9 A goose 0 2 1 0 2 9 Eggs, 5 for 0 0 2 1 egg 0 1
Salt, per stone 0 1 8 0 1 10 Soap, per lb. 0 0 6 0 0 10 Candles do. 0 0 7 0 0
10 Hay per stone 0 0 9 0 0 6 Men's shoes, per pair 7s. to 0 7 3 0 7 6 Womens'
do. 0 4 6 0 5 0 Mens' clogs p. pair 0 4 0 0 4 0 Womens' do. 0 2 6 0 2 6

Further Particulars respecting Carlisle Market.
LAMB, in the early part of the season, sells for 1s. 3d. per lb. but continues
lowering in value as it becomes less rare, till it may be bought for 3d
halpenny, and 3d. per lb. From Christmas till about Lady Day, ten to twelve
carcases of beef are weekly disposed of in the market: from that time till
Martinmas, sixteen to eighteen may be sold per week; and from Martinmas to
Christmas, thirty-five to forty per week. The reason why the number increases
so much in the latter period, is a prevalent custom among the people in the
neighboring country, of buying a quantity of beef at that season to salt and
dry for the winter's use. -- Salmon is caught in large quantities in the Eden,
near Carlisle: it becomes in season the beginning of December, but as it brings
a high price in London, Manchester, etc. few purchasers are found here while it
continues at about 2s. per lb. but as the season advances, the prices drop;
because, in warm weather, it cannot be sent to a distance, and is therefore
sold in the neighborhood at about 3d. per pound. In the autumn salmon is
generally cheapest, when several of the middling and lower classes of people
salt and dry it: in that state, we presume, it affords a very unwholesome food,
tending to occasion scurvies and other impurities of the blood.

FUEL, is coal from Blenkinsop, Blenkinsop is the property of a Mr. Coulson.
Talkin, and Tindale-Fells, distant twenty, twelve, and fifteen miles to the
east, and are the property of the Earl of Carlisle. Coal from the first
mentioned place has the preference. That article is brought from the pits to
market in single horse carts, and disposed of, neither by weight or measure,
but by the cart load; consequently a very discriminating eye is necessary to
prevent being imposed on. -- Coals that are sold by dealers, are commonly 5d.
the Carlisle peck -- Peats from Scaleby and Roweliff mosses, distant five
miles, ten for a penny.

PUBLIC INNS here have good accommodation, both in rooms and stabling. -- The
Bush-Inn, Englishstreet, and Crown and Mitre, Castle street, are the houses the
mail-coaches put up at: the King's Arms, Grapes, Blue Bell, and Duke's Head,
are also much resorted to by travelers: there are several other good inns,
both in the city and suburbs.

The Mail-Coaches and other public Carriages are numerous here. -- Two
mail-coaches set out every morning for London, one by Manchester and the other
by Borrowbridge: a heavy coach is also forwarded to the metropolis every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. -- A mail-coach every afternoon to Glasgow, and
a mail diligence at the same time to Dumfries. -- A diligence goes from this to
Edinburgh every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday; and to Newcastle on Sundays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Fridays; and one to Whitchaven on Saturdays -- The
arrivals are in proportion to their several distances.

WAGONS AND CARTS for the conveyance of goods are exceeding numerous here,
being the great thorough-fair between England and Scotland: in this branch of
commerce there are above two hundred horses employed: and as most of the
goodsstood in the public streets during the market, great inconvenience was
felt; now each are getting private warehouses; and it is much to be wished that
a proper marketplace was provided for the butchers, as their shambles greatly
incommode the streets.

LITERATURE.] In this department, Carlisle can boast of many literary
productions; and, perhaps, there are few towns in this kingdom where literature
has flourished more than it has done here of late years. -- We shall mention
only the names of the authors and their works.

The Rev. W. Paley, D. D. Archdeacon of this diocese, published, while he
resided in this city, Moral and Political Philosophy; Horae Paulinae; Reasons
for Contentment; a View of the Evidence of Christianity, and Occasional
Sermons; all which works, as they possess a high degree of celebrity, so have
been well received by a discerning public. -- The Rev B. Grisdale, D. D. two
occasional sermons. -- The Rev. J. D. Carlyle, B. D. Chancellor of this
diocese, Prose and Poetical Translations from the Arabic. -- The Rev. R. Miln,
A. M. dissenting minister, Lectures upon the Antedeluvian World, and Occasional
Sermons. -- The Rev. G. Thomson, ditto, the Spirit of Modern History, and
Occasional Sermons. -- R. Harrington, M. D. several Treatises upon Air,
Phlogiston, etc. -- J. Heysham, M. D. a Treatise upon the Jail Fever, Bills of
Mortality, etc. -- Mark Lonsdale, poems, and pieces adapted for the theater.

ARTS, SCIENCES, etc.] These have kept pace with the other improvements of this
city. -- Guy Head, an ingenious artist; who, from the years of infancy,
manifested a strong genius in painting and drawing; and to a fancy bold and
vigorous, joined assiduity, rarely concentrated in one person. The talents of
this gentleman are now likely to reflect honor on his native city, as he has
been for some years resident in Italy, for the purpose of studying the
excellent remains of the Italian masters. -- Robert Smirke, Esquire. R. A.
historical painter, is a native of this county, and passed many of his juvenile
years at Carlisle, where his father then resided, he gave some proofs of that
genius which has since placed him at the head of one of the most exalted
departments of his profession -- Robert Carlyle excells in drawing antiquities
and copying: his drawing of the cathedral of Carlisle, and other antiquities,
are specimens of his abilities this way, and do him credit, as they gained him
the silver medal from the society for the encouragement of the arts, etc. --
James Lowes, a self-taught draughts-man and engraver, whose first attempts as
an artist, are coeval with the commencement of this history, and his
improvement is to be traced in the work: we can always vouch for the accuracy,
if not the elegance, of all his works. -- John Howard, a native of this city,
at present a teacher of Mathematics in Newcastle, is well known to all the
lovers of that science. He has the most extensive knowledge of all the parts of
mathematical learning, and is a self-taught genius. Robert Bowman, a pupil of
his, (blind from his infancy) is also a rare instance of genius: he is a
perfect master of the higher branches of the mathematics. -- Joseph Strong,
blind from his infancy, is a musician and an artist: in the latter capacity he
constructed a tolerable well toned organ, and is a great proficient in
fancy-weaving. So true it is, that with a sound judgment, a ready apprehension,
and strong imagination, great progress may be made without sight in the arts
and sciences. -- Edward Foster, clock-maker, has constructed a clock and
planetarium, upon an extensive and variegated scale. It is the production of
twenty years' study and labor: its dimensions are nine feet high, five feet
broad, three feet deep; and consists of four principal parts: 1st, It shows the
seconds, minutes, and hours of the day; the fasts and festivals; the equation
of time; the perpetual day of the month; the place of the moon's nodes, or the
part of the ecliptic intersected by her orbit. 2d, The Copernic, or true solar
system TABLE IV. -- Deaths in each Month for the following Years.
Deaths in 1779 1780 1781 1782 1783 1784 1785 1786 1787 Males. Females. Males.
Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males.
Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Tot. for 9 yrs. January. 4 7 11 6 2 7
9 10 5 5 5 7 9 4 3 15 19 12 140 February. 6 4 10 8 5 2 7 11 10 11 7 10 8 9 7 3
7 7 132 March. 6 6 4 8 3 4 7 15 8 8 12 8 7 8 7 10 10 11 142 Total in 3 months.
16 17 25 22 10 13 23 36 23 24 24 25 24 21 17 28 36 30 414 April. 6 3 14 15 8 11
7 15 6 11 8 9 12 9 6 8 4 14 166 May. 7 10 14 20 8 9 5 20 8 7 7 9 10 13 9 11 6
16 189 June. 5 3 8 10 13 9 5 13 10 6 8 10 16 5 2 12 8 143 Total in 3 months. 18
16 36 45 29 29 17 48 14 28 21 26 32 38 20 21 22 38 498 July. 7 7 7 8 8 7 8 11 7
6 3 5 12 6 7 5 12 9 135 August. 14 5 4 12 14 9 3 3 8 6 3 7 4 7 4 1 9 3 116
September. 20 22 11 8 9 12 10 9 10 8 5 5 6 9 7 12 4 2 169 Total in 3 months. 41
34 22 28 31 28 21 23 25 20 11 17 22 22 18 18 25 14 420 October. 30 23 11 14 11
15 10 2 10 10 6 5 7 8 13 15 3 6 199 November. 18 20 6 7 14 7 6 6 8 7 5 4 4 11
16 13 6 4 162 December. 10 15 8 1 8 9 7 7 5 7 6 8 5 10 16 10 9 6 147 Total in 3
months. 58 58 25 22 33 31 23 15 23 24 17 17 16 29 45 38 18 16 508 Males. Fem.
Males. Fem. Tot. 1st Quar. 414 1779 133 125 Brought up 513 561 2d - do. 498
Total in the years 1780 108 117 1784 73 85 1781 103 101 1785 94 110 3d - do.
420 1782 84 122 1786 100 105 4th - do. 508 1783 85 96 1787 101 98 Total 1840
Total 513 561 Total 881 959 TABLE V. -- Deaths from under one Month up to
Twenty Years old.
Ages. 1779 1780 1781 1782 1783 1784 1785 1786 1787 Males Fem. Males Fem. Males
Fem. Males Fem. Males Fem. Males Fem. Males Fem. Males Fem. Males Fem. Tot. for
9 yrs. Under 1 month. 6 7 9 15 10 2 6 6 11 5 3 5 8 4 13 8 19 7 135 From 1 to 2
2 5 4 4 2 1 2 2 1 2 1 5 1 4 3 39 2 to 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 2 1 2 22 3 to 6 5 2 3
5 4 4 5 4 4 2 2 9 11 5 4 3 72 6 to 9 2 4 1 4 3 1 1 1 6 1 2 1 5 4 4 5 4 2 51 9
to 12 10 9 1 2 2 1 1 2 8 4 2 7 3 3 5 8 3 71 1 year to 2 21 12 14 11 8 4 8 10 5
8 7 4 11 15 10 13 5 7 173 2 to 3 17 19 9 4 5 3 9 9 3 5 3 5 4 4 7 8 6 8 128 3 to
4 10 8 3 6 2 4 5 5 1 3 2 2 2 4 3 4 6 70 4 to 5 6 10 3 5 4 1 2 2 2 2 5 3 2 4 51
5 to 10 7 7 5 11 5 5 7 6 4 5 2 2 3 6 5 5 4 89 10 to 15 4 3 2 1 2 2 1 4 2 4 1 1
1 2 1 3 34 15 to 20 2 2 5 1 4 5 5 2 1 4 1 3 1 1 2 4 1 44 Total. 92 83 61 67 52
39 51 52 38 46 34 28 51 53 67 59 53 53 979 Males. Fem. Males. Fem 1779 92 83
Brought up 294 287 Total in the years 1780 61 67 1784 34 28 1781 52 39 1785 51
53 1782 51 52 1786 67 59 1783 38 46 1787 53 53 Total 294 287 Total 499 480
Total 979

TABLE I. -- Population of the Parishes of St. Mary and St. Cuthbert, taken in
1780 and 1796.
1780. 1796. Incr and decr betw. 1780 and 1796. Quarters. Houses. Families.
Males. Females. Total. Houses. Families. Males. Females. Total. Incr. Decr
English-street. 208 319 639 732 1371 213 482 738 892 1630 259 Scotch-street.
122 197 354 437 791 140 290 411 504 915 124 Fisher-street. 53 82 130 194 324 52
75 134 183 317 93 Castle-street. 81 143 220 307 527 162 260 379 496 875 348
Abbey and Annetwell-st. 77 120 173 271 444 78 124 205 276 481 38 The Abbey. 8 8
17 31 48 8 8 18 25 43 5 Total within the Walls. 549 870 1533 1971 3504 675 1239
1885 2376 4261 757 Botchardgate. 95 202 385 457 842 172 330 689 762 1451 609
Rickergate 82 177 307 356 663 124 204 366 445 811 148 Caldewgate. 165 356 592
698 1290 322 541 1010 1183 2193 903 Total in the Suburbs. 342 735 1284 1511
2795 618 1075 2065 2390 4455 1660 Newtown. 16 19 40 52 92 23 23 56 58 114 22
Harraby. 9 10 31 41 72 8 8 19 32 51 21 Carleton. 30 30 66 67 133 34 34 99 88
187 54 Wreay. 17 18 56 58 114 21 21 60 54 114 Brisco. 32 34 107 85 192 34 35 97
94 191 1 Botchardby. 21 22 46 52 9^ 19 19 38 40 78 20 Uprightby. 20 21 35 54 89
22 22 44 49 93 4 Blackhall. 63 64 176 178 354 70 73 193 185 378 24 Cumersdale.
22 22 60 50 110 33 36 112 110 222 112 Morton-head and Newby 27 27 57 67 124 30
31 75 70 145 21 Total in the Country. 257 267 674 704 1378 294 302 793 780 1573
195 Total of all. 1148 1872 3591 4186 7677 1587 2616 4743 5546 10289 2612 47
TABLE III. -- Of the Number of Inhabitants of different Ages.
1780. 1787. Ages. City and Suburbs. Villages. Total in 1780. Total in 1787.
Incr. betw. 1780 and 1787. Under 5 years. 859 170 1029 1164 135 5-10 731 177
908 1026 118 10-15 587 128 7^5 808 93 15-20 543 132 675 763 88 20-30 1030 298
1328 1501 173 30-40 733 144 877 991 114 40-50 729 129 858 970 112 50-60 498 90
588 665 77 60-70 375 63 438 494 56 70-80 164 27 191 216 25 80-90 44 14 58 66 8
90-100 5 5 10 11 1 100-105 1 1 2 2 Total of the whole. 6299 1378 7677 8677 1000
TAB. II. -- Number of Husbands, etc
1780. Husbands. Wives. Widowers Widows. Total. Within the Walls. 531 569 46
248 1394 Suburbs. 488 522 45 160 1215 Villages. 188 191 1^ 68 464 Total. 1207
1282 108 476 3073 Widowers to Widows, as 1 is to 4 3/^ nearly.

TABLE VII. -- Of the Proportion of the Deaths to the Living, under different
Ages.
1779 1780 1781 1782 1783 1784 1785 1786 1787 Average of nine Years. Under 5
years. 1 in 6 9/10 1 in 9 9/10 1 in 15 1/7 1 in 13 1 in 14 1 in 22 1 in 10 1 in
9 5/7 1 in 13 1/12 1 in 12 9 -- 11ths nearly 5 -- 10 1 -- 64 6/7 1 -- 56 1 --
113 1 -- 75 1 -- 227 1 -- 151 1 -- 151 1 -- 82 1 -- 114 1 -- 115 2 -- 9ths
nearly 10 -- 15 1 -- 119 1 -- 357 1 -- 178 1 -- 143 1 -- 357 1 -- 178 1 -- 715
1 -- 238 1 -- 269 1 -- 284 1 -- 7th nearly 15 -- 20 1 -- 168 1 -- 112 1 -- 84 1
-- 96 4/7 1 -- 168 1 -- 225 1 -- 675 1 -- 225 1 -- 190 1 -- 119 3 -- 10ths
nearly 20 -- 30 1 -- 132 1 -- 83 1 -- 189 5/7 1 -- 120 8/11 1 -- 110 1 -- 147 1
-- 147 5/9 1 -- 265 1 -- 115 1 -- 145 9 -- 10ths nearly 30 -- 40 1 -- 146 1 --
109 1 -- 54 1 -- 79 8/11 1 -- 87 7/10 1 -- 97 1 -- 97 4/9 1 -- 87 7/10 1 -- 145
1 -- 100 3 -- 5ths nearly 40 -- 50 1 -- 95 1 -- 85 1 -- 40 6/7 1 -- 66 1 -- 78
1 -- 95 1 -- 50 1 -- 95 1 -- 57 1 -- 73 5 -- 6ths nearly 50 -- 60 1 -- 58 1 --
65 (...) 1 -- 26 1 -- 42 1 -- 49 1 -- 73 1 -- 55 1 -- 58 1 -- 83 1 -- 57 nearly
60 -- 70 1 -- 24 1 -- 20 6/7 1 -- 24 1 -- 29 1 -- 23 1 -- 15 1/10 1 -- 24 1 --
23 1/19 1 -- 30 1 -- 23 9-10ths nearly 70 -- 80 1 -- 13 1 -- 10 5/8 1 -- 12 1
-- 9 1 -- 9 1 -- 14 5/7 1 -- 11 1 -- 12 1 -- 11 1 -- 10 7 -- 8ths nearly 80 --
90 1 -- 4 5/6 1 -- 6 4/9 1 -- 6 4/9 1 -- 4 1/7 1 -- 5 1 -- 4 1 -- 4 1/7 1 -- 9
1 -- 6 1 -- 5 11 -- 14ths nearly 90 -- 100 1 -- 5 1 -- 3 1 -- 3 1 -- 3 1 -- 5 1
-- 2 1 -- 1 1 -- 5 1 -- 3 1 -- 3 13 -- 18ths nearly 100 -- 102 1 -- 2 1 aged
105 Of all the Inhabitants. 1 -- 30 3/9 1 -- 34 1 -- 38 1 -- 38 1 -- 43 1/7 1
-- 50 1 -- 37 1/7 1 -- 37 1 -- 44 1 -- 39 1 -- 4th nearly

N. B. This Table makes the Mortality greater than it actually is, as the
Calculations from 1779 to 1787 inclusive, were made from the Number of
Inhabitants which existed in January 1780; whereas there was an Increase of a
Thousand in that Period.

TABLE VIII. -- Of Christenings and Deaths of both Parishes, from 1779, to 1796.
Christenings. Deaths. Males. Females. Total. Dissenters Males. Females. Total.
Increase. Decrease. 1779 102 109 211 The Christenings of Dissenters these three
years were not obtained. -- The Dissenters are (...) 133 125 258 47 1780 132
120 252 The Christenings of Dissenters these three years were not obtained. --
The Dissenters are (...) 108 117 225 27 1781 136 130 266 The Christenings of
Dissenters these three years were not obtained. -- The Dissenters are (...) 103
101 204 62 1782 118 139 257 38 84 122 206 51 1783 139 123 262 35 85 96 181 81
1784 121 153 274 36 73 85 158 116 1785 148 110 267 28 94 110 204 63 1780 123
103 226 43 100 105 205 21 1787 145 122 267 51 101 98 199 68 1788 144 118 262 44
81 106 187 75 1789 131 109 240 53 107 106 213 27 1790 107 118 225 49 105 130
235 10 1791 129 127 256 67 171 173 344 88 1792 148 137 285 54 109 117 226 59
1793 141 139 280 48 107 109 216 64 1794 145 134 279 39 129 130 259 20 1795 144
122 266 30 131 157 288 22 1796 147 149 296 39 141 132 273 23

Total of Christenings.
Males 2410 4681 Females 2271 4681 Males exceed Fem. 139
Total of Deaths.
Males 1962 4081 Females 2119 4081 Fem. exceed Males 157 Births exceed Deaths
600
TABLE VI. Of Deaths, Ages, and Conditions, from Twenty Years old and upwards.
1779. 1780. 1781. 1782. 1783. Ages. Bachelors. Husbands. Widowers Maids.
Wives. Widows. Total. Bachelors. Husbands. Widowers Maids. Wives. Widows.
Total. Bachelors. Husbands. Widowers Maids. Wives. Widows. Total. Bachelors.
Husbands. Widowers Maids. Wives. Widows. Total. Bachelors. Hus^ands. Widowers
Maids. Wives. Widows. Total. 20 to 30 2 3 3 3 1 12 2 4 9 1 1 17 3 2 2 7 2 1 7 1
11 4 2 2 4 12 30 to 40 3 3 6 3 3 2 8 2 9 1 6 18 1 4 2 3 1 11 1 4 4 1 10 40 to
50 4 2 2 1 9 1 4 4 1 10 1 8 1 8 3 21 3 1 2 5 3 14 2 6 1 1 1 11 50 to 60 1 4 2 2
1 10 3 2 3 1 9 7 3 9 3 22 3 5 6 14 6 5 1 12 60 to 70 11 1 1 4 1 18 3 5 2 1 1 9
21 4 1 3 4 6 18 2 2 1 3 7 15 6 3 5 5 19 70 to 80 3 3 1 7 14 1 6 4 7 18 2 4 2 1
2 4 15 1 4 3 2 4 6 20 2 4 2 4 8 20 80 to 90 1 3 1 1 6 12 1 2 3 3 9 1 1 3 1 3 9
1 3 1 1 8 14 1 3 1 6 11 90 to 100 1 1 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 1 2 3 1 1 2 100 to 105 2
Aged 103
2 1 Aged 102
1 3 29 9 9 16 17 83 15 26 6 10 15 25 97 9 33 10 8 31 22 113 5 20 8 14 22 34
103 10 29 8 5 23 22 97 TABLE SIXTH CONTINUED,
1784. 1785. 1786. 1787. Ages. Bachelors. Husbands. Widowers Maids. Wives.
Widows. Total. Bachelors. Husbands. Widowers Maids. Wives. Widows. Total.
Bachelors. Husbands. Widowers Maids. Wives. Widows. Total. Bachelors. Husbands.
Widowers Maids. Wives. Widows. Total. Total for 9 years. Total for each year.
20 to 30 1 3 3 2 9 1 5 3 9 2 2 1 1 6 3 2 3 5 13 96 1779 -- 83 30 to 40 2 3 2 3
10 5 1 2 1 9 1 2 1 4 2 10 2 1 3 1 7 89 1780 -- 97 40 to 50 1 4 2 3 10 3 1 3 9 1
17 1 1 1 5 1 9 1 7 2 7 17 118 1781 -- 113 50 to 60 2 3 3 8 2 4 2 2 10 5 1 3 1
10 3 1 3 1 8 103 1782 -- 103 60 to 70 11 1 2 6 9 29 9 1 4 4 18 8 3 6 2 19 8 2 2
2 2 16 173 1783 -- 97 70 to 80 2 2 3 1 5 13 1 4 2 2 4 4 17 1 4 1 2 8 16 10 2 2
2 3 19 152 1784 -- 96 80 to 90 3 1 1 8 13 1 2 5 1 5 14 1 5 6 1 4 5 10 98 1785
-- 100 90 to 100 1 1 2 4 2 4 6 2 2 1 1 1 3 28 1786 -- 79 100 to 105 1 Aged 105
1 4 1787 -- 93 7 29 4 12 20 24 96 5 29 9 11 25 21 100 4 24 5 4 21 21 79 4 34 8
12 22 13 93 861 Total -- 861 of the planets round the sun, showing their
aphelia, perhelia, nodes, aspects, etc. with the time of their several
revolutions, according to Sir I. Newton's calculations. 3. The celestial globe,
which shows the sun's place in the ecliptic, and the moon's place in her orbit;
by which the eclipses are known, what signs and degrees they happen in, and how
many digits are eclipsed. 4. The terrestrial globe, which shows the diurnal
motion of the earth, and by which may be known the time of day or night in any
part on the globe; likewise, a variety of curious figures in motion and music.
-- Finished in 1777.

The late George Blamire, Esquire. was a good mathematician and mechanic, both in
theory and practice. -- John Bell, of the artillery, a native of this place,
has made some valuable discoveries and improvements in the art of gunnery.
Several mechanics here, have, by their ingenuity as artists, much improved the
manufactures of this place, so that the printed calicoes and other goods
manufactured in Carlisle, are in great esteem over all Britain, and in foreign
countries.

The manners of the inhabitants have nothing very distinguishable from those of
other such flourishing places. They are, in general, very hospitable and
affable to strangers. There are many persons eminent for their piety; morality,
and industry. The increase of wealth has brought with it a manner of living
heretofore unknown.

An Abridgment of the Observations on the Bills of Mortality in Carlisle, from
the Year 1779, to 1787, inclusive. Of the population of the two parishes of St.
Mary's and St. Cuthbert's, Carlifle, we have no account, (except D^.
Littleton's enumeration in 1763) till Dr. Pleysham published his observations
on the bills of mortality, in the year 1779. These observations were published
annually till 1787, including a period of nine years. From them (with the
author's permission) we have made this abridgment: to whom we are under great
obligations, for this, and the population of many other parishes. -- THE
EDITORS.

1779. THE advantages which may be derived from accurate registers of
mortality, are thus illustrated by an ingenious philosopher and physician. The
establishment of a judicious and accurate register of the births and burials,
in every town and parish, would be attended with the most important advantages,
medical, political, and moral. By such an institution, the increase or decrease
of certain diseases; the comparative healthiness of different situations,
climates, and seasons; the influence of particular trades and manufactures on
longevity; with many other curious circumstances, not more interesting to
physicians than beneficial to mankind, would be ascertained with tolerable
precision. In a political view, exact registers of human mortality are of still
greater consequence, as the number of people, and progress of population in the
kingdom, may, in the most easy and unexceptionable manner, be deduced from
them. They are the foundation, likewise, of all calculations concerning the
values of assurances on lives, reversionary payments, and of every scheme for
providing annuities for widows, and persons in old age. In a moral light also,
such Tables are of evident utility, as the increase of vice or virtue may be
determined, by observing the proportion which the diseases arising from luxury,
intemperance, and other similar causes bear to the rest; and in what particular
places distempers of this class are found to be most fatal. -- Percival's
Essays, vol. II.

CARLISLE is situated in latitude 54, 55 north, and is surrounded by a wall
about a mile and a quarter in circumference. The situation is rendered
exceedingly pleasant by its vicinity to three beautiful rivers, with which it
is almost surrounded, viz. the Eden on the north east side, Petteral on the
south east, and Caldew on the north-west. The air about Carlisle is pure and
dry, the soil chiefly sand and clay. No marshes or stagnant waters corrupt the
atmosphere; its neighborhood to a branch of the sea, and its due distance from
the mountains on all sides, render the air temperate and moderate.

In July 1763, at the request of Dr. Littleton. Lord Bishop of Carlisle, the
inhabitants were numbered with great care and attention by the Rev. Mr.
Richardson, the Rev. Mr. Simpson, and Mr. Alderman Hodgson. There were at that
time in the city and suburbs, 1059 families, and 4158 inhabitants.

In January 1780, a very careful and accurate survey was made by Mr. Stanger
and Mr. Howard, under my own inspection. When there were in the district,
before surveyed, 891 houses, 1605 families, and 6299 inhabitants -- For a more
particular account of the survey. -- See Tables I. II. III.

This astonishing increase of 2141 inhabitants, which is above half of the
original number, in the small space of seventeen years, may, in some measure,
be attributed to the establishment of manufactories.

This increase of population too has taken place, during that very period in
which Dr. Price asserts the depopulation of Great Britain to have been rapid
and progressive: and what makes this increase more remarkable, Carlisle has,
during the whole period alluded to, been constantly supplying the army, the
navy, the metropolis, and even the distant regions of India, with her hardy,
active, and enterprizing sons.

From tables, number IV. V. and VI. we can with pleasure demonstrate the
extreme salubrity of Carlisle, even in a very unhealthy year; a year in which
no less than 129 persons were cut off by two epidemic disorders, viz. the small
pox and scarlet fever. By the bills of mortality published in different towns
in England, as well as the continent, it appears on an average, that in Vienna
about 1 in 19 and a half of the inhabitants die annually; in London, 1 in 20
and three quarters; in Edinburgh, 1 in 20 and four fifths; in Leeds, 1 in 21
and three fisths; in Dublin, 1 in 22; in Rome, 1 in 23; in Amsterdam, 1 in 24;
in Breslaw, 1 in 25; in Berlin, 1 in 26 and a half, in Northampton and
Shrewsbury, 1 in 26 and a half; in Liverpool, 1 in 27 and a half; in
Manchester, 1 in 28; in Chester, 1 in 40; but in the year 1774, when the small
pox were very general and fatal, 1 in 27; and in the parish of Sedburgh, in the
county of York, 1 in 37 and a half; and in Blandford Forum in Dorset, 1 in 39;
in Carlisle, this year, 1 in 30 and three ninths -- See Table VII.

Tables, number III. V. and VI. are of the utmost importance to the physician,
the politician, and the calculator of annuities, and to every one who has the
health and happiness of himself and family at heart. They clearly demonstrate,
as far as one year's observation can have weight, what periods of life are the
most healthy, what are the most obnoxious to disease.

As no particular epidemic disease occurred last year, which had any
considerable effect on the lives of adult persons, it is apprehended these
calculations for the periods above ten years old, will not be attended with
much variation in other years.

That women in general live longer than men, is almost universally agreed, and
the following observations tend much to confirm the truth of this opinion.
During the last year twelve persons died between eighty and ninety years old,
eight of these were females, and between ninety and a hundred, two died, both
females. -- See table VI. In table III. we see two people are above 100 years
old, and these likewise are females.

Table II. which contains the number of husbands, wives, etc. shows how
inferior in number widowers are to widows. There are above four widows to one
widower: an astonishing disproportion; in what manner is it to be accounted
for? The following causes are conceived to operate considerably:

1st, Men are, in general, more intemperate than women. 2d, They are exposed to
greater hardships and dangers. 3d, Widowers, perhaps, in general, have greater
opportunities of getting wives, than widows have of getting husbands. 4th,
Widows have a greater propensity to live in towns than widowers. Women, in
general, and more especially among the middle ranks of life, marry earlier than
men.
5th and lastly, The constitutions of males, as fitted for more violent and
laborious exertions, are firmer and more robust than those of females: their
muscular and nervous fibers, may therefore be supposed to become stiff, rigid,
and incapable of performing the functions necessary to health and life sooner
than those of females, both on account of their original texture, and the
friction which must necessarily occur from laborious exercise. But from
whatever causes the difference of longevity betwixt males and females may
arise, the fact itself is sufficiently ascertained by table VI. where we find,
that between the ages of sixty and seventy, although there are a greater number
of wives than husbands, yet eleven husbands and only four wives have died, and
of all different ages twenty-nine husbands and sixteen wives.

During this year two epidemics raged with uncommon violence, and swept off a
great number of children, viz. the small pox, and a species of the scarlet
fever.

As the persons affected with the small pox were chiefly of the lower class,
who seldom called in medical assistance, it is impossible to ascertain the
precise number: from the information, however, which I have had, it appears,
that about 300 were, during the last six months of the year, seized with the
small pox in the natural way: of these no less than ninety fell victims to its
virulence. Hence, near one in three died of all that were affected with the
natural small pox; which, while at the same time, it serves as a melancholy
proof of its fatal effects, points out the great and salutary advantages which
are derived from inoculation. During the same period several hundreds were
inoculated in the neighborhood of Carlisle, and it is a pleasing truth, that
not one of them died. Had those 300 been inoculated, it is more than probable,
that of the ninety not above six would have died; and even these not of
inoculation, but of other disorders. Hence we see eighty-four persons might
have been saved to their parents and the public. Yet so great is the prejudice
against the salutary practice of inoculation amongst the vulgar, that few, very
few, can be prevailed upon, either by promises, rewards, or entreaties, to
submit to the operation. No wonder, that in rude, ignorant, and barbarous
times, superstition hurried men into the grossest absurdities; when in a
polished and enlightened age, in an age too, when the experience of full twenty
years has clearly demonstrated the utility of inoculation, we see the bulk of
mankind ready to sacrifice their children, and all that is dear to them, to a
foolish prejudice.

FOR THE YEAR 1780.] The population of Great Britain must ever be a subject
deserving the attention of every lover of his country, and especially since the
commencement of the present war, it has become highly interesting.

Within these few years, some very able writers have published their thoughts
and calculations on this subject. Those who are willing to depreciate the
resources of this country, and to magnify those of our enemies, have
endeavored to persuade us, that our situation is truly lamentable, and that
population has rapidly and progressively decreased for this twenty or thirty
years past.

The data from which these calculations and inferences have been made, are
principally the returns of the window surveyors, and the books of the customs
and excise.

Others, who from different sources of information, have attempted to confute
such sentiments, have presented us with a more favorable picture; they, with
much appearance of truth, have endeavored to prove, that the number of
inhabitants in Great Britain, instead of decreasing, has considerably
increased, during the period above alluded to. In support of the latter
hypothesis, I think it may not be improper to mention the following facts: --

In the beginning of the year 1780, I made an actual, and I believe an
accurate, survey of the two parishes, St. Mary's and St. Cuthbert's, and found
they contained 1148 houses, 1872 families, and 7677 inhabitants See last year's
observations on the bills of mortality for Carlisle.
A few months afterward, another actual survey was made of the two parishes,
by Mr. Coulson, general surveyor of the four northern counties for the
window-tax, and Mr. William Monkhouse, surveyor of Cumberland, Leith, and
Eskdale wards; and though I have every reason to apprehend, that their survey
was much more accurate, than surveys for the window-tax heretofore have been,
yet they only returned 815 houses; the difference therefore between the real
number of houses, and the number returned to the window-tax is 333. Now, to
show how fallacious all calculations are, with respect to the number of
inhabitants in any particular place, founded on the returns of the surveyors of
the window-tax, even when they make the most accurate survey. Let us suppose I
had wanted to ascertain the number of inhabitants in Carlisle and the adjoining
villages, and had been ignorant of the real number of houses which they
contained, I should have multiplied 815 by 6 and two thirds, which is nearly
the number of people in each house, the product will be 5433 nearly, which is
2244 less than the real number or two sevenths nearly of the whole. And if I
had been ignorant of the number of inhabitants in each house, I should most
probably have multiplied 815 by 6, which would have made the difference still
more considerable.

The salubrity of Carlisle was proved by the bills of mortality published last
year; and it appears still more evident from the present, for only 1 in 34 and
a half nearly, of all the inhabitants have died this year, in consequence of
diseases -- See Table VII.

Table VI. coroborates the observations made in the last year's bills, viz.
that women live longer than men; for between 100 and 103 years old, two persons
died, who were both females; 26 husbands, and only 15 wives have died, although
there are a greater number of wives than husbands in Carlisle.

FOR THE YEAR 1781.] People of all ranks, ages, and conditions of life, enjoyed
an uncommon degree of health during the first three months of this year; for,
within that period, no more than twenty-three persons died; and of these,
fifteen were either very young children, or old and infirm. But about the
beginning of April, a very epidemic fever, evidently the Typhus Carcerum, began
to make its appearance. It broke out in a house in Rickergate, which contains
about half a dozen very poor families; the rooms are exceeding small, and in
order to diminish the window-tax, every window, that even poverty could
dispense with, was shut up: hence stagnation of air, which was rendered still
more noxious by the filth and uncleanliness of the people. The surgeon who
attended some of those poor wretches, told me, the smell was so offensive and
disagreeable, that it was with difficulty he could stay in the house, while he
inquired into the situation of his patient. One of the persons affected with
the fever in this house was a weaver, who, on his recovary, went to his usual
employment at a large work-shop, where he communicated the disorder to his
fellow-weavers, and from thence the fever spread all over the town. It,
however, chiefly. I may almost say entirely, raged amongst the common and lower
ranks of people, and more especially amongst those who lived in narrow, close,
confined lanes, and in small, crowded apartments. It affected adults more
frequently than children; the infirm, than the robust; women than men; and the
married were more subject to it than the single. Three or four persons in a
family were frequently seized with it, one after another. It was almost
altogether confined to this place, none being seized with it ever in the
neighboring villages, except in a very few instances, where the feeds of it
were evidently carried by some persons who had labored under the disease. In
the short space of about eight months, near five hundred persons were affected
with this fever, forty-eight of whom died; of these, one was under five years
o^ age; two between five and ten; one between ten and fifteen; two between
fifteen and twenty; one between twenty and thirty; eight between thirty and
forty; thirteen between forty and fitty; twelve between fifty and sixty; six
between sixty and seventy; two between seventy and eighty years.

The small pox were constantly in town all this year, but made little or no
progress till toward the latter end of October, when they became rather more
general, but they could scarce ever be said to rag^ as an epidemic: nineteen
only died. No other epidemic appeared, and indeed, excepting the jail fever
this year was by no means unhealthy. Great numbers were inoculated both in the
town and country villages.

During the present year, 1 in 38 and 3 fifths of all the inhabitants have died
in consequence of diseases -- See Table VII.

The difference of the number of deaths of husbands and wives, is not near so
great as it was in the years 1779 and 1780; yet still the deaths of the former
exceed those of the latter by two; for thirty three husbands and only
thirty-one wives have died, which difference is not the less extraordinary than
i^ the two preceding years, when we consider, in the first place, that the
constitutions of women are more predisposed to be acted upon by the contagion
of the Jail Fever than those of men; and in the second that they are, from
their habits and situations in life, infinitely more exposed to that contagion.
Between eighty and ninety years of age, five males and four females, and
between ninety and an hundred, three females have died. -- See Table VI.

FOR THE YEAR 1782.] Upon the whole, this year, notwithstanding it was so
extremely cold and wet cannot be considered as an unhealthy one. The Typhus
Carcerum, or Jail Fever, which raged with so much violence last year, gradually
declined, and was scarcely to be met with after May. Sixteen persons died of it.

And although the small pox were constantly in town, yet they were neither
general nor very fatal* Thirty persons only died of that disease.

In the beginning of June, the Catarrhus Contagiosus or Influenza became
general; very few families either in the town or country, escaping its
influence. It is, perhaps, the most contagious of all disorders to which the
human body is subject; and were it as fatal as it is infectious, it would soon
depopulate the world. When it once breaks out, it does not, like the small pox,
the plague, or the jail fever, confine itself to a city, a province, or a
kingdom; but traverses whole continents, and is sometimes wafted across the
Atlantic Ocean. It has raged no less than eleven or twelve times as an epidemic
in Europe, within the present century, and pretty generally exhibits the same
phoenomena; yet no barrier has hitherto been discovered to arrest its progress;
nor have the causes which first produced it at each period, been yet
ascertained. Fortunately, however, it is a very mild disease, differing little
from the common catarrh or cold, except that the febrile symptoms are more
constant and rather more severe. The Influenza attacked every age, sex, and
apparently people of every habit; yet it is evident, a predisposition was
required, as several, and among the rest myself, who were frequently exposed to
the contagion, escaped the disease. In what that predisposition consists,
remains yet to be discovered. It finished its course in the neighborhood of
Carlisle, in about the space of three weeks or a month; and its symptoms were
here so mild, that medical advice was seldom sought for. One person only is
supposed to have died of it in Carlisle, viz. a woman sixty-five years of age.
During this year 1 in 38 of all the inhabitants have died in consequence of
diseases. -- See Table VII.

Hitherto the number of deaths of husbands, has considerably exceeded those of
wives, each year: but during the present year, the deaths of wives somewhat
exceed; for twenty-two wives, and only twenty husbands have died. -- See Table
VI.

Between eighty and ninety years of age, five males and nine females; and
between ninety and a hundred, one male and two females have died; between a
hundred and one, and a hundred and two years of age, one female, viz a widow,
died during the present year. -- See Table VI.

In the month of August not one person died in the parish of St. Cuthbert, a
circumstance which has not occurred these twenty years.

FOR THE YEAR 1783.] The present year has been much more healthy, than any of
the preceding years; on which, observations on the bills of mortality in
Carlisle have been made: for, notwithstanding the number of inhabitants has
considerably increased, yet the number of deaths is by no means so great, one
hundred and eighty one persons only have died.

No dangerous or fatal epidemic, except the small pox, raged with any degree of
violence. -- The weather, during the latter end of June, the whole of July, and
part of August, was extremely hot and sultry; the atmosphere was replete with
the electric fluid; and there was more thunder and lightening than ever was
remembered, even by the oldest person. This state of the atmosphere was by no
means peculiar to the neighborhood of Carlisle, but was pretty universal
throughout Europe.

In September and October, the small pox became so general, and were of so
fatal a kind, that the monthly committee of the dispens^ry were of opinion,
that a general inoculation of the poor and indigent inhabitants, would be
attended with very beneficial effects. Early in the month of November, a
general inoculation accordingly took place. Great numbers were inoculated, not
only by the surgeon to the dispensary, but also by most of the other surgeons
in the town. By this salutary measure the city of Carlisle was, in the space of
two months, totally freed from a most dangerous and fatal disorder which has
been raging in different parts of the county with the utmost violence. The
number of persons affected with the natural small pox in Whitehaven, within the
last six months, have been almost incredible, and it is a melancholy truth,
that scarcely one in three survived. In Wigton and its neighborhood they have
been also extremely general and fatal.

Twenty nine husbands and twenty three wives have died this year. -- See Table
VI.

Between eighty and ninety years of age, four males and seven females, six of
whom were widows; and between ninety and an hundred, one male and one female
have died. -- See Table VI.

Nineteen only fell victims to the small pox, and seventeen of these were
children under five years of age.

A poplexies were remarkably frequent this year; no less than nine persons
having died of that distemper. -- The number of deaths were remarkably equal
during all the seasons; forty-seven died in winter, forty-two in the spring,
forty five in the summer, and forty-seven in autumn. -- See Table IV.

During the present year, 1 in 43 and 1-7th of all the inhabitants have died in
consequence of diseases. -- See Table VII.

FOR THE YEAR 1784.] In the observations on the bills of mortality for last
year, I took notice of the extreme healthiness of that season; it is, however,
with peculiar satisfaction I am able to inform the public, that it has been far
exceeded in salubrity by the present.

One hundred and fifty-four persons only have died, which are fewer by
twenty-seven than died last year; and in the year 1779, the number swept off by
two diseases only, viz. the small pox and scarlet fever was nearly equal to the
whole number of deaths this year, whether occasioned by diseases or accidents.

This remarkable degree of healthiness may be accounted for, from the absence
of almost all epidemical disorders; for not one made its appearance except the
small pox, which were of a very mild kind, and proved fatal to no more than ten
persons, nine of whom were under five years of age. How to account for the
absence of all other epidemic and contagious diseases, is not so easy.

With respect to the weather, I shall only remark that the present year
commenced and ended with the severest and longest continued frosts ever
remembered since the year 1740. The summer too was uncommonly cold and wet, and
yet was the healthiest season, as may be seen by examining table IV.

Whether the severity of the frost had any effect in purifying the air, and
hence rendering it unfavourable to the propagation, etc. etc. of epidemical
disorders, perhaps, may be doubted; but it certainly operated most powerfully
in the production of an obstinate cutaneous disease, by physicians denominated,
Herpes; but by the common people and empiries, called Scurvy, though it is
essentially different from that disorder.

This cutaneous complaint, viz. Herpes, has been extremely prevalent, and
remarkably obstinate these two last winters, and has appeared under a variety
of forms.

The number of deaths of husbands still continues to exceed that of wives, and
this year in a very great proportion, for twenty nine husbands have died, but
only twenty wives. -- See Table VI.

Four widowers, and twenty-four widows have died.

Between eighty and ninety years of age, four males and nine females, eight of
whom were widows; and between ninety and an hundred, one male and three females
have died. -- See Table VI.

Hitherto the number of males born has exceeded the number of females; but this
year it is the reverse, for 121 males and 153 females have been christened. --
See Table VIII.

During this year, 1 in 50 and 1-6th nearly, of all the inhabitants have died
in consequence of diseases. -- See Table VII.

FOR THE YEAR 1785.] The present year, like the last, was ushered in by a very
severe and long continued frost. There was also a considerable fall of snow;
and a complete thaw, which was slow, gradual, and without rain, did not take
place till near the middle of April. The thaw was succeeded by cold easterly
winds, which continued a long time; and a greater degree of drought was
scarcely ever remembered. The fields were parched, the springs and rivers were
almost dried up, circumstances not to be wondered at, when we consider that
there was no rain, a very few slight showers excepted, from the month of
October, 1784, till the 29th of July. On that day we had, in the neighborhood
of Carlisle, a great deal of thunder and lightning, accompanied by a most
violent and heavy rain; and from that time, till near the end of the year, the
weather became moist and warm.

Notwithstanding this long continued drought, the weather was never exceedingly
hot or sultry; which may probably be the reason why dangerous disorders were
not more prevalent. For this year was far from being unhealthy, no epidemic
diseases occurring, but such as had arisen before the dry and warm season came
on; which, therefore, could have no effect in producing them.

Very early in the month of January, the jail fever, which I believe first
originated among the felons confined in the jail, began to make its appearance
in the city, and continued to rage almost the whole of the year. As the poorest
class of inhabitants chiefly suffered from it: its progress, etc. will be best
ascertained by examining the books of the dispensary, where I find four
patients, laboring under the disorder, were admitted in the month of January;
four in February; four in March; three in April; eight in May; eight in June;
ten in July: fifteen in August; nineteen in September; eleven in October; and
eleven in November. In December it seems to have almost entirely ceased, for
not one was admitted during that month. Ninety-seven patients, affected with
this fever, were therefore admitted into the dispensary in the space of eleven
months.

The present epidemic was of the same nature as that which appeared at Carlisle
in the year 1781, and of which I published an account. It, however, differed in
some few particulars, which difference I shall briefly relate. 1. It did not
rage so universally, the contagion, probably, not being so virulent. 2. The
symptoms, in general, were more mild. 3. Petechiae and haemorrhages were seldom
observed. 4. A greater proportion of children were affected. 5. Relapses were
much more frequent. In the fever of 1781, I did not see one instance of a
relapse; whereas in the present, it was a very common circumstance; several
patients having even two relapses.

Of the ninety-seven patients laboring under this fever, and which were
admitted into the dispensary, only four have died, who were all in extreme
danger at the time of their admission, and two of them so much exhausted, as
not to be able almost to take any medicine: viz. Margaret Storey, of
Rickergate, a married woman, aged forty-two years, who died on the third day
after admission; and Mary Wilson, of Nanson's lane, a child, aged three years,
who died two days after admission. If we, therefore, omit these two, as cases
already desperate, ninety-five will remain, of which only two died, which is
exactly one in forty-seven and one half. A circumstance which strongly marks
the efficacy of the practice, and more especially when it is considered, that
almost the whole of these patients were confined, during their illness, in
small, close, dirty rooms, where, in some cases, six persons were ill at the
same time; and sometimes even three of them in one bed.

In the whole city nine persons died of this fever.

Before I conclude this part of my subject, I cannot omit observing that the
dispensary has expended upwards of thirty pounds for wine, all of which was
consumed by persons affected with this disouse.

Early in the month of December, 1784, the small pox were introduced by some
vagrants, into the Damside, Irish Gates, to the neighborhood of which they
were confined some time, but afterward became general, and continued till the
latter end of July, or beginning of August, when they entirely ceased. Eight
patients affected with the natural small pox were admitted into the dispensary
in the month of January; eight in February; two in March; twenty-one in April;
nine in May; and four in July; in all fifty-two; twelve of whom died. Total of
deaths of this disease, thirty-nine, who were all under five years of age.

As one in four and one third died of all those who were admitted into the
dispensary, it is highly probable that of the whole number who labored under
the natural small pox, many of whom had not the least advice or assistance, one
in four would die, which makes the number affected, one hundred and fifty-six.
As soon as the disease made its appearance within the walls of the city, the
monthly committee of the dispensary resolved, that a general inoculation of the
poor inhabitants, agreeable to the plan which I had proposed in the year 1783,
The small pox, both natural and from inoculation, being now pretty general in
Carlisle, and likely to spread still further, the monthly committee of the
Carlisle Dispensary are of opinion, that a general inoculation of the poor and
indigent inhabitants will be attended with very beneficial effects.

R^SOLVED 1st, That all such persons as come recommended by a subscriber, shall
be inoculated gratis at the dispensary.

2d, That the sum of 2s. 6d. be given to the parents who are most indigent, and
who have three or more children inoculated, as a reward for nursing them
properly during inoculation.

3d, That a subscriber of one guinea shall have the privilege of recommending
three persons to be inoculated, with the reward; or five who do not require it;
and so in proportion for any larger sum.

4th, That the privilege of being inoculated at the dispensary be continued for
the space of two months, and no longer.


should take place at the dispensary, and it was with great pleasure I observed
the prejudices of the vulgar against that most salutary invention, were greatly
diminished. For as soon as the resolution of the committee was made public by
the common crier, great numbers from all quarters of the town flocked to the
dispensary, to reap the benefits which it held out to them. No less than ninety
one were inoculated at the expense of the charity, and rather more than that
number by the different practitioners. So that upon a moderate calculation, the
whole number inoculated this year, amounted to two hundred; every one of whom
not only recovered, but had the disease in a very favorable manner. As we have
stated it as probable, that one in four died of the natural small pox, it is
therefore probable that fifty lives were saved by this general inoculation; and
if all those affected in the natural way had been also inoculated, no less than
eighty-nine lives would have been preserved.

During this year, 1 in 37 and 1-7th nearly, of all the inhabitants have died
-- See Table VII.

Apoplexies and paralytic strokes were very frequent: no less than eight
suffered from the apoplexy.

As usual the number of deaths of husbands continues to exceed that of wives;
twenty-nine husbands have died, and only twenty-five wives. -- See Table VI.

Nine widowers, and twenty-one widows have died this year. -- See Table VI.

Persons between the ages of ten and fifteen, and fifteen and twenty years,
have been astonishingly healthy, When I made the survey of Carlisle in the
beginning of the year 1780, there were between ten and fifteen, seven hundred
and fifteen; and between fifteen and twenty years of age, six hundred and
seventy-five persons: in all, one thousand three hundred and ninety. Since that
period the inhabitants have unquestionably increased much: it is therefore very
probable, that at present there are not less than one thousand four hundred and
fifty persons between the age of ten and twenty years, and yet of this number
only two have died. -- See Table V.

The present year, however, seems to have been fatal to old people, between
eighty and ninety years of age, eight males and six females, five of whom were
widows; and between ninety and an hundred, two males and four females have
died. -- See Table VI.

The number of males born greatly exceed the number of females; for, 148 males,
and 119 females have been christened. -- See Table VIII.

FOR THE YEAR 1786.] Although we had not nearly so much frost this year as the
last, yet in other respects, the weather, during the present spring and summer,
greatly resembled that of the year 1785. The winds, which were dry and cold,
came chiefly from the east during the whole of the months of March, April, and
a part of May, which made the spring late: and although the drought which
succeeded was not of equal duration, yet it was much more intense, and
consequently the fields exhibited the same parched and arid appearance they had
done the last summer. Refreshing rains fell toward the middle of July: the
autumn was fine; and a more mild and open winter was seldom or ever remembered.

There was scarcely any difference in the salubrity of the two years, two
hundred and four persons dying the last, and two hundred and five in the
present year. June, July, and August, which were the hottest months, were by
far the most healthy, for only twenty-four persons died during that period. --
See Table IV.

On the contrary, October, November, and December, were the most unhealthy,
during which eighty-three deaths occurred: See Table IV. -- This difference,
however, did not seem to proceed from any alteration of the atmosphere, but
from the measles, which were introduced into the town some time in August, and
raged, during these three months, with the greatest violence.

About two o'clock on Friday morning, August 11th, a slight shock of an
earthquake was very sensibly felt by many persons in Carlisle and the
neighborhood. Those who were perfectly awake, or who happened to be out of
doors, report that the concussion continued about four or five seconds; and
that it was immediately preceded by a hollow tremulous sound. Many were
awakened out of their sleep, by the shaking of their houses, beds, doors, and
window shutters. Birds in cages were likewise sensible of its influence, and
fluttered as if greatly agitated and alarmed. Very providentially, however,
little or no damage was sustained; a few chimneys and old walls were here and
there thrown down, and three people in Whitehaven were thrown off their feet.
But in other respects, a momentary fright and alarm were the only
inconveniences which were suffered from it. The concussion seemed to take its
direction from the east to the west, and extended quite across the island,
being felt both at Neweastle and Whitehaven. And from the north toward the
south, it extended from Glasgow to the northern parts of Lancashire. The
atmosphere on Wednesday and Thursday preceding, was moist, gloomy, and sultry;
and so much so, on Thursday night, that a lady, who was on a visit at Dalston,
actually foretold when she went to bed, that an earthquake would take place
before morning. Friday was a very clear, hot, calm, sultry, day.

Early in the spring, the measles made their appearance in the south-west parts
of Northumberland, where, I am informed, they proved very fatal. From thence
they gradually advanced farther south, and the infection began to operate in
Carlisle about the beginning of August: and as this epidemic had not visited us
since the year 1780, there must consequently have been a great number of
children who were liable to be affected by the contagious matter generated by
this disorder. Hence the infection spread rapidly, and the disease soon became
general, and continued to rage till the latter end of December, or beginning of
January, 1787, when it altogether disappeared.

Notwithstanding, however, the disorder was so very general, yet its symptoms
were extremely mild and favorable: for, of the great number who were affected,
I should suppose not less than six or seven hundred, only twenty-eight died,
and the greater part of these were the children of the very poorest and lowest
class of inhabitants, who were either too ignorant, or too obstinate to call in
medical assistance. Of the twenty-eight who died, twenty-six were under five
years of age, and two were between five and ten years old.

Another epidemic, viz. the chincough, occurred pretty early in the year, but
this disease made little progress, until October, and even then did not become
very general. Only nine children, who were all under five years of age, died of
it, and some of those were affected with the chincough and measles at the same
time, and therefore probably suffered from the joint effects of both.

During the present year, 1 in 37 and 5-6ths nearly, of all the inhabitants
died in consequence of diseases. -- See Table VII.

The number of deaths of husbands still continues to exceed that of wives;
twenty-four husbands have died, and only twenty-one wives. -- See Table VI.

Between eighty and ninety years of age, one male and five females, who were
all widows; and between ninety and an hundred, two widows have died.

A man who had long been a soldier, and who must consequently have been subject
to many varieties and vicissitudes of life, died at the advanced age of 105.

FOR THE YEAR 1787.] In the beginning of January, 1780, the inhabitants of the
two parishes of St. Mary's and St. Cuthbert's, Carlisle, were very accurately
numbered by Mr. Stanger, Mr. Howard, and myself. At that period these parishes
contained 3491 males, and 4186 females, in all 7677.

Sometime in the year 1787, an order was issued from the court of Quarter
Sessions, to the different constables in the county of Cumberland, to make an
actual survey of all the inhabitants of the county. The survey was accordingly
made at Carlisle in the latter end of December; but, as the motives which
induced the magistrates to issue this order were not generally known, many
gentlemen refused to give an account of their families. The abbey, as being
extraparochial, and the township of Wreay, through some mistake, were
altogether omitted in this survey: hence it is evident, the lists delivered in
to the Quarter Sessions are very erroneous.

I, however, had an opportunity of examining all the returns of the above
parishes very minutely, and as the constables marked down the names of all
those persons who refused to give them information, I was enabled to make up
the deficiency, by procuring the numbers in each of their families, and I am
persuaded the enumeration is now pretty exact; but if there be any error, it
will be on the side of deficiency, rather than of excess.

From this survey, thus corrected, it appears that the two parishes of St.
Mary's and St. Cutbbert's* contain at present 3864 males, 4813 females, and
consequently 8677 inhabitants. -- For a more particular account see Table III.

There has therefore been an increase, in the space of eight years, of a
thousand inhabitants; which is a circumstance, that must give great pleasure to
all those who are well-wishers to the prosperity of the city of Carlisle.

From what causes, it may be asked, has this rapid increase arisen? It affords
me considerable satisfaction to be able to inform the public, that it has
principally been owing to two general causes, viz. The salubrity of the place,
and the increase of trade and manufactures. The former is clearly proved by the
great excess of births above deaths; for, during the last eight years, the
period in question, 2071 children have been baptized, and only 1582 persons
have been buried. The births, therefore, exceed the deaths 489. The latter,
viz. the increase of trade and manufactures, is proved by an ingress of
inhabitants into Carlisle, exceeding the emigration out of it, during the same
period, 511; which numbers together make up the increase of 1000.

Inoculation, I am persuaded, has also greatly contributed to the increase of
population, not only in Carlisle, but likewise in the whole county of
Cumberland. In the year 1779, when the lower class of inhabitants were
extremely averse to this salutary discovery, no fewer than ninety persons died
of the natural small pox; whereas only 151 have died during the eight
succeeding years; which is, upon an average, not quite nineteen in each year;
and yet that disorder prevailed in every one of these years. (See all the bills
of mortality which have been published.) Since that period, viz. 1779, the
prejudices of the vulgar against inoculation, have greatly diminished, and will
soon, I doubt not, be totally eradicated. And since the institution of the
dispensary, the poor have enjoyed the privilege of having their children
inoculated gratis; an advantage which they have, in general, with great
readiness embraced.

The first four months of the present year, greatly resembled the beginning of
the year 1779. The weather in both was remarkably mild and temperate, for there
was scarce any frost in either. The common daisy was in full flower on
new-year's-day, and continued in blossom almost the whole year: the Primrose
began to blow on the 1st of February: and the Colt's-foot and Barren Strawberry
very early in the same month: in short, all the early flowering plants were in
full blow five or six weeks before their usual time. The state of the weather,
however, throughout the year, was the reverse of 1785 and 1786; these years
were remarkably hot and dry; this was cold, gloomy, and uncommonly wet,
insomuch that there never was a year in which, probably, more rain fell than in
the present.

The late Dr. Carlyle kept an accurate account of the quantity of rain which
fell at Carlisle during a period of twenty years, viz. from the year 1757 to
1776 inclusive, which his son, the Rev. Mr. Chancellor Carlyle, has been kind
enough to communicate to me. During this period, the greatest quantity which
fell in any one year, was thirty-one inches and a few lines; and the medium
depth of these years was only twenty four inches, eight lines and a half.
Unfortunately, since 1776, no regular measure has been taken at Carlisle; but
Dr. Campbell, a very ingenious physician at Lancaster, has sent me a table of
the quantity which fell at that place during the present year; and from which
it appears, that it amounted to the almost incredible quantity of fifty-one
inches and one line. The rain, therefore, which fell this year, is considerably
above double the quantity which has fallen in any one year, on an average of
twenty year's calculation, and exceeds, in quantity, twenty inches what fell in
the wetest of the above years. It must, however, be observed, that Lancaster is
situated somewhat nearer the western ocean than Carlisle; and that the hills to
the east and north-east of that place, are nearer it than the hills about
Carlisle, which, in all probability, will make some difference in the quantity
of rain which falls at each place.

Notwithstanding the very great moisture of the atmosphere, above related, yet
the present year was a healthy one, and the last six months were remarkably so;
seventy-three persons only died during that period. -- See Table IV.

The small pox made their appearance in January, and were in Carlisle the
greatest part of the year; but inoculation soon became general, which prevented
the disorder from raging with any great degree of violence Thirty only died,
twenty-eight of whom were under five years of age, and two between five and ten
years. Eighty-four were inoculated at the dispensary, all of whom not only
survived, but had the disorder very favorably; and considerable numbers were
likewise inoculated by several surgeons in the town.

The putrid or jail fever also prevailed almost the whole year; but as it
neither became general, nor malignant, till the beginning of 1788, I shall at
present only observe, that fourteen persons fell victims to it.

The difference in the number of deaths of husbands and wives is this year very
considerable; for thirty-four husbands have died, and only twenty two wives. --
See Table VI.

Between eighty and ninety years of age, five males and five females, (the
latter were widows;) and between ninety and one hundred, one male and two
females have died. -- See Table VI.

During the present year, only 1 in 44 nearly, of all the inhabitants have died
in consequence of diseases; and upon an average of the last nine years 1 in 39
and 1-4th has died. -- See Table VII. It must be remarked in the first place,
that every infectious and epidemic disease, to which the human body is subject,
(the plague excepted) prevailed during this period at Carlisle; and in the
second place, that the calculations were made for the first eight years: from
the number of inhabitants which existed in the beginning of the year 1780, the
great increase (of one thousand) not being ascertained till the present year
1787. Therefore, although the deaths from accidents were not taken into the
account for several of the first years; yet, upon the whole, the mortality is
stated to be greater than it actually is. -- See Table VII.

The deaths which occurred from accidents, were, in 1779, four; in 1780, three;
in 1781, five; in 1782, four; in 1783, three; in 1784, five; in 1785, four; in
1786, two; and in 1787, two.

From table VII. it appears that the most healthy period of human life is from
ten to fifteen years of age, and that health declines in the following order,
viz. between 20 and 30, -- 15 and 20, -- 5 and 10, -- 30 and 40, -- 40 and 50,
-- 50 and 60, -- 60 and 70, -- under 5, -- 70 and 80, -- 80 and 90, -- 90 and
100. -- See Table VII.

Table VIII. gives a connected view of all the christenings and burials from
1779 to 1796, inclusive.

Dr. Heysham's tables of deaths and diseases of persons of different ages are
omitted, as wholly appertaining to medical subjects.

I shall conclude the observations on the bills of mortality, with an account
of a very curious and important circumstance in physiology, which occurred at
Carlisle during the present year. A child was born, apparently at the full
time, not only alive, but which lived and took nourishment several days,
without the smallest vestige of a brain. In all my reading I do not recollect
to have met with so extraordinary a phenomenon; nor does it appear that
Professor Monro, who has spent the greatest part of his time in anatomical and
physiological pursuits, has either seen or read of any thing exactly similar.
He has indeed, in his ingenious observations on the structure and functions of
the nervous system, published in 1783, favored the world with some plates,
which represent the heads of two children, born at the full time, in which the
bones which generally form the top of the cranium are wanting, and in which the
brain, which is extremely small, projects like an excrescence. In these two
instances, however, there was a small portion of brain in each, and though both
the children are stated to have been born at the full time, yet it does not
appear that they were even born alive, much less that they lived any time after
birth; for, if either had been the case, we cannot suppose that a gentleman of
Dr. Monro's great accuracy, would have omitted circumstances so remarkable; but
I think we may, on the contrary, infer from his silence, and from the following
conclusions, which he himself draws from the abovementioned monstrous
productions, and which I shall take the liberty of quoting, as the work is not
in every person's hands, that they were really born dead: --

Nay we may, perhaps, go a step farther, and doubt whether, instead of
considering the brain as the origin of the nerves, we ought not to consider it
merely as connected with the nerves: or whether there are better reasons for
supposing the brain to produce the nerves, than for supposing the nerves to
produce the brain. Some facts, at least, may be here observed, which seem to
show that the nerves may exist, independent of the brain.

I. In children delivered at the full time, plump and well formed in their
trunk and limbs, I have observed the substance which supplied the place of the
brain, not more bulky than a small nut; and, instead of containing a white
medullary substance, it was of a red color, resembling a clot of blood: and
small cords, occupying the place of the optic nerves, were likewise of a red
color. Yet the spinal marrow, and all the nerves from it, had the ordinary
size and appearance.

II In a monstrous kitten, with two bodies and the appearance of one head, I
found the spinal marrow of one of the bodies connected with a brain and
cerebellum of the common shape and size. But the spinal marrow of the other
body, though equally large, had only a small button of medullary substance at
its upper end, without a suitable brain or cerebellum. See Monro's Observations
on the Nervous System, page 26, 116, and table VIII.


An account of a Female Child which was born at Carlisle, at the full Time,
alive, and which lived five Days and twenty-one Hours, without the smallest
appearance of a Brain.
At eight o'clock on Monday morning, May 26, 1788, Mary Clarke, aged 26 years,
and the mother of six children, some of whom are healthy and others unhealthy,
was delivered of a living female child, at the expense of the Carlisle
dispensary.

The midwife, shocked at the strange and unusual appearance of the child's
head, sent for me immediately. I got there about an hour after the delivery,
and at first sight, it appeared evident that the bones which form the upper
part of the scull were wanting, and that the brain was only covered by its
proper membranes, the pia and dura matter, and resembled a large excrescence
which projected a little over the common integuments, especially toward the
forehead, where it extended over the root of the nose. The color of this
substance was a dark reddish brown, and upon examining it more particularly, I
thought I could perceive the division of the two hemispheres of the brain, and
likewise the division of the cerebrum from the cerebellum. I gently raised with
my fingers, a part of it which projected over the integuments, which made the
child cry, and produced a considerable starting, similar to what is occasioned
by an electric shock. The child was full grown, and seemed in perfect health,
her limbs were plump, firm, and well proportioned, and she moved them with
apparent agility. The external organs of sense were also perfect. She swallowed
well, and took a sufficient quantity of nourishment for several days, but
sometimes during the action of swallowing started a little. She lived till five
o'clock on Sunday morning, June the 1st, when she expired Some time before her
death she was affected with flight convulsions. During the three or four days
preceding her death, there was a constant discharge of a thin watery fluid,
somewhat tinged with blood, from the excrescence, which greatly diminished its
bulk; for at her death, it was only about half the size of what it had been
when she was born, and the surface was, in some places, beginning to put on an
appearance of mortification.

A few hours after her death, Dr. Blamire, and Mr. Charles Farish, accompanied
me to the house, where Dr. Blamire very cautiously dissected, away from the
bones, the whole of the substance; when we found the greatest part of the
frontal, the temporal, the occipital, and the whole of the parietal bones
wanting. The substance removed was then carefully examined, and what was our
astonishment to find it entirely to consist of membranes, blood vessels, but
principally of several bags; one of which was as large as a nut-meg, the rest
of different sizes, but much smaller. They were all filled with a brownish
colored fluid; which, when the cysts were punctured, gushed out with some
violence.

There was not the least appearance of cerebrum, cerebellum, or any medullary
substance whatever. The spinal marrow had a natural appearance, but did not
seem to have been connected with the parts above described.

Having accurately related the facts as they appeared to Dr. Blamire and
myself, which for their singularity deserve to be recorded; I think the few
following obvious inferences may be drawn from them 1. That the fluid
discharged from the excrescence during the life of the infant, and which
produced the great diminution of its bulk, was occasioned by the rupture, or
erosion of cysts, similar to those which remained sound and full of water after
death. 2d, That the living principle, the nerves of the trunk, and extremities,
sensation and motion, may exist independent of, and that the natural, vital,
and animal functions, may be performed without the brain. And as the external
organs of sense, viz. the eyes, the nose, the tongue, and the ears, all seemed
perfect; may we not, therefore, suppose, that the optic, the olfactory, the
gustatory, and the auditory nerves, may exist independent of, and unconnected
with either the brain or spinal marrow?

I content myself with little more than describing this extraordinary case, and
leave to others to deduce from it, such conclusions as the appearances observed
may be thought to warrant.

FOR THE YEAR 1796.] In the month of April, this year, a survey, under the
direction of the editors, was made by Mr. Johnston, a person of accuracy and
attention, who found that the two parishes of St. Mary and St. Cuthbert
contained 1587 houses, 2616 families, and 10,289 inhabitants. It therefore
appears that the increase since 1780 has been 2612; and since 1787, 1612. --
For a more particular account of the different surveys which have been made,
see Tables I. and III.

Middlescugh and Brathwaite, two small townships within the parish of St. Mary,
but nine miles distant from Carlisle, are not included in any of the surveys,
as the inhabitants of these townships, never christen their children, or bury
their dead at the parish church.

THE CARLISLE DISPENSARY
Was established on the 1st of July, 1782, for administering medical relief to
the sick poor of Carlisle. -- The officers appointed for conducting this
charity were: --

PRESIDENT. -- The Right Honorable the Earl of Surrey, now Duke of Norsolk. --
Vice Presidents, the Right Rev. the Bishop of Dromore; the Right Rev. the
Bishop of Clonse^t, now Bishop of Elphin; William Dacre, Esquire. Joseph Liddell,
Esquire. John Losh, Esquire. -- Treasurer Mr. John Mitchinson. -- Secretary, Mr. A.
Elliot. -- Physician, John Heysham, M. D^ -- Surgeon, Mr. William Graham. --
Apothecary, Mr. Watson.

Total Number of Patients admitted since the Institution of the Charity.
In 1782 -- 390 Brought up 6829 1783 -- 685 In 1790 -- 750 1784 -- 787 1791 --
877 1785 -- 683 1792 -- 873 1786 -- 825 1793 -- 996 1787 -- 1389 1794 -- 553
1788 -- 1069 1795 -- 532 1789 -- 971 Total 11,382 6829 Cured 10,496 Relieved
301 Irregular 193 Incurable 81 Dead 265 Remaining on the Books 46 Total 11,382.

The State of Agriculture in the two Parishes of St. Mary and St. Cuthbert.
EXTBNT.] North and south about five miles and a half; east and west about
three miles.

SOIL AND PRODUCE.] The soil is very different in quality and fertility: a
sandy or gravelly loam prevails in the vicinage of Carlisle and Carleton: a
loam, in which clay predominates, is found in most other parts of these
parishes, particularly about Botchardby Harraby, Uprightby, Blackhall, and most
parts of the chapel of Wreay. About Cumersdale, a greyish soil covers a stratum
of clay. Toward the southern and western extremities, are considerable tracts
of moorish soils, which, not many years ago, were very barren commons; but
which, by enclosure and proper management, are now generally in a progressive
state of improvement.

Land near Carlisle is chiefly applied to the purposes of dairying, breeding
and feeding sheep, growing hay for horses, etc. Wheat is the principal grain
cultivated upon the best strong soils; a fallow generally precedes. On soils
having a considerable portion of land, turnips, barley, and clover, or other
artificial grasses, are beginning to be much sown, which is found to be a very
profitable system. Potatoes form a considerable article of cultivation in these
parishes. On the late enclosed commons, oats is the most prevailing crop: that
grain also has its turn in the course of husbandry in more fertile districts,
as have pease and beans. I am sorry to add, that the barbarous and unprofitable
system of taking two or more white crops in succession, though yearly losing
ground, has yet its advocates here The great quantity of manure made at
Carlisle, fertilizes the soil in the neighborhood; and the crops are generally
abundant. Grass ground increase, while that in tillage diminishes.

RENT.] Within half a mile of Carlisle, is from 3l. to 5l. 10s. per acre. In
old enclosures, and pretty good soils at a greater distance, from 1l. to about
2l. 10s. There are, however, some farms, where the soil is unfertile, that do
not fetch above 10s. per acre.

So great is the improvement of land in these parishes that, I was told, ground
which did not bring more than 8s. per acre, forty years ago, is now let from
2l. to 3l. 10s. per acre. It was at that period in common field.

SHEEP AND CATTLE.] About five hundred or six hundred sheep may be kept here,
which are mostly of the short legged, long wooled breed. The standing stocks
are improving in fineness of bone and wool, and inclination to feed, by tups of
the improved breed from the stocks of Mr. Culley, and other eminent
sheep-breeders in Northumberland.

Mr. Porter of Carlisle ranks among the first who introduced that profitable
breed into Cumberland, and is now in possession of a valuable stock, which
depasture upon the Swifts. Cattle are generally of the best Cumberland breeds;
but the cow keepers about Carlisle seem to prefer the short horned, or Dutch
sort; some of which, when properly fed, afford a very great quantity of milk.
There are instances of some giving forty quarts per day (wine measure) for a
few weeks after calving; thirty quarts is not very uncommon, and twenty-four
frequent. She is, however, esteemed a good cow, that affords from sixteen to
twenty quarts of milk per day for great part of the summer. These cows are fed
with the most luxuriant grass in summer, hay in winter, and generally grains or
potatoes every day in the year. The expense of feeding is heavy: but the most
experienced cow keepers have found that the great secret of profiting by cows,
is to select the best milkers, either of the Dutch, Lancashire, or Galloway
breeds, and to feed them with sufficient quantities of the best food. That
however, it must be acknowledged, is a practice not much followed in most other
parts of this county.

RIVERS AND FISH.] The Eden, Caldew, and Petterel, water these parishes. These
rivers abound with trout, eel, and other sorts of small fish, common in the
country. In the Eden large quantities of salmon are caught. The waters of
Caldew and Petterel, and particularly the former, are remarkable for the
quality of bleaching white. It is rather an unpleasant reflection, that these
rapid streams, so peculiarly adapted to the purpose of turning machinery for
miles above Carlisle, more particularly the Caldew: and by a proper application
of which, that city might be rendered almost the Birmingham of the north,
should only be employed in giving motion to three or four solitary corn mills,
and a few cotton works.

THE KING-GARTH FISHERY.] A little below Cargo, is the King-Garth fishery,
which the corporation of Carlisle, held under the charter of Edward III. and
having given rise to a subject of some notoriety in this part of the county, a
few years ago, it may not be amiss here to give a short account of it.

An eye draught of the Stell Fisheries at King-garth.



A. The main river of Eden, formerly a small stream, called the Gut or Goat.

B. Where the stells crossed the river.

C. The ancient main course of the river, where the stells were formerly
placed, now dried up, called King-Garth.

D. King-Garth fishhouse.

E. Carbed.

F. Cargo-Holm.

This fishery of the corporation (being a several fishery) extended only across
the stream, between Cargo-holm and Carbed, and so has been lost, by the river
altering its course many years ago. The fishery in that part of the river where
the stell was lately placed, belonged to Lord Lonsdale; and was, till lately,
under lease to the corporation. The device for catching fish, called a Stell,
used by the lessees of the corporation, was a net across the water, tied to
stakes drove in for that purpose, which caught or stopped most of the salmon;
it being only in high floods that any could get past it: by those means the
other fisheries higher up the river, were become of trifling value.

For remedy whereof, an action was commenced, in the year 1783, by the owners
of those other fisheries, against the lessees of the corporation upon the
statute 2d. Hen. VI. chap. 15th. (which statute expressly prohibits the
standing of nets fastened to posts, continually day and night, overthwart the
river Thames, and other rivers of the realm: under the penalty of 100 shillings
for every offense). -- This action came to a hearing at the assizes at
Carlisle, the same year, before judge Buller; when a verdict was given for the
plaintiff: and which, on a new trial the year following, was confirmed. Since
which, that fishery has been occupied by Lord Lonsdale's agents, in the usual
way of nets drawn by hands.

It may be observed, that, this matter was about being brought to a legal
decision, about fifty years ago, when the double passage in the river
occasioned the difficulty of obtaining redress, in regard the nets not being
entirely overthwart the same, within the description and meaning of the act.

The corporation are also entitled to a free fishery (generally called a boat
fishery) in this river, which was granted by the charter of Edward IV.

There are from this part of the river up to Carlisle, about seventeen other
boat fishings, belonging to at least, as many different proprietors; the annual
value of which are various, between 6l. and 40l. each, and upwards.

ROADS.] Are tolerably good. Two old fashioned narrow stone bridges, over two
branches of the Eden connect Carlisle with Stanwix. Caldewgate is also
connected with Carlisle by two stone bridges over as many branches of the
Caldew. Two roads, the one from the south and the other from the east, cross
the Petterel; and at each place there is a stone bridge. The road from London
to Edinburgh, and that from Whitehaven to Newcastle, intersect these parishes
in different directions.

FUEL.] Is chiefly coal from Tindale-fell.

* Since the last page was printed off, we were credibly informed the number of
sheep kept in these two parishes, is about 1600.
GAME.] Are hares and partridges.

QUARRIES AND BUILDINGS.] In these parishes are excellent freestone quarries in
different places. Those of most note are on the Petterel near Newbiggin, and
those near Durdare and Burnthwaite. -- No limestone. Near Quarrygate is a vein
or quarry of alabaster, or gypsum. Buildings are generally pretty good, and
covered with blue or red state: a few houses are yet thatched, and some are
even built with clay walls.

TITHES.] A considerable part of these parishes pay tithes in kind; and a
portion pay a modus in lieu thereof.

SCHOOL.] At Blackhall, a donation amounting annually to 5l. 8s. was left by
the late Thomas Lowry, Esquire. of Blackhall, for the education of seven poor
children.

WOODS AND PLANTATIONS.] The banks of Caldew are clothed with wood,
principally oak; some small plots of woodland appear in other parts, and a few
trees grow on hedge-rows. Several hundred acres of the most barren parts of the
common, when they were enclosed, were planted with forest trees, and chiefly
Scotch fir: they have succeeded beyond the expectation of every one, and now
not only beautify the country, and shelter the farms in the neighborhood, but
will ultimately prove very profitable to the proprietors. Rearing of wood is
the most profitable way of applying most barren soils.

ASPECT AND GENERAL APPEARANCE.] Though this district contains many irregular,
but gentle swells; it is as level, and perhaps more so, than most parts of the
county: the general inclination is toward the north, but small.

The extensive vales, formed by the Eden, the Caldew and Petterel, are level,
fertile, and beautiful; they incircle Carlisle, which rises on a gentle
eminence in the center, and commands a pleasant prospect of the adjacent
country. Among other delightful views which appear from that city, the neat
house, gardens, etc. of William Richardson, Esquire. at Rickerby, are seen beyond
the verdant fields through which the Eden winds its way, and forms an excellent
object.

Mr. Losh of Woodside is making every thing smile round him: his house, his
garden, his farms, are almost daily under his improving hands: land too barren
for tillage he plants with wood. Between Woodside and Durdare is a tract of
very poor ground, divided, but not enclosed, nor cultivated: Mr. Losh has
lately purchased a small part thereof for 2l. 10s. per acre, enclosed and
planted it with forest trees: the other proprietors, it appears, have not yet
discovered how much it would be to their advantage, either to dispose of their
shares to Mr. Losh; or follow his example in turning them to profit.

COUNTY GAOL AT CARLISLE.] Is old, much out of repair, and without the regular
means of supplying the different rooms with fresh air, so necessary in these
wretched receptacles of guilt and misfortune. The celebrated Mr. Howard
describes it as follows: --

The court spacious, 85 yards by 36: it was common to all prisoners; but now a
part is appropriated to the felons, and separated by iron palisades. In the
court is a chapel, built as appears by the date, in 1734. Five rooms for master
side debtors: and as many on the common side. Most of the latter are large, but
have windows to the street. Where there are so many rooms, not to separate the
men and women is certainly inexcusable.

The wards for felons are two rooms, down a step or two; dark and dirty. One of
them, the day room, had a window to the street; through which spirituous
liquors, and tools for mischief, might be easily conveyed: but it is now
bricked up: the night room is only 11 feet by 9. At my last visit, men and
women were lodged together in it. The men and women felons are now confined in
separate apartments.
Two rooms over the felons' wards, which have been used as tap rooms, seem to
be intended for the women only, They are now appropriated to that purpose.
but in one of these I also found three men, and four women, lodged together.
No infirmary. Transports had not the allowance of two shillings and sixpence a
week. Clauses against spirituous liquors, and act for preserving the health of
prisoners, not hung up. Gaol delivery once a year. Few gaols have so many
convenient rooms for common side debtors. It is the more remarkable here,
because there is no table signed by the magistrates, to particularize the free
wards. Some gaolers avail themselves of such a circumstance, and demand rent
for rooms which were undoubtedly designed for common side prisoners.

The furniture is provided by the prisoners, and is generally wretched in the
extreme. Mr. Mullinder, the present jailer, seems, however, to keep the
different apartments as clean and comfortable as circumstances will admit. The
rooms and passages are whitewashed once a year; and the felons' rooms (wholly
composed of stone) cleaned of all noxious matter, by burning a large quantity
of straw upon the floor, so that disorders rarely prevail there. We would,
however, recommend a more frequent use of lime as a wash: being convinced,
that, nothing is more conducive to the prevention, or eradication of
infections. -- The prisoners have an opportunity of purchasing milk and
vegetables, every day, in great plenty. No ale nor spirits are now sold in the
gaol: and it is much to be wished that intoxicating liquors were very sparingly
allowed to be brought therein.

The magistrates for the county have had it in contemplation, these several
years, to build a new goal, in the castle-green: and have prepared a large
quantity of stones for the purpose: a situation we cannot too much recommend:
but from what reason the design is not forwarded, we are not informed.

IMPORTATIONS AND EXPORTATIONS AT CARLISLE PORT.] Extracted from the custom
house books. -- The importations principally consist of deals, tar, staves,
rum, etc. etc. and the exportations of grain, potatoes, oak bark, oat meal,
flour, timber, lead, freestone, herrings, alabaster, British barrel staves,
etc. etc.

Years. Quantity of Tons imported. Quantity of Do. exported. 1733. -- 27. 1734.
154. -- No books found.
1735. 230. -- No books found.
1736. 290. -- No books found.
1737. 120. -- No books found.
1738. 144. -- No books found.
1739. 110. -- No books found.
1740. 100. -- No books found.
1765. 210. 25. 1766. 440. 56. 1767. 189. -- 1768. 250. 30. 1769. 590. 67.
1770. 660. 44. 1780. 180. 72. 1781. 187. 30. 1782. 154. 80. 1791. 1367. 144.
1792. 2683. 116. 1793. 906. 159. 1794. 486. 50

HOUSMAN'S NOTES.

CONTENTS.
GENERAL description PAGE. 3 Etymology PAGE. 4 Its antiquity PAGE. 5 King
Egfrid rebuilds and fortifies the city PAGE. 7 Destroyed by the Danes PAGE. 8
Rebuilt, in part, by K. William Rufus PAGE. 9 He plants a colony of Flemings
PAGE. ibid First Earl of Carlisle PAGE. 10 Report of the state of the city and
castle of Carlisle, in the time of Queen Elizabeth PAGE. 11 A list of ancient
governors of castles, in Cumberland PAGE. 13 View from the great tower of the
castle PAGE. 14 Description of the cathedral PAGE. 15 Legends described PAGE.
18 Monuments and Epitaphs PAGE. 20 Denton's account of the religious
foundations PAGE. 22 -- rectory of St. Cuthbert PAGE. 23 List of Deans PAGE. 24
Relics of saints PAGE. ibid Foundation of the priory PAGE. 25 List of priors
PAGE. 26 Extracts from records PAGE. 27 Diffolution of the priory PAGE. 28
Formed into an episcopal see PAGE. 29 Possessions belonging to the same PAGE.
ibid Valuation in the king's books PAGE. 30 Ecclesiastical Survey of the 26th
K. Henry VIII. PAGE. 31 Lives of the Bishops.
1 Ethelwald PAGE. 36 2 Bernard PAGE. 37 3 Hugh PAGE. 38 4 Walter PAGE. ibid 5
Sylvester de Everdon PAGE. 39 6 Thomas Vetriponte PAGE. ibid 7 Robert de
Chauncy PAGE. ibid 8 Ralph Irton PAGE. 40 9 John Halton PAGE. 41 10 John Ross
PAGE. ibid 11 John Kirby PAGE. 42 12 Gilbert Wellon PAGE. ibid 13 Thomas
Appleby PAGE. ibid 14 Robert Reed PAGE. 43 15 Thomas Merks PAGE. ibid 16
William Strickland PAGE. ibid 17 Robert Whelpdale PAGE. ibid 18 William Barrow
PAGE. 44 19 Marmaduke Lumley PAGE. ibid 20 Nicholas Close PAGE. ibid 21 William
Percy PAGE. ibid 22 John Kingscalt PAGE. ibid 23 Richard Scroop PAGE. 45 24
Edward Stony PAGE. ibid 25 Richard Bell PAGE. ibid 26 William Lever PAGE. ibid
27 Roger Leyburn PAGE. ibid 28 John Penny PAGE. ibid 29 John Kyte PAGE. 46 30
Robert Aldridge PAGE. ibid 31 Owen Oglethorp PAGE. 47 32 John Best PAGE. ibid
33 Richard Barnes PAGE. 48 34 John Meye PAGE. ibid 35 Henry Robinson PAGE. ibid
36 Richard Snowden PAGE. ibid 37 Richard Milburn PAGE. 49 38 Richard Senhouse
PAGE. ibid 39 Francis White PAGE. ibid 40 Barnaby Potter PAGE. ibid 41 James
Usher PAGE. ibid 42 Richard Stern PAGE. 50 43 Edward Rainbow PAGE. 51 44 Thomas
Smith PAGE. ibid Sums expended by him in public buildings and charities PAGE. 52
45 William Nicholson PAGE. ibid 46 Samuel Bradford PAGE. 53 47 John Waugh
PAGE. ibid 48 George Fleming PAGE. ibid 49 Richard Osbaldiston PAGE. ibid 50
Charles Lyttleton PAGE. 54 51 Edmund Law PAGE. ibid 52 John Douglas PAGE. 56 53
Edward V. Vernon PAGE. ibid
Institution of the dean and prebendaries PAGE. 56 Their possessions PAGE. ibid
List of chancellors, vicars general, and officials PAGE. 57 -- archdeacons
PAGE. ibid -- prebendaries PAGE. ibid Parochial description of the two
parishes, and boundaries PAGE. 58 Chapelry of Wreay PAGE. 59 Woodside, with a
sine vsew PAGE. ibid Biography of the late Rev. Mr. Losh PAGE. ibid Manor of
Botchardby PAGE. 60 -- Blackhall PAGE. ibid -- Caldcotts PAGE. 61 Grants and
privileges of the city PAGE. 62 K. Charles I. confirms their former grants, and
appoints the mode of electing the corporate body PAGE. 64 List of Burgesses
PAGE. 65 Assizes first held here PAGE. ibid St. Nicholas' Hospital PAGE. 66
House of gray friars PAGE. 67 -- black friars PAGE. 68 Antiquities described
PAGE. ibid Historical incidents PAGE. 7^ David King of Scotland takes
possession of the city PAGE. ibid sets all the women captives at liberty PAGE.
ibid Prince Henry knighted by K. David; takes an oath, and afterward breaks it
PAGE. ibid K. Alexander, of Scotland, besieges and takes the city, but not the
castle PAGE. ibid The city suffers greatly by an accidental fire PAGE. ibid
besieged by the Scots in 1296; but on their attempting to scale the walls, the
women assisted in the defense, and finally beat them off PAGE. ibid
K. Edward I. resides here PAGE. ibid Harcla, Earl of Carlisle, siezed PAGE. 73
Depredations committed by the Scotch PAGE. ibid The city besieged in Aske's
rebellion; but, the assailants are repulsed by the garrison PAGE. 74 suffered
much by the plague PAGE. ibid sustained a long siege in 1644; when the distress
of the inhabitants was so great, that all kinds of vermin were eaten PAGE. ibid
besieged -- taken and retaken, in 1745 PAGE. ibid
An account of the manufactures, revenue, produce, improvements in agriculture
and cattle PAGE. 75 The modern state of Carlisle; giving a particular account
of its rise and progress in trade, manufactures, etc. from the beginning of the
present century, to the end of the year 1796 PAGE. 76 Average prices of
provisions PAGE. 83 Public inns, coaches, Wagons, etc. PAGE. 84 State of
literature, arts and sciences PAGE. ibid Bills of mortality, with observations
PAGE. 85 Tables of population, etc. PAGE. 93 Dispensary PAGE. 95 Housman's
report on the state of agriculture and rural affairs PAGE. 96 King-Garth
fishery PAGE. 97 Goal PAGE. 98 Custom-house exports and imports PAGE. 99
DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.
Frontispiece, being a view of the city from Stanwix bank, where the road
strikes off to go to Rickerby; there the finest station is for a general view
Page. A view from the turnpike, on Harraby-hill Page. 3 Ground plan of the city
Page. ibid Another view from the high ground, a little to the East of Harraby
village: this gives an extensive view of the country round the city, and the
back ground closes with the majestic mountains in Scotland Page. ibid N. B. The
second plate was given as a substitute to some of the former, which got too
saint in printing. A view of the castle from Battle-holme Page. 11 A view of
the cathedral from the North -- a view of the deanery -- a view of the fratery
-- two views of the castle. Round the cathedral is arranged the following arms.
-- No. 1. James Hay, E. of Carlisle, 2. Henry Clifford, E. of Cumberland, 3.
Henry Fitz David, E. of Carlisle, 4. the city arms, 5. Marcatus, E. of
Carlisle, 6 Ranulph Meschines, first E of Carlisle, 7. Andrew de Harcla, E. of
Carlisle, 8. Prince Rupert, Duke of Cumberland. Page. 15 N. B. We have not
attempted a chronological arrangement of the ^arls, as we have not met with any
record on the subject. -- For the arms of the present Earl of Carlisle, see the
view of Naworth Castle. The legends of St. Anthony and St. Austin Page. 18
Bishop Bell's monument Page. 21 A view of Woodside from the road Page. 59
Antiquities found in, and about, Carlisle Page. 70 N. B. Several of them belong
to Stanwix, and are described there A view of the castle, to show where the
Duke of Cumberland battered it in 1745: the parts in the wall marked "new
buildings," were those he damaged. This view also includes a great part of the
city Page. 75
FINIS.

