AN ESSAY TO INSTRUCT Women how to protect themselves in a State of Pregnancy,
from the Disorders incident to that Period, or how to cure them.

ALSO, SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE Treatment of Children, Which, if attended to,
may ward off DANGEROUS DISEASES, AND PREVENT FUTURE EVILS.

BY MRS. WRIGHT, Midwife.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, No. 30, Southampton-street, Strand; And Sold
by J. BARKER, Dramatic Repository, No. 19, Great Russell-street, Covent Garden;
LEE and HURST, Paternoster Row; and J. KIR^Y, No. 190, Oxford-street.

1798.

INTRODUCTION.
TO a woman who never wrote more than a common letter, it seems somewhat
awkward to take up the pen to write for public perusal, but my friends desire
that I may do it; they have a better opinion of me, than I have of myself; they
say if I give nothing new to the world, I may still be useful to my own sex, by
recommending many things familiar to my experience, which they may have had few
opportunities of knowing; much experience is not the portion of many young
women; few read large elaborate works, and many would be glad to receive
instruction advantageous to themselves and their families, from a small
pamphlet; they have many occupations, and care not to torment themselves with
technical terms in languages unknown to them, or toil over hundreds of pages
they do not understand; my greatest anxiety shall be to be plain and easily
comprehended. Some females ascend into the paths of literature, by accident,
genius, or industry; to the first and last I am indebted, but as to the second,
alas, I have few pretensions; all I can boast of, is, much good temper,
patience, and a tolerable share of common sense.

If this little Essay should make its way to the hands of a learned critic, it
is not improbable, that after reading the title page, and seeing it comes from
a midwife, he may throw it aside with disdain, supposing it smells too strong
of gruel, caudle, and the slops of the nursery, and so I may escape a scourging
from him; but another, after some investigation, may tell us that this
obstetric dame might have employed herself better with her needle; a third,
with as much good nature, and full as much science, may kindly invite her into
the field of literature, hoping that a little more study may enable her to
correct her deficiencies, and I will bend to him with obedience and the lowest
courtesy of my acknowledgment for his gentleness and liberality.

The intention of this Essay is, to convey to my amiable country-women some
hints or instructions how to preserve themselves in pregnancy from evils that
often torment or destroy them, and from which a little rational instruction may
stand as it were like a beacon, to point out latent evil; and I have the vanity
to hope that my humble attempts to be useful, will neither be neglected nor
lost. Another part of my intention is, as a tender mother myself, to teach
others who have less experience, how to superintend their infant offspring.
This is an important concern, for it is a melancholy truth, that above half the
human race suffer much, or sink into untimely graves, before they are two or
three years old; nor is it unlikely, that many of these infants are injured by
the ignorance or carelessness of persons employed to look after them; perhaps
in my way through this little tract I may touch on the office or duty of a
midwife, and other articles in a miscellaneous manner. On sexual disorders it
was my intention to have exposed the futility of what is often done, and how to
substitute some things more effectual; but I find myself incapable of writing
publicly on this branch of feminine infirmities, without violating in some
degree, my own sense of delicacy and modesty, but to make up for this, it is my
intention henceforward, to act as a midwife, and to give advice, and even
particular medicines, in all diseases of women and children, to all who may do
me the honor to employ me; whenever I may be puzzled, (the most able are
non-plussed sometimes though they may not own it) it is my determination to
apply for help, to some of my friends, physicians of learning and much
experience, that will readily give me their best advice.

The diseases of children are numerous, and require the most careful
examination. I have studied them much on pathological principles, and though I
have not consumed much of the midnight oil, have been successful in removing
them. That dismal train of evils that depends on worms bred in the intestines
of children, and frequently of grown up persons, may commonly be removed by
proper attention. I pretend not to the possession of infallible nostrums, nor
would I practice on dogmatical principles, for then we can have no clue to
causes, nor could we have occasion for reason or education; a few recipes
without knowledge, would in this case be sufficient to cure diseases; on this
plan, a person who knows the names of the ropes and sails may go to sea, but,
without the art of navigation, he would seldom carry a ship safe to her port.

It may be supposed I am no great theorist, yet I am not altogether ignorant of
pathology, or the difference in distempers, or of their causes and effects. I
have practiced much among poor people, gratis, on the Continent and at home,
giving them their medicines, because, I think it a duty on all to do good, and
my intentions have been answered with general success. It is my intention still
to carry on this eleemosynary practice, with this difference, that in London, I
cannot afford to furnish remedies for all that may want them, but, if female
paupers will call Sundays and Thursdays, in the morning, from 8 to 10 o'clock,
they shall be welcome to my best endeavors to serve them. If they are sober,
and obedient to directions, I will sometimes give them medicines, and I shall
never be wanting to their welfare; if not, they must not be surprised, if I
excuse myself from hearing their complaints.

If any person who never heard of me before, should have any inclination to
employ me, they may naturally wish to know who I am, and to know my character;
I shall only hope to be known, my vouchers are neither obscure or unworthy of
notice; I may venture to say this for myself, my friends all say it of me,
though no sycophant, I never yet made a foe, or lost a friend. It may be
objected to my proposals, that this Essay may be regarded as a quack
advertisement; I feel, and I dread the force of such a charge, but I am neither
a boaster, nor a vain pretender, this truth may be easily made evident. I may,
after six years residence, call myself a stranger in this great city, for I am
very little known, only to a few friends of the middle rank, who cannot step
beyond their line to recommend me, and I may remain in obscurity, were I now to
suppress this Essay, which may be found useful by many, on purpose to prevent
the calumny of objectors. My friends support my spirits on one hand, on this
attempt to become an author, but my own apprehensions depress them on the
other, and it is with much trepidation I am prevailed on to risk my reception
with the public.

No. 30, Southampton Street, Strand.
AN ESSAY etc.
SECTION I. On the Diseases of early Pregnancy.
THIS Section may deserve the attention of women who are constitutionally
afflicted with troublesome complaints in the first months of pregnancy. The
most common symptoms of breeding are, sickness, loathing, vomiting, giddiness,
drowsiness, heartburn, diarrhoea, a painful fullness of the breasts, nervous
fits, faintings, etc. If the patient is healthy, or of a full habit, it may be
useful for her to let blood repeatedly, in small quantities, not exceeding six
or seven ounces at a time, especially if the sickness is attended with
flushings, parched mouth, or any other feverish symptoms; larger evacuations
are not safe. The bowels in such cases ought to be kept soluble by ripe fruits,
cooling diet, magnesia, cream of tartar whey, soluble tartar, manna, or such
gentle things, and yet more advantageously by oily or emollient clysters; an
useful domestic injection may be made in a few minutes thus: -- Take of
strained gruel, about three quarters of a pint, brown sugar, one ounce, Castile
soap, half an ounce, salad oil, two ounces; this, or something like it, may be
thrown up occasionally. If frights or falls have done harm, the same treatment
is recommended. When vomiting is troublesome, I have frequently known this
symptom carried off by drinking chamomile tea, or giving two or three grains of
ipecacuanha, to cause a discharge of the offending matter from the stomach. It
may be remembered, as a general rule, that all strong or violent remedies are
hurtful, therefore, we caution against antimonials, mercurials, cathartics,
jalap, aloes, or even rhubarb, because it often causes griping pains. When
nervous complaints come on, the most effectual relief may be obtained from
gentle opiates. If the patient is delicate or weak, bleeding may do harm; but
an invigorating diet in small quantities, and a little pure old wine, taken
from time to time, may be useful. Much more may be said to make up a book; if
more is wanted, we recommend the advice of an experienced physician; let it be
remembered, I do not propose to trouble my readers with a large volume; my
intention is only to give useful hints in a shilling pamphlet; it is not
necessary to say more on this part, but come in course to our Second Section.

SECTION II. On the Diseases of advanced Pregnancy.
THE diseases of advanced pregnancy ought to be well understood by every
midwife; for if ill treated, may be attended with the worst consequences. As
pregnancy advances, the uterus increases in size, and presses more and more
heavily on the bowels, by which their important functions are impaired, the
circulation of the blood, and the nervous influence, are materially obstructed,
what wonder then if disagreeable effects often come from such causes?

Let us now mention some of the complaints that take place, and the best means
of removing them. When the gravid uterus rises higher up into the abdomen, in
the fifth, sixth, or seventh month of pregnancy, then commonly commences the
complaints of advanced pregnancy, such as colics, cramps, hysteric fits, pains
in the back, difficulty of breathing, oedematous or watery swelling of the
legs, etc. vomitings, convulsions, difficulty or suppression of urine,
micturition, haemorrhoids, varicous swellings in the veins of the legs, besides
some others we shall not mention. If colic torments the patient, let her have
the intestines moderately emptied by gentle laxatives, lubricating clysters, or
bloodletting, according to circumstances, in case she is strong or feverish,
and costiveness ought to be guarded against. If cramps are frequent, the same
treatment may be useful; if they are slight, we have frequently known walking
barefooted on the cold floor to give speedy relief; when more uneasy, the
following liniment will afford case: take of tincture of opium, one ounce, of
camphorated spirit of wine, six drams, oil of amber, two drams, spirit of
ammonia, four drams, mix them, and let some of it be well rubbed occasionally
on the parts affected. If piles are painful, the body must be kept open as
above, but we recommend castor oil, if not offensive, for this purpose, one or
two spoonsful is a moderate dose; if the haemorrhoids are very uneasy, we
recommend strongly the following mixture and ointment: take of balsam capivi,
two drams, mucilage of gum arabic, one ounce, tincture of columbo root, one
ounce, simple cinnamon water, two ounces, sirup of ginger, one ounce, mix them
and give a desert spoonful thrice a day. The ointment may be depended on: take
of gall nuts in fine powder, one ounce, pure verdigrise powdered, two drams,
hog's lard, two ounces, mix them to make an ointment, which may be applied to
the swelled parts occasionally. When great difficulty of breathing attacks the
patient, great relief may be procured from bleedings, and keeping the body
soluble. When a dropsy of the whole body, called anasarca, comes on, it may
proceed from laxity, and ought if possible to be removed, without loss of time;
we have little experience of this complaint, it seldom occurs, yet we have
heard much, but we believe that a strengthening and warm stimulating diet is
useful, with generous wine, but spirits, watery meats, or fluids, are hurtful;
after a safe delivery, much may be done. If the fluor albus comes on, the same
mode of treatment as in the dropsy may be recommended.

The oedematous, or watery swellings of the lower extremities, seldom come from
the same cause as the general dropsy, but entirely from the presture of the
gravid uterus, and though they are of little importance, yet it may be proper
to diminish them, by bleeding, laxatives, a spare opening diet, friction, and a
horizontal posture. If the patient is weakly, cordials and a comfortable diet
may be useful. Delivery contributes more than any thing to the cure. When
varicous or distended swellings of the veins become large and painful, they may
be made easier, by taking away occasionally small quantities of blood from the
arm, and keeping the body open, because they come from the pressure of the
gravid uterus. The best application to the parts is a styptic or astringent
water, which a venerable physician of great experience assures me is often very
useful in varicous dilatations: take of blue vitriol and alum, of each three
ounces, of water, two pints, boil them till the salts are dissolved, then
filter the liquor, and add one ounce and a half of the vitriolic acid, and two
drams of pure or refined verdigrise, lay on the swelled veins compresses of
linen, and bind them on with a tightish roller, and keep these compresses
constantly moist with this solution.

We have strongly recommended the frequent use of injections, to keep the body
soluble, and if we could persuade those for whom this little Essay is intended,
to use the self-syringe with their own hands, without any assistant, it might
prevent the trouble of taking medicines, it would be less uneasy, less painful,
less expensive, or disagreeable, at the same time more delicate; but these are
not all the advantages, a syringe throws the clyster farther up than any other
contrivance into the colon or great gut, where all the obstructed matter is
detained, by the pressure of the distended uterus on the os sacrum or rump bone.

We earnestly recommend the introduction of the self-syringe into every house,
for the use of those who have complaints in their bowels, about the anus, or
are troubled with costiveness. They may be purchased in every considerable
pewterer's shop. I have been told, and I believe it implicitly, that there are
many persons of both sexes, who with some hesitation took these machines into
their houses, that now they understand how to use them, they would not part
with them on any consideration.

SECTION III. The Qualities necessary in an Accoucheur and an Accoucheuse.
HERE we will offer a few remarks on the qualifications necessary for an
accoucheur, or rather let me describe the sort of accoucheur I would recommend.
A man-midwife ought to be not younger than forty, not talkative, possessing
much sagacity and prudence, naturally modest, benevolent and humane; in short,
a gentleman, and withal have the reputation of being well educated. A midwife
ought to be turned of thirty, clean, and neat in her person, pleasant in her
manners, gentle, attentive, and kind to her patients, by supporting their
spirits in distress, civil to servants, but nothing of a gossip, healthy and
active, never taking snuff, fond of children, skilful and tender in handling
new born infants, capable and ready to teach awkward nurses how to dress or
clean them, qualified to write safe and useful prescriptions for a morbid
mother, or an ailing child; she ought to be a woman that has been well
instructed, that has had much practice, not conceited, nor proud, nor vain,
nor superstitious, but firm in her mind, plain, discreet, and honest; a sincere
friend in every family, always disposed to call in to her assistance a
physician, or an experienced accoucheur, whenever there is any necessity, or
even a distant desire of some kind relation, for this will raise her
reputation, prevent reflections, and demonstrate her discretion.

The fashion of latter years has taken the practice of midwifery almost
entirely out of the hands of women, and placed it into those of the men, and
the reasons for it were obvious. Formerly every conceited gossiping woman that
chose to act as a midwife, began this profession, without instruction, I had
almost said without common sense, or any one requisite for such an important
employment, and many notorious evils ensued. Then the physicians and surgeons,
being men skilled in physiology, rescued many unfortunate patients from the
fangs of ignorant women, and it becoming a lucrative branch of business, they
kept it snug, till a numerous body in the inferior departments, desiring to
share the profits, came forth, like a hord of hungry untaught men, from the
labors of the pestle and mortar, with a few hooks, forceps and crotchets, in a
bag, like Dr. Slop, they call themselves accoucheurs, or men-midwives, but for
obstetric knowledge, we have seen some of them as ignorant as messengers of the
contents of their dispatches, yet some of these men have arrived at eminence,
or rather have acquired extensive practice and fortunes, but in cases of
difficulty, they are as awkward as any of the most ignorant female
practitioners. Women often employ men to act as midwives, from a supposition
that they must know more than the women mid-wives; but this, like many other
suppositions, may frequently have no real foundation in truth.

SECTION IV.
LET us attempt to remark the difference betwixt the Accoucheur and the Midwife.

Comparison of an Accoucheur with a Midwife.
I. I. The adroit accoucheur is a person that can foresee and often prevent all
the evils of difficult labors, with as little hurry or unnecessary delay as
possible, and to assist, can sometimes use the forceps, or other instruments
contrived to remove the obstructions to delivery. The instructed accoucheuse is
one who is not ignorant of all the natural or preternatural causes of danger
that can happen, nor of the means of removing them, yet never uses any
artificial instrument; but in preternatural cases, when patience and the hopes
of parturition are lost in fruitless endeavors, before it is too late, she
calls in an approved accoucheur, to assist her.

N. B. It is a certain truth, that instruments, the catheter excepted, are very
seldom wanted, perhaps seldomer than they are used.

II. II. The uninstructed accoucheur is commonly in too great a hurry to
exhibit his dexterity in using his iron instruments, and thereby often does
mischief, it would be horrible to relate.

The most intelligent of the faculty seldom or never use instruments.

The ignorant midwife knows not when to assist or to leave the business to
nature; so blunders on, till sometimes both mother and infant are lost, where
there was in reality no danger. III. III. The accoucheur in great practice
cannot in lingering labors afford to lose so much of his time in waiting for
slow operations of nature, therefore hurries on delivery, or leaves the patient
till he can call again, when he can find time, particularly if his patient is
not opulent. The accoucheuse can sit more patiently among females in a lying-in
room, where she is looked up to every moment for assistance; she can better
sooth impatience, by recalling hope; she can more properly continue in the room
constantly, and delicately give directions about what is necessary, so is not
so easily tired out with attendance. IV. IV. The accomplished accoucheur has a
more general and liberal knowledge of things, by his study in physiology. All
the parts of animal bodies are known to him, and he can reason better on cause
and effect, than women who have amused themselves with fashions, dress, taste,
or appearance; but such men I have observed are soon fatigued with the
conversations of us poor women. The sensible and sagacious midwife may make
herself more agreeable, though she is less learned; and as to her necessary
knowledge in anatomy, she may learn it and all the technical terms in a few
months; learning is not difficult to those who love study, but knowledge is
only useful when we possess sagacity or sense to apply it properly. We have all
seen learned fools. V. V. Men in high practice seldom know how to handle new
born children; they often touch them with dislike, as they would toads or young
snakes. What is then to be done when the nurse is awkward, or at a loss how to
manage the infant, which is too frequently the case? Women have commonly a
great superiority over men in the care of infants, it is more in their
province, and a sensible midwife thinks she should qualify herself for every
adverse accident that may happen. In this respect women are preferable to men.

Seem Reasons offered why Women are preferable to Men as Midwives.
There are many women who cannot converse easily or freely with a man, on many
circumstances that happen about the time of parturition, or even on some sexual
disorders, this may be called false modesty, but still it exists and causes
many evils; here we suppose skilful women might be more agreeable and useful.
One of the first physicians in the city, who I believe to be my friend, said to
me one day, lately, that if clever women would diligently study to accomplish
themselves in midwifery, he would wish for the sake of propriety, and the good
of mankind, that this profession was again restored to female hands. It is the
opinion of many learned physicians, that the advantages to the sex are small,
if any, by the over grown number of male practitioners, at the same time, they
are clearly of opinion, that a number of eminent accoucheurs should be selected
and appointed to give advice both to ordinary men and women midwives in
difficult and preternatural cases. It is fortunate for us, few, very few
parturient females, not one in many hundreds, need be under the necessity of
calling in an accoucheur. Indeed, the numbers of women who are delivered with
little assistance, may convince us how much nature acts in these cases for
our advantage. In the obstetric art, as well as in other branches of the
science of healing, it might be better if we could wait patiently, and would
humbly rate ourselves as the handmaids of nature. Premature practitioners, are
apt, like the philosopher in Rasselas, to suppose they can govern the natural
course of things, but after a few trials, they must find out their incapacity;
a little modesty and common sense, may point out their errors, but conceited
young men and ignorant women are seldom easily reclaimed from forwardness,
therefore, prudence ought to induce us to have recourse when we can, to
intelligent practitioners.

SECTION V. On the Care of Children.
INFANTS often suffer much from the carelessness, ignorance, or officiousness
of nurses; to prevent this, it is the duty of an intelligent midwife to cast a
careful eye over their conduct, a little conscientious pains ought to be
bestowed upon it; cleanliness is a most important article, the infant ought to
be washed twice a day in lukewarm water; it is the constant custom in the South
of Europe, even in summer, for if perspiration or any other excrementitious
matter is left on their tender skins, it will soon become acrid, cause
inflammation, excoriation, and consequently much uneasiness; this is not
written from a fine spun theory, but is the result of experience. We are of
opinion, that washing of tender infants in lukewarm water, is greatly
preferable to cold water, and that the theory of relaxation is here more
imaginary than real, and that experience confirms this doctrine. If from
neglect, the skin of infants becomes inflamed or excoriated, let the parts be
well washed, and made dry, then dust on a little powdered white lead from a
muslin cloth, this is simple but effectual, but let the cerussa, or powder of
lead, be removed so as not to go near their victuals.

An intelligent midwife that has as much, perhaps more experience, and I
believe has had better opportunities of instruction, than any other in this
city, from the repetition of lectures, has emphatically desired me to mention,
in my pamphlet, that if infants are kept dry and clean, their tempers and
dispositions will be more pleasant; they will seldom be liable to rickets, or
any of those disorders that affect the bones, so as to cause bandy legs, etc.
and that when female infants are neglected in these articles, the bones of the
pelvis, or lowest part of the body, are often softened and diminished in their
natural capacity, so as when adults, the distorted pelvis cannot admit a child
to pass easily, and from thence proceeds the reason for inventing of so many
iron instruments to faciliate difficult labors, and to give occasion to bold
operators to try their hands; moreover, this gentlewoman adds, that if it were
not for the neglect of cleanliness in infancy, many men and women would be
stronger in their loins, better proportioned in their limbs, more healthy, and
move more gracefully, but above all, there would be rarely any cause to call in
even the prudent and experienced accoucher to assist in parturition; let me
add, that these observations are confirmed by the opinions of practical men,
whose judgments are not apocryphal. An attention to this doctrine can never do
harm, and nurses, who conscientiously discharge their duty, deserve rewards and
friendship.

It sometimes happens, that wet nurses have not enough of milk for their
nurselings, and make up their food with bread, tapioca, or Indian arrow root,
and the common milk of this town; we believe, that in general, beef tea, mutton
or veal broth, mixed with them, is preferable. Infants are liable to acidity in
the stomach and guts, which often occasions griping, purging, etc. a little
magnesia given occasionally is the best domestic remedy. If costiveness at any
time comes on, a little manna, or, when very young, a few tea-spoonsful of
equal parts of fresh oil of almonds and syrup of violets, repeated
occasionally, is a safe and useful laxative. If vomiting from foul matter in
the stomach is troublesome, one or two grains of the powder of ipecacuan may be
given as an emetic, with safety, and sometimes, two or three tea spoonsful of
wine, and some warm water, by way of assisting the evacuation, will answer the
purpose; if more is wanted, the best way is to apply soon for proper advice.

In childrens diseases, much may be done by liberal well informed women; in
diseases of the bowels, diarrhoea, or flux of the belly, vomitings, worms,
hooping coughs, etc. rational women may be more in the way of examining their
evacuations, and prying into particular complaints, and naturally attend more
to their disorder, than either the learned physician, or the skilful
apothecary, whose longest visits last only a few minutes, and then are told the
symptoms and circumstances by some indistinct attendant, that knows less than
she pretends to do; thus a child is often lost in the hands of able men. Even,
when children are ill in the smallpox, measles, fever, fits, etc. they are
often totally trusted to the care of very ignorant, pretending old women, who
know as little of these disorders, as I do of the French Directory, or the
Irish Rebellion. Would it not be better, to find out some intelligent person,
who can and will give attention to them? It is true, some do recover in spite
of bad treatment, but, if they die, are not the parents blameable for
overlooking so important a concern? If some women can be found fit for all the
important duties of a midwife, and of giving sound advice in sexual disorders,
or in those of children, why hesitate to employ them? Are women by nature
incapable of instruction, or are they deficient in sagacity to be useful?
Custom or fashion govern the world, and often deprives us of that judgment, or
common sense, that would be more advantageous to society. Let it not be
supposed, I wish to reject the advice of able men, far from it, I wish only to
demonstrate that women may be capable of being very useful in sexual disorders,
as well as in those of children; it seems to me as if nature had allotted this
part of the healing art to females, because we have better opportunities of
investigating the real state of the illness, and if benevolently assisted by
sagacious physicians, might save many lives.

There has been some conjectures agitated among men of no mean consideration,
false or true, I leave to others to determine; they have supposed, since women
of all ranks, gave themselves up to menmidwives, they have lost much of that
delicacy, which before rendered them so amiable, and in losing delicacy, say
they, may not chastity itself be easily violated? If we lose possession of
either, or both, what are we? Others suppose, since that period, more
elopements, trials for crim. con. divorces, private intrigues among married
women, have been common, and that we have acquired more of a masculine swing in
our gait. Some men of gallantry have not scrupled to say, that women who employ
menmidwives, are in general, an easier prey than those who do not. It is step
by step, or slow advances, that women commonly arrive at vice, just so, do
thoughtless boys become cruel, by being suffered to torment birds, beasts,
reptiles, insects, etc. by and by, they lose every feeling of humanity, and can
murder men without horror. If we could but be cautious to defend ourselves
against the approach of all impropriety, the ladies of Britain would be as
superior in virtue as they are in beauty. (...)

A comparative Review of Male and Female Temperaments.
Females, when young, may at least claim equal esteem with their brothers, the
lords of creation, for filial affection, and all the virtues of parental
obedience; as wives, men of great observation have given testimony in their
writings, that we are by no means inferior to our husbands in conjugal duties.

As mothers, I have still the testimony of men, that we are full as tender and
careful of our children as their fathers are; as mistresses of families, are we
not equally economical, as kind to our servants, and benevolent to the poor?
Authors of the most eminent abilities, after a comparative review of both
sexes, have heartily declared, upon the whole, we are by no means inferior, or
rather we are superior, in acting our parts in all the concerns of life. All
these commendations we can receive with conscious pride, while we merit them,
but when we part with delicacy or modesty, alas! how are we fallen! even, like
a flower after it is cropped, soon loses all its sweetness, and is cast like a
loathsome weed away. I wish my amiable readers may consider here what I have
said, both in a moral, and a religious point of view; it can do them no harm,
and if the thinking part of men can also agree with me, it may be an object
worthy of their attention, to lessen, or do away one of the greatest causes of
our misfortunes and unhappiness.

I could wish that female education was more solicitously attended to. When
young, we often have a bad education, which is worse than none; so by
imitation, from bad examples, of ease, freedom, fashion, grace, etc. insensibly
we lose the elegant sweetness of female delicacy and reserve. I am always happy
to see young ladies exhibit excellence in the dance, to hear the charms of
music from their well-toned instruments, or transported by the melting sounds
of the voice, and to behold their taste in drawing; but I am sometimes sorry to
find, that these accomplished young ladies are ignorant of the grammar of their
own language, that they are deficient in understanding the first principles of
virtue, and that they have had no instruction on the holy scriptures; the first
of these two last, may show them the beauty and felicity of moral conduct, and
the second, the eternal bliss, that is promised us, in studying the laws of our
Almighty Creator, or Redeemer; and I will venture to assure my fair readers,
that by studying carefully these sacred laws, so as to practice them as
strictly as possible, they will find continually that satisfaction in their
minds, that will give cheerfulness to their features, that will beautify their
beauty; besides, if the day of adversity should overtake us, the consciousness
of having done our duty, will feel to afflicted minds as a source of celestial
consolation.

I am a mother myself, and it is on these principles I endeavor to instruct my
children. If I dared, as a female writer, I would venture to recommend to young
ladies of fashion, some attention to history, geography, botany, natural
history, moral and natural philosophy, etc. these might occupy any blank in
their minds, and make them capable to carry on agreeable conversations on any
subject; this would make them admired by all their acquaintances, and adored by
their husbands, it would render their actions more graceful, and their beauty
more pleasing; it would make religion more rational, by opening their eyes to
the power and goodness of the Almighty in all his works.

APPENDIX.
IT may be observed by some, that I have been silent on three most important
parts of midwifery, Abortion, Uterine-hemorrhage, and the Puerperal fever;
these have been ably discussed by more intelligent writers, therefore, I
purposely passed them over, but I may venture these observations, that Abortion
when well treated, is seldom attended with any danger; that Uterine-hemorrhage
almost always requires great attention, skill, and sagacity, to prevent danger;
and as to the Puerperal sever, as it is a complicated disease, of a mortal
tendency, we recommend it to the care of the intelligent and experienced
physician, either to prevent or to cure it.

Having finished my little work, with the assistance of some friends, much more
intelligent than myself, they desire me to add, by way of postscript, that I
intend to practice midwifery, being entitled to it by my liberal certificates,
from the physicians and surgeons of the British Lying-in Hospital, in
Brownlow-street; to whom, for their goodness and able instructions, I shall
always feel the sincerest obligations; and to the intelligent matrons of that
useful charity, I also offer my honest acknowledgments.

I have taken much satisfaction, for years, to acquire knowledge in female
diseases, under able instructors, both at home and abroad; the witnesses of my
success in practice are not few, and I hope to be employed by many in this
city, who are, or may be afflicted with weakness, relaxation, fluor albus,
scorbutic, or any other eruptions, nervous or hysterical affections, complaints
in the bowels, irregular fluxes, or obstructions, etc.

Letters from the country, post paid, distinctly stating all the symptoms, or
if they can, the causes of complaint, age, habit of body, and how long ill,
shall receive an answer, and we trust satisfaction. The diseases of children
are numerous, though some of them are obstinate, yet many, if taken early, are
easily conquered; therefore, we recommend timely attention; procrastination
kills many. I have said above, the knowledge of children's diseases requires
application, instruction, sagacity, observation and patience, in these, I hope,
I am not deficient; success in many of their illnesses embolden me to offer my
assistance, and, if strangers to me can be induced, from what I now write, to
trust to a woman, whose character will stand any test of examination, I will
promise, that all my poor abilities, with the help of my medical friends, shall
always be exerted to relieve them, or, if I discover that the cause of malady
comes not within the sphere of my capacity, I will honestly, without opiniatry,
desire them not to trust to me, but to call in more learned advice.

To prevent any complaints from any of my female readers who may not clearly
understand me, or be accustomed to technical terms, that for the sake of
brevity, or more agreeable reading, were inserted in this little Essay, I will
subjoin a compendious explanation.

If I had written this pamphlet with a circumlocution of phrase familiar to
myself, it had much exceeded the size I intended, but my friends, and Dr.
Johnson's dictionary, assisted me to contract it. Now it is finished, I tremble
to think of its publication.

EXPLANATION of a few WORDS that are somewhat TECHNICAL, but may be found in
JOHNSON'S DICTIONARY.
A Abdomen. That part of the body, which is placed betwixt the breast and the
thighs Abortion. Miscarriage Accoucheur. A man-midwife Accoucheuse. A midwife
Adult. Grown up Apocryphal. Of a doubtful nature

D Dogmatical. Positive assertion Diarrhoea. A flux of the belly

E Elaborate. Accomplished with much study Eleemosynary. Given in charity

F Futility. Triflingness Fastidiosity. Over nicety Feminine. Belonging to
women

G Gravid uterus. The womb in the latter months of pregnancy. H Hemorrhoids.
Piles I Intestines. Bowels L Latent. That lies hidden from our senses
M Micturition. A too frequent desire to pass urine Miscellaneous. Mingled
Morbid. Sickly

O Obstetric. Midwifish Opiniatry. Conceited obstinacy

P Pathological. Belonging to the nature of diseases Physiology. The doctrine
of the constitution of the works of nature Parturient. About to bring forth
Preternatural. Out of the common course of nature Pelvis. Bones of the lower
part of the body, forming the haunches and the rump Puerperal fever. Childbed
fever

S Sexual. Belonging to women To substitute. To put in the place of others To
superintend. To manage or direct others Soluble. Open, or free from costiveness

T Technical. Belonging to arts Theorist. One disposed to speeulation, or to
deduce consequences from premises Uterine-hemorrhage. A dangerous flux of blood
from the womb


