LETTER ADDRESSED TO THE ABBE RAYNAL ON THE AFFAIRS OF North America. IN WHICH
The Mistakes in the Abbe's Account OF THE REVOLUTION OF AMERICA ARE CORRECTED
AND CLEARED UP.

BY THOMAS PAIN, M. A. of the University of Pennsylvania, and Author of the
Pamphlet and other Publications, entitled, "Common Sense."

PHILADELPHIA, Printed.

BOSTON: Reprinted by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, in CORNHILL, near the Market.

M,DCC,LXXXII.

INTRODUCTION.
A LONDON translation of an original work in French, by the Abbe Raynal, which
treats of the Revolution of North America, having been reprinted in
Philadelphia and other parts of the continent, and as the distance at which the
Abbe is placed from the American theater of war and poli^ics, has occasioned
him to mistake several facts, or, misconceive the causes or principles by which
they were produced; the following tract, therefore, is published with a view to
rectify them, and prevent even accidental errors intermixing with history,
under the sanction of time and silence.

THE editor of the London eidtion has entitled it, " The Revolution of America,
by the ABBE RAYNAL," and the American printers have followed the example. But I
have understood, and I believe my information just, that the piece, which is
more properly r^fl^ctions on the revolution, was unfairly purloined from the
printer which the Abbe employed, or from the manuscript copy, and is only part
of a large work then in the press, or preparing for it. The person who procured
it appears to have been an Englishman, and though in an advertisement prefixed
to the London edition, he has endeavored to gloss over the embezzlement with
professions of patriotion, and to soften it with high encomiums on the author
yet the action, in any view, in which it can be placed, is illiberal and
unpardonable.

"In the course of his travels," says he, the translator happily succeeded in
obtaining a copy of this exquisite little piece, which has not yet made its
appearance from any press. He publishes a French edition, in favor of those who
will feel its eloquent reasoning more forcibly in its native language, at the
same time with the following translation of it; in which he has been desirous,
perhaps in vain, that all the warmth, the grace, the strength, the dignity of
the original, should not be lost. And he flatters himself, that the indulgence
of the illustrious historian will not be wanting to a man, who, of his own
motion, has taken the liberty to give this composition to the public, only from
a strong persuasion, that its momentous argument will be useful, in a critical
conjuncture, to that country which he loves with an ardor, that can be exceeded
only by the nobler flame, which burns in the bosom of the philanthropic author,
for the freedom and happiness of all the countries upon earth.

THIS plausibility of setting off a dishonorable action, may pass for
patriotism and sound principles with those who do not enter into its demerits
and whose interest is not injured nor their happiness affected thereby. But it
is more than probable, notwithstanding the declarations it contains, that the
copy was obtained for the sake of profiting by the sale of a new and popular
work, and that the professions are but a garb to the fraud.

IT may with propriety be remarked, that in all countries where literature is
protected and it never can flourish where it is not, the works of an author are
his legal property; and to treat letters in any other light than this, is to
banish them from the country or strangle them in the birth. The embezzlement
from the Abbe Raynal, was. it is true, committed by one country upon another,
and therefore shows on defect in the laws of either. But it is nevertheless a
breach of civil manners and literary justice; neither can it be any apology,
that because the countries are at war, literature shall be entitled
depredation. The states of literature in America must one day become a subject
of legislative consideration. Hitherto it has been a disinterested volunteer
in the service of the revolution, and no man though of profits: but when peace
shall give time and opportunity for study, the country will deprive itself of
the honor and service of letters and the improvement of science, unless
sufficient laws are made to prevent depredations on literary property. -- It is
well worth remarking, that Russia, who but a sew years ago, was scareely known
in Europe, owes a large share of her present greatness to the close attention
she has paid, and the wise encouragement she has given, to every brahch of
science and learning; and we have almost the same instance in France, in the
reign of Lewis the XIV.


BUT the forestalling the Abbe's publication by London editions, both in French
and English, and thereby not only defrauding him and throwing an expensive
publication on his hands by anticipating the sale, are only the smaller
injuries which such conduct may occasion. A man's opinions, whether written or
in thought, are his own until he pleases to publish them himself; and it is
adding curely to injustice, to make him the author of what future reflection,
or better information, might occasion him to suppress or amend. There are
declarations and sentiments in the Abbe's piece, which, for my own part, I did
not expect to find, and such as himself, on a revisal, might have seen occasion
to change; but the anticipated piracy effectually prevented him the
opportunity, and precipitated him into difficulties, which, had it not been for
such ungenerous fraud, might not have happened.

THIS mode of making an author appear before his time, will appear still more
ungenerous, when we consider how exceedingly few men there are in any country,
who can at once, and without the aid of reflection and revisal, combine warm
passions with a cool temper, and the full expansion of imagination with the
natural and necessary gravity of judgment, so as to be rightly balanced within
themselves, and to make a reader feel, fancy, and understand justly at the same
time. To call three powers of the mind into action at once, in a manner that
neither shall interrupt, and that each shall aid and vigorate the other, is a
talent very rarely possessed.

IT often happens that the weight of an argument is lost by the wit of setting
it off; or the judgment disordered by an intemperate irriration of the
passions: yet a certain degree of animation must be felt by the writer, and
raised in the reader, in order to interest the attention; and a sufficient
scope given to the imagination, to enable it to create in the mind a sight of
the persons, characters and circumstances of the subject; for without these the
judgment will feel little or no excitement to office, and its determinations
will be cold, sluggish, and imperfect. But if either or both of the two former
are raised too high, or heated too much, the judgment will be jossied from its
seat, and the whole matter, however important in itself, will diminish into a
pantomime of the mind, in which we create images that promote no other purpose
than amusement.

THE Abbe's writings bear evident marks of that extension and rapidness of
thinking and quickness of sensation, which of all others require revisal, and
the more particularly so, when applied to the living characters of nations or
individuals in a state of war. The least misinformation or misconception leads
to some wrong conclusion, and an error believed becomes the progenitor of
others -- And as the Abbe has suffered some inconveniences in France by
mistating certain circumstances of the war, and the characters of the parties
therein, it becomes some apology for him that those errors were precipitated
into the world by the avarice of an ungenerous enemy.

LETTER ADDRESSED TO THE ABBE RAYNAL ON THE Affairs of North America.
TO an author of such distinguished reputation as the Abbe Raynal, it might
very well become me to apologize for the present undertaking; but as to be
right is the first wish of philosophy, and the first principle of history, he
will, I presume, accept from me a declaration of my motives, which are those of
doing justice, in preference to any complimental apology I might otherwise
make. -- The Abbe, in the course of his work, has, in some instances, extolled
without a reason, and wounded without a cause. He has given same where it was
not deserved, and withheld it where it was justly due; and appears to be so
frequently in and out of temper with his subjects and parties, that few or none
of them are decicively and uniformly marked.

IT is yet too soon to write the history of the revolution, and whoever
attempts it precipitately, will unavoidably mistake characters and
circumstances, and involve himself in error and difficulty Things like men are
seldom understood rightly at first sight. But the Abbe is wrong even in the
foundation of his work; that is, he has misconceived and mistated the couses
which produced the rupture between England and her th^n colonies, and which led
on, step by step, unstudied and uncontrived on the part of America, to a
revolution, which has engaged the attention, and affected the interest, of
Europe.

To prove this, I shall bring forward a passage, which, though placed toward
the latter part of the Abbe's work, is more intimately connected with the
beginning; and in which, speaking of the original cause of the dispute, he
declares himself in the following manner. --

"NONE," says he, of those energetic causes, which have produced so many
revolutions upon the globe, existed in North America. Neither religion nor laws
had been outraged. The blood of martyrs or patriots had not there streamed from
scaffolds. Morals had not there been insulted. Manners, customs, habits, no
object dear to nations, had there been the sport of ridicule. Arbitrary power
had not there torn any inhabitant from the arms of his family and his friends,
to drag him to a dreary dungeon. Public order had not been there inverted. The
principles of administration had not been changed there; and the maxims of
government had there always remained the same. The whole question was reduced
to the knowing whether the mother country had, or had not a right to lay,
directly or indirectly, a slight tax upon the colonies.

ON this extraordinary passage, it may not be improper, in general terms, to
remark, that none can feel like those who suffer; and that for a man to be a
competant judge of the provocative, or, as the Abbe styles them, the energetic
causes of the revolution, he must have resided in America.

THE Abbe in saying that the several particulars he has enumerated, did not
exist in America, and neglecting to point out the particular period, in which
he means they did not exist, reduces thereby his declaration to a nullity by
taking away all meaning from the passage.

THEY did not exist in 1763 and they all existed before 1776; consequently as
there was a time when they did not, and another, when they did exist, the time
when constitutes the essence of the fact, and not to give it, is to withhold
the only evidence, which proves the declaration right or wrong, and on which it
must stand or fall. But the declaration as it now appears, unaccompanied by
time has an effect in holding out to the world, that there was no real cause
for the revolution, because it denies the existence of all those causes, which
are supposed to be justifiable and which the Abbe styles energetic.

I CONFESS myself exceedingly at a loss to find out the time to which the Abbe
alludes; because, in another part of the work in speaking of the stamp act
which was passed in 1764, he styles it, "An usurpation of the Americans most
precious and sacred rights." Consequently he here admits the most energetic of
all causes that is, an usurpation of their most precious and sacred rights, to
have existed in America twelve years before the declaration of independence,
and ten years before the breaking out of hostilities -- The time, therefore, in
which the paragraph is true, must be antecedent to the stamp act, but as at
that time there was no revolution nor any idea of one, it consequently applies
without a meaning; and as it cannot, on the Abbe's own principle, be applied to
any time after the stamp act, it is therefore a wandering solitary paragraph
connected with nothing and at variance with every thing.

THE stamp act, it is true, was repealed in two years after it was passed* but
it was immediately followed by one of infinitely more mischievous magnitude, I
mean the declaratory act, which asserted the right, as it was styled, of the
British Parliament, "to bind America in all cases whatsoever."

IF then the stamp act was an usurpation of the Americans most precious and
sacred rights, the declaratory act left them no right at all; and contained the
full grown seeds of the most despotic government ever exercised in the world.
It placed America not only in the lowest, but in the basest state of vassalage;
because it demanded an unconditional submission in every thing, or as the act
expresses it, in all cases whatsoever: And what renders this act the more
offensive is, that it appears to have been p^ssed as an act of mercy; truly
then may it be said, that the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

ALL the original charters from the Crown of England, under the f^i^h of which,
the adventurers from the old world settled in the new, were by this act
displaced from their foundations; because, contrary to the nature of them which
was that of a compact they were now made subject to repeal or alteration at the
mere will of one party only The whole condition of America was thus put into
the hands of the Parliament or the Ministry without leaving to her the least
right in any case whatsoever.

THERE is no despotism to which this iniquitous law did not extend; and though it
might have been convenient in the execution of it to have consulted manners and
habits, the principle of ^he ^ot made all tyranny legal. It stopped nowhere It
went to every thing. It took in with it the whole life of a man, or if I may so
express it, an eternity of circumstances It is the nature of law to require
obedience, but this demanded servitude; and the condition of an American under
the operation of it* was not that of a subject but a vassal. Tyranny has often
been established without law and sometimes against it, but the history of
mankind does not produce another instance, in which it has been established by
law. It is an audacious outrage upon civil government, and cannot be too much
exposed, in order to be sufficiently detested.

NEITHER could it be said after this, that the legislature of that country any
longer made laws for this but that it gave out commands; for wherein differed
an act of Parliament constructed on this principle, and operating in this
manner, over an unrepresented people, from the orders of a military
establishment.

THE Parliament of England, with respect to America, was not septennial but
perpetual. It appeared to the latter a body always in being. Its election or
its expiration were to her the same as it its members succeeded by inheritance,
or went out by death, or lived for ever, or were appointed to it as a matter of
office. Therefore for the people of England to have any just conception of the
mind of America, respecting this extraordinary act, they must suppose all
election and expiration in that country to cease for ever, and the present
parliament, its heirs, etc. to be perpetual; in this case, I ask, what would
the most clamorous of them think were an act to be p^ss^d, declaring the right
of such a parliament to bind them in all cases whatsoever? For this word
whatsoever would go as effectually to their Magna Charta, Bill of Rights. Trial
by Juries, etc. as it went to the charters and forms of govermeat in America.

I AM persuaded that the Gentleman to whom I address remarks will not, after
the passing this act, say, That the principles of administration had not been
changed in America, and that the maxims of government had there been always the
same. For here is, in principle, a total overthr^w of the whole; and not a
subversion only, but an annihilation of the foundation of liberty, and absolute
domination established in its stead.

THE Abbe likewise states the case exceedingly wrong and i^juriously, when he
says, that the whole question was reduced to the knowing whether the mother
country had, or had not, a right to lay, directly, or indirectly a slight tax
upon the colonies -- This was not the whole of the question; neither was the
quantity of the tax the object* either to the Ministry or to the Americans. It
was the principle, of which the tax made but a part* and the quantity still
less, that formed the ground on which America opposed.

THE tax on tea, which is the tax here alluded to was neither more or less than
an experiment to establish the practice of the declaratory law upon; modelled
into the more fashionable phrase of the universal supremacy of Parliament. For
until this time the declaratory law had lain dormant, and the framers of it had
contented themselves with barely declaring an opinion.

THEREFORE the whole question with America, in the opening of the dispute, was
shall we be bound in all cas^^ wha^soever by the British Parliament, or shall
we not? For submission to the tea or tax act implied an acknowledgment of the
declaratory act, or in other words, of the universal supremacy of Parliament,
which as they never intended to do, it was necessary they should oppose it, in
its first stage of execution.

IT is probable, the Abbe has been led into this mistake by perusing detached
pieces in some of the American newspapers; for in a ease, where all were
interested, every one had a right to give his opinion; and there were many, who
with the best intentions, did not choose the best* nor indeed the true ground,
to defend their cause upon. They felt themselves right by a general impulse,
without being able to separate, analyze, and arrange the parts.

I AM somewhat unwilling to examine too minutely into the whole of this
extraordinary passage of the Abbe, lest I should appear to treat it with
severity; otherwise I could show that not a single declaration is justly
founded: For instance, the reviving an obsolete act of the reign of Henry the
eighth, and fitting it to the Americans by authority of which they were to be
seized and brought from America to England, and there imprisoned and tried for
any supposed offenses, was, in the worst sense of the words, to tear them, by
the arbitrary power of Parliament, from the arms of their families and friends
and drag them not only to dreary but distant dungeons. Yet this act was
contrived some years before the breaking out of hostilities. And again, though
the blood of martyrs and patriots had not streamed on the scaffolds, it
streamed in the streets, in the massacre of the inhabitants of Boston, by the
British soldiery in the year 1770.

HAD the Abbe said that the causes which produced the revolution in America
were originally different from those which produced revolutions in other parts
of the globe, he had been right. Here the value and quality of liberty, the
nature of government, and the dignity of man, were known and understood, and
the attachment of the Americans to these principles produced the revolution as
a natural and almost unavoidable consequence. They had no particular family to
set up or pull down. Nothing of personality was incorporated with their cause.
They started even handed with each other, and went no faster into the several
stages of it, than they were driven by the unrelenting and imperious conduct of
Britain. Nay, in the last act, the declaration of independence, they had nearly
been too late; for had it not been declared at the exact time it was, I see no
period in their affairs since, in which it could have been declared with the
same effect, and probably not at all.

BUT the object being formed before the reverse of fortune took place, that is
before the operations of the gloomy campaign of 1776, their honor, their
interest, their every thing called loudly on them to maintain it; and that glow
of thought and energy of heart, which even a distant prospect of independence
inspires, gave confidence to their hopes and resolution to their conduct, which
a state of dependence could never have reached. They looked forward to happier
days and scenes of rest, and qualified the hardships of the campaign by
contemplating the establishment of their new born system.

IF on the other hand we take a review of what part Britain has acted, we shall
find every thing which ought to make a nation blush. The most vulgar abuse,
accompanied by that species of haughtiness, which distinguishes the hero of a
mob from the character of a gentleman; it was equally as much from her manners
as from her injustice that she lost the colonies. By the latter she provoked
their principles, by the former she wore out their temper; and it ought to be
held out as an example to the world, to show, how necessary it is to conduct
the business of government with civility. In short, other revolutions may have
originated in caprice or generated in ambition; but here, the most un^ff^^ding
hu^ility was tortured into rage, and the infancy of existence made to weep.

A UNION so extensive* continued and determined suffering with patience and
never in despair could not have been produced by common causes. I must be
something capable of reaching the whole soul of man and arming it with
perpetual energy In vein is it to look for precedents among the revolutions of
former ages to find out* by comparison, the causes of this. The spring, the
progress, the object* the consequences ray the men, their habits of thinking
and all the circumstances of the country are different. Those of other nations
are in general, little more than the history of their quarrels. They are marked
by no important character in the annals of events; mixed in the mass of general
matters they occupy but a common page; and while the chief of the successful
parti^^ns slept into power, the plundered ^^ultitude sat down and sorrowed. Few
very few of them are accompanied with reformation either in government or
manners; many of them with the most consummate profligacy. Triumph on the one
side and misery on the other were the only events. Pains, punishments, torture,
and death were made the business of mankind, until c^m^^^^i^n* the f^irest
associate of the heart, was driven from its place and the eye accustomed to
continual cruelty, could behold it without offense.

BUT as the principles of the present revolution differed from those which
preceeded it, so likewise has the conduct of America both in government and war
Neither the foul finger of disgrace nor the bloody hand of vengeance has
hitherto put a blot upon her fame. Her victories have received luster from a
greatness of lenity; and her laws been permitted to slumber* where they might
justly have awakened to punish. War, so much the trade of the world, has here
been only the business of necessity; and when the necessity shall cease, her
very enemies must confess, that as she drew the sword in her just defense, she
used it without cruelty and sheathed it without revenge.

AS it is not my design to extend these remarks to a history, I shall now take
my leave of this passage of the Abbe, with an observation, which until
something unfolds itself to convince me otherwise, I cannot avoid believing to
be true; -- which is that it was the fix^ determination of the British cabinet
to quarrel with America at all events.

THEY (^he members who compose the cabinet) had no doubt of success, if they
could once bring it to the issue of a battle; and they expected from a
conquest, what they could neither propose with decency no^ hope for by
negotiation. The charters and constitutions of the colonies were become to them
matters of offense, and their rapid progress in property and population were
disgustingly beheld as the growing and natural means of independence. They saw
no way to retain them long but by reducing them in time. A conquest would at
once have made them both lords and landlords; and put them in possession both
of the revenue and rental. The whole trouble of government would have ceased in
a victory, and a final end been put to remonstrance and debate. The experience
of the stamp act had taught them how to quarrel with the advantages of cover
and convenience, and they had nothing to do but to renew the scene, and put
contention into motion. They hoped for a rebellion, and they made one They
expected a declaration of independence, and they were not disappointed. But
after this, they looked for victory, and they obtained a defeat.

In this be taken as the generating cause of the contest, then is every part of
the conduct of the British Ministry consistent from the commencement of the
dispute, until the signing the treaty of Paris, after which, conquest becoming
doubtful, they retreated to negotiation, and were again defeated.

THOUGH the Abbe possesses and displays great powers of genius and is a master of
style and language, he seems not to pay equal attention to the office of an
historian. His facts are coldly and carelessly stated. They neither inf^r^ the
reader nor interest him. Many of them are erroneous and most of them defective
and obscure. It is undoubtedly both an ornament and a useful addition to
history to accompany it with maxims and reflections. They afford likewise an
agreeable change to the style and a more diversified manner of expression; but
it is absolutely necessary that the root from whence they spring or the
foundations on which they are raised should be well attended to which in this
work they are not. The Abbe hastens through his narrations as if he was glad to
get from them, that he may enter the more copious field of eloquence and
imagination.

THE actions of Trenton and Princeton in New Jersey, in December 1776 and
January following on which the fate of America stood for a while trembling on
the point of suspense, and from which the most important consequences followed,
are comprised within a single paragraph faintly conceived, and barren of
character, circumstance and description.

"ON the 25th of December," says the Abbe, they (^he Americans) crossed the
Delaware, and fell accidentally upon Trenton, which was occupied by fifteen
hundred of the twelve thousand Hessians, sold in so b^se a manner by their
avaricious master to the King of Great Britain. This corpse was massacred taken,
or dispersed. Eight days after, three English regiments were in like manner
driven from Princeton, but after having better supported their reputation than
the foreign troops in their pay.

THIS is all the account which is given of these most interesting events. The
Abbe has preceded them by two or three pages on the military operations of both
armies, from the time of General How arriving before New York from Halifax,
and the vast reinforcements of British and foreign troops with Lord How from
England. But in these, there is so much mistake, and so many omissions, that,
to set them right, must be the business of history and not of a letter. The
action of Long Island is but barely hinted at, and the operations at the White
Plains wholly omitted: as are likewise the attack and loss of fort Washington,
with a garrison of about two thousand five hundred men, and the precipitate
evacuation of Fort Lee, in consequence thereof; which losses were in a great
measure the cause of the retreat through the Jersies to the Delaware, a
distance of about ninety miles. Neither is the manner of the retreat described,
which, from the season of the year, the nature of the country, the nearness of
the two armies, (sometimes within sight and shot of each other for such a
length of way) the rear of the one employed in pulling down bridges, and the
van of the other in building them up, must necessarily be accompanied with many
interesting circumstances.

IT is a period of distresses. A crisis rather of danger than of hope. There is
no description can do it justice; and even the actors in it, looking back upon
the scene, are surprised how they got through; and at a loss to account for
those powers of the mind and springs of animation, by which they withstood the
force of accumulated misfortune.

IT was expected, that the time for which the army was inlisted, would carry
the campaign so far into the winter, that the severity of the season, and the
consequent condition of the roads, would prevent any material operation of the
enemy, until the new army could be raised for the next year. And I mention it
as a matter worthy of attention by all future historians, that the movements of
the American army, until the attack upon the Hessian post at Trenton, the 26th
December, are to be considered as operating to effect no other principal
purpose than delay, and to wear away the campaign under all the disadvantages
of an unequal force, with as little misfortune as possible.

BUT the loss of the garrison at Fort-Washington on the 16th of November, and
the expiration of the time of a considerable part of the army, so early as the
30th of the same month, and which were to be followed by almost daily
expirations afterward made retreat the only final expedient. To these
circumstances may be added the forlorn and destitute condition of the few that
remained; for the garrison of Fort-Lee, which composed almost the whole of the
retreat, had been obliged to abandon it so instantaneously, that every article
of stores and baggage was left behind, and in this destitute condition, without
tent or blanket, and without any other utensils to dress their provision than
what they procured by the way, they performed a march of about ninety miles,
and had the address and management to prolong it to the space of nineteen days.

BY this unexpected or rather unthought of turn of affairs, the country was in
an instant surprised into confusion, and found an enemy within its bowels
without an army to oppose him. There were no succors to be had, but from the
free will offering of the inhabitants. All was choice and every man reasoned
for himself.

IT was in this situation of affairs, equally calculated to confound or to
inspire, that the gentleman, the merchant, the farmer, the tradesman and the
labourer mutually turned from all the conveniences of home, to perform the
duties of private soldiers and undergo the severities of a winter campaign. The
delay so judiciously contrived on the retreat, afforded time for the volunteer
reinforcements to join General Washington on the Delaware.

THE Abbe is likewise wrong in saying, that the American army fell accidentally
on Trenton. It was the very object for which General Washington crossed the
Delaware in the dead of the night and in the midst of snow, storms, and ice;
and which he immediately re-crossed with his prisoners, as soon as he had
accomplished his purpose. Neither was the intended enterprise a secret to the
enemy, information having been sent of it by letter from a British officer at
Princetown to Colonel Roll, who commanded the Hessians at Trenton, which
letter was afterward found by the Americans. Nevertheless, the post was
completely surprised. A small circumstance which had the appearance of mistake
on the part of the Americans, led to a more capital and real mistake on the
part of Roll.

THE case was this. A detachment of twenty or thirty Americans had been sent
across the river from a post a few miles above, by an officer unacquainted with
the intended attack; these were net by a body of Hessians on the night, to
which the information pointed, which was Christmas night, and repulsed. Nothing
further appearing, and the Hessians, mistaking this for the advanced party,
supposed the enterprise disconcerted, which at that time was not began, and
under this idea returned to their quarters; so that, what might have raised an
alarm, and brought the Americans into an ambuscade, served to take off the
force of an information and promote the success of the enterprise. Soon after
day light General Washington entered the town, and after a little opposition,
made himself master of it, with upwards of nine hundred prisoners.

THIS combination of equivocal circumstances, falling within what the
Abbestiles "the wide empire of chance," would have afforded a fine field for
thought, and I wish, for the sake of that elegance of reflection he is so
capable of using, that he had known it.

BUT the action at Princeton was accompanied by a still greater embarrassment
of matters, and followed by more extraordinary consequences. The Americans, by
a happy stroke of generalship, in this instance, not only deranged and defeated
all the plans of the British in the intended moment of execution, but drew from
their posts the enemy they were not able to drive, and oblige them to close the
campaign. As the circumstance is a curiosity in war, and not well understood in
Europe, I shall, as concisely as I can, relate the principal parts; they may
serve to prevent future historians from error, and recover from forgetfulness a
scene of magnificent fortitude.

IMMEDIATELY after the surprise of the Hessians at Trenton, General Washington
recrossed the Delaware, which at this place is about three quarters of a mile
over, and reassumed his former post on the Pennsylvania side. Trenton remained
unoccupied, and the enemy were posted at Princeton, twelve miles distant, on
the road toward New York. The weather was now growing very severe, and as
there were very few houses near the shore where General Washington had taken
his station, the greatest part of his army remained out in the woods and
fields. -- These, with some other circumstances, induced the recrossing the
Delaware and taking possession of Trenton. It was undoubtedly a bold adventure,
and carried with it the panic struck condition of the enemy on the loss of the
Hessian post. But in order to give a just idea of the affair, it is necessary I
should describe the place.

TRENTON is situated on a rising ground, about three quarters of a mile distant
from the Delaware, on the eastern or Jersey side; and is cut into two divisions
by a small creek or rivulet, sufficient to turn a mill which is on it; after
which it empties itself at nearly right angles into the Delaware. The upper
division, which is to the north east, contains about seventy or eighty houses,
-- and the lower about forty or fifty. The ground on each side this creek, and
on which the houses are, is likewise rising, and the two divisions present an
agreeable prospect to each other, with the creek between, on which there is a
small stone bridge of one arch.

SCARCELY had General Washington taken post here, and before the several
parties of militia, out on detachments, or on their way could be collected,
than the British, leaving behind them a strong garrison at Princeton, marched
suddenly and entered Trenton at the upper or north east quarter. A party of the
Americans skirmished with the advanced party of the British, to afford time for
removing the stores and baggage, and withdrawing over the bridge.

IN a little time the British had possession of one half of the town, General
Washington of the other; -- and the creek only separated the two armies.
Nothing could be a more critical situation than this; -- and if ever the fate
of America depended on the event of a day, it was now. The Delaware was filling
fast with large sheets of driving ice, and was impassible, so that no retreat
into Pennsylvania could be effected; neither is it possible, in the face of an
enemy, to pass a river of such extent. The roads were broken and rugged with
the frost, and the main road was occupied by the enemy.

ABOUT four o'clock a party of the British approached the bridge, with a design
to gain it, but were repulsed. The^ made no more attempts, though the creek
itself is possible any where between the bridge and the Delaware. It runs into
a rugged natural made ditch, over which a person may pass with little
difficulty, the stream being rapid and shallow. Evening was now coming on, and
the British, believing they had all the advantages they could wish for, and
that they could use them when they pleased, discontinued all further
operations, and held themselves prepared to make the attack next morning.

BUT the next morning produced a scene, as elegant as it was unexpected. The
British were under arms and ready to march to action, when one of their
light horse from Princeton, came suriously down the street, with an account,
that General Washington had that morning attacked and carried the British post
at that place, and was proceeding on to seize the magazine at Brunswick; on
which the British, who were then on the point of making an assault on the
evacuated camp of the Americans, wheeled about, and in a fit of consternation,
marched for Princeton.

THIS retreat is one of those extraordinary circumstances, that in future ages
may probably pass for fable. For it will with difficulty be believed, that two
armies, on which such important consequences depended, should be crowded into
so small a space as Trenton; and that the one, on the eve of an engagement,
when every ear is supposed to be open, and every watchfulness employed should
move completely from the ground, with all its stores baggage, and artillery,
unknown, and even unsuspected by the other. And so entirely were the British
deceived, that when they heard the report of the cannon and small arms at
Princeton, they supposed it to be thunder, though in the depth of winter.

GENERAL Washington, the better to cover and disguise his retreat from Trenton,
had ordered a line of fires to be lighted up in front of his camp. These not
only served to give an appearance of going to rest, and continuing that
deception, but they effectually concealed from the British whatever was acting
behind them, -- for flame can no more be seen through than a wall, -- and in
this situation, it may wish some propriety be said, they became a pillar of
fire to the one army, and a pillar of a cloud to the other: after this, by a
circuitous march of about eighteen miles, the Americans reached Princeton early
in the morning.

THE number of prisoners taken were between two and three hundred, with which
General Washington immediately set off. The van of the British army from
Trenton entered Princeton about an hour after the Americans had left it, who
continuing their match for the remainder of the day, arrived in the evening at
a convenient situation, wide of the main road to Brunswick, and about sixteen
miles distant from Princeton. -- But so wearied and exhausted were they, with
the continual and unabated service and fatigue of two days and a night, from
action to action, without shelter and almost without refreshment, that the bare
and frozen ground, with no other covering than the sky, became to them a place
of comfortable rest. By these two events, and with but little comparative force
to accomplish, which, but a few days before, threatened the country with
destruction. The British army, apprehensive for the safety of their magazines
at Brunswick, eighteen miles distant, marched immediately for that place, where
they arrived late in the evening, and from which they made no attempts to move,
for nearly five months.

HAVING thus stated the principal outlines of these two most interesting
actions, I shall now quit them, to put the Abbe right in his mistated account
of the debt and paper money of America, wherein, speaking of these matters, he
says,

THESE ideal riches were rejected. The more the multiplication of them was
urged by want, the greater did their depreciation grow. The Congress was
indignant at the affronts given to its money, and declared all those to be
traitors to their country who should not receive it as they would have received
gold itself.

DID not this body know, that prepossessions are no more to be controled than
feelings are? Did it not perceive, that in the present crisis every rational
man would be afraid of exposing his fortune? Did it not see, that at the
beginning of a republic, it permitted to itself the exercise of such acts of
despotism as are unknown even in the countries which are molded to, and become
familiar with servitude and oppression? Could it pretend that it did not punish
a want of confidence with the pains which would have been scarcely merited by
revolt and treason? Of all this was the Congress well aware? But it had no
choice of means. Its despised and despicable scraps of paper were actually
thirty times below their original value, when more of them were ordered to be
made. On the 13th of September, 1779, there was of this paper money, amongst
the public, to the amount of L 35,544,155. The state owed moreover L 8,385,356,
without reckoning the particular debts of single provinces.

IN the above recited passages, the Abbe speaks as if the United States had
contracted a debt of upwards of forty millions pounds sterling, besides the
debts of individual States. After which, speaking of foreign trade with
America, he says, that those countries in Europe, which are truly commercial
ones, knowing that North America had been reduced to contract debts at the
epoch of even her greatest prosperity, wisely thought, that, in her present
distress, she would be able to pay but very little for what might be carried to
her.

I KNOW it must be extremely difficult to make foreigners understand the nature
and circumstances of our paper money, because there are natives, who do not
understand it themselves. But with us its fate is now determined. Common
consent has consigned it to rest with that kind of regard which the long
service of inanimate things insensibly obtains from mankind. Every stone in the
bridge that has carried us over, seems to have a claim upon our esteem. But
this was a corner stone, and its usefulness cannot be forgotten. There is
something in a grateful mind which extends itself even to things that can
neither be benefitted by regard, nor suffer by neglect; -- But so it is; and
almost every man is sensible of the effect.

BUT to return. -- The paper money, though issued from Congress under the name
of dollars, did not come from that body always at that value. Those which were
issued the first year were equal to gold and silver; the second year less; the
third still less, and so on for nearly the space of five years; at the end of
which, I imagine that the whole value at which Congress might pay away the
several emissions, taking them together, was about ten or twelve millions
pounds sterling.

NOW as it would have taken ten or twelve millions sterling of taxes to carry
on the war for five years, and, as while this money was issuing and likewise
depreciating down to nothing, there were none, or few valuable taxes paid;
consequently the event to the public was the same, whether they sunk ten or
twelve millions of expended money, by depreciation, or paid ten or twelve
millions by taxation; for as they did not do both, and chose to do one, the
matter, in a general view, was indifferent. And therefore, what the Abbe
supposes to be a debt, has now no existence; it having been paid, by every body
consenting to reduce at his own expense, from the value of the bills
continually passing among themselves a sum equal to nearly what the expense of
the war was for five years.

AGAIN. The paper money having now ceased, and the depreciation with it, and
gold and silver supplied its place, the war will now be carried on by taxation,
which will draw from the public a considerable less sum than what the
depreciation drew; but as while they pay the former, they do not suffer the
latter and as when they suffered the latter, they did not pay the former, the
thing will be nearly equal, with this moral advantage, that taxation occasions
frugality and thought, and depreciation produced dissipation and carelessness.

AND again. If a man's portion of taxes comes to less than what he lost by the
depreciation, it proves the alteration is in his favor. If it comes to more,
and he is justly assessed it shows that he did not sustain his proper share of
depreciation, because the one was as operatively his tax as the other.

IT is true, that it never was intended, neither was it foreseen, that the debt
contained in the paper currency should sink itself in this manner; but as by
the voluntary conduct of all and of every one it has arrived at this fate, the
debt is paid by those who owed it. Perhaps nothing was ever so universally the
act of a country (...) this. Government had no hand in it. Every man
depreciated his own money by his own consent, for such was the effect, which
the raising the nominal value of goods produced. But as by such reduction he
sustained a loss equal to what he must have paid to sink it by taxation,
therefore the line of justice is to consider his loss by the depreciation as
his tax for that time, and not to tax him when the war is over, to make that
money good in any other persons hands, which became nothing in his own.

AGAIN. The paper currency was issued for the express purpose of carrying on
the war. It has performed that service without any other material charge to the
public, while it lasted. But to suppose, as some did, that, at the end of the
war, it was to grow into gold or silver, or become equal thereto, was to
suppose that we were to get two hundred million of dollars by going to war,
instead of paying the cost of carrying it on.

BUT if any thing in the situation of America, as to her currency or her
circumstances, yet remains not understood, then let it be remembered, that this
war is the public's war; the people's war; the country's war. It is their
independence that is to be supported; their property that is to be secured;
their country that is to be saved. Here government, the army and the people,
are mutually and reciprocally one. In other wars, kings may lose their thrones
and their dominions; but here, the loss must fall on the majesty of the
multitude, and the property they are contending to save. Every man being
sensible of this, he goes to the field, or pays his portion of the charge, as
the sovereign of his own possessions; and when he is conquered a monarch falls.

THE remark which the Abbe in the conclusion of the passage has made,
respecting America contracting debts in the time of her prosperity (by which he
means before the breaking out of hostilities) serves to show, though he has not
made the application, the very great commercial difference between a dependent
and an independent country. In a state of dependence, and with a fettered
commerce, though with all the advantages of peace, her trade could not balance
itself, and she annually run into debt. But now, in a state of independence,
though involved in war, she requires no credit; her stores are full of
merchandise, and gold and silver are become the currency of the country. How
these things have established themselves are difficult to account for: But they
are facts, and facts are more powerful than arguments.

As it is probable this letter will undergo a re publication in Europe, the
remarks here thrown together will serve to show the extreme follow of Britain
in resting her hopes of success on the extinction of our paper currency. The
expectation is at once so childish and forlorn, that it places her in the
laughable condition of a famished lion watching for prey at a spider's web.

FROM this account of the currency, the Abbe proceeds to state the condition of
America in the winter 1777, and the spring following; and closes his
observations with mentioning the treaty of alliance, which was signed in
France, and the propositions of the British ministry, which were rejected in
America. But in the manner in which the Abbe has arranged his facts, there is a
very material error, that not only he, but other European historians have
fallen into; none of them having assigned the true cause why the British
proposals were rejected, and all of them have assigned a wrong one.

IN the winter 1777, and spring following, congress were assembled at York town
in Pennsylvania, the British were in possession of Philadelphia, and General
Washington with the army were encamped in huts at the Valley-Forge, twenty-five
miles distant therefrom. To all who can remember, it was a season of hardship,
but not of despair; and the Abbe, speaking of this period and its
inconveniences, says, --

A multitude of privations, added to so many other misfortunes, might make the
Americans regret their former tranquillity, and incline them to an accommodation
with England. In vain had the people been bound to the new government by the
sacredness of oaths and the influence of religion. In vain had endeavors been
used to convince them that it was impossible to treat safely with a country, in
which one parliament might overturn what should have been established by
another. In vain had they been threatened with the eternal resentment of an
exasperated and vindictive enemy. It was possible that these distant troubles
might not be balanced by the weight of present evils.

So thought the British ministry, when they sent to the New World public
agents, authorized to offer every thing except independence to these very
Americans, from whom they had two years before exacted an unconditional
submission. It is not improbable but that by this plan of conciliation, a few
months sooner, some effect might have been produced. But at the period at which
it was proposed by the Court of London, it was rejected with disdain, because
this measure appeared but as an argument of fear and weakness. The people were
already re assured. The Congress, the Generals, the troops, the bold and
skilful men, in each colony had possessed themselves of the authority; every
thing had recovered its first spirit. This was the effect of a treaty of
friendship and commerce between the United States and the Court of Versailles,
signed the 6th of February, 1778.

ON this passage of the Abbe's I cannot help remarking, that, to unite time
with circumstance, is a material nicety in history; the want of which
frequently throws is into endless confusion and mistake, occasions a total
separation between causes and consequences, and connects them with others they
are not immediately, and sometimes not at all, related to.

THE Abbe, in saying that the offer: of the British ministry "were rejected
with disdain," it right, as to the fact, but wrong as to the time; and this
error in the time, has occasioned him to be mistaken in the cause.

THE signing the treaty of Paris the 6th of February, 1778, could have no
effect on the mind or politics of America, until it was known in America; and
therefore, when the Abbe says, that the rejection of the British offers was in
consequence of the alliance being known in America; which was not the case: And
by this mistake he not only takes from her the reputation which her unshaken
fortitude in that trying situation deserves, but it likewise led very
injuriously to suppose, that had she not known of the treaty, the offers would
probably have been accepted; whereas she knew nothing of the treaty at the time
of the rejection, and consequently did not reject them on that ground.

THE propositions or offers abovementioned were contained in two bills brought
into the British Parliament by Lord North on the 17th of February, 1778. Those
bills were hurried through both Houses with unusual haste, and before they had
gone through all the customary forms of Parliament, copies of them were sent over
to Lord How and General How, then in Philadelphia, who were likewise
Commissioners. Genesis How ordered them to be printed in Philadelphia, and sent
copies of them by a flag, to General Washington, to be forwarded to Congress,
at Yorktown, where they arrived the 21st of April, 1778. Thus much for the
arrival of the bills in America.

CONGRESS, as is their usual mode, appointed a committee from their own body,
to examine them, and report thereon. The report was bro't in the next day (the
22d) was read, and unanimously agreed to, entered on their journals, and
published for the information of the country. Now this report must be the
rejection to which the Abbe alludes, because Congress gave no other formal
opinion on those bills and propositions: And on a subsequent application from
the British Commissioners, dated the 27th of May, and received at York Town the
6th of June, Congress immediately referred them for an answer to their printed
resolves of the 22d of April. Thus much for the rejection of the offers.

ON the 2d of May, that is, eleven days after the above rejection was made, the
treaty between the United States and France, arrived at Yorktown; and until
this moment, Congress had not the least notice or idea, that suck a measure was
in any train of execution. But lest this declaration of mine should pass only
for assertion, I shall support it by proof, for it is material to the character
and principle of the revolution to show, that no condition of America, since
the declaration of independence, however trying and severe, ever operated to
produce the most distant idea of yielding it up either by force, distress,
artifice or persuasion. And this proof is the more necessary, because it was
the system of the British Ministry at this time, as well as before and since,
to hold out to the European powers that America was unfix^ in her resolutions
and policy; hoping, by this artifice, to lessen her reputation in Europe, and
weaken the confidence which those powers, or any of them, might be inclined to
place in her.

AT the time these matters were transacting, I was secretary in the foreign
department of Congress. All the political letters from the American
Commissioners rested in my hands, -- and all that were officially written* went
from my office; and so far from Congress knowing any thing of the signing the
treaty, at the time they rejected the British offers, they had not received a
line of information from their Commissioners at Paris, on any subject whatever,
for upwards of a twelve month. Probably the loss of the port of Philadelphia,
and the navigation of the Delaware, together with the dangers of the seas,
covered at this time with British cruisers, contributed to the disappointment.

ONE packet, it is true, arrived at Yorktown, in January preceding, which was
about three months before the arrival of the treaty; but strange as it may
appear, every letter had been taken out, before it was put on board the vessel
which brought it from France, and blank white paper put in their stead.

HAVING thus stated the time when the proposals from the British Commissioners
were first received, and likewise the time when the treaty of alliance arrived,
and shown that the rejection of the former was eleven days prior to the arrival
of the latter, and without the least knowledge of such circumstance having
taken place, or being about to take place; the rejection, therefore, must, and
ought to be attributed to the fixed unvaried sentiments of America respecting
the enemy she is at war with, and her determination to support her independence
to the last possible effort, and not to any new circumstance in her favor,
which at that time she did not and could not know of.

BESIDES, there is a vigor of determination and spirit of defiance in the
language of the rejection, (which I here subjoin) which derive their greatest
glory by appearing before the treaty was known; for that which is bravery in
distress, becomes insult in prosperity: and the treaty placed America on such a
strong foundation, that had she then known it, the answer which she gave, would
have appeared rather as an air of triumph, than as the glowing serenity of
fortitude.

UPON the whole, the Abbe appears to have entirely mistaken the matter: for
instead of attributing the rejection of the propositions to our knowledge of
that event. And then the reason why they were hurried over to America in the
state of bills, that is, before they were passed into acts, is easily accounted
for, which is, that they might have the chance of reaching America before any
knowledge of the treaty should arrive, which they were lucky enough to do, and
there met the fate they so richly merited. That these bills were brought into
the British Parliament after the treaty with France was signed is proved from
the dates: The treaty being on the 6th, and the bills the 17th of February. And
that the signing the treaty was known in Parliament when the bills were bro't
in, is likewise proved by a speech of Mr. Charles Fox, on the said 17th of
February, who in reply to Lord North, informed the House of the treaty being
signed, and challenged the Minister's knowledge of the same fact. IN CONGRESS,
April 22d, 1778.
THE Committee to whom was referred the General's letter of the 18th,
containing a certain printed paper sent from Philadelphia, purporting to be the
draught of a Bill for declaring the intensions of the Parliament of Great
Britain, as to the exercise of what they are pleased to term their right of
imposing taxes within these United States; and also the draught of a bill to
enable the King of Great Britain to appoint Commissioners, with powers to
treat, consult and agree upon the means of quieting certain disorders within
the said States, beg leave to observe.

That the said paper being industriously circulated by emissaries of the enemy,
in a partial and secret manner, the same ought to be forthwith printed for the
public information.

The Committee cannot ascertain whether the contents of the said paper have
been framed in Philadelphia, or in Great Britain, much less whether the same
are really and truly intended to be brought into the Parliament of that
kingdom, or whether the said Parliament will confer thereon the usual
solemnities of their laws. But are inclined to believe this will happen, for
the following reasons:

"1st. Because their General has made diverse feeble efforts to set on foot
some kind of treaty during the last winter, though, either from a mistaken idea
of his own dignity and importance, the want of information, or some other
cause, he has not made application to those who are invested with a proper
authority.

"2dly. Because they suppose that the fallacious idea of a cessation of
hostilities will render these States remiss in their preparations for war.

"3rdly. Because believing the Americans wearied with war, they suppose we
shall accede to their terms for the sake of peace.

"4thly. Because they suppose that our negociations may be subject to a like
corrupt influence with their debates.

"5thly. Because they expect from this step the same effects they did from what
one of their ministers thought proper to call his conciliatory motion, viz.
That it will prevent foreign powers from giving aid to these States; that it
will lead their own subjects to continue a little longer the present war; and
that it will detach some weak men in America from the cause of freedom and
virtue.

"6thly. Because their King, from his own showing, has reason to apprehend
that his fleets and armies, instead of being employed against the territories
of these States, will be necessary for the defense of his own dominions. And

"7thly. Because the impracticability of subjugating this country being every
day more and more manifest, it is their interest to extricate themselves from
the war upon any terms.

The Committee beg leave further to observe, That* upon a supposition the
matters contained in the said paper will really go into the British Statute
Book, they serve to show, in a clear point of view, the weakness and wickedness
of the enemy.

Their weakness.

1st. Becaused they formerly declared, not only that they had a right to bind
the inhabitants of these States in all cases whatsoever, but also that the said
inhabitants should absolutely and unconditionally submit to the exercise of
that right And this submission they have endeavored to exact by the sword.
Receding from this claim therefore* under the present circumstances, shows
their inability to enforce it.

2dly. Because their Prince has heretofore rejected the humblest petitions of
the Representatives of America, praying to be considered as subjects, and
protected in the enjoyment of peace, liberty and safety; and has waged a most
cruel war against them, and employed the savages to butcher innocent women and
children But now the same Prince pretends to treat with those very
Representatives, and grant to the arms of America what he refused to her
prayers.

3dly. Because they have uniformly labored to conquer this continent,
rejecting every idea of accommodation proposed to them from a confidence in
their own strength. Wherefore it is evident, from the change in their mode of
attack that they have lost this confidence. And

4thly Because the constant language, spoken not only by their Ministers, but
by the most public and authentic acts of the nation, has been that it is
incompatible with their dignity to treat with the Americans while they have
arms in their hands. Notwithstanding which, and offer is now about to be made
for treaty.

THE WICKEDNESS and INSINCERITY of the enemy appear from the following
considerations:

1st. Either the Bills now to be passed contain a direct or indirect cession of
a part of their former claims, or they do not If they do, then it is
acknowledged that they have sacrificed many brave men in an unjust quarrel. If
they do not then they are calculated to deceive America into terms to which
neither argument before the war, nor force since, could procure her assent

2dly. The first of these Bills appears from the title* to be a declaration of
the intentiors of the British Parliament concerning the exercise of the right
of imposing taxes within these States. Wherefore should these States treat
under the said Bill they would indirectly acknowledge that right, to obtain
which acknowledgment the present war has been avowedly undertaken and
prosecuted on the part of Great Britain

3dly. Should such pretended right be so acquiesced in then of consequence the
same might be exercised whenever the British Parliament should find themselves
in a different temper and disposition; since it must depend upon these, and
such like contingences, how far men will act according to their former
intentions.

4thly. The said first Bill, in the body thereof* contains no new matter, but
is precisely the same with the motion before mentioned, and liable to all the
objections which lay against the said motion, excepting the following
particular, viz. that by the motion actual taxation was to be suspended, so
long as America should give as much as the said parliament might think proper:
Whereas, by the proposed Bill, it is to be suspended, as long as future
Parliaments continue of the same mind with the present.

5thly. From the second Bill it appears, that the British King* may, if he
pleases, appoint Commissioners to treat and agree with those, whom they please,
about a variety of things therein mentioned. But such treaties and agreements
are to be of no validity without the concurrence of the said Parliament, except
so far as they relate to the suspension of hostilities, and of certain of their
acts, the granting of pardons, and the appointing of Governors to these
sovereign, free and independent States. Wherefore, the said Parliament have
reserved to themselves, in express words, the power of setting aside any such
treaty and taking the advantage of any circumstances which may arise to subject
this continent to their usurpations.

6thly. The said Bill, by holding forth a tender of pardon, implies a
criminality in our justifiable resistance, and consequently, to treat under it
would be an implied acknowledgment, that the inhabitants of these States were,
what Britain has declared them to be, Rebels.

7thly. The inhabitants of these States being claimed by them as subjects, they
may infer, from the nature of the negotiation now pretended to be set on foot,
that the said inhabitants would of right be afterward bound by such laws as
they should make. Wherefore any agreement entered into on such negotiation
might at any future time be repealed.

8thly. Because the said Bill purports* that the Commissioners therein
mentioned may treat with private individuals; a measure highly derogatory to
the dignity of national character.

From all which it appears evident to your Committee, that the said Bills are
intended to operate upon the hopes and fears of the good people of these
States, so as to create divisions among them, and a defection from the common
cause, now by the blessing of Divine Providence drawing near to a favorable
issue. That they are the sequel of that insidious plan, which, from the days of
the Stamp act down to the present time, has involved this country in
contention and bloodshed. And that, as in other cases so in this, although
circumstances may force them at times to recede from their unjustifiable claim,
there can be no doubt but they will as heretofore, upon the first favorable
occasion, again display that last of domination, which has rent in swain the
mighty empire of Britain.

Upon the whole matter, the Committee beg leave to report it as their opinion
that as the Americans united in this arduous contest upon principles of common
interest, for the defense of common rights and privileges, which union has
been cemented by common calamities and by mutual good offices and affection, so
the great cause for which they contend* and in which all mankind are
interested, must derive its success from the continuance of that union.
Wherefore any man or body of men, who should presume to make any separate or
partial convention or agreement with Commissioners under the crown of Great
Britain, or any of them, ought to be considered and treated as open and avowed
enemies of these United States.

And further your Committee beg leave to report it as their opinion, That these
United States cannot, with proprity, hold any conference or treaty with any
Commissioners on the part of Great Britain, unless they shall, as a preliminary
thereto, either withdraw their fleets, and armies, or else, in positive and
express terms, acknowledge the Independence of the said States.

And inasmuch as it appears to be the design of the enemies of these States to
lull them into a fatal security -- to the and that they may act with a becoming
weight and importance, it is the opinion of your Committee that the several
States be called upon to use the most strenuous exertions to have their
respective quotas of continental troops in the field as soon at possible, and
that all the militia of the said States be held in readiness, to act as
occasion may require.

The following is the answer o Congress to the second application to the
Commissioners:

York Town, June 6, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE had the honor of laying your letter of the 3d instant, with the acts of
the British Parliament, which come enclosed, before Congress; and I am
instructed to acquaint you, Sir, that they have already expressed their
sentiments upon bills, not essentially different from those acts, in a
publication of the 22d of April last.

Be assured, Sir, when the King of Great Britain shall be seriously disposed to
put an end to the unprovoked and cruel war waged against these UnitedStates,
Congress will readily attend to such terms of peace as may consist with the
honor of independent nations, the interest of their constituents, and the
sacred regard they mean to pay to treaties.

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient and most humble servant, HENRY
LAURENS, President of Congress

His Excellency Sir Henry Clinton, K B. Philad.




THOUGH I am not surprised to see the Abbe mistakes in matters of history,
acted at so great a distance from his sphere of immediate observation, yet I am
more than surprised to find him wrong (or at least what appears so to me) in
the well enlightened field of philosophical reflection Here the materials are
his own; creased by himself; and the error therefore is an act of the mind.

HITHERTO my remarks have been confined to circumstances: ^h^ order in which
they arose, and the events they produced* In these, my information being better
than the Abbe's my task was easy. How I may succeed in controverting matters of
sentiment and opinion, with one whom years, experience, and long established
reputation have placed in a superior line, I am less confident in; but as they
fall within the scope of my observations it would be improper to pass them over.

FROM this part of the Abbe's work to the latter end, I find several
expressions, which appear to me to start, with a cynical complexion, from the
path of liberal thinking, or at least they are so involved as to lose many of
the beauties which distinguish other parts of the performance.

THE Abbe having brought his work to the period when the treaty of alliance
between France and the United States commenced, proceeds to make some remarks
thereon.

"IN short," says he, philosophy whose first sentiment is the desire to see all
governments just and all people happy, in casting her eyes upon this alliance
of a monarchy, with a people who are defending their liberty, is curious to
know its motive She fees at once, too clearly, that the happiness of mankind
has no part in it

WHATEVER train of thinking or of temper the Abbe might be in, when he penned
this expression, matters not. They will neither qualify the sentiment, nor add
to its defect. If right, it needs no apology; if wrong. it merits no excuse. It
is sent into the world as an opinion of philosophy, and may be examined without
regard to the author.

IT seems to be a defect, connected with ingenuity, that it often employs
itself more in matters of curiosity, than usefulness. Man must be the privy
counselor of fate, or something is not right. He must know the springs, the
whys and wherefores of every thing, or he fits down unsatisfied. Whether this
be a crime, or only a caprice of humanity. I am not enquiring into. I shall
take the Passage as I find it, and place my objections against it.

IT is not so properly the motives which produced the alliance, as the
consequences which are to be produced from it, that mark out the field of
philosophical reflection, In the one we only penetrate into the barren cave of
secrecy, where little can be known, and every thing may be misconceived; in the
other, the mind is presented with a wide extended prospect of vegetative good,
and sees a thousand blessings budding into existence.

BUT the expression, even within the compass of the Abbe's meaning, sets out
with an error, because it is made to declare that which no man has authority to
declare. Who can say that the happiness of mankind made no part of the motives
which produced the alliance? To be able to declare this, a man must be
possessed of the mind of all the parties concerned, and know that their motives
were something else.

IN proportion as the independence of America became contemplated and
understood, the local advantages of it to the immediate actors, and the
numerous benefits it promised to mankind, appeared to be every day increasing;
and we saw not a temporary good for the present race only, but a continued good
to all posterity; these motives, therefore, added to those which preceeded
them, became the motives on the part of America, which led her to propose and
agree to the treaty of alliance, as the best effectual method of extending and
securing happiness; and therefore with respect to us, the Abbe is wrong.

FRANCE. on the other hand, was situated very differently to America. She was
not acted upon by necessity to seek a friend, and therefore her motive in
becoming one, has the strongest evidence of being good, and that which is so,
must have some happiness for its object. With regard to herself, she saw a
train of conveniences worthy her attention. By lessening the power of an enemy,
whom, at the same time, she sought neither to destroy nor distress, she gained
an advantage without doing an evil, and created to herself a new friend by
associating with a country in misfortune. The springs of thought that led to
actions of this kind, however political they may be, are nevertheless naturally
beneficient; for in all causes, good or bad it is necessary there should be a
fitness in the mind to enable it to act in character with the object: Therefore
as a bad cause cannot be prosecuted with a good motive, so neither an a good
cause be long supported by a had one, and as no man acts without a motive,
therefore in the present instance, as they cannot be bad they must be admitted
to be good. But the Abbe sets out upon such an extended scale, that he
overlooks the degrees by which it is measured, and rejects the beginning of
good, because the end comes not at once.

IT is true that bad motives may in some degree be brought to support a good
cause or prosecute a good object; but it never continues long, which is not the
case with France; for either the object will reform the mind, or the mind
corrupt the object, or else nor being able, either way, to get into unison,
they will separate in disgust: And this natural, though unperceived progress of
association or contention between the mind and the object, is the secret cause
of fidelity or defection. Every object a man pursues, is for the time, a kind
of mistress to his mind: if both are good or bad, the union is natural; but if
they are in reverse, and neither can seduce nor yet reform the other, the
opposition grows into dislike and a separation fellows.

WHEN the cause of America first made her appearance on the stage of the
universe, there were many, who, in the style of adventurers and fortune
hunters, were dangling in her train, and making their court to her with every
profession of honor and attachment. They were loud in her praise and
ostentations in her service. Every place echoed with their ardor or their
anger, and they seemed like men in love. But, alas, they were fortune hunters.
Their expectations were excited, but their minds were unimpressed; and finding
her not to their purpose, nor themselves reformed by her influence, they ceased
their suit, and in some instances deserted and betrayed her.

THERE were others, who at first beheld her with indifference, and unacquainted
with her character were cautions of her company. They treated her as one, who,
under the fair name of liberty, might conceal the hideous figure of anarchy, or
the gloomy monster of tyranny. They knew not what she was. If fair, she was
fair indeed. But still she was suspected, and though born among us appeared to
be a stranger.

ACCIDENT with some, and curiosity with others, bro^^ on a distant
acquaintance. They ventured to look at her. They felt an inclination to speak
to her. One intimacy led to another, till the suspicion were away and a change
of sentiment stole gradually upon the mind; and having no self-interest to
serve, no passion of dishonor to gratify, they became enamoured of her
innocence, and unaltered by misfortune or uninflamed by success, shared with
fidelity in the varieties of her fate.

THIS declaration of the Abbe's, respecting motives, has led me unintendedly
into a train of metaphysical reasoning; but there was no other avenue by which
it could so properly be approached. To place presumption against presumption,
assertion against assertion, is a mode of opposition that has no effect; and
therefore the more eligible method was to show, that the declaration does not
correspond with the natural progress of the mind and the influence it has upon
our conduct. -- I shall now quit this part and proceed to what I have before
stated, namely, that it is not so properly the motives which produced the
alliance, as the consequences to be produced from it, that mark out the field
of philosophical reflection.

IT is an observation I have already made in some former publication, that the
circle of civilization is yet incomplete. A mutuality of wants have formed the
individuals of each country into a kind of national society, and here the
progress of civilization has stopped. For it is easy to see, that nations with
regard to each other (notwithstanding the ideal civil law which every one
explains as it suits him) are like individuals in a state of nature. They are
regulated by no fixed principle, governed by no compulsive law, and each does
independently what is pleases or what it can.

WERE it possible we could have known the world when in a state of barbarism,
we might have concluded that it never could be brought into the order we now
see it. The untamed mind was then as hard, if not harder, to work upon in its
individual state, than the national mind is in its present one. Yet we have
seen the accomplishment of the one, why then should we doubt that of the other.

THERE is a greater fitness in mankind to extend and complete the civilization
of nations with each other at this day* than there was to begin it with the
unconnected individuals at first; in the same manner that it is somewhat easier
to put together the materials of a machine after they are formed* than it was
to form them from original matter. The present condition of the world differing
so exceedingly from what it formerly was, has given a new cast to the mind of
man, more than what he appears to be sensible of. The want of the individual,
which first produced the idea of society, are now augmented into the wants of
the nation, and he is obliged to seek from another country what before he
sought from the next person.

LETTERS, the tongue of the world, have in some measure brought all mankind
acquainted, and by an extension of their uses are every day promoting some new
friendship. Through them distant nations become capable of conversation, and
losing by degrees the awkwardness of strangers, and the moroseness of
suspicion, they learn to know and understand each other. Science, the partisan
of no country, but the beneficient patroness of all, has liberally opened a
temple where all may meet. Her influence on the mind, like the sun on the
chilled earth, has long been preparing it for higher cultivation and further
improvement. The philosopher of one country sees not an enemy in the
philosopher of another: He takes his seat in the temple of science and asks not
who sits beside him.

THIS was not the condition of the barbarian world. Then the wants of man were
few, and the objects within his reach. While he could acquire these, he lived
in a state of individual independence, the consequence of which was, there were
as many nations as persons, each contending with the other, to secure something
which he had, or to obtain something which he had not. The world had then no
business to follow, no studies to exercise the mind. Their time was divided
between sloth and fatigue. Hunting and war were their chief occupations; sleep
and food their principal enjoyments.

Now it is otherwise. A change in the mode of life has made it necessary to be
busy; and man finds a thousand things to do now which before he did not.
Instead of placing his ideas of greatness in the rude achievements of the
savage, he studies arts, science, agriculture and commerce, the refinements of
the gentleman, the principles of society, and the knowledge of the philosopher.

THERE are many things which in themselves are morally neither good nor bad,
but they are productive of consequences, which are strongly marked with one or
other of these characters. Thus commerce, though in itself a moral nullity, has
had a considerable influence in tempering the human mind. It was the want of
objects in the ancient world, which occasioned in them such a rude and
perpetual turn for war. Their time hung on their hands without the means of
employment. The indolence they lived in afforded leisure for mischief, and
being all idle at once, and equal in their circumstances, they were easily
provoked or induced to action.

BUT the introduction of commerce furnished the world with objects, which in
their extent, reach every man and give him something to think about and
something to do; by these his attention is mechanically drawn from the
pursuits, which a state of indolence and an unemployed mind occasioned, and he
trades with the same countries, which former ages, tempted by their
productions, and too indolent to purchase them, would have gone to war with.

THUS, as I have already observed, the condition of the world being materially
changed by the influence of science and commerce, it is put into a fitness not
only to admit of, but to desire, an extension of civilization. The principal
and almost only remaining enemy it now has to encounter, is prejudice; for it
is evidently the interest of mankind to agree and make the best of life. The
world has undergone its divisions of empire, the several boundaries of which
are known and settled. The idea of conquering countries like the Greeks and
Romans does not now exist; and experience has exploded the notion of going to
war for the sake of profit. In short, the obj^cts for war are exceedingly
diminished, and there is now ^^ft scarcely any thing to quarrel about, but what
arises ^^^m that demon of society, prejudice, and the consequent sullenness and
untractableness of the temper.

THERE is something exceedingly curious in the constitution and operation of
prejudice. It has the singular ability of accommodating itself to all the
possible varieties of the human mind. Some passion^^ and vices are bu^ thinly
scattered among mankind, and find only here and there a fi^ness of reception.
But prejudice, like the spider, makes every where his home. It has neither
taste nor choice of place, and all that it requires is room. There is scarcely
a situation except fire or water, in which a spider will not live. So let the
mind be as naked as the wills of an empty and forsaken tenement, gloomy as a
dungeon, or ornamented with the richest abilities of thinking, let it be hot,
cold, dark or light, lonely or inhabited, still prejudice, if undisturbed, will
fill it with cobwebs, and live, like the spider, where there seems nothing to
live on. If the one prepares her food by poisoning it to her palate and her
use, the other does the same; and as several of our passions are strongly
charactered by the animal world, prejudice may be denominated the spider of the
mind.

PERHAPS no two events ever united so intimately and f^rceab^y to combat and
expel prejudice, as the Revolutio^ of America and the Alliance with France.
Their effects are felt, and their influence already extends as well to the old
world as the new. Our style and manner of thinking have undergone a revolution,
more extraordinary than the political revolution of the country. We see with
other eyes; we hear with other ears; and think with other thoughts, than those
we formerly used. We can look back on our own prejudices, as if they had been
the prejudices of other people. We now see and know they were pr^judices and
nothing else, and relieved from their shackles enjoy a freedom of mind, we felt
not before. It was not all the argument, however powerful, nor all the
reasoning, however elegant, that could have produced this change, so necessary
to the extention of the mind, and the cordiality of the world, without the two
circumstances of the Revolution and the Alliance.

HAS America dropped quietly from Britain, no material change in sentiment, had
taken place. The same notions, prejudices, and conceits, would have governed in
both countries, as governed them before, and still the slaves of error and
education, they would have traveled on in the beaten track of vulgar and
habitual thinking. But bro't about by the means it has been, both with regard
to ourselves to France, and to England, every corner of the mind is swept of
its cobwebs, poison, and dust, and made fit for the reception of generous
happiness.

PERHAPS there never was an Alliance on a broader basis, than that between
America and France, and the progress of it is worth attending to. The countries
had been enemies, not properly of themselves, but through the medium of
England. They, originally, had no quarrel with each other, nor any cause for
one, but what arose from the interest of England and her arming America against
France. At the same time, the Americans at a distance from, and unacquainted
with the world, and tutored in all the prejudices which governed those who
governed them conceived it their duty to act as they were taught. In doing this
they expended their substance to make conquests, not for themselves but for
their masters, who in return treated them as slaves.

A LONG succession of insolent severity, and the separation finally occasioned
by the commencement of hostilities at Lexington, on the 19th of April, 1775,
naturally produced a new disposition of thinking. As the mind closed itself
toward England it opened itself toward the world, and our prejudices like our
oppressions underwent though less observed a mental examination; until we found
the former as inconsistent with reason and benevolence, as the latter were
repugnant to our civil and political rights.

WHILE we were thus advancing by degrees into the wide field of extended
humanity, the alliance with France was concluded. An alliance not formed for
the mere purpose of a day, but on just and generous grounds, and with equal and
mutual advantages; and the easy affectionate manner in which the parties have
since communicated, has made it an alliance not of courts only but of
countries. There is now an union of mind as well as of interest; and our hearts
as well as our prosperity call on us to support it.

THE people of England not having experienced this change, had likewise no idea
of it. They were hugging to their bosoms the same prejudices we were trampling
beneath our feet; and they expected to keep a hold upon America, by that
narrowness of thinking, which America disdained. What they were proud of, we
despised; and this is a principal cause why all their negociations, constructed
on this ground, have failed. We are now really another people, and cannot again
go back to ignorance and prejudice. The mind once enlightened cannot again
become dark. There is no possibility, neither is there any term to express the
supposition by, of the mind, unknowing any thing it already knows; and
therefore all attempts on the part of England, fitted to the former habit of
America, and on the expectation of their applying now, will be like persuading
a seeing man to become blind, and a sensible one to turn an idiot. The first of
which is unnatural, and the other impossible.

As to the remark which the Abbe makes of the one country being a monarchy and
the other a republic, it can have no essential meaning. Forms of government
have nothing to do with treaties. The former are the internal police of the
countries severally; the latter, their external policy jointly: and so long as
each performs its part, we have no more right or business to know how the one
or the other conducts its domestic affairs, than we have to enquire into the
private concerns of a family.

BUT had the Abbe reflected for a moment, he would have seen, that courts or
the governing powers of all countries, be their forms what they may, are
relatively republics with each other. It is the first and true principle of
alliancing. Antiquity may have given precedence, and power will naturally
create importance, but their equal right in never disputed. It may likewise be
worthy of remarking, that a monarchial country can suffer nothing in its
popular happiness by allying with a republican one; and republican governments
have never been destroyed by their external connections, but by some internal
convulsion or contrivance. France has been in alliance with the republic of
Swisserland for more than two hundred years, and still Swisserland retains her
original form as entire as if she had allied with a republic like herself;
therefore this remark of the Abbe goes to nothing -- Besides, it is best that
mankind should mix. There is ever something to learn, either of manners or
principle; and it is by a free communication, without regard to domestic
matters, that friendship is to be extended, and prejudice destroyed all over
the world.

BUT notwithstanding the Abbe's high professions in favor of liberty, he
appears sometimes to forget himself, or that his theory is rather the child of
his fancy than of his judgment: For in almost the same instant that he censures
the alliance as not originally or sufficiently calculated for the happiness of
mankind, he, by a figure of implication, accuses France for having acted so
generously and unreservedly in concluding it. Why did they (says he, meaning
the Court of France) tie themselves down by an inconsiderate treaty to
conditions with the Congress, which they might themselves have held in
dependence by ample and regular supplies.

WHEN an author undertakes to treat of public happiness, he ought to be certain
that he does not mistake passion for right, nor imagination for principle.
Principle, like truth, needs no contrivance. It will ever tell its own tale,
and tell it the same way. But where this is not the case, every page must be
watched, recollected, and compared, like an invented story.

I AM surprised at this passage of the Abbe. It means nothing or it means ill;
and in any case it shows the great difference between speculative and practical
knowledge. A treaty according to the Abbe's language would have neither
duration nor affection; it might have lasted to the end of the war, and then
expired with it. But France, by acting in a style superior to the little
polities of narrow thinking, has established a generous fame and won the love
of a country she was before a stranger to. She had to treat with a people who
thought as nature taught them; and, on her own part, she wisely saw, there was
no present advantage to be obtained by unequal terms, which could balance the
more lasting ones that might flow from a kind and generous beginning.

FROM this part the Abbe advances into the secret transactions of the two
Cabinets of Versailles and Madrid respecting the independence of America;
through which I mean not to follow him. It is a circumstance sufficiently
striking without being commented on, that the former union of America with
Britain produced a power, which in her hands, was becoming dangerous to the
world And there is no improbability in supposing* that had the latter known as
much of the strength of the former before she began the quarrel as she has
known fince, that instead of attempting to reduce her to unconditional
submission, she would have proposed to her the conquest of Mexico. But from the
countries separately Spain has nothing to apprehend, though from their union
she had more to fear than any other power in Europe.

THE part which I shall more particularly confine myself to, is that wherein
the Abbe takes an opportunity of complimenting the British Ministry with high
encomiums of admiration, on their rejecting the offered mediation of the court
of Madrid, in 1779.

IT must be remembered that before Spain joined France in the war, she
undertook the office of a mediator and made proposals to the British King and
Ministry so exceedingly favorable to their interest, that had they been
accepted, would have become inconvenient, if not inadmissible, to America.
These proposals were nevertheless rejected by the British cabinet; on which the
Abbe says, --

It is in such a circumstance as this; it is in the time when noble pride
clevates the soul superior to all terror; when nothing is seen more dreadful
than the shame of receiving the law, and when there is no doubt or hesitation
which to choose, between ruin and dishonor; it is then, that the greatness of a
nation is displayed. I acknowledge however that men, accustomed to judge of
things by the event, call great and perilous resolutions, heroism or madness,
according to the good or bad success with which they have been attended. If
then, I should be asked, what is the name which shall in years to come be given
to the firmness, which was in this moment exhibited by the English. I shall
answer that I do not know. But that which it deserves I know. I know that the
annals of the world hold out to us but rarely, the august and majestic
spectacle of a nation, which chooses rather to renounce its duration than its
glory.

IN this paragraph the conception is lofty and the expression elegant; but the
coloring is too high for the original, and the likeness fails through an
excess of graces. To fit the powers of thinking and the turn of language to the
subject, so as to bring out a clear conclusion that shall hit the point in
question and nothing else, is the true criterion of writing. But the greater
part of the Abbe's writings (if he will pardon me the remark) appear to me
uncentral and burdensome with variety. They represent a beautiful wilderness
without paths; in which the eye in diverted by every thing, without being
particularly directed to any thing; and in which it is agreeable to be lost,
and difficult to find the way out.

BEFORE I offer any other remark on the spirit and composition of the above
passage, I shall compare it with the circumstance it alludes to.

THE circumstance then does not deserve the encomium. The rejection was not
prompted by her fortitude but her vanity She did not view it as a case of
despair or even of extreme danger, and consequently the determination to
renounce her duration rather than her glory, cannot apply to the condition of
her mind. She had then high expectations of subjugating America, and had no
other naval force against her than France; neither was she certain that
rejecting the mediation of Spain would combine that power with France. New
mediations might arise more favorable than these she had refused. But if they
should not, and Spain should join, she still saw that it would only bring out
her naval force against France and Spain, which was not wanted and could not be
employed against America, and habits of thinking had taught her to believe
herself superior to both.

BUT in any case to which the consequence might point, there was nothing to
impress her with the idea of renouncing her duration. It is not the policy of
Europe to suffer the extinction of any power, but only to lop off or prevent
its dangerous enerease. She was likewise freed by situation from the internal
and immediate horrors of invasion; was rolling in dissipation and looking for
conquests; and though she suffered nothing but the expense of war, she still had
a greedy eye to magnificent reimbursement.

BUT if the Abbe is delighted with high and striking singularities of
character, he might, in America, have sound ample field for encomium. Here was
a people, who could not know what part the world would take for, or against
them; and who were venturing on an untried scheme, in opposition to a power,
against which more formidable nations had failed. They had every thing to learn
but the principles which supported them, and every thing to precure that was
necessary for their defense. They have at times seen themselves as low as
distress could make them, without showing the least stagger in their fortitude;
and been raised again by the most unexpected events, without discovering an
unmanly discomposure of joy. To hesitate or to despair are conditions equally
unknown in America. Her mind was prepared for every thing; because her original
and final resolution of succeeding or perishing included all possible
circumstances.

THE rejection of the British propositions in the year 1778, circumstanced as
America was at that time, is a far greater instance of unshaken fortitude than
the refusal of the Spanish mediation by the Court of London: And other
historians, besides the Abbe, struck with the vastness of her conduct therein,
have, like himself, attributed it to a circumstance, which was then unknown,
the alliance with France. Their error shows their idea of its greatness;
because, in order to account for it, they have sought a cause suited to its
magnitude, without knowing that the cause existed in the principles of the
country. Extract from "A short review of the present reign" in England.
Page 45 in the New Annual Register, for the year 1780. THE Commissioners, who
in consequence of Lord North's conciliatory bill, went over to America, to
prepose terms of peace to the colonies, were wholly unsuccessful. The
concessions which formerly would have been received with the utmost gratitude
were rejected with disdain. Now was the time of American pride and haughtiness.
It is probable, however that it was not pride and haughtiness alone that
dictated the Resolutions of Congress, but a distrust of the sincerity of the
offers of Britain, a determination not to give up their independence, and,
ABOVE ALL THE ENLARGEMENTS INTO WHICH THEY HAD ENTERED BY THEIR LATE TREATY
WITH FRANCE.




BUT this passionate encomium of the Abbe is deservedly subject to moral and
philosophical objections. It is the effusion of wild thinking, and has a
tendency to prevent that humanity of reflection which the criminal conduct of
Britain enjoins on her as a duty. -- It is a laudanum to courtly iniquity. --
It keeps in intoxicated sleep the conscience of a nation: and more mischief in
effected by wrapping up guilt in splendid excuse, than by directly patronizing
it.

BRITAIN is now the only country which holds the world in disturbance and war;
and instead of paying compliments to the excess of her crimes, the Abbe would
have appeared much more in character, had he put to her, or to her monarch,
this serious question --

ARE there not miseries enough in the world, too difficult to be encountered
and too pointed to be borne, without studying to enlarge the list and arming it
with new destruction? Is life so very long, that it is necessary, nay even a
duty to shake the sand and hasten out the period of duration? Is the path so
elegantly smooth, so decked on every side and carpeted with joys, that
wretchedness is wanted to enrich it as a foil? Go ask thine aching heart when
sorrow from a thousand causes wound it, go ask thy sickened self when every
medicine fails, whether this be the case or not?

QUITTING my remarks on this head, I proceed to another in which the Abbe has
let loose a vein of ill nature, and, what is still worse, of injustice.

AFTER cavilling at the treaty, he goes on to characterize the several parties
combined in the war -- "Is it possible," says the Abbe, that a strict union
should long subsist among confederates of characters so opposite as the hasty,
light, distainful Frenchman, the jealous, haughty sly, slow, circumspective
Spaniard, and the American, who is secretly snatching looks at the mother
country, and would rejoice, were they compatible with his independence, at the
disasters of his allies.

TO draw foolish portraits of each other, is a mode of attack and reprisal,
which the greater part of mankind are fond of indulging. The serious
philosopher should be above it, more especially in cases from which no possible
good can arise, and mischief may, and where no received provocation can
palliate the offense. -- The Abbe might have invented a difference of character
for every country in the world; and they in return might find others for him,
till in the war of wit all real character is lost. The pleasantry of one nation
or the gravity of another may, by a little penciling, be distorted into
whimsical features, and the painter become as much laughed at as the painting.

BUT why did not the Abbe look a little deeper and bring forth the excellencies
of the several parties. Why did he not dwell with pleasure on that greatness of
character, that superiority of heart, which has marked the conduct of France in
her conquests, and which has forced an acknowledgment even from Britain.

THERE is one line at least (and many others might be discovered) in which the
confederates unite, which is, that of a rival eminence in their treatment of
their enemies. Spain, in her conquest of Minorca and the Bahama islands
confirms this remark. America has been invariably in her lenity from the
beginning of the war, notwithstanding the high provocations she has
experienced. It is England only who has been insolent and cruel.

BUT why must America be charged with a crime undeserved by her conduct, more
so by her principles, and which, if a fact, would be fatal to her honor. I mean
that of want of attachment to her allies, or rejoicing in their disasters She,
it is true, has been assiduous in showing to the world that she was not the
aggressor toward England, that the quarrel was not of her seeking, or, at that
time, even of her wishing. But to draw inferences from her candor, and even
from her justification, to stab her character by, and I see nothing else from
which they can be supposed to be drawn, is unkind and unjust.

DOES her rejection of the British propositions in 1778, before she knew of any
alliance with France, correspond with the Abbe's description of her mind? Does
a single instance of her conduct since that time justify it? -- But there is a
still better evidence to apply to, which is, that of all the mails, which at
different times have been waylaid on the road, in diverse parts of America, and
taken and carried into New York, and from which the most secret and
confidential private letters, as well as those from authority, have been
published, not one of them, I repeat it, not a single one of them, gives
countenance to such a charge.

THIS is not a country where men are under government restraint in speaking;
and if there is any kind of restraint, it arises from a fear of popular
resentment. Now, if nothing in her private or public correspondence favors
such a suggestion, and if the general disposition of the country is such as to
make it unsafe for a man to show an appearance of joy at any disaster to her
ally, on what grounds, I ask, can the accusation stand. What company the Abbe
may have kept in France, we cannot know; but this we know, that the account he
gives does not apply to America.

HAD the Abbe been in America at the time the news arrived of the disaster of
the fleet under Count de Grass, in the West Indies, he would have seen his
vast mistake. Neither do I remember any instance, except the loss of
Charlestown, in which the public mind suffered more severe and pungent concern,
or underwent more agitations of hope and apprehension as to the truth or
falsehood of the report. Had the loss been all our own it could not have had a
deeper effect, yet it was not one of these cases which reached to the
independence of America.

IN the geographical account which the Abbe gives of the Thirteen States, he is
so exceedingly erroneous, that to attempt a particular refutation, would exceed
the limits I have prescribed to myself. And as it is a matter neither
political, historical, nor sentimental, and which can always be contradicted by
the extent and natural circumstances of the country, I shall pass it over; with
this additional remark, that I never yet saw an European description of America
that was true, neither can any person gain a just idea of it, but by coming to
it.

THOUGH I have already extended this letter beyond what I at first proposed, I
am, nevertheless, obliged to omit many observations I originally designed to
have made. I wish there had been no occasion for making any. But the wrong
ideas which the Abbe's work had a tendency to excite, and the prejudicial
impressions they might make, must be an apology for my remarks, and the freedom
with which they are done.

I OBSERVE the Abbe has made a sort of epitome of a considerable part of the
pamphlet Common Sense, and introduced it in that form into his publication. But
there are other places where the Abbe has borrowed freely from the same
pamphlet without acknowledging it. The difference between society and
government, with which the pamphlet opens, is taken from it, and in some
expressions almost literally, into the Abbe's work as if originally his own;
and through the whole of the Abbe's remarks on this head, the idea in Common
Sense is so closely copied and pursued, that the difference is only in words,
and in the arrangement of the thoughts, and not in the thoughts themselves.
COMMON SENSE. AERE RAYNAL. "Some writers have so confounded society with
government, as to leave little or no distinction between them; whereas, they
are not only different, but have different origins." "Care must be taken not to
confound together society with government. That they may be known distinctly,
their origin should be considered." "Society is produced by our wants and
governments by our wickedness; the former promotes our happiness positively, by
uniting our affections, the latter negatively, by restraining our vices."
"Society originates in the wants of men, government in their vices, Society
tends always to good; government ought always to tend to the repressing of
evil." In the following paragraphs there is no less likeness in the language,
but the ideas in the one are evidently copied from the other.

COMMON SENSE. ABBE RAYNAL. "In order to gain a clear and just idea of the
design and end of government, let us suppose a small number of persons, meeting
in some sequestered part of the earth unconnected with the rest; they will then
represent the peopling of any country, or of the world. In this state of
natural liberty, society will be our first thought A thousand motives will
excite them thereto. The strength of one man is so unequal to his wants, and
his mind so un^^^ted for perpetual solitude, that he is soon obliged to seek
asistance of another, who, in his turn, requires the same. Four or five united
would be able to raise a tolerable dwelling in the midst of a wilderness; but
one man might labor out the common period of life, without accomplishing any
thing; when he had felled his timber, he could not remove it, nor erect it
after it was removed, bunger, in the mean time would urge him from his work,
and every different want call him a different way. Disease, nay even
misfortune, would be death: for though neither might be immediately mortal, yet
either of them would disable him from living, and reduce him to a State in
which he might rather be said to perish than to die. -- Thus necessity, like a
gravitating power, would form our newly arrived emigrants into society, the
reciprocal blessings of which would supercede and render the obligations of law
and government unnecessary, while they remained perfectly just to each other.
But as nothing but heaven is impregnable to vice, it will unavoidably happen,
that in proportion as they surmount the first difficulties of emigration, which
bound them together in a common cause, they will begin to relax in their duty
and attachment to each other and this remissness will point out the necessity
of establishing some form of government to supply the defect of moral virtue."
"Man, thrown as it were, by chance upon the globe, surrounded by all the evils
of nature obliged continually to defend and protect his life against the storms
and tempests of the air, against the inundations of water, against the fire of
vulcances, against the intemperance of frigid and torrid zones, against the
sterrility of the earth which refuses him ailment, or its baneful fecundity,
which makes poison spring up beneath his feet; in short, against the claws and
teeth of savage beasts who dispute with him his habitation and his prey, and,
attacking his person, seem resolved to render themselves rulers of this globe,
of which he thinks himself to be the master: Man, in this state, alone and
abandoned to himself, could do nothing for his preservation. It was necessary,
therefore, that he should units himself, and associate with his like, in order
to bring together their strength and intelligence in common stock It is by this
union that he has triumph* ed over so many evils that he has fashioned this
globe to his use, restrained the rivers, subjugated the seas* insured his
subsistence, conquered a part of the animals in obliging them to serve him and
driven others far from his empire to the depth of deserts or of woods, where
their number diminishes from age to age. What a man alone would not have been
able to effect men have executed in concert; and altogether they preserve their
work. Such is the origin, such the advantages, and the end of society --
Government owes its birth to the necessity of preventing and repressing the
injuries which the associated individuals had to fear from one another. It is
the centinal who watches, in order that the common labors be not disturbed."


BUT as it is time I should come to a conclusion of my letter, I shall forbear
all further observation on the Abbe's work and take a concise view of the state
of public affair, since the time in which that performance was published.

A MIND habited to actions of meanness and injustice, commits them without
r^^l^ction, or with a very partial one; for on what other ground than this can
we account for the declaration of war against the Dutch. To gain an idea of the
politics which actuated the British Ministry to this measure, we must enter
into the opinion which they, and the English in general, had formed of the
temper of the Dutch nation; and from thence infer what their expection of the
consequences would be.

COULD they have imagined that Holland would have seriously made a common cause
with France, Spain, and America, the British Ministry would never have dared to
provoke them. It would have been a madness in polities to have done so; unless
their views were to hasten on a period of such emphatic distress as should
justify the concessions which they saw they must one day or other make to the
world, and for which they wanted an apology to themselves. -- There is a temper
in some men which seeks a pretense for submission. Like a ship disabled in
action* and unfited to continue it, it waits the approach of a still larger out
to strike to, and feels relief at the opportunity. Whether this is greatness or
littleness of mind, I am not enquiring into. I should suppose it to be the
latter, because it proceeds from the want of knowing how to bear misfortune in
its original state.

BUT the subsequent conduct of the British cabinet has shown that this was not
their plan of politics, and consequently their motives must be sought for in
another line.

THIS truth is, that the British had formed a very humble opinion of the Dutch
nation. They looked on them as a people who would submit to any thing; that
they might insult them as they liked, plunder them at they p^^as^d, and still
the Dutch dated not to be provoked.

IF this be taken as the opinion of the British cabinet, the measure it easily
accounted for; because it goes on the supposition that when, by a declaration
of hostilities, the had rubbed the Dutch of some millions sterling (and to rob
them was popular) they could make peace with them again whenever they pleased
and on almost any terms the British Ministry should propose. And no sooner was
the plundering committed, than the accommodation was set on foot, and failed.

WHEN once the mind loses the sense of its own dignity, it loses, likewise, the
ability of judging of it in another. And the American war has throw Britain
into such a variety of absurd situations that arguing from herself, she sees
not in what conduct national dignity consists in other countries. From Holland
she expected duplicity and submission, and this mistake arose from her having
acted, in a number of instances during the present war, the same character
herself.

To be allied to, or connected with Britain, seems to be an unsafe and
impolitic situation. Holland and America are instances of the reality of this
remark. Make those countries the allies of France or Spain, and Britain will
court them with civility, and treat them with respect; make them her own
allies, and she will insult and plunder them In the first case, she feels some
apprehensions at offending them, because they have support at hand; in the
latter, those apprehensions do not exist. Such, however, has hitherto been her
conduct.

ANOTHER measure which has taken place since the publication of the Abbe's
work, and likewise since the time of my beginning this letter, is the change in
the British ministry. What line the new cabinet will pursue respecting America,
is at this time unknown; neither is it very material, unless they are seriously
disposed to a general and honorable peace.

REPEATED experience has shown, not only the impracticability of conquering
America, but the still higher impossibility of conquering her mind, or
recalling her back to her former condition of thinking. Since the commencement
of the war, which is now approaching to eight years, thousands and tens of
thousands have advanced and are daily advancing into the first stage of
manhood, who know nothing of Britain but as a barbarous enemy, and to whom the
independence of America appears as much the natural and established government
of the country, as that of England does to an Englishman And on the other hand,
thousands of the aged, who had British ideas, have dropped, and are daily
dropping, from the stage of business and life. The natural progress of
generation and decay operates every hour to the disadvantage of Britain. Time
and death, hard enemies to contend with, fight constantly against her interest;
and the bills of mortality in every part of America, are the thermometers of
her decline. The children in the streets are from their cradle bred to consider
her as their only foe. They hear of her cruellies; of their fathers, uncles,
and kindred killed; they see the remains of burnt and destroyed houses, and the
common tradition of the school they go to, tells them, those things were done
by the British.

THESE are circumstances which the mere English state politician, who considers
man only in a state of manhood, does not attend to. He gets entangled with
parties coeval or equal with himself at home, and thinks not how (...) ^he
r^^ing generation in America is growing beyond his knowledge of them, or they
of him. In a few years all ^^rso^al remembrance will be lost, and who is King
or Minister in England, will be little known and scarcely enquired after.

THE new British administration is composed of persons who h^ve ever been
against the war, and who have constantly reprobated all the violent measures of
the former one. They considered the American war as destructive to themselves
and opposed it on that ground. But what are these things to America? She has
nothing to do with English parties. The ins and the outs are nothing to her It
is the whole country she is at war with, or must be at peace with.

WERE every Minister in England a Chatham it would now weigh little or nothing
in the scale of American politics. (...) has preserved to the memory of this
statesm^n (...) same which he, by ^iving would have lost. His plans (...)
opinions, toward the letter part of his (...) would have been attended with as
many evil consequences, and as much reprobated here, as those of Lord (...) and
considering him a w^^^ man, they abound (...) amounting to absurdities.

IT has apparently been the fault of many in the late minority, to suppose,
that America would agree to certain terms with them, were they in place, which
she would not ever listen to from the then Administration. This idea can answer
no other purpose than to prolong the war; and Britain may, at the expense of
many more millions, learn the fatality of such mistakes. If the new ministry
wisely avoid this hopeless policy, they will prove themselves better pilots,
and wiser men, than they are conceived to be; for it is every day expected to
see their bark strike upon some hidden rock and go to pieces.

BUT there is a line in which they may be great. A more brilliant opening needs
not to present itself; and it is such a one, as true magnanimity would improve,
and humanity rejoice in.

A TOTAL reformation is wanted in England. She wants an expanded mind. -- an
heart which embraces the universe. Instead of shutting herself up in an island,
and quarrelling with the world* she would derive more lasting happiness, and
acquire more real riches, by generously mixing with it, and bravely saying, I
am the enemy of none. It is not now a time for little contrivances or artful
politics. The European world is too experienced to be imposed upon, and America
too wise to be duped. It must be something new and masterly that must succeed.
The idea of seducing America from her independence, or corrupting her from her
alliance, is a thought too little for a great mind, and impossible for any
honest one, to attempt Whenever politics are applied to debauch mankind from
their integrity, and dissolve the virtues of human nature, they become
detestable; and to be a statesman upon this plan, is to be a commissioned
villain. He who aims at it leaves a vacancy in his character, which may be
filled up with the worst of epithets.

In the disposition of England should be such, as not to agree to a general and
honorable place, and that the war must, at all events, con^^^^^ longer, I
cannot help wishing, that the allia^c^^ which America has or may enter into,
may become ^h^ only o^j^cts of the war. She wants an opportunity of ^h^wing to
the world, that she holds her honor as dear and sacred as her independence, and
that she will in no situation forsake those, whom no negociations could induce
to forsake her. Peace to every reflective mind, is a desirable object; but that
peace which is accompanied with a ruined character, becomes a crime to the
seducer, and a curse upon the seduced.

BUT where is the impossibility or even the great difficulty of England forming
a friendship with France and Spain, and making it a national virtue to renounce
for ever those prejudiced inveteracies it has been her custom to cherish; and
which, while they serve to sink her with an increasing enormity of debt, by
involving her in fruitless wars, become likewise the bane of her repose, and
the destruction of her manners. We had once the fetters that she has now, but
experience has shown us the mistake, and thinking justly has set us right.

THE true idea of a great nation is that which extends and promotes the
principles of universal society. Whole mind rises above the atmospheres of
local thoughts, and considers mankind, of whatever nation or profession they
may be, as the work of one Creator. The rage for conquest has had its fashion,
and its day. Why may not the amiable virtues have the same? The Alexanders and
Caesar's of antiquity have left behind them their monuments of destruction, and
are remembered with hatred; while these more exalted characters, who first
taught society and science, are blessed with the gratitude of every age and
country. Of more use was one philosopher, though a heathen, to the world, than
all the heathen conquerors that ever existed.

SHOULD the present revolution be distinguished by opening a new system of
extended civilization, it will receive from heaven the highest evidence of
approbation; and as this is a subject to which the Abbe's powers are so
eminently suited, I recommend it to his attention, with the affection of a
friend, and the ardor of a universal citizen.

POSTSCRIPT
SINCE closing the foregoing letter, some intimations, respecting a general
peace, have made their way to America On what authority or foundation they
stand, or how near or remote such an event may be, are circumstances I am not
inquiring into But as the subject must sooner or later become a matter of
serious attention, it may not be improper, even at this early period, heartily
to investigate some points that are connected with it, or lead toward it.

THE independence of America is at this moment as firmly established as that of
any other country in a state of war. It is not length of time, but power that
gives stability. Nations at war know nothing of each other on the score of
antiquity. It is their present and immediate strength, together with their
connections, that must support them. To which we may add, that a right which
originated today* is as much a right, as if it had the sanction of a thousand
years; and therefore the independence and present governments of America are in
no more danger of being subverted, because they are modern, than that of
England is secure, because it is ancient.

THE polities of Britain, so far as they respected America, were originally
conceived in idiotism, and acted in madness. There is not a step which bears
the smallest trace of rationality. In her management of the war, she has
labored to be wretched, and studied to be hated; and in all her former
propositions for accommodation, she has discovered a total ignorance of
mankind, and of those natural and unalterable sensations by which they are so
generally governed. How she may conduct herself in the present or future
business of negociating a peace is yet to be proved.

HE is a weak politician who does not understand human nature, and penetrate
into the effect which measures of government will have upon the mind. All the
miscarriages of Britain have arisen from this defect. The former Ministry acted
as if they supposed mankind to be without a mind; and the present Ministry, as
if America was without a memory. The one must have supposed we were incapable
of feeling; and the other, that we could not remember injuries.

THERE is likewise another line in which politicians mistake, which is that of
not rightly calculating, or rather of misjudging* the consequence which any
given circumstance will produce. Nothing is more frequent as well in common as
in political life than to hear people complain, that such or such means
produced an event directly contrary to their intentions. But the fault lies in
their not judging rightly, what the event would be: for the means produced only
its proper and natural consequence.

IT is very probable, that in a treaty for peace, Britain will contend for some
post or other in North America; perhaps Canada or Halifax or both: And I infer
this from the known deficiency of her politics, which have ever yet made use of
means, whose natural event was against both her interest and her expectation.
But the question with her ought to be, whether it is worth her while to hold
them, and what will be the consequence.

RESPECTING Canada, one or other of the two following will take place, viz If
Canada should people, it will revolt; and if it do not people* it will not be
worth the expense of holding. And the same may be said of Halifax, and the
country round it. But Canada never will people; neither is there any occasion
for contrivances on one side or the other, for nature alone will do the whole,

BRITAIN may put herself to great expenses in sending settlers to Canada; but
the descendants of those settlers will be Americans, as other descendants have
been before them. They will look round and see the neighboring States
sovereign and free, respected abroad and trading at large with the world; and
the natural love of liberty, the advantages of commerce, the blessings of
independence and of a happier climate, and a richer soil, will draw them
southward, and the effect will be that Britain will sustain the expense, and
America reap the advantage.

ONE would think that the experience which Britain has had of America, would
entirely sicken her of all thoughts of continental colonization; and any part
which she might retain, will only become to her a field of jealousy and thorns,
of debate and contention, for ever struggling for privileges, and meditating
revolt. She may form new settlements, but they will be for us; they will become
part of the United States of America; and that against all her contrivances to
prevent it, or without any endeavors of ours to promote it. In the first place
she cannot draw from them a revenue, until they are able to pay one, and when
they are so, they will be above subjection. Men soon become attached to the
soil they live upon, and incorporated with the prosperity of the place; and it
signifies but little what opinions they come over with, for time, interest, and
new connections will render them obsolete, and the next generation know nothing
of them.

WERE Britain truly wise, she would lay hold of the present opportunity to
disentangle herself from all continental embarrassments in North America, and
that not only to avoid future broils and troubles, but to save expenses. For to
speak explicitly on the matter, I would not, were I an European power, have
Canada, under the conditions that Britain must retain it* could it be given to
me. It is one of those kind of dominions that is* and ever will be, a constant
charge upon any foreign holder.

AS to Halifax, it will become useless to England after the present war, and
the loss of the United States. A harbor, when the dominion is gone, for the
purpose of which only it was wanted, can be attended only with expense. There
are, I doubt not, thousands of people in England, who suppose, that those
places are a profit to the nation whereas they are directly the contrary and
instead of producing any revenue, a considerable part of the revenue of England
is annually drawn off, to support the expense of holding them.

GIBRALTAR is another instance of national ill policy. A post which in time of
peace is not wanted, and in time of war is of no use, must at all times be
useless. Instead of affording protection to a navy, it requires the aid of one
to maintain it. And to suppose that Gibraltar commands the Mediterranean, or
the pass into it, or the trade of it, is to suppose a detected falsehood;
because though Britain holds the post she has lost the other three, and every
benefit she expected from it. And to say that all this happens because it is
besieged by land and water, is to say nothing* for this will always be the case
in time of war, while France and Spain keep up superior fleets, and Britain
holds the place. -- So that, though as an impenetrable inaccessible rock it may
be held by the one, it is always in the power of the other to render it useless
and excessively chargeable.

I SHOULD suppose that on e of the principal objects of Spain in besieging it,
is to show to Britain, that though she may not take it, she can command it,
that is, she can shut it up, and prevent its being used as a harbor, though not
a garrison. -- But the short way to reduce Gibraltar, is, to attack the British
fleet; for Gibraltar is as dependent on a fleet for support, as a bird is on
its wing for food, and when wounded there it starves.

THERE is another circumstance which the people of England have not only not
attended to, but seem to be utterly ignorant of, and that is, the difference
between permanent power, and accidental power, considered in a national sense.

BY permanent power, I mean, a natural inherent and perpetual ability in a
nation, which though always in being, may not be always in action, or not
always advantageously directed; and by accidental power, I mean, a fortunate or
accidental disposition or exercise of national strength, in whole or in part.

THERE undoubtedly was a time when any one European nation, with only eight or
ten ships of war, equal to the present ships of the line, could have carried
terror to all others, who had not began to build a navy, however great their
natural ability might be for that purpose: But this can be considered only as
accidental, and not as a stand to compare permanent power by, and could last no
longer than until those powers built as many or more ships than the former.
After this a larger fleet was necessary in order to be superior; and a still
larger would again supersede it. And thus mankind have gone on building fleet
upon fleet, as occasion or situation dictated. And this reduces it to an
original question, which is: Which power can build and man the largest number
of ships? The natural answer to which is, That power which has the largest
revenue and the greatest number of inhabitants, provided its situation of coast
affords sufficient conveniences.

FRANCE being a nation on the continent of Europe, and Britain an island in its
neighborhood, each of them derived different ideas from their different
situations. The inhabitants of Britain could earry on no foreign trade, nor
stir from the spot they dwelt upon, without the assistance of shipping; but
this was not the case with France. The idea therefore of a navy did not arise
to France from the same original and immediate necessity which produced it to
England. But the question is, that when both of them turn their attention, and
employ their revenues the same way, which can be superior?

THE annual revenue of France is nearly double that of England, and her number
of inhabitants more than twice as many. Each of them has the same length of
coast on the channel, besides which. France has several hundred miles extent on
the bay of Biscay, and an opening on the Mediterranean: And every day proves
that practice and exercise make sailors as well as soldiers in one country as
well as another.

IT then Britain can maintain an hundred ships of the line, France can as well
support an hundred and fifty, because her revenues and her population are as
equal to the one, as those of England are to the other. And the only reason why
she has not done it, is because she has not till very lately attended to it.
But when she sees, as she now sees, that a navy is the first engine of power,
she can easily accomplish it.

ENGLAND very falsely, and ruinously for herself, infer, that because she had
the advantage of France, while France had the smaller navy, that for that
reason it is always to be so. Whereas it may be clearly seen, that the strength
of France has never yet been tried on a navy, and that she is able to be as
superior to England in the extent of navy, as she is in the extent of her
revenues and her population. And England may lament the day, when, by her
insolence and injustice, she provoked in France a maritime disposition.

IT is in the power of the combined fleets to conquer every island in the West
Indies, and reduce all the British navy in those places. For were France and
Spain to send their whole naval force in Europe to those islands, it would not
be in the power of Britain to follow them with an equal force. She would still
be twenty or thirty ships inferior, were she to send every vessel she had, and
in the mean time all the foreign trade of England would lay exposed to the
Dutch.

IT is a maxim, which, I am persuaded, will ever hold good, and more especially
in naval operations, that a great power ought never to move in detachments, if
it can possibly be avoided But to go with its whole force to some important
object, the reduction of which shall have a decisive effect upon the war. Had
the whole of the French and Spanish fleets in Europe come last spring to the
West Indies, every island had been their own, Rodney their prisoner, and his
fleet their prize. From the United States the combined fleets can be supplied
with provisions, without the necessity of drawing them from Europe, which is
not the case with England.

ACCIDENT has thrown some advantages in the way of England, which, from the
inferiority of her navy, she had not a right to expect For though she has been
obliged to fly before the combined fleets, yet Rodney has twice had the fortune
to fall in with detached squadrons, to which he was superior in numbers: The
first off Cape St Vincent, where he had nearly two to one, and the other in the
West Indies, where he had a majority of six ships. Victories of this kind
almost produce themselves. They are won without honor, and suffered without
disgrace: And are ascribable to the chance of meeting not to the superiority of
fighting. For the same Admiral, under whom they were obtained, was unable, in
three former engagements, to make the least impression on a fleet consisting of
an equal number of ships with his own, and compounded for the events by
declining the actions. See the accounte, either English or French of three
actions in the West Indies, between Count de Guichen and Admiral Rodney, in
1780.


To conclude, if it may be said that Britain has numerous enemies, it likewise
proves that she has given numerous offenses. Insolence is sure to provoke
hatred, whether in a nation or an individual. The want of manners in the
British Court may be seen even in its birth days and new years Odes, which are
calculated to infatuate the vulgar, and disgust the man of refinement: And her
former overbearing rudeness, and insufferable injustice on the seas, have made
every commercial nation her foe. Her fleets were employed as engines of prey;
and acted on the surface of the deep the character which the shark does beneath
it. -- On the other hand, the Combined Powers are taking a popular part, and
will render their reputation immortal, by establishing the perfect freedom of
the ocean, to which all countries have a right, and are interested in
accomplishing. The sea is the world's highway; and he who arrogates a
prerogative over it, transgresses the right, and justly brings on himself the
chastisement of nations.

PERHAPS it might be of some service to the future tranquillity of mankind, were
an article introduced into the next general peace, that no one nation should,
in time of peace, exceed a certain number of ships of war. something of this
kind seems necessary; for according to the prefent fashion, half the world will
get upon the water, and there appears no end to the extent to which navies may
be carried. Another reason is, that navies add nothing to the manners or morals
of a people. The sequestered life which attends the service, prevents the
opportunities of society, and is too apt to occasion a coarseness of ideas and
language, and that more in ships of war than in commercial employ; because in
the latter they mir more with the world, and are nearer related to it. I
mention this remark as a general one; and not applied to any one country more
than to another.

BRITAIN has now had the trial of above seven years, with an expense of nearly
an hundred million pounds sterling; and every month in which she delays to
conclude a peace, costs her another million sterling, over and above her
ordinary expenses of government, which are a million more; so that her total
monthly expense is two million pounds sterling, which is equal to the whole
yearly expense of America, all charges included. Judge then who is best able to
continue it.

SHE has likewise many atonements to make to an injured world as well in one
quarter as another. And instead of pursuing that temper of arrogance, which
serves only to sink her in the esteem, and entail on her the dislike, of all
nations, she would do well to reform her manners retrench her expenses, live
peaceably with her neighbors, and think of war no more.

Philadelphia, August 21, 1782.

