COMMON SENSE: ADDRESSED TO THE INHABITANTS OF AMERICA, On the following
interesting SUBJECTS.

I. Of the Origin and Design of Government in general, with concise Remarks on
the English Constitution. II. Of Monarchy and Hereditary Succession. III.
Thoughts on the present State of American Affairs. IV. Of the present Ability
of America, with some miscellaneous Reflections.
Written by an ENGLISHMAN.

Man knows no Master save creating HEAVEN,
Or those whom choice and common good ordain.
THOMSON. PHILADELPHIA, Printed. And Sold by R. BELL, in Third-Street, 1776.

INTRODUCTION.
PERHAPS the Sentiments contained in the following Pages, are not yet
sufficiently fashionable to procure them general favor; a long habit of not
thinking a Thing wrong, gives it a superficial appearance of being right, and
raises at first a formidable outcry in defense of Custom. But the tumult soon
subsides. Time makes more converts than Reason.

As a long and violent abuse of Power, is generally the means of calling the
right of it in question (and in matters too which might never have been thought
of, had not the Sufferers been aggravated into the enquiry) and as the King of
England has undertaken in his own right, to support the Parliament in what he
calls theirs, and as the good People of this Country are grievously oppressed
by the combination, they have an undoubted privilege to enquire into the
pretensions of both, and equally to reject the usurpation of either.

IN the following Sheets, the Author has studiously avoided every thing which
is personal among ourselves. Compliments as well as Censure to individuals make
no part thereof. The wise and the worthy, need not the triumph of a pamphlet;
and those whose sentiments are injudicious, or unfriendly, will cease of
themselves, unless too much pains are bestowed upon their conversion.

The cause of America is in a great measure the cause of all mankind. Many
circumstances have, and will arise, which are not local, but universal, and
through which the principles of all lovers of mankind are affected, and in the
event of which, their affections are interested. The laying a country desolate
with fire and sword, declaring war against the natural rights of all mankind,
and extirpating the defenders thereof from the face of the earth, is the
concern of every man to whom nature has given the power of feeling; of which
class, regardless of party censure, is the

AUTHOR.

COMMON SENSE.
Of the Origin and Design of Government in general, with concise Remarks on the
English Constitution.
SOME Writers have so confounded Society with government, as to leave little or
no distinction between them; whereas, they are not only different, but have
different origins. Society is produced by our wants, and government by our
wickedness; the former promotes our happiness possitively by uniting our
affections, the latter negatively by restraining our vices. The one encourages
intercourse, the other creates distinctions. The first is a patron, the last a
punisher.

Society in every state is a blessing, but Government even in its best state is
but a necessary evil; in its worst state an intolerable one: for when we
suffer, or are exposed to the same miseries by a Government, which we might
expect in a country without Government, our calamity is heightened by
reflecting that we furnish the means by which we suffer. Government like dress
is the badge of lost innocence; the palaces of kings are built on the ruins of
the bowers of paradise. For were the impulses of conscience clear, uniform, and
irresistibly obeyed, man would need no other lawgiver; but that not being the
case, he finds it necessary to surrender up a part of his property to furnish
means for the protection of the rest; and this he is induced to do by the same
prudence which in every other case advises him, out of two evils to choose the
least. Wherefore, security being the true design and end of government, it
unanswerably follows, that whatever form thereof appears most likely to ensure
it to us, with the least expense and greatest benefit, is preferable to all
others.

In order to gain a clear and just idea of the design and end of government,
let us suppose a small number of persons settled in some sequestered part of
the earth unconnected with the rest; they will then represent the first
peopling of any country, or of the world. In this state of natural liberty,
society will be their first thought. A thousand motives will excite them
thereto, the strength of one man is so unequal to his wants and his mind so
unfitted for perpetual solitude, that he is soon obliged to seek assistance and
relief of another, who in his turn requires the same. Four or five united would
be able to raise a tolerable dwelling in the midst of a wilderness, but one man
might labor out the common period of life without accomplishing any thing;
when he had felled his timber he could not remove it, nor erect it after it was
removed; hunger in the mean time would urge him from his work, and every
different want call him a different way. Disease, nay even misfortune would be
death; for though neither might be mortal, yet either would disable him from
living, and reduce him to a state in which he might rather be said to perish,
than to die.

Thus necessity like a gravitating power would soon form our newly arrived
emigrants into society, the reciprocal blessings of which would supersede, and
render the obligations of law and government unnecessary, while they remained
perfectly just to each other: but as nothing but Heaven is impregnable to vice
it will unavoidable happen that in proportion as they surmount the first
difficulties of emigration, which bound them together in a common cause, they
will begin to relax in their duty and attachment to each other: and this
remissness will point out the necessity of establishing some form of government
to supply the defect of moral virtue.

Some convenient Tree will afford them a State-House, under the branches of
which, the whole Colony may assemble to deliberate on public matters. It is
more than probable that their first laws will have the title only of
REGULATIONS, and to be enforced by no other penalty than public disesteem. In
this first parliament every man by natural right will have a seat.

But as the colony increases, the public concerns will increase likewise, and
the distance at which the members may be separated, will render it too
inconvenient for all of them to meet on every occasion as at first, when their
number was small, their habitations near, and the public concerns few and
trifling. This will point out the convenience of their consenting to leave the
legislative part to be managed by a select number chosen from the whole body,
who are supposed to have the same concerns at stake which those have who
appointed them, and will act in the same manner as the whole body would act
were they present. If the colony continues increasing, it will become necessary
to augment the number of the representatives, and that the interest of every
part of the colony may be attended to, it will be found best to divide the
whole into convenient parts, each part sending its proper number: and that the
elected might never form to themselves an interest separate from the electors,
prudence will point out the propriety of having elections often: because as the
elected might by that means return and mix again with the general body of the
electors in a few months, their fidelity to the public will be secured by the
prudent reflection of not making a rod for themselves. And as this frequent
interchange will establish a common interest with every part of the community,
they will mutually and naturally support each other, and on this (not on the
unmeaning name of king) depends the strength of Government; and the happiness
of the governed.

Here then is the origin and rise of government; namely, a mode rendered
necessary by the inability of moral virtue to govern the world; here too is the
design and end of government, viz. freedom and security. And however our eyes
may be dazzled with show, or our ears deceived by sound; however prejudice may
warp our wills, or interest darken our understanding, the simple voice of
nature and of reason will say, it is right.

I draw my idea of the form of government from a principle in nature which no
art can overturn, viz. that the more simple any thing is the less liable is it
to be disordered; and with this maxim in view I offer a few remarks on the so
much boasted constitution of England. That it was noble for the dark and
slavish times in which it was erected, is granted. When the world was overrun
with tyranny the least remove therefrom was a glorious rescue: But that it is
imperfect, subject to convulsions, and incapable of producing what it seemed to
promise is easily demonstrated.

Absolute governments, (though the disgrace of human natute) have this advantage
with them, that they are simple; if the people suffer, they know the head from
which their suffering springs; know likewise the remedy; and are not bewildered
by a variety of causes and cures. But the constitution of England is so
exceedingly complex, that the nation may suffer for years together without
being able to discover in which part the fault lies, some will say in one and
some in another, and every political physician will advise a different medicine.

I know it is difficult to get over local or long standing prejudices, yet if
we will suffer ourselves to examine the component parts of the English
constitution, we shall find them to be the base remains of two ancient
tyrannies, compounded with some new Republican materials.

First. -- The remains of Monarchical tyranny in the person of the King.

Secondly. -- The remains of Aristocratical tyranny in the persons of the Peers.

Thirdly. -- The new republican materials, in the persons of the Commons, on
whose virtue depends the freedom of England.

The two first by being hereditary are independent of the People; wherefore in
a constitutional sense they contribute nothing toward the freedom of the State.

To say that the constitution of England is an union of three powers
reciprocally checking each other, is farcical, either the words have no meaning
or they are flat contradictions.

To say that the Commons are a check upon the King, presupposes two things.

First. -- That the King is not to be trusted without being looked after; or in
other words, that a thirst for absolute power is the natural disease of
Monarchy. Secondly. -- That the Commons by being appointed for that purpose,
are either wiser or more worthy of confidence than the Crown.
But as the same constitution which gives the Commons a power to check the King
by withholding the supplies, gives afterward the King a power to check the
Commons by empowering him to reject their other bills; it again supposes that
the King is wiser than those, whom it has already supposed to be wiser than
him. A mere absurdity!

There is something exceedingly ridiculous in the composition of Monarchy, it
first excludes a man from the means of information yet empowers him to act in
cases where the highest judgment is required. -- The state of a King shuts him
from the World; yet the business of a King requires him to know it thoroughly:
wherefore, the different parts by unnaturally opposing and destroying each
other, prove the whole character to be absurd and useless.

Some writers have explained the English constitution thus; the King say they
is one, the People another; the Peers are an house in behalf of the King; the
Commons in behalf of the People; But this has all the distinctions of an house
divided against itself; and though the expressions be pleasantly arranged, yet
when examined they appear idle and ambiguous: and it will always happen, that
the nicest construction that words are capable of, when applied to the
description of some thing which either cannot exist, or is too incomprehensible
to be within the compass of description, will be words of sound only, and though
they may amuse the ear, they cannot inform the mind: for this explanation
includes a previous question, viz. how came the King by a power which the
People are afraid to trust and always obliged to check? Such a power could not
be the gift of a wise People, neither can any Power which needs checking be
from God: yet the provision which the constitution makes, supposes such a power
to exist.

But the provision is unequal to the task, the means either cannot, or will not
accomplish the end, and the whole affair is a Felo de se: for as the greater
weight will always carry up the less, and as all the wheels of a machine are
put in motion by one, it only remains to know which power in the constitution
has the most weight, for that will govern: and though the others, or a part of
them, may clog, or check the rapidity of its motion, yet so long as they cannot
stop it, their endeavors will be ineffectual: the first moving power will at
last have its way, and what it wants in speed will be supplied by time.

That the crown is this overbearing part in the English constitution needs not
be mentioned, and that it derives its whole consequence merely from being the
giver of places and pensions is self-evident, wherefore, though we have been wise
enough to lock the door against absolute Monarchy, we at the same time have
been foolish enough to put the Crown in possession of the key.

The prejudice of Englishmen in favor of their own government by King, Lords
and Commons, arises as much or more from national pride than reason.
Individuals are undoubtedly safer in England than in some other Countries: but
the will of the King is as much the law of the land in Britain as in France,
with this difference, that instead of proceeding directly from his mouth, it is
handed to the People under the more formidable shape of an act of Parliament.
For the fare of Charles the first has only made Kings more subtle -- not more
just.

Wherefore laying aside all national pride and prejudice in favor of modes and
forms, the plain truth is, that it is wholly owing to the constitution of the
People, and not to the constitution of the Government that the Crown is not as
oppressive in England as in Turkey.

An enquiry into the constitutional errors in the English form of government,
is at this time highly necessary; for as we are never in a proper condition of
doing justice to others, while we continue under the influence of some leading
partiality, so neither are we capable of doing it to ourselves while we remain
fettered by any obstinate prejudice. And as a man who is attached to a
prostitute is unfitted to choose or judge of a wife, so any prepossession in
favor of a rotten constitution of government will disable us from discerning a
good one.

Of MONARCHY and hereditary succession.
MANKIND being originally equals in the order of creation, the equality could
only be destroyed by some subsequent circumstance: the distinctions of rich and
poor may in a great measure be accounted for, and that without having recourse
to the harsh ill-sounding names of oppression and avarice. Oppression is often
the consequence, but seldom or never the means of riches: and though avarice will
preserve a man from being necessitously poor, it generally makes him too
timorous to be wealthy.

But there is another and greater distinction for which no truly natural or
religious reason can be assigned, and that is, the distinction of Men into
KINGS and SUBJECTS. Male and female are the distinctions of nature, good and
bad the distinctions of Heaven; but how a race of Men came into the World so
exalted above the rest, and distinguished like some new species, is worth
enquiring into, and whether they are the means of happiness or of misery to
mankind.

In the early ages of the World according to the Scripture chronology there
were no Kings; the consequence of which was there were no wars; it is the pride
of Kings which throws mankind into confusion. Holland without a King has
enjoyed more peace for this last century, than any of the Monarchical
governments in Europe. Antiquity favors the remark; for the quiet and rural
lives of the first Patriarchs has a happy something in them, which vanishes
away when we come to the history of Jewish royalty.

Government by Kings was first introduced into the World by the Heathens, from
whom the children of Israel copied the custom. It was the most prosperous
invention the Devil ever set on foot for the promotion of idolatry. The
Heathens paid divine honors to their deceased Kings, and the Christian World
has improved on the plan by doing the same to their living ones. How impious
is the title of sacred Majesty applied to a worm, who in the midst of his
splendour is crumbling into dust!

As the exalting one man so greatly above the rest cannot be justified on the
equal right of nature, so neither can it be defended on the authority of
scripture; for the will of the Almighty, as declared by Gideon and the prophet
Samuel, expressly disapproves of Government by Kings. All anti-monarchical
parts of scripture have been very smoothly glossed over in monarchical
governments, but they undoubtedly merit the attention of Countries which have
their governments yet to form. "Render unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's," is the scripture doctrine of Courts, yet it is no support of
monarchical government, for the Jews at that time were without a King and in a
state of vassalage to the Romans.

Near three thousand years passed away from the Mosaic account of the creation,
till the Jews under a national delusion requested a king. Till then, their form
of government (except in extraordinary cases where the Almighty interposed) was
a kind of republic administered by a judge and the elders of the tribes. Kings
they had none, and it was held sinful to acknowledge any Being under that title
but the Lord of Hosts. And when a man seriously reflects on the idolatrous
homage which is paid to the persons of kings, he need not wonder that the
Almighty, ever jealous of his honor, should disapprove of a form of government
which so impiously invades the prerogative of Heaven.

Monarchy is ranked in scripture as one of the sins of the Jews, for which a
curse in reserve is denounced against them. The history of that transaction is
worth attending to.

The children of Israel being oppressed by the Midianites, Gideon marched
against them with a small army, and victory through the Divine interposition
decided in his favor. The Jews elate with success, and attributing it to the
generalship of Gideon, proposed making him a king; saying, Rule thou over us,
thou and thy son and thy son's son. Here was temptation in its fullest extent;
not a kingdom only, but an hereditary one, but Gideon in the piety of his soul
replied, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you. The LORD
SHALL RULE OVER YOU. Words need not be more explicit; Gideon does not decline
the honor, but denies their right to give it; neither does he compliment them
with invented declarations of his thanks, but in the positive style of a
prophet charges them with disaffection to their proper Sovereign, the King of
Heaven.

About one hundred and thirty years after this, they fell again into the same
error. The hankering which the Jews had for the idolatrous customs of the
Heathens, is something exceedingly unaccountable; but so it was, that laying
hold of the misconduct of Samuel's two sons, who were entrusted with some
secular concerns, they came in an abrupt and clamorous manner to Samuel,
saying, behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways, now make us a
king to judge us like all the other nations. And here we cannot but observe
that their motives were bad, viz. that they might be like unto other nations,
i. e. the Heathens, whereas their their true glory lay in being as much unlike
them as possible. But the thing displeased Samuel when they said, give us a
King to judge us: and Samuel prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord said unto
Samuel, hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee,
for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, THAT I SHOULD NOT
REIGN OVER THEM. According to all the works which they have done since the day
that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me and served other Gods: so do they also unto thee. Now therefore
hearken unto their voice, howbeit, protest solemnly unto them and show them the
manner of the King that shall reign over them, i. e. not of any particular
King, but of the general manner of the Kings of the Earth whom Israel was so
eargerly copying after. And notwithstanding the great distance of time and
difference of manners, the character is still in fashion. And Samuel told all
the words of the Lord unto the People, that asked of him a King. And he said
this shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you. He will take
your sons and appoint them for himself, for his chariots and to be his
horsemen, and some shall run before his chariots. (This description agrees
with the present mode of impressing men) And he will appoint him captains over
thousands and captains over fisties, will set them to ear his ground and to
reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his
chariots. And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries and to be
cooks, and to be bakers. (This describes the expense and luxury as well as the
oppression of Kings) And he will take your fields and your vineyards, and your
olive-yards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants. And he will
take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give them to his
officers and to his servants. (By which we see that bribery, corruption, and
favouritism, are the standing vices of Kings) And he will take the tenth of
your men servants, and your maid servants, and your goodliest young men and
your asses, and put them to his work; and he will take the tenth of your sheep,
and ye shall be his servants, and ye shall cry out in that day because of your
King which ye shall have chosen, AND THE LORD WILL NOT HEAR YOU IN THAT DAY.
This accounts for the continuation of Monarchy; neither do the characters of
the few good Kings which have lived since, either sanctify the title, or blot
out the sinfulness of the origin; the high encomium given of David takes no
notice of him officially as a King, but only as a Man after God's own heart.
Nevertheless the People refused to obey the voice of Samuel, and they said nay
but we will have a King over us, that we may be like all the nations, and that
our King may judge us, and go out before us and fight our battles. Samuel
continued to reason with them but to no purpose, he set before them their
ingratitude, but all would not avail, and seeing them fully bent on their
folly, he cried out, I will call unto the Lord and he shall send thunder and
rain (which then was a punishment, being in the time of wheat harvest) that ye
may perceive and see that your wickedness is great which ye have done in the
sight of the Lord, IN ASKING YOU A KING. So Samuel called unto the Lord, and
the Lord sent thunder and rain that day, and all the prople greatly feared the
Lord and Samuel. And all the people said unto Samuel, pray for thy servants
unto the Lord thy God, that we die not, for WE HAVE ADDED UNTO OUR SINS THIS
EVIL, TO ASK A KING. These portions of scripture are direct and positive. They
admit of no equivocal construction. That the Almighty has here entered his
protest against monarchical government is true, or the scripture is false. And
a man has good reason to believe that there is as much of king-craft as
priestcraft, in withholding the scripture from the public in popish
countries. For monarchy in every instance is the popery of government.

To the evil of monarchy we have added that of hereditary succession; and as
the first is a degradation and lessening of ourselves, so the second, claimed
as a matter of right, is an insult and an imposition on posterity. For all men
being originally equals, no one by birth could have a right to set up his own
family in preference to all others for ever, and though himself might deserve
some decent degree of honors of his cotemporaries, yet his descendants might
be far too unworthy to inherit them. One of the strongest natural proofs of the
folly of hereditary right in kings, is, that nature disapproves it, otherwise
she would not so frequently turn it into ridicule by giving mankind an ass for
a lion.

Secondly, as no man at first could possess any other public honors than were
bestowed upon him, so the givers of those honors could have no power to give
away the right of posterity, and though they might say, "we choose you for our
head," they could not without manifest injustice to their children say "that
your children and your children's children shall reign over our's forever."
Because such an unwise, unjust, unnatural compact might (perhaps) in the next
succession put them under the government of a rogue or a fool. Most wise men in
their private sentiments have ever treated hereditary right with contempt; yet
it is one of those evils, which when once established is not easily removed:
many submit from fear, others from superstition, and the more powerful part
shares with the king the plunder of the rest.

This is supposing the present race of kings in the world to have had an
honorable origin: whereas it is more than probable, that could we take off the
dark covering of antiquity and trace them to their first rise, that we should
find the first, of them nothing better than the principal ruffian of some
restless gang, whose savage manners or pre-eminence in subtilty obtained him
the title of chief among plunderers; and who by increasing in power and
extending his depredations, overawed the quiet and defenseless to purchase
their safety by frequent contributions. Yet his electors could have no idea of
giving hereditary right to his descendants, because such a perpetual exclusion
of themselves was incompatible with the free and unrestrained principles they
professed to live by. Wherefore hereditary succession in the early ages of
monarchy could not take place as a matter of claim, but as something casual or
complimental; but as few or no records were extant in those days, and
traditionary history stuffed with fables, it was very easy after the lapse of a
few generations, to trump up some superstitious tale conveniently timed,
Mahomet like, to cram hereditary right down the throats of the vulgar. Perhaps
the disorders which threatened, or seemed to threaten, on the decease of a
leader and the choice of a new one (for elections among ruffians could not be
very orderly) induced many at first to favor hereditary pretensions; by which
means it happened, as it has happened since, that what at first was submitted
to as a convenience was afterward claimed as a right.

England since the conquest has known some few good monarchs, but groaned
beneath a much larger number of bad ones: yet no man in his senses can say that
their claim under William the Conqueror is a very honorable one. A French
Bastard landing with an armed Banditti and establishing himself king of England
against the consent of the natives, is in plain terms a very paltry, rascally
original. -- It certainly has no divinity in it. However it is needless to
expend much time in exposing the folly of hereditary right, if there are any so
weak as to believe it, let them promiscuously worship the Ass and Lion and
welcome. I shall neither copy their humility nor disturb their devotion.

Yet I should be glad to ask how they suppose Kings came at first? the question
admits but of three answers, viz. either by lot, by election, or by usurpation.
If the first king was taken by lot, it establishes a precedent for the next,
which excludes hereditary succession. Saul was by lot, yet the succession was
not hereditary, neither does it appear from that transaction there was any
intention it ever should. If the first king of any country was by election that
likewise establishes a precedent for the next; for to say that the right of all
future generations is taken away by the act of the first electors in their
choice not only of a king, but of a family of kings for ever, has no parallel
in or out of scripture but the doctrine of original sin, which supposes the
free will of all men lost in Adam: and from such comparison, and it will admit
of no other, hereditary right can derive no glory. For as in Adam all sinned,
and as in the first electors all men obeyed; as in the one all mankind were
subjected to Satan, and in the other to sovereignty; as our innocence was lost
in the first, and our authority in the last; and as both disable us from
reassuming some former state and privilege, it unanswerably follows that
original sin and hereditary succession are parallels. Dishonorable rank!
inglorious connection! yet the most subtle sophist cannot produce a juster
simile.

As to usurpation no man will be so hardy as to defend it; and that William the
conqueror was an usurper is a fact not to be contradicted. The plain truth is,
that the antiquity of English monarchy will not bear looking into.

But it is not so much the absurdity as the evil of hereditary succession which
concerns mankind. Did it ensure a race of good and wise men it would have the
seal of divine authority, but as it opens a door to the foolish, the wicked and
the improper, it has in it the nature of oppression. Men who look upon
themselves born to reign, and others to obey, soon grow insolent -- selected
from the rest of mankind their minds are easily poisoned by importance; and the
world they act in differs so very materially from the world at large, that they
have but little opportunity of knowing its true interests, and when they
succeed to the government are frequently the most ignorant and unfit of any
throughout the dominions.

Another evil which attends hereditary succession, is, that the throne is
subject to be possessed by a minor at any age; all which time the regency
acting under the cover of a king have every opportunity and inducement to
betray their trust. The same national misfortune happens when a king worn out
with age and infirmity enters the last stage of human weakness. In both these
cases the public becomes a prey to every miscreant who can tamper successfully
with the follies either of age or infancy.

The most plausible plea which has ever been offered in favor of hereditary
succession, is, that it preserves a Nation from civil wars; and were this true
it would be weighty; whereas it is the most barefaced falsity ever imposed upon
mankind. The whole history of England disowns the fact. Thirty kings and two
minors have reigned in that distracted kingdom since the conquest, in which
time there has been (including the Revolution) no less than eight civil wars
and nineteen Rebellions. Wherefore instead of making for peace, it makes
against it, and destroys the very foundation it seems to stand on.

The contest for monarchy and succession between the houses of York and
Lancaster laid England in a scene of blood for many years. Twelve pitched
battles besides skirmishes and sieges were fought between Henry and Edward.
Twice was Henry prisoner to Edward, who in his turn was prisoner to Henry. And
so uncertain is the fate of war and the temper of a Nation, when nothing but
personal matters are the ground of a quarrel, that Henry was taken in triumph
from a prison to a palace, and Edward obliged to fly from a palace to a foreign
land. Yet as sudden transitions of temper are seldom lasting, Henry in his turn
was driven from the throne and Edward recalled to succeed him. The parliament
always following the strongest side.

This contest began in the reign of Henry the 6th, and was not entirely
extinguished till Henry the 7th, in whom the families were united. Including a
period of 67 years, viz. from 1422 to 1489.

In short, monarchy and succession have laid (not this or that kingdom only)
but the world in blood and ashes. It Is a form of government which the word of
God bears testimony against, and blood will attend it.

If we enquire into the business of a King we shall find that in some countries
they have none; and after sauntering away their lives without pleasure to
themselves or advantage to the nation, withdraw from the scene and leave their
successors to tread the same idle round. In absolute monarchies the whole
weight of business civil and military lies on the King; the children of Israel
in their request for a King urged this plea "that he may judge us, and go out
before us and fight our battles." But in countries where he is neither a judge
nor a general, as in England, a man would be puzzled to know what is his
business.

The nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is
for a King. It is somewhat difficult to find a proper name for the government
of England. Sir William Meredith calls it a Republic; but in its present state
it is unworthy of the name, because the corrupt influence of the Crown by
having all the places in its disposal, has so effectually swallowed up the
power and eaten out the virtue of the House of Commons (the Republican part of
the constitution) that the government of England is nearly as monarchical as
that of France or Spain. Men fall out with names without understanding them.
For it is the republican and not the monarchical part of the constitution of
England which Englishmen glory in, viz. the liberty of choosing an house of
commons from out of their own body -- and it is easy to see that when
republican virtue fails, slavery ensues. Why is the constitution of England
sickly? but because monarchy has poisoned the republic; the crown has
engrossed the commons.

In England a King has little more to do than to make war and have away
places; which in plain terms, is to impoverish the nation and set it together
by the ears. A pretty business indeed for a man to be allowed eight hundred
thousand sterling a year for, and worshipped into the bargain! Of more worth is
one honest man to society and in the sight of God, than all the crowned
ruffians that ever lived.

THOUGHTS on the present STATE of AMERICAN AFFAIRS.
IN the following pages I offer nothing more than simple facts, plain
arguments, and common sense: and have no other preliminaries to settle with the
reader, than that he will divest himself of prejudice and prepossession, and
suffer his reason and his feelings to determine for themselves: that he will
put on, or rather that he will not put off, the true character of a man, and
generously enlarge his views beyond the present day.

Volumes have been written on the subject of the struggle between England and
America. Men of all ranks have embarked in the controversy, from different
motives and with various designs; but all have been ineffectual and the period
of debate is closed. Arms as the last resource decide the contest; the appeal
was the choice of the King, and the continent has accepted the challenge.

It has been reported of the late Mr. Pelham (who though an able minister was
not without his faults) that on his being attacked in the House of Commons on
the score that his measures were only of a temporary kind, replied, "they will
last my time." Should a thought so fatal and unmanly possess the Colonies in
the present contest, the name of Ancestors will be remembered by future
generations with detestation.

The Sun never shined on a cause of greater worth. It Is not the affair of a
City, a County, a Province or a Kingdom; but of a Continent -- of at least one
eighth part of the habitable globe. It Is not the concern of a day, a year, or
an age; posterity are virtually involved in the contest, and will be more or
less affected even to the end of time by the proceedings now. Now is the seed
time of continental union, faith and honor. The least fracture now, will be
like a name engraved with the point of a pin on the tender find of a young oak;
the wound will enlarge with the tree, and prosterity read it in full grown
characters.

By referring the matter from argument to arms, a new era for politics is
struck -- a new method of thinking has arisen. All plans, proposals, etc.
prior to the 19th of April, i. e. to the commencement of hostilities, are like
the almanacks of the last year; which though proper then, are superceded and
useless now. Whatever was advanced by the advocates on either side of the
question then, terminated in one and the same point, viz. a union with Great
Britain; the only difference between the parties, was the method of effecting
it; the one proposing force, the other friendship; but it has so far happened
that the first has failed, and the second has withdrawn her influence.

As much has been said of the advantages of reconciliation, which, like an
agreeable dream, has passed away and left us as we were, it is but right, that
we should examine the contrary side of the argument, and enquire into some of
the many material injuries which these Colonies sustain, and always will
sustain, by being connected with and dependant on Great Britain. To examine
that connection and dependence on the principles of nature and common sense, to
see what we have to trust to if separated, and what we are to expect if
dependant.

I have heard it asserted by some, that as America has flourished under her
former connection with Great Britain, that the same connection it necessary
toward her future happiness and will always have the same effect -- Nothing
can be more fallacious than this kind of argument: -- we may as well assert
that because a child has thrived upon milk, that it is never to have meat, or
that the first twenty years of our lives is to become a precedent for the next
twenty. But even this is admitting more than is true, for I answer, roundly,
that America would have flourished as much, and probably much more, had no
European power taken any notice of her. The commerce by which she has enriched
herself are the necessaries of life, and will always have a market while eating
is the custom of Europe.

But she has protected us, say some. That she has engrossed us is true, and
defended the Continent at our expense as well as her own is admitted; and she
would have defended Turkey from the same motive, viz. the sake of trade and
dominion.

Alas! we have been long led away by ancient prejudices and made large
sacrifices to superstition. We have boasted the protection of Great Britain,
without considering, that her motive was interest not attachment; that she did
not protect us from our enemies on our account, but from her enemies on her own
account, from those who had no quarrel with us on any other account, and who
will always be our enemies on the same account. Let Britain wave her
pretensions to the continent, or the continent throw off the dependence, and we
should be at peace with France and Spain were they at war with Britain. The
miseries of Hanover last war ought to warn us against connections.

It has lately been asserted in Parliament, that the colonies have no relation
to each other but through the parent country, i. e. that Pennsylvania and the
Jerseys and so on for the rest, are sister colonies by the way of England; this
is certainly a very round about way of proving relationship, but it is the
nearest and only true way of proving enemyship, if I may so call it. France and
Spain never were, nor perhaps ever will be our enemies as Americans, but as our
being the subjects of Great Britain.

But Britain is the parent country say some. Then the more the shame upon her
conduct. Even brutes do not devour their young, nor savages make war upon their
families; wherefore the assertion, if true, turns to her reproach; but it
happens not to be true, or only partly so, and the phrase, parent or
mother country, has been jesuitically adopted by the King and his parasites,
with a low papistical design of gaining an unfair bias on the credulous
weakness of our minds. Europe and not England is the parent country of America.
This new world has been the asylum for the persecuted lovers of civil and
religious liberty from every part of Europe. Hither have they fled, not from
the tender embraces of the mother, but from the cruelty of the monster; and it
is so far true of England, that the same tyranny which drove the first
emigrants from home, pursues their descendants still.

In this extensive quarter of the globe, we forget the narrow limits of three
hundred and sixty miles (the extent of England) and carry our friendship on a
larger scale; we claim brotherhood with every European Christian, and triumph
in the generosity of the sentiment.

It is pleasant to observe by what regular gradations we surmount the force of
local prejudice as we enlarge our acquaintance with the world. A man born in
any town in England divided into parishes, will naturally associate most with
his fellow parishioners (because their interests in many cases will be common)
and distinguish him by the name of neighbor: if he meet him but a few miles
from home, he drops the narrow idea of a street, and salutes him by the name of
townsman: if he travel out of the county and meet him in any other, he forgets
the minor divisions of street and town, and calls him countryman. i. e.
county-man: but if in their foreign excursions they should associate in France,
or any other part of Europe, their local remembrance would be enlarged into
that of Englishmen. And by a just parity of reasoning, all Europeans meeting in
America, or any other quarter of the Globe, are countrymen; for England,
Holland, Germany, or Sweden, when compared with the whole, stand in the same
places on the larger scale, which the divisions of street, town, and county do
on the smaller one; Distinctions too limited for Continental minds. Not one
third of the inhabitants, even of this province, are of English descent.
Wherefore, I reprobate the phrase of parent or mother country applied to
England only, as being false, selfish, narrow and ungenerous.

But admitting that we were all of English descent, what does it amount to?
Nothing. Britain being now an open enemy, extinguishes every other name and
title: and to say that reconciliation is our duty, is truly farcical. The first
king of England, of the present line (William the Conqueror) was a Frenchman,
and half the Peers of England are descendants from the same country; wherefore,
by the same method of reasoning, England ought to be governed by France.

Much has been said of the united strength of Britain and the Colonies, that
in conjunction, they might bid defiance to the world: But this is mere
presumption, the fate of war is uncertain, neither do the expressions mean any
thing, for this Continent would never suffer itself to be drained of
inhabitants, to support the British Arms in either Asia, Africa, or Europe.

Besides, what have we to do with setting the world at defiance. Our plan is
commerce, and that well attended to, will secure us the peace and friendship of
Europe, because it is the interest of all Europe to have America a free port.
Her trade will always be a protection, and her barrenness of gold and silver
will secure her from invaders.

I challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation, to show a single
advantage that this Continent can reap, by being connected with Great Britain.
I repeat the challenge, not a single advantage is derived. Our corn will fetch
its price in any market in Europe, and our imported goods must be paid for, buy
them where we will.

But the injuries and disadvantages we sustain by that connection, are without
number, and our duty to mankind at large, as well as to ourselves, instruct us
to renounce the alliance: Because any submission to, or dependence on Great
Britain, tends directly to involve this Continent in European wars and
quarrels. As Europe is our market for trade, we ought to form no political
connections with any part of it. It Is the true interest of America, to steer
clear of European contentions, which she never can do, while by her dependence
on Britain, she is made the make-weight in the scale of British politics.

Europe is too thickly planted with Kingdoms to be long at peace, and whenever
a war breaks out between England and any foreign power, the trade of America
goes to ruin, because of her connection with Britain. The next war may not turn
out like the last, and should it not, the advocates for reconciliation now,
will be wishing for separation then, because neutrality in that case, would be
a safer convoy than a man of war. Every thing that is right or reasonable
pleads for separation. The blood of the slain, the weeping voice of nature
cries, IT IS TIME TO PART. Even the distance at which the Almighty has placed
England and America, is a strong and natural proof, that the authority of the
one over the other, was never the design of Heaven. The time likewise at which
the Continent was discovered, adds weight to the argument, and the manner in
which it was peopled increases the force of it. -- The Reformation was preceded
by the discovery of America; as if the Almighty graciously meant to open a
sanctuary to the persecuted in future years, when home should afford neither
friendship nor safety.

The authority of Great Britain over this Continent is a form of government
which sooner or later must have an end. And a serious mind can draw no true
pleasure by looking forward, under the painful and positive conviction, that
what he calls "the present constitution," is merely temporary. As parents, we
can have no joy, knowing that this government is not sufficiently lasting to
ensure any thing which we may bequeath to posterity: And by a plain method of
argument, as we are running the next generation into debt, we ought to do the
work of it, otherwise we use them meanly and pitifully. In order to discover
the line of our duty rightly, we should take our children in our hand, and fix
our station a few years farther into life; that eminence will present a
prospect, which a few present fears and prejudices conceal from our sight.

Though I would carefully avoid giving unnecessary offense, yet I am inclined
to believe, that all those who espouse the doctrine of reconciliation, may be
included within the following descriptions. Interested men who are not to be
trusted, weak men who cannot see, prejudiced men who will not see, and a
certain set of moderate men who think better of the European world than it
deserves; and this last class, by an ill-judged deliberation, will be the cause
of more calamities to this continent, than all the other three.

It is the good fortune of many to live distant from the scene of present
sorrow; the evil is not sufficiently brought to their doors to make them feel
the precariousness with which all American property is possessed. But let our
imaginations transport us for a few moments to Boston; that seat of
wretchedness will teach us wisdom, and instruct us for ever to renounce a power
in whom we can have no trust. The inhabitants of that unfortunate city who but
a few months ago were in ease and affluence, have now no other alternative than
to stay and starve, or turn out to beg. Endangered by the fire of their friends
if they continue within the city, and plundered by government if they leave it.
In their present condition they are prisoners without the hope of redemption,
and in a general attack for their relief, they would be exposed to the fury of
both armies.

Men of passive tempers look somewhat lightly over the offenses of Britain, and
still hoping for the best, are apt to call out. Come, come, we shall be friends
again for all this. But examine the passions and feelings of mankind; Bring the
doctrine of reconciliation to the touchstone of nature, and then tell me
whether you can hereafter love, honor, and faithfully serve the power that
has carried fire and sword into your land? If you cannot do all these, then
are you only deceiving yourselves, and by your delay bringing ruin upon
posterity. Your future connection with Britain whom you can neither love nor
honor, will be forced and unnatural, and being formed only on the plan of
present convenience, will in a little time, fall into a relapse more wretched
than the first. But if you say, you can still pass the violations over, then I
ask, Has your house been burnt? Has your property been destroyed before your
face? Are your wife and children destitute of a bed to lie on, or bread to live
on? Have you lost a parent or a child by their hands and yourself the ruined
and wretched survivor? If you have not, then are you not a judge of those who
have. But if you have, and still can shake hands with the murderers, then are
you unworthy the name of husband, father, friend, or lover, and whatever may be
your rank or title in life, you have the heart of a coward, and the spirit of a
sycophant.

This is not inflaming or exaggerating matters, but trying them by those
feelings and affections which nature justifies, and without which, we should be
incapable of discharging the social duties of life, or enjoying the felicities
of it. I mean not to exhibit horror for the purpose of provoking revenge, but
to awaken us from fatal and unmanly slumbers, that we may pursue determinately
some fixed object. It Is not in the power of England or of Europe to conquer
America, if she does not conquer herself by delay and timidity. The present
winter is worth an age if rightly employed, but if lost or neglected, the whole
continent will partake of the misfortune; and there is no punishment which that
man does not deserve, be he who, or what or where he will, that may be the
means of sacrificing a season so precious and useful.

It Is repugnant to reason, to the universal order of things; to all examples
from former ages, to suppose, that this continent can long remain subject to
any external power. The most sanguine in Britain does not think so. The utmost
stretch of human wisdom cannot, at this time, compass a plan, short of
separation, which can promise the continent even a year's security.
Reconciliation is now a fallacious dream. Nature has deserted the connection,
and art cannot supply her place. For as Milton wisely expresses "never can true
reconcilement grow where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep."

Every quiet method for peace has been ineffectual. Our prayers have been
rejected with disdain; and has tended to convince us that nothing flatters
vanity or confirms obstinacy in Kings more than repeated petitioning -- and
nothing has contributed more, than that very measure, to make the Kings of
Europe absolute. Witness Denmark and Sweden. Wherefore, since nothing but blows
will do, for God's sake let us come to a final separation, and not leave the
next generation to be cutting throats, under the violated unmeaning names of
parent and child.

To say they will never attempt it again, is idle and visionary, we thought so
at the repeal of the stamp act, yet a year or two undeceived us; as well may we
suppose that nations which have been once defeated will never renew the quarrel.

As to government matters, it is not in the power of Britain to do the Continent
justice: The business of it will soon be too weighty and intricate to be
managed with any tolerable degree of convenience, by a power so distant from
us, and so very ignorant of us; for if they cannot conquer us they cannot
govern us. To be always running three or four thousand miles with a tale or a
petition, waiting four or five months for an answer, which when obtained
requires five or six more to explain it in, will in a few years be looked upon
as folly and childishness -- There was a time when it was proper, and there is
a proper time for it to cease.

Small islands not capable of protecting themselves, are the proper objects for
government to take under their care: but there is something very absurd in
supposing a Continent to be perpetually governed by an island. In no instance
has nature made the satellite larger than its primary planet, and as England
and America, with respect to each other, reverse the common order of nature, it
is evident they belong to different systems. England to Europe: America to
itself.

I am not induced by motives of pride, party or resentment to espouse the
doctrine of separation and independance; I am clearly, positively, and
conscientiously persuaded that it is the true interest of this continent to be
so; that every thing short of that is mere patchwork, that it can afford no
lasting felicity -- that it is leaving the sword to our children, and shrinking
back at a time, when a little more, a little farther, would have rendered this
continent the glory of the earth.

As Britain has not manifested the least inclination toward a compromise, we
may be assured that no terms can be obtained worthy the acceptance of the
continent, or any ways equal to the expense of blood and treasure we have been
already put to.

The object contended for, ought always to bear some just proportion to the
expense. The removal of North, or the whole detestable junto, is a matter
unworthy of the millions we have expended. A temporary stoppage of trade was an
inconvenience, which would have sufficiently balanced she repeal of all the
acts complained of, had such repeals been obtained; but if the whole Continent
must take up arms, if every man must be a soldier, it is scarcely worth our
while to fight against a contemptible ministry only. Dearly, dearly do we pay
for the repeal of the acts, if that is all we fight for; for in a just
estimation, it is as great a folly to pay a bunker-hill price for law as for
land. As I have always considered the independancy of this Continent as an
event which sooner or later must arrive, so from the late rapid progress of the
Continent to maturity, the event could not be sar off. Wherefore on the
breaking out of hostilities, it was not worth the while to have disputed a
matter, which time would have finally redressed, unless we meant to be in
earnest: otherwise it is like wasting an estate on a suit at law, to regulate
the trespasses of a tenant, whose lease is just expiring. No man was a warmer
wisher for reconciliation than myself, before the fatal 19th of April 1755 but
the moment the event of that day was made known I rejected the hardened, sullen
tempered Pharaoh of England forever; and disdain the wretch, that with the
pretended title of FATHER OF HIS PEOPLE can unfeelingly hear of their
slaughter, and composedly sleep with their blood upon his foul.

But admitting that matters were now made up, what would be the the event? I
answer, the ruin of the Continent. And that for several reasons.

First. The powers of governing still remaining in the hands of the king, he
will have a negative over the whole legislation of this Continent: And as he
has shown himself such an inveterate enemy to liberty, and discovered such a
thirst for arbitrary power, is he, or is he not, a proper man to say to these
Colonies, You shall make no laws but what I please. And is there any inhabitant
in America so ignorant, as not to know that according to what is called the
present constitution, that this Continent can make no laws but what the king
gives leave to; and is there any man so unwise, as not to see, that
(considering what has happened) he will suffer no laws to be made here, but
such as suit his purpose. We may be as effectually enslaved by the want of laws
in America, as by submitting to laws made for us in England. After matters are
made up, (as it is called) can there be any doubt, but the whole power of the
crown will be exerted to keep this Continent as low and humble as possible?
Instead of going forward, we shall go backward, or be perpetually quarrelling
or ridiculously petitioning. -- We are already greater than the King wishes us
to be, and will he not hereafter endeavor to make us less. To bring the matter
to one point, is the power who is jealous of our prosperity, a proper power to
govern us? Whoever says No to this question is an Independent, for independency
means no more than whether we shall make our own laws, or, whether the King,
the greatest enemy this Continent has, or can have, shall tell us there shall
be no laws but such as I like.

But the King you will say has a negative in England; the people there can make
no laws without his consent. In point of right and good order, there is
something very ridiculous, that a youth of twenty-one (which has often
happened) shall say to six millions of people older and wiser than himself, "I
forbid this or that act of yours to be law." But in this place I decline this
sort of reply, though I will never cease to expose the absurdity of it, and only
answer, that England being the King's residence, and America not so, makes
quite another case. The King's negative here is ten times more dangerous and
fatal than it can be in England, for there he will scarcely refuse his consent
to a bill for putting England into as strong a state of defense as possible,
and here he would never suffer such a bill to be passed.

America is only a secondary object in the system of British politics, England
consults the good of this country, no farther than it answers her own purpose.
Wherefore her own interest leads her to suppress the growth of ours in every
case which does not promote her advantage, or in the least interferes with it.
A pretty state we should soon be in, under such a second-hand government,
considering what has happened! Men do not change from enemies to friends by the
alteration of a name: And in order to show that reconciliation now is a
dangerous doctrine, I affirm, that it would be policy in the King at this time,
to repeal the acts for the sake of reinstating himself in the government of the
provinces; in order that HE MAY ACCOMPLISH BY CRAFT AND SUBTILTY, IN THE LONG
RUN, WHAT HE CANNOT DO BY FORCE AND VIOLENCE IN THE SHORT ONE. Reconciliation
and ruin are nearly related.

Secondly. -- That as even the best terms which we can expect to obtain, can
amount to no more than a temporary expedient, or a kind of government by
guardianship, which can last no longer than till the Colonies come of age, so
the general face and state of things in the interim will be unsettled and
unpromising: Emigrants of property will not choose to come to a country whose
form of government hangs but by a thread, and who is every day tottering on the
brink of commotion and disturbance: And numbers of the present inhabitants
would lay hold of the interval to dispose of their effects; and quit the
continent.

But the most powerful of all arguments is, that nothing but independance, i.
e. a continental form of government, can keep the peace of the continent and
preserve it inviolate from civil wars. I dread the event of a reconciliation
with Britain now, as it is more than probable, that it will be followed by a
revolt some where or other, the consequences of which may be far more fatal
than all the malice of Britain.

Thousands are already ruined by British barbarity; (thousands more will
probably suffer the same fate;) Those men have other feelings than us who have
nothing suffered. All they now possess is liberty, what they before enjoyed is
sacrificed to its service and having nothing more to lose, they disdain
submission. Besides, the general temper of the colonies toward a British
government, will be like that of a youth, who is nearly out of his time; they
will care very little about her: And a government which cannot preserve the
peace, is no government at all, and in that case we pay our money for nothing;
and pray what is it that Britain can do, whose power will be wholly on paper,
should a civil tumult break out the very day after reconciliation? I have heard
some men say, many of whom I believe spoke without thinking, that they dreaded
an independance, fearing that it would produce civil wars: It is but seldom
that our first thoughts are truly correct, and that is the case here; for there
are ten times more to dread from a patched up connection, than from
independance. I make the sufferers case my own, and I protest, that were I
driven from house and home, my property destroyed, and my circumstances ruined,
that as a man sensible of injuries, I could never relish the doctrine of
reconciliation, or consider myself bound thereby.

The colonies have manifested such a spirit of good order and obedience to
continental government, as is sufficient to make every reasonable person easy
and happy on that head. No man can assign the least pretense for his fears, on
any other grounds, than such as are truly childish and ridiculous, viz. that
one colony will be striving for superiority over another.

Where there are no distinctions, there can be no superiority; perfect equality
affords no temptation. The republics of Europe are all, (and we may say always)
in peace. Holland and Swisserland, are without wars foreign or domestic:
Monarchical governments, it is true, are never long at rest; the crown itself
is a temptation to enterprising ruffians at home; and that degree of pride and
insolence ever attendant on regal authority, swells into a rupture with foreign
powers in instances, where a republican government by being formed on more
natural principles, would negociate the mistake.

If there is any true cause for fear respecting independance, it is because no
plan is yet laid down. Men do not see their way out -- Wherefore, as an opening
into that business I offer the following hints; at the same time modestly
affirming, that I have no other opinion of them myself, than that they may be
the means of giving rise to something better. Could the straggling thoughts of
individuals be collected, they would frequently form materials for wise and
able men to improve into useful matter.

LET the assemblies be annual with a president only. The representation more
equal. Their business wholly domestic, and subject to the authority of a
Continental Congress.

Let each Colony be divided into six, eight, or ten convenient districts, each
district to send a proper number of Delegates to Congress, so that each Colony
send at least thirty. The whole number in Congress will be at least 390. Each
Congress to sit and to choose a president by the following method. When the
Delegates are met, let a colony be taken from the whole thirteen Colonies by
lot, after which let the whole Congress choose (by ballot) a president from our
of the Delegates of that province. In the next Congress let a Colony be taken
by lot from twelve only, omitting that Colony from which the president was
taken in the former Congress, and so proceeding on till the whole thireen shall
have had their proper rotation. And in order that nothing may pass into a law
but what is satisfactorily just, not less than three fifths of the Congress to
be called a majority. -- He that will promote discord under a government so
equally formed as this, would have joined Lucifer in his revolt.

But as there is a peculiar delicacy from whom, or in what manner, this
business must first arise, and as it seems most agrreeable and consistent, that
it should come from some intermediate body between the governed and the
governors, that is between the Congress and the People. Let a CONTINENTAL
CONFERENCE be held in the following manner, and for the following purpose.

A Committee of twenty six members of Congress, viz. Two for each Colony. Two
members from each house of Assembly, or Provincial convention; and sive
Representatives of the people at large, to be chosen in the capital city or
town of each Province, for, and in behalf of the whole Province, by as many
qualified voters as shall think proper to attend from all parts of the Province
for that purpose; or if more convenient, the Representatives may be chosen in
two or three of the most populous parts thereof. In this CONFERENCE thus
assembled, will be united the two grand principles of business, knowledge and
power. The members of Congress, Assemblies, or Conventions, by having had
experience in national concerns, will be able and useful counselors, and the
whole, by being empowered by the people, will have a truly legal authority.

The conferring Members being met, let their business be to frame a CONTINENTAL
CHARTER, or Charter of the United Colonies; (answering, to what is called the
Magna Charta of England) fixing the number and manner of choosing members of
Congress, members of Assembly, with their date of sitting, and drawing the line
of business and jurisdiction between them: Always remembering, that our
strength and happiness, is continental not provincial. Securing freedom and
property to all men, and above all things, the free exercise of religion,
according to the dictates of conscience; with such other matters as is
necessary for a charter to contain. Immediately after which, the said
conference to dissolve, and the bodies which shall be chosen conformable to the
said charter, to be the Legislators and Governors of this Continent, for the
time being: Whose peace and happiness may God preserve. AMEN.

Should any body of men be hereafter delegated for this or some similar
purpose, I offer them the following extracts from that wise observer on
governments DRAGONETTI. "The science" says he of the Politician consists in
fixing the true point of happiness and freedom. Those men would deserve the
gratitude of ages, who should discover a mode of government that contained the
greatess sum of individual happiness, with the least national expense.

DRAGONETTI on Rewards and Virtue.

But where, say some, is the King of America? I Will tell you Friend, he reigns
above; and does not make havoc of mankind like the Royal Brute of Great
Britain. Yet that we may not appear to be defective even in earthly honors,
let a day be solemnly set apart for proclaiming the Charter; let it be brought
forth placed on the divine law, the word of God; let a Crown be placed thereon,
by which the world may know, that so far as we approve of monarchy, that in
America THE LAW IS KING. For as in absolute governments the King is law, so in
free countries the law ought to be King, and there ought to be no other. But
lest any ill use should afterward arise, let the Crown at the conclusion of
the ceremony be demolished, and scattered among the People whose right it is.

A government of our own is our natural right: and when a man seriously
reflects on the precariousness of human affairs, he will become convinced, that
it is infinitely wiser and safer, to form a constitution of our own, in a cool
deliberate manner, while we have it in our own power, than to trust such an
interesting event to time and chance. If we omit it now, some Thomas Anello,
otherwise Massanello, a fisherman of Naples, who, after spiriting up his
countrymen in the public marketplace, against the oppression of the Spaniards,
to whom the place was then subject, prompted them to revolt, and in the space
of a day became King.
Massanello may hereafter arise, who laying hold of popular disquietudes, may
collect together the desperate and the discontented, and by assuming to
themselves the powers of government, may sweep away the liberties of the
Continent like a deluge. Should the government of America return again into the
hands of Britain, the tottering situation of things will be a temptation for
some desperate adventurer to try his fortune; and in such a case, what relief
can Britain give? Ere she could hear the news, the fatal bufiness might be
done; and ourselves suffering like the wretched Britons under the oppression of
the Conqueror. Ye that oppose independance now, ye know not what ye do; ye are
opening a door to eternal tyranny, by keeping vacant the seat of government.
There are thousands, and tens of thousands, who would think it glorious to
expel from the Continent that barbarous and hellish power, which has stirred
up the Indians and the Negroes to destroy us; the cruelty has a double guilt,
it is dealing brutally by us and treacherously by them.

To talk of friendship with those in whom our reason forbids us to have faith,
and our affections wounded through a thousand pores instruct us to detest, is
madness and folly. Every day wears out the little remains of kindred between us
and them, and can there be any reason to hope, that as the relationship
expires, the affection will increase, or that we shall agree better, when we
have ten times more and greater concerns to quarrel over than ever?

Ye that tell us of harmony and reconciliation, can ye restore to us the time
that is past? Can ye give to prostitution its former innocence? Neither can ye
reconcile Britain and America. The last cord is now broken, the people of
England are presenting addresses against us. There are injuries which nature
cannot forgive; she would cease to be nature if she did. As well can the lover
forgive the ravisher of his mistress, as the Continent forgive the murders of
Britain. The Almighty has implanted in us these unextinguishable feelings for
good and wise purposes. They are the guardians of his image in our hearts. They
distinguish us from the herd of common animals. The social compact would
dissolve, and justice be extirpated the earth, or have only a casual existence,
were we callous to the touches of affection. The robber and the murderer would
often escape unpunished, did not the injuries which our tempers sustain,
provoke us into justice.

O ye that love mankind! Ye that dare oppose not only the tyranny but the
tyrant, stand forth! Every spot of the old world is overrun with oppression.
Freedom has been hunted round the globe. Asia and Africa have long expelled
her. -- Europe regards her like a stranger, and England has given her warning
to depart. O receive the fugitive, and prepare in time an asylum for mankind.

Of the PRESENT ABILITY of AMERICA, with some MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS.
I Have never met with a man either in England or America, who has not
confessed his opinion, that a separation between the countries would take
place, one time or other: And there is no instance, in which we have shown less
judgment; than in endeavoring to describe what we call the ripeness or fitness
of the Continent for independance.

As all men allow the measure, and vary only in their opinion of the time, let
us, in order to remove mistakes, take a general survey of things, and endeavor
if possible, to find out the very time. But I need not go far, the enquiry
ceases at once, for the time has found us. The general concurrence, the
glorious union of all things, prove the fact.

It Is not in the numbers but in unity that our great strength lies: yet our
present numbers are sufficient to repel the force of all the world. The
Continent has at this time the largest disciplined army of any power under
Heaven: and is just arrived at that pitch of strength, in which no single
Colony is able to support itself, and the whole, when united, is able to do any
thing. Our land force is more than sufficient, and as to navy affairs, we
cannot be insensible that Btitain would never suffer an American man of war to
be built, while the Continent remained in her hands. Wherefore, we should be no
forwarder an hundred years hence, in that branch than we are now; but the truth
is, we should be less so, because the timber of the country is every day
diminishing.

Were the Continent crowded with inhabitants, her sufferings under the present
circumstances would be intolerable. The more seaport towns we had, the more
should we have both to defend and to lose. Our present numbers are so happily
proportioned to our wants, that no man need be idle. The diminution of trade
affords an army, and the necessities of an army create a new trade.

Debts we have none: and whatever we may contract on this account will serve as
a glorious memento of our virtue. Can we but leave posterity with a settled
form of government, an independent constitution of its own, the purchase at any
price will be cheap. But to expend millions for the sake of getting a few vile
acts repealed, and routing the present ministry only, is unworthy of the
charge, and is using posterity with the utmost cruelty; because it is leaving
them the great work to do, and a debt upon their backs from which they derive
no advantage. Such a thought is unworthy a man of honor, and is the true
characteristic of a narrow heart and a pidling politician.

The debt we may contract does not deserve our regard if the work be but
accomplished. No nation ought to be without a debt. A national debt is a
national bond; and when it bears no interest, is in no case a grievance.
Britain is oppressed with a debt of upwards of one hundred and forty millions
sterling, for which she pays upwards of four millions interest. And as a
compensation for her debt; she has a large navy: America is without a debt, and
without a navy; but for the twentieth part of the English national debt, could
have a navy as large again. The navy of England is not worth at this time more
than three millions and an half sterling.

No country on the globe is so happily situated, or so internally capable of
raising a fleet as America. Tar, timber, iron, and cordage are her natural
produce. We need go abroad for nothing. Whereas the Dutch, who make large
profits by hiring out their ships of war to the Spaniards and Portuguese, are
obliged to import most of the materials they use. We ought to view the building
a fleet as an article of commerce, it being the natural manufactory of this
country. It Is the best money we can lay out. A navy when finished is worth more
than it cost: And is that nice point in national policy, in which commerce and
protection are united. Let us build; if we want them not, we can sell, and by
that means re-place our paper currency with ready gold and silver.

In point of manning a fleet, people in general run into great errors; it is
not necessary that one fourth part should be sailors. The Terrible privateer,
Capt. Death, stood the hottest engagement of any ship last war, yet had not
twenty sailors on board, though her complement of men was upwards of two
hundred. A few able and social sailors will soon instruct a sufficient number
of active landmen in the common work of a ship. Wherefore we never can be more
capable to begin on maritime matters than now, while our timber is standing,
our sisheries blocked up, and our sailors and shipwrights out of employ. Men of
war of seventy and eighty guns were built forty years ago in New England, and
why not the same now? Ship building is America's greatest pride, and in which,
she will in time excel the whole world. The great empires of the East are
mostly inland and consequently excluded from the possibility of rivalling her.
Africa is in a state of Barbarism; and no power in Europe, has either such an
extent of coast, or such an internal supply of materials. Where nature has
given the one she has withheld the other; to America only has she been
liberal of both. The vast empire of Russia is almost shut out from the sea;
wherefore, her boundless forests, her tar, iron, and cordage are only articles
of commerce.

In point of safety, ought we to be without a fleet? We are not the little
people now, which we were sixty years ago, at that time we might have trusted
our property in the streets, or fields rather, and slept securely without locks
or bolts to our doors and windows. The case now is altered, and our methods of
defense, ought to improve with our increase of property. A common pirate twelve
months ago might have come up the Delaware, and laid the city of Philadelphia
under instant-contribution for what sum he pleased; and the same might have
happened to other places. Nay, any daring fellow in a brig of 14 or 16 guns
might have robbed the whole continent, and carried off half a million of money.
These are circumstances which demand our attention and point our the necessity
of naval protection.

Some perhaps will say, that after we have made it up with Britain that she
will protect us. Can we be so unwise as to mean that she shall keep a navy in
our harbors for that purpose? Common sense will tell us, that the power which
has endeavored to subdue us, is of all others, the most improper to defend
us. Conquest may be effected under the pretense of friendship; and ourselves
after a long and brave resistance, be at last cheated into slavery. And if her
ships are not to be admitted into our harbors, I would ask, how is she to
protect us? A navy three or four thousand miles off can be of little use, and
on sudden emergencies, none at all. Wherefore if we must hereafter protect
ourselves, why not do it for ourselves? why do it for another?

The English list of ships of war, is long and formidable, but not a tenth part
of them are at any one time fit for service, numbers of them not in being; yet
their names are pompously continued in the list if only a plank is left of the
ship: and not a fifth part of such as are fit for service, can be spared on any
one station at one time. The East and West Indies, Mediterranean, Africa, and
other parts over which Britain extends her claim, make large demands upon her
navy. From a mixture of prejudice and inattention, we have contracted a false
notion respecting the navy of England, and have talked as if we should have the
whole of it to encounter at once, and for that reason, supposed, that we must
have one as large; which not being instantly practicable, has been made use of
by a set of disguised tories to discourage our beginning thereon. Nothing can
be farther from truth than this, for if America had only a twentieth part of
the naval force of Britain, she would be by far an over match for her; because
as we neither have, nor claim any foreign dominion, our whole force would be
employed on our own coast, where we should, in the long run, have two to one
the advantage of those who had three or four thousand miles to sail over,
before they could attack us, and the same distance to return in order to refit
and recruit. And although Britain by her fleet has a check over our trade to
Europe, we have as large a one over her trade to the West Indies, which by
laying in the neighborhood of the Continent lies entirely at its mercy.

Some method might be fallen on to keep up a naval force in time of peace, if
we should not judge it necessary to support a constant navy. If premiums were
to be given to merchants to build and employ in their service, ships mounted
with 20, 30, 40 or 50 guns (the premiums to be in proportion to the loss of
bulk to the merchant) fifty or sixty of those ships, with a few guard ships on
constant duty would keep up a sufficient navy, and that without burdening
ourselves with the evil so loudly complained of in England, of suffering their
fleets in time of peace to lie rotting in the docks. To unite the sinews of
commerce and defense is sound policy; for when our strength and our riches play
into each other's hand we need fear no external enemy.

In almost every article of defense we abound. Hemp flourishes even to
rankness, so that we need not want cordage. Our iron is superior to that of
other countries. Our small arms equal to any in the world. Cannon we can cast
at pleasure. Saltpeter and gunpowder we are every day producing. Our
knowledge is hourly improving. Resolution is our inherent character, and
courage has never yet forsaken us. Wherefore what is it that we want? Why is
it that we hesitate? From Britain we can expect nothing but ruin. If she is
once admitted to the government of America again, this Continent will not be
worth living in. Jealousies will be always arising; insurrections will be
constantly happening; and who will go forth to quell them? who will venture his
life to reduce his own countrymen to a foreign obedience; the difference
between Pennsylvania and Connecticut, respecting some unlocated lands, shows
the insignificance of a British government, and fully proves, that nothing but
Continental authority cna regulate Continental matters.

Another reason why the present time is preferable to all others, is, that the
fewer our numbers are, the more land there is yet unoccupied, which instead of
being lavished by the king on his worthless dependants, may be hereafter
applied, not only to the discharge of the present debt, but to the constant
support of government. No nation under Heaven has such an advantage as this.

The infant state of the Colonies, as it is called, so far from being against
is an argument in favor of independance. We are sufficiently numerous, and
were we more so we might be less united. It Is a matter worthy of observation,
that the more a country is peopled, the smaller their armies are. In military
numbers the ancients far exceeded the moderns: and the reason is evident, for
trade being the consequence of population, men become too much absorbed thereby
to attend to any thing else. Commerce diminishes the spirit both of Patriotism
and of military defense. And history sufficiently informs us that the bravest
achievements were always accomplished in the nonage of a nation. With the
increase of commerce England has lost its spirit. The more men have to lose,
the less willing are they to venture. The rich are in general slaves to fear,
and submit to courtly power with the trembling duplicity of a spaniel.

Youth is the seed time of good habits as well in nations as in individuals. It
might be difficult, if not impossible to form the Continent into one Government
half a century hence. The vast variety of interests occasioned by an increase
of trade and population, would create confusion. Colony would be against
Colony. Each being able would scorn each others assistance: and while the proud
and foolish gloried in their little distinctions, the wise would lament that
the union had not been formed before. Wherefore, the present time is the true
time for establishing it. The intimacy which is contracted in infancy, and the
friendship which is formed in misfortune, are of all others, the most lasting
and unalterable. Our present union is marked with both these characters: we are
young, and we have been distressed; but our concord has withstood our
troubles, and fixes a memorable Era for posterity to glory in.

The present time likewise, is that peculiar time, which never happens to a
nation but once, viz. the time of forming itself into a government. Most
nations have let slip the opportunity, and by that means have been compelled to
receive laws from their conquerors, instead of making laws for themselves.
First they had a king, and then a form of government; whereas the articles or
charter of government should be formed first, and men delegated to execute them
afterward; but from the errors of other nations let us learn wisdom, and lay
hold of the present opportunity -- To begin Government at the right end.

When William the Conqueror subdued England, he gave them law at the point of
the sword; and until we consent that the seat of government in America be
legally and authoritatively filled, we shall be in danger of having it filled
by some fortunate ruffian, who may treat us in the same manner, and then, where
will be our freedom? where our property?

As to religion, I hold it to be the indispensible duty of government to
protect all conscientious professors thereof, and I know of no other business
which government has to do therewith: let a man throw aside that narrowness of
soul, that selfishness of principle, which the niggards of all professions are
so unwilling to part with, and he will be delivered from his fears on that
head. Suspicion is the companion of mean souls and the bane of all good
society. For my self, I fully and conscientiously believe, that it is the will
of the Almighty, that there should be diversity of religious opinions among us.
It affords a large field for our christian kindness; were we all of one way of
thinking, our religious dispositions would want matter for probation: and on
this liberal principle I look on the various denominations among us, to be like
children of the same family, differing only in what is called their christian
names.

In page 30 and 31 I threw out a few thoughts on the propriety of a continental
charter, (for I only presume to offer hints, not plans,) and in this place I
take the liberty of re-mentioning the subject, by observing, that a charter is
to be understood as a bond of solemn obligation, which the whole enters into,
to support the right of every separate part, whether of religion, personal
freedom, or property. A right reckoning makes long friends.

In a former page I likewise mentioned the necessity of a large and equal
representation; and there is no political matter which more deserves our
attention. A small number of electors, or a small number of representatives are
equally dangerous. But if the number of the representatives be not only small,
but unequal, the danger is increased. As an instance of this I mention the
following; when the associators petition was before the House of Assembly of
Pennsylvania, twenty eight members only were present. All the Bucks county
members, being eight, voted against it, and had seven of the Chester members
done the same, this whole Province had been governed by two counties only, and
this danger it is always exposed to. The unwarrantable stretch likewise, which
that house made in their last sitting, to gain an undue authority over the
Delegates of that Province, ought to warn the people at large, how they trust
power out of their own hands. A set of instructions for the Delegates were put
together, which in point of sense and business would have dishonored a
schoolboy, and after being approved by a few, a very few without doors, were
carried into the house, and there passed in behalf of the whole Colony: whereas
did the whole Colony know, with what ill will that house had entered on some
necessary public measures, they would not hesitate a moment to think them
unworthy of such a trust.

Immediate necessity makes many things convenient, which if continued would
grow into oppressions. Expedience and right, are different things. When the
calamities of America require a consultation, there was no method so ready, or
at that time so proper, as to appoint persons from the several houses of
Assembly for that purpose; and the wisdom with which they have proceeded has
preserved this Continent from ruin. But as it is more than probable that we
shall never be without a CONGRESS, every well wisher to good order, must own,
that the mode for choosing members of that body, deserves consideration. And I
put it as a question to those, who make a study of mankind, whether
representation and election is not too great a power for one and the same body
of men to possess? When we are planning for posterity, we ought to remember,
that virtue is not hereditary.

It is from our enemies that we often gain excellent maxims, and are frequently
surprised into reason by their mistakes. Mr. Cornwall (one of the Lords of the
Treasury) treated the petition of the New York Assembly with contempt, because
that house, he said, consisted but of twenty six members, which trifling
number, he argued, could not with decency be put for the whole. We thank him
for his involuntary honesty. Those who would fully understand of what great
consequence a large and equal representation is to a State, should read Burgh's
political Disquisitions.


TO CONCLUDE, however strange it may appear to some, or however unwilling they
may be to think so, matters not, but many strong and striking reasons may be
given to show, that nothing can settle our affairs so expeditiously as an open
and determined declaration for independance. Some of which are,

First. -- It is the custom of Nations, when any two are at war, for some other
powers not engaged in the quarrel, to step in as Mediators and bring about the
Preliminaries of a Peace: but while America calls herself the Subject of Great
Britain, no power, however well disposed she may be, can offer her Mediation.
Wherefore in our present state we may quarrel on for ever.

Secondly. -- It is unreasonable to suppose, that France or Spain will give us
any kind of assistance, if we mean only to make use of that assistance, for the
purpose of repairing the breach, and strengthening the connection between
Britain and America; because, those powers would be sufferers by the
consequences.

Thirdly. -- While we profess ourselves the Subjects of Britain, we must in the
eye of foreign nations be considered as Rebels. The precedent is somewhat
dangerous to their peace, for men to be in arms under the name of Subjects: we
on the spot can solve the paradox; but to unite resistance and subjection,
requires an idea much too refined for common understanding.

Fourthly -- Were a manifesto to be published and dispatched to foreign Courts,
setting forth the miseries we have endured, and the peaceable methods we have
ineffectually used for redress, declaring at the same time, that not being able
any longer to live happily or safely, under the cruel disposition of the
British Court, we had been driven to the necessity of breaking off all
connections with her: at the same time, assuring all such Courts of our
peaceable disposition toward them, and of our desire of entering into trade
with them: such a memorial would produce more good effects to this Continent,
than if a ship were freighted with petitions to Britain.

Under our present denomination of British Subjects, we can neither be received
nor heard abroad; the custom of all Courts is against us, and will be so, until
by an Independance we take rank with other Nations.

These proceedings may at first appear strange and difficult, but, like all
other steps which we have already passed over, will in a little time become
familiar and agreeable: and until an Independance is declared, the Continent
will feel itself like a man who continues putting off some unpleasant business
from day to day, yet knows it must be done, hates to set about it, wishes it
over, and is continually haunted with the thoughts of its necessity.

LARGE ADDITIONS TO COMMON SENSE; Addressed to the Inhabitants of AMERICA, On
the following interesting Subjects.

I. The American Patriot's Prayer. II. American Independency defended, by
Candidus. III. The Propriety of Independency, by Demophilus. The dread of
Tyrants, and the sole resource
Of those that under grim Oppression groan.
THOMPSON. IV. A Review of the American Contest, with some Strictures on the
King's Speech. Addressed to all Parents in the Thirteen United Colonies, by a
Friend to Posterity and Mankind. V. Letter to Lord Dartmouth, by an English
American. VI. Observations on Lord North's Conciliatory Plan. by Sincerus.
TO WHICH IS ADDED, An Appendix to Common Sense: Together with an Address to
the People called Quakers, on their Testimony concerning Kings and Government,
and the present Commotions in AMERICA.

The AMERICAN PATRIOT'S Prayer.
PARENT of all, omnipotent
In heaven, and earth below,
Through all creation's bounds unspent,
Whose streams of goodness flow.
Teach me to know from whence I rose,
And unto what designed;
No private aims let me propose,
Since linked with human kind.
But chief to hear my country's voice,
May all my thoughts incline,
It Is reason's law, it is virtue's choice,
It Is nature's call and thine.
Me from fair freedom's sacred cause,
Let nothing ever divide;
Grandeur, nor gold, nor vain applause,
Nor friendship false misguide.
Let me not faction's partial hate
Pursue to this land's woe;
Nor grasp the thunder of the state,
To wound a private foe.
If, for the right, to wish the wrong,
My country shall combine,
Single to serve the erroneous throng,
Spite of themselves, be mine.
ADDITIONS to COMMON SENSE.
AMERICAN INDEPENDANCY defended.
WHEN the little pamphlet entitled COMMON SENSE first made its appearance in
favor of that so often abjured idea of independance upon upon Great Britain, I
was informed that no less than three gentlemen of respectable abilities were
engaged to answer it. As yet I have seen nothing which directly pretends to
dispute a single position of the author. The oblique essay in Humphreys's
paper, and solemn Testimony of the Quakers, however intended, having offered
nothing to the purpose, I shall take leave to examine this important question,
with all candor and attention, and submit the result to my much interested
country.

Dependence of one man, or state, upon another, is either absolute, or limited
by some certain terms of agreement. The dependence of these colonies which
Great Britain calls constitutional, as declared by act of parliament, is
absolute. If the contrary of this be the bugbear so many have been declaiming
against, I could wish my countrymen would consider the consequences of so
stupid a profession. If a limited dependence is intended. I would be much
obliged to any one who will show me the Britanno American Magna Charta wherein
the terms of our limited dependence are precisely stated. If no such thing can
be found, and absolute dependence be accounted inadmissible, the sound we are
squabbling about has certainly no determinate meaning. If any say we mean that
kind of dependence we acknowledged at and before the year 1763; I answer, vague
and uncertain laws, and more especially CONSTITUTIONS, are the very instruments
of slavery. The Magna Charta of England was very explicit, considering the time
it was formed, and yet much blood was spilt in disputes concerning its meaning.

Besides the danger of an indefinite dependence upon an undetermined power, it
might be worth while to consider what the characters are on whom we are so
ready to acknowledge ourselves dependant. The votaries for this idol tell us,
upon the good people of our Mother Country, whom they represent as the most
just, humane, and affectionate friends we can have in the world. Were this
true, it were some encouragement; but who can pretend ignorance that these just
and humane friends are as much under the tyranny of men of a reverse character
as we should be, could those miscreants gain their ends? I disclaim any more
than a mutual dependence on any man, or number of men upon earth; but an
indefinite dependence upon a combination of men, who have, in the face of the
sun, broken through the most solemn covenants, debauched the hereditary, and
corrupted the elective guardians of the people's rights, who have, in fact,
established an absolute tyranny in Great Britain and Ireland, and openly
declared themselves competent to bind the Colonists in all cases whatsoever: I
say indefinite dependence on such a combination of usurping innovators is
evidently as dangerous to liberty, as fatal to civil and social happiness, as
any one step that could be proposed, even by the destroyer of men. The utmost
that the honest party in Great Britain can do, is to warn us to avoid this
dependence at all hazards? Does not even a Duke of Grafion declare the
ministerial measures illegal and dangerous? And shall America, no way connected
with this administration, press our submission to such measures, and
reconciliation to the authors of them? Would not such pigeon-hearted wretches
equally forward the recall of the Stuart family, and the establishment of Popery
throughout Christendom, did they conceive the party in favor of those loyal
measures the strongest? Shame on the men who can court exemption from present
trouble and expense, at the price of their own and posterity's liberty! The
honest party in England cannot wish for the reconciliation proposed. It is as
unsafe to them as to us, and they thoroughly apprehend it. What check have they
now upon the crown, and what shadow of control can they pretend, when the crown
can command fifteen or twenty millions a year, which they have nothing to say
to? A proper proportion of our commerce is all that can benefit any good man in
Britain or Ireland, and God forbid we should be so cruel as to furnish bad men
with power to enslave both Britain and America. Administration has now fairly
dissevered the dangerous tie: Execrated will he be by the latest posterity who
again joins the fatal cord! But say the puling pusillanimous cowards, we shall
be subject to a long and bloody war, if we declare independance. On the
contrary, I affirm it the only step that can bring the contest to a speedy and
happy issue. By declaring independance we place ourselves on a footing for an
equal negotiation: Now we are called a pack of villainous rebels, who, like the
St. Vincent Indians, can expect nothing more than a pardon for our lives, and
the sovereign favor, respecting freedom and property, to be at the King's will.
Grant Almighty God that I may be numbered with the dead before that sable day
dawn on North America!

All Europe knows the illegal and inhuman treatment we have received from
Britons. All Europe wishes the haughty empress of the main reduced to a more
humble deportment. After herself has thrust her Colonies from her, the maritime
powers cannot be such idiots as to suffer her to reduce them to a more absolute
obedience of her dictates than they were heretofore obliged to yield. Does not
the most superficial politician know, that while we profess ourselves the
subjects of Great Britain, and yet hold arms against her, they have a right to
treat us as rebels, and that according to the laws of nature and nations no
other state has a right to interfere in the dispute? But on the other hand, on
our declaration of independance, the maritime states at least will find it
their interest, which always secures the question of inclination, to protect a
people who can be so advantageous to them. So that those short-sighted
politicians, who conclude that this step will involve us in slaughter and
devastation, may plainly perceive that no measure in our power will so
naturally and effectually work our deliverance. The motion of a finger of the
Grand Monarch would procure as gentle a temper in the omnipotent British
Minister, as appeared in the Manilla ransom and Falkland islands affairs. From
without certainly we have every thing to hope, nothing to fear; from within,
some tell us the Presbyterians, if freed from the restraining power of
Great Britain, would overrun the peaceable Quakers in this government. For my
own part. I despise the bickerings of sectaries, and am apprehensive of no
trouble from that quarter, especially while no peculiar honors nor emoluments
are annexed to either. I heartily wish too many of the Quakers did not give
cause of complaint, by endeavoring to counteract the measures of their fellow
citizens for the common safety. If they profess themselves only pilgrims here,
let them walk through the men of this world without interfering with their
actions on either side. If they would not pull down Kings, let them not support
tyrants; for whether they understand it or not, there is, and ever has been, an
essential difference in the characters.

Finally, with M. De Vatell, I account a state a moral person, having an
interest and will of its own, and I think that state a monster, whose prime
mover has an interest and will, in direct opposition to its prosperity and
security. This position has been so clearly demonstrated in the pamphlet first
mentioned in this essay, that I shall only add, if there are any arguments in
favor of returning to a state of dependence on Great Britain, that is, on the
present Administration of Great Britain, I could wish they were timely offered,
that they may be soberly considered, before the cunning proposals of the
cabinet set all the timid, lazy and irresolute members of the community into a
clamor for peace at any rate.

CANDIDUS,

The Propriety of INDEPENDANCY.
TO acknowledge that the Creator formed Man for society, and that society
cannot subsist without regulations, laws, and government; and at the same time
to assert, that in spite of all human care to prevent it, every government
will degenerate into a tyranny, is such a daring blasphemy of the divine
attributes, that had I not heard it asserted, and acquiesced in as a truth. I
could not have believed such a position could have obtained in a civilized
country! This monstrous hypothesis concludes that notwithstanding the Deity had
power enough to form such admirable creatures as men and women, and fit them
for enjoying of each other a thousand ways, and though by means of the most
exquisite of those enjoyments a race should arise from them over which every
power of rightful government must of necessity be exercised, yet just and
rightful government is in reality utopian, imaginary, and impracticable! Did
not God cloth the grass, direct the wild Goat, and provide for the Sparrow, I
might more easily be persuaded to suspect his care of Man.

I readily grant that the delegates of governmental power are too apt to
consider themselves the possessors of it in their own right, and that they
therefore take every means in their power to become the masters in the place of
servanis to their constituents; and that the people in all civilized countries
have been too inattentive to the usurpations of their rulers: But I conceive of
no cause in the nature of things which so absolutely counteracts the power of a
wise, learned, and free community as to render it impossible for them to
preserve their liberty. The arguments bro't from the condition of other states,
are by no means conclusive with respect to the North American colonies. I am
bold to assert, that such a favorable combination of circumstances as they are
blessed with at this important conjuncture, never did take place among any
people with whom history has made us acquainted. The most just and solid
foundation of social happiness was laid in the first settlement of the
Continent, the cultivation of the earth for the subsistence of its proprietor.
Here was no feudal tenure from some military Lord; every cultivator being the
lord of his own soil, and content with its produce, had no thoughts of
encroaching upon and subjecting his neighbor to his absolute dominion. Hence'
a handsome competency has enabled the bulk of the people to give their children
such an education as enables them to read, and become acquainted with the
usurpations of the deepest plotters of their ruin. The spirit of the people for
obtaining this necessary information, is evident from the incredible number of
newspapers and other periodical publications which they encourage, and the
effect of such institutions never have been so great in any community, yet
known, as in these pantaplebean (altogether Commons) colonies. How quickly the
most important revolution of the fundamentals of our policy can pervade a
continent, may be guessed at by the progress of the idea of Colonial
Independency in three weeks or a month at farthest! Surely thousands and ten
thousands of common farmers and tradesmen must be better reasoners than some of
our trammelled juris consultors, who to this hour feel a reluctance to part
with the abominable chain, which remaining, in any shape whatever, though
modified by all the wisdom and caution of the greatest men now living, must in
a very little time drag the colonies into the most abject slavery. Many profess
themselves zealous for the liberties of America, yet declare an abhorrence of
the idea of independancy on Great Britain. If this be not a solecism, as absurd
and irreconcilable as ever was obtruded on mankind, I know not the meaning of
the term! Civil Liberty never was defined in stricter terms than an EXEMPTION
from all control, WITHOUT THE COMMUNITY, in which every qualified member has
an equal voice. No American, as such, has the shadow of incorporation with the
government of Great Britain; and in consequence, if he receives the least
syllable of law from that quarter, he gives up his claim to the definitive
exemption. If the sticklers for dependence do not mean dependence for some
certain laws, in the forming of which the Colonists have no voice at all, I do
not yet understand them; and if they do mean that we should admit the claim of
any state, or any part of the power of any state, with which the domocratic
power of this state is not incorporated, to give us law in any case whatever,
they admit a fiber, which I must make free to tell them, will speedily grow
into an iron sinew which neither themselves nor posterity will be able to
endure or burst asunder. And further, it is not only the admission of some
possible law from a foreign power, that hurries a people into slavery; a mere
negative power on acts for the repeal of grievous laws will more slowly, but as
certainly subvert liberty,

Again, Mr. Hume's observation, [ Perfect Commonwealth, p. 301.] that "the
sword being in the hands of a single person who will always neglect to
discipline the militia, in order to have the pretext to keep: up a standing
army;" and the succeeding one, "that this is a mortal distemper in the British
government of which it must, at last inevitably perish," now so fatally
confirmed, may be a sufficient warning to the Colonies to beware of being again
entangled with the yoke of bondage.

Many object to a Republican Government as impracticable in a large state. "The
contrary of this [says Hume, Per. Com. 302.] seems evident. Though it is more
difficult to form a Republican Government in an extensive country than in a
city; there is more facility, when once it is formed, of preserving it steady
and uniform, without tumult or faction, in the former than the latter. ( Per.
Com. 303.) In a large government which is modelled with masterly skill, there
is compass and room enough to refine the democracy from the lower people, who
may be admitted into the first elections, or first concoction of the
commonwealth, to the higher magistrates who direct all the motions. At the same
time the parts are so distant and remote that it is very difficult either by
intrigue, prejudice, or passion, to hurry them into measures against the public
interest." Thus far Mr. Hume, whose plan for a perfect commonwealth, will
speedily be submitted to public consideration.

DEMOPHILUS.

A Review of the American Contest, with some Strictures on the King's Speech,
and its consequences. Addressed to all Parents, in the Thirteen United
Colonies. By a Friend to Posterity and Mankind.
NATURE instructs the brute creation to provide for, guard and protect their
offspring until they are able to do for themselves. The dam is never known to
forsake her young while her care is necessary for their safety, nor to do any
thing which would involve them in distress and difficulty. Man, who has this
principle in common with brutes, is endowed with others yet more valuable, but
which to him are absolutely necessary, whereby he is taught to provide for the
future welfare of his descendants and to guard them from the encroachments of
that power which civil society constitutes for its own safety; but which,
through the depravity of human nature is often turned against it. There are few
parents who do not make it their constant study and earnest endeavor to leave
some valuable inheritance to their children: few who have been so lost to the
feelings of nature and calls of parental affection, as to entail difficuly and
distress on their children, when it was in their power to leave them a fair and
easy inheritance. And yet it has so happened, that by an ill timed attachment
to the present, without paying proper attention to the future, they have
entailed misery upon them by the very means which were designed to preserve
them from it.

It is now in your power to bequeath to your children the one or the other, and
it becomes you to have an eye to them in all your proceedings. It is
sufficiently known to you, that riches in arbitrary states are often the ruin
of their possessors, and that security to property is absolutely necessary to
stamp their true value on wealth and possessions, He therefore, who wishes to
leave his children in flourishing circumstances ought to be a zealous friend to
those measures, and that plan of government which gives the greatest security
to property, and an active warm opposer of those which leave it to the
arbitrary disposal of men, who find a greater advantage in making free with
what does not belong to them, than in frugally using what is justly their own.
Whig and Tory should be out of the question. Private pique, party faction and
animosity ought to subside. He who thinks should think for posterity, and he
who acts should act for his children.

It is a great weakness to suffer our passions to take place of our season and
blindly to follow their dictates, though to our manifest hurt, rather than
subject them to our better sense. A false pride, which will not acknowledge an
error though ever so evident, an obstinate perseverance in our own opinion
without deigning to hear advice or instruction, and an unreasonable atrachment
to party, have done much mischief to mankind, and may yet do more if not
carefully avoided. I have directed this paper to you in preference to others,
because your parental affection should form more than a counter poise to every
false principle, which can influence the human mind where the interest of your
offspring is at stake.

Our present contest is immensely great, and every man must see that it will
affect posterity. Its consequences cannot end with itself; but the latest
generations must seel its effects. The great Ruler of the universe has
permitted it for wise purposes, and has called every one of us to act our part
in it. It becomes us, therefore, laying aside all former prejudices, partiality
and party attachments, to act upon principles which will justify us to him who
has assigned us our stations, and cause posterity to bless the memory of their
forefathers. We all agree in this, that Great Britain is unjust and arbitrary,
and we have hitherto principally differed in the mode of opposition, which
ought to have been pursued. I speak not to those who think one way and talk
another. They act upon such base principles, that it is in vain to attempt to
rouse in them any just or generous sentiments. We have no instances of the
conversion of avaricious or ambitious hypocrites, and it would be wasting time
to use arguments to convince them. I direct myself to you who have sincerity
sufficient to examine the principles on which you proceed, and honesty enough
to pursue that course of conduct which appears to be right, and so much
affection for your children as to prefer their interest and happiness to every
other consideration. For you I mean to throw together a few hints which may
assist you in finally fixing a right choice.

The British administration began its attacks on our liberties with a stamp
act, but meeting with strong opposition they thought fit to repeal it. This act
threw the colonies into strong convulsions, and we rejoiced exceedingly on its
repeal, and fondly hoped that we would enjoy future tranquillity. But we were
mistaken. They never intended to relinquish the design, but only to change
their ground, that which they first pitched upon not seeming tenable. An
American revenue granted by a British Parliament was the object, and they never
lost sight of it; for they soon renewed their attacks upon principles which
they thought more favorable to their intentions; but meeting with as little
success in that, as in the preceding attempt, they suspended their measures for
a time, in hopes of lulling us into a careless security. They accordingly once
more returned to the charge, and endeavored to effect by cunning and arrifice
what they had heretofore attempted in vain on every other peaceable plan. This
not succeeding, they were reduced to their last shift of bullying and force.
They levied armies, appointed generals of reputation to command, and sent them
amongst us, we may know their commission by their conduct; for after abusing,
brow-beating and insulting, after starving and tarring and feathering, after
offering every possible injury which a free people could bear, without
obtaining their ends, and every other measure failing, they drew the sword, and
at once reduced us to the dire alternative of submitting to their illegal
claims of jurisdiction, or entering into the bloody contest. Like men
determined to be free we chose the latter. It now rests on the last argument,
an argument which finally settles all controversies of a like nature. The plan
of operation is now opened, and they who stand to it with the most steady
perseverance must finally succeed. This is the decree of providence in all
cases, he that persevereth unto the end shall be saved. We have, by the
blessing of God, effectually baffled all their former attempts; but if we fail
in this, all our former victories will only serve to make our fall the more
conspicuous and terrible.

I will not enquire what would have been the efficacy of any heretofore
recommended, but untried means. The worst that can has happened, and it is with
it we have now to deal; to relinquish it on our part, would be to give up the
matter, for however any means might once have done, cowardice alone would now
desert the field, and slavery must be the inevitable consequence.

I do not wonder that war sits heavy on us, and that we are somewhat restless
and uneasy; but I shall be surprised, if we, who have so long and so
successfully opposed tyranny and oppression, should all on a sudden lose every
desire of retaining our liberties. I am forced into this remark by the artful,
cunning and designing manner in which some men talk of a reconciliation with
Great Britain; and the bug-bears they conjure up to frighten the timid,
irresolute and ignorant, from a steady prosecution of those means, which alone
can help us in our present circumstances. Facts bear evidence from the
beginning of the contest that every scheme they ever recommended has, upon
trial, proved inadequate to the end for which it was intended; yet they
proceed. Beware of such men, they love neither their country, nor their
liberties, so much as something else.

There are many I doubt not who are denominated Tories by the more zealous
Whigs, who in their hearts wish success to our measures, though they may be
chagrined because those they proposed did not go down with the people; these
are uniform and not very dangerous; but there are others, who under the cloak
of friendship for the cause, harbor the bitterest rancour and malice in their
hearts. These talk favorably in general, though their discourses mostly
terminate with a doubt, suspicion, or but, which give those with whom they
converse, reason to dread some hidden design, or approaching evil, which most
men have not properly attended to. They artfully recall your attention to a
certain period, when all was peace and quietness, and by pathetically lamenting
the unhappy alteration, endeavor to impress your minds with an opinion that
all our troubles arose from ourselves. They carefully avoid mentioning the
iniquitous measures of the British government which produced them, and by
keeping those out of sight, they gradually lead the unwary into the belief,
that the men who have been most active on the present occasion in opposing the
tyrannical proceedings of Great Britain, and who have hazarded their all in
defense of their country, have been actuated by sinister motives in all they
have done. If every man who hears such insinuations were to ask those who cast
them out, what measures have not the men they condemn tried at one time or
another to avoid the present contest, and save our liberties? What advantages
can they reap by a successful end of it, which every freeman on the continent
will not reap equally with them? And in an unsuccessful close of it, all will
allow they must be the greatest sufferers. Their lives must go, let who will
else escape. These questions might recall them to facts, and these facts would
enable men (...) judge aright.

Honesty could not stand the force of a few pertinent questions, but these men
have taken their leave of it, and like Manasseh of old, have sold themselves to
do wickedly. Were it not so, could it be possible for them in the face of the
sun, to charge all our troubles on the New England Presbyterians, troubles
which originally began, and have all along been kept up by a wicked
administration and a venal parliament. To make them the hatchers of mischiefs
occasioned by unconstitutional acts of parliament, and the only fomenters of
our just opposition with a Pennsylvanian Quaker, a Maryland and a Virginian
Churchman, did more to effect than all the other men on the continent put
together, is cruelty in the extreme. My heart bleeds when I think of such men;
who would sell the whole continent and all the blood on it for private
advantage, and with whom a few thousand guineas with a title would be esteemed
an equivalent for the lives, liberty and property of the freemen of a colony.
May that God who sees how little they can gain, if successful, open their eyes
and turn their hearts, ever they be convinced by fatal experience, that he who
purchases the whole world at the price of his soul, is a very unwise dealer,
and makes but a poor bargain in the end. If the calls of virtue, the precepts
of religion, and dictates of patriotism cannot awaken them to a sense of their
duty, yet Norfolk might open their eyes. But let them do as they please, we
ought to act wisely. If we do not make such a settlement now as will secure the
privileges we contend for to posterity, we entail either slavery or a civil war
on our children. This is certain, let what will be doubtful. Look round you
then, view your offspring, and tell me, are you willing to leave them such a
legacy? Do not trifle on this occasion, all your other legacies must derive
their true value from the part you now take in this contest. Think not that the
God who charges him with worse than infidelity who provides not for his own,
and those of his household, will justify you in returning to the state you were
in when our troubles began, and thereby delivering over your offspring to the
mischievous machinations of a power that from the beginning has set right,
justice, and mercy at defiance, and in all her deliberations considered nothing
but her ability to execute.

Look to the year 1763, that happy period, as many so fondly call it, and see
what safety there is to America in such a situation. Lord North has said, "If
that is all they want, we are agreed;" and the saying pleases many of you. His
Lordship, like others, who have learned wisdom by experience, wishes to have
all to begin again believing that he could more easily effect his purpose by
other means than those he is at present pursuing. Swallow the bait and you are
undone forever.

Can any man in his senses believe, that he who has so long, and so invariably
pursued his point against the sense of the best men in the nation, will finally
desert his master's most favorite scheme so easily? Has he uttered a single
syllable that can make the most credulous believe that he is convinced of the
injustice of his conduct? He confesses he was deceived; but wherein lay the
deception? In believing that fewer troops would effect a submission than he is
now convinced must be employed. Here lay the deception he complains of, and he
is therefore determined to send his terms with such an armed force, as he
expects will frighten you into a compliance. Does this lock like the conduct of
one who designs to relinquish his claims? Were he or his master sensible of the
injustice of their proceedings and the wrongs they have done us, they would
both speak a very different language. Why does he call you rebels? Why call in
foreign troops to his aid? Why does his master lament so pathetically, that the
extensive operations of the war he means to carry on against you, will exhaust
his funds and increase the public debts, while he has not a single tear to
shed, not a groan, nor as much as a sigh for all the blood he has already
spilt, and yet means to spill, if he wishes to allow you security to your
privileges? Oh! George! The day thou utteredst that sentiment in the face of
the sun, thou gave up all title to humanity. Among the many unavoidable ill
consequences of this rebellion, none affects me more sensibly, says the King,
than the extraordinary burden it must create to my faithful subjects. "Most
humane Prince! most pious Sovereign! most affectionate father of thy people! an
addition to thy British subjects burdens to obtain a most unrighteous purpose
of thy own, affects thee in order to reconcile them to the bearing of it; but
to spill the blood of thy oppressed American subjects disturbs not thy
guiltless conscience! Let me tell thee, O King, that there is a God who sees
through the veil that covers thy deceit, and who hears the cry of the needy,
and regards the prayer of the distressed, who will recompense vengeance on the
wicked, though supported by the power of Great Britain. Our weakness is
sufficient in his hands for the purpose, If thine and thy ministers are not
evil against us, why did thou not hearken to the repeated prayers of thy
distressed subjects in America? Why do thou not recall thy troops, repeal the
acts, indemnify us for what we have suffered, and offer any further security to
our rights, which we may think necessary? Thou begannest the attack, and this
is thy duty; besides, thou have an obedient parliament, which disputes not thy
will, and all this is in thy power, and in no one's else."

Had the King made a speech to the house recommending these things, he would
have given unequivocal proof of his honest intentions, and it might justly be
termed gracious. But who can trust a Prince, who while he speaks the language
of peace and humanity with his lips, has nothing but cruelty and war in his
conduct. The man who does, may have the innocence of the dove, but he cannot be
possessed of the wisdom of the serpent. I conclude by entreating you, that as
you love your children, and their happiness, you never desert your present
opposition, until you obtain such a plan of constitutional vigor, as shall put
it at all times in your power to secure yourselves and your descendants from
tyrannical encroachments. This you never had, nor never can have, on the plan
of your former dependence. Remember, I call the Deity to witness, that I have
warned you against destroying your offspring, and prayed you to be on your
guard against the snares of the insidious. May he who acts from a principle of
humanity and benevolence to mankind finally meet with success, and may the
schemes of hypocrites be blasted.

A Friend to Posterity and Mankind.

To the Right Honorable Lord DARTMOUTH, Secretary of State for AMERICA.
Philadelphia, Jan. 1. 1776. My Lord,
YOU are the minister of the American department. You have the character of a
religious man, a rare virtue in a modern statesman. It has become my duty and
interest to address you, on the present circumstances of affairs in America. I
know the Americans well; their strongest and ruling passion was their affection
to their mother country; the honor, the glory of Great Britain they esteemed
as their greatest happiness; a large portion of the same affection remains;
nothing but repeated injuries and injustice could have lessened it. My Lord,
from a wanton and avaricious exercise of power, the ministry of Great Britain
have heaped injuries on the heads of the Americans, that no one period of
history can parellel.

The practice of the Egyptians in smothering the children of the Israelites in
the birth, the swords of Cortez and Pizarro, who slew millions of innocent
Mixicans and Peruvians, the dreadful famine brought by the East India Company
upon the poor East-Indians must all be brought into one scale, to serve as any
sort of balance to the system of desolation, that you and your brother
ministers, are meditating and daily practicing against the unhappy people of
North America.

The elements, which the providence of God has given for all his creatures,
you have the presumption to deprive them of, Fire, sword, famine, and
desolation, show the vicinity of your fleets and armies; children and servants
are animated to rise and slaughter their benefactors. No species of cruelty,
which the wit or malice of man or devile could advise, but are practiced
against the Americans.

Do you believe in God, my Lord, and direct these things? Do you believe that
God made America as well as Great Britain? If you do, ponder, consider well;
what answer you will give if you escape punishment in this world, when you come
to be questioned before the Throne of God, for the destruction you have made of
his creatures, the work of his hands, to whom he granted life and liberty,
earth, air and water equally as to yourself: and yet presumptuous man, you have
dared to counteract his providence! Have you conscience my Lord? If you have, I
would not for the empire of a thousand worlds be Lord Dartmouth? But, my Lord,
it is not to awaken your conscience only that I write you this letter: the
flame of civil war, by your management, has extended far and wide in America;
battles have been fought, numbers have been slain, and prisoners taken on both
sides; the Americans have in their possession ten for one, and among them many
men of rank, Prescot, Preston, Stopford and others; they are all treated with
tenderness and regard, while the prisoners you have taken are treated with
severity, carried to England in irons, there, as it is said, to be tried, and
of course condemned and executed, or in other words, under form of law murdered!

My Lord, if there be any thing on earth or in heaven that you respect, avoid
that rock -- You have Col. Allen, Capt. Martindale and some other prisoners --
the hour that it is known here that any of those prisoners are executed, the
prisoners here will be sacrificed -- nay more, every English and Scots
adherent; -- dread, shun, and for ever abandon such murderous intentions. --
The cries and vengeance of all the relations of those whose blood shall be shed
in this manner will surround you, death and horror will be your constant
companions, and the torments of the damned, even on earth, will await you.

My Lord, this is but the beginning of sorrows. Take in good part what I write.
It is truth, and intended for the benefit of Britain and America.

AN ENGLISH AMERICAN.

Observations on LORD NORTH'S Conciliatory PLAN.
I CANNOT recall an idea to my mind more amazingly absurd and stupid than the
idea of Lord North's second attempt to gull the Colonists into a belief of his
inclination to hold out to them terms of a safe and amicable reconciliation
with Great Britain. No one is ignorant that the Americans have offered every
thing that can possibly be devised to bury the injurious and enslaving claims
of administration, in perpetual oblivion, and leave matters on the same footing
they were before the pretense was held up. Those generous proposals, however
often repeated, have as often been rejected with an insolent contempt, and yet
the profound politician tells his opponents in the British House of Commons,
that he is heartily inclined to a reconciliation with the Colonies, and willing
to put them in the situation they so passionately desire; that is, says he, to
a courtier demanding explanation, in a state of absolute dependence on the
British Parliament in all cases whatsoever; for, says his Lordship, they were
unquestionably thus dependant in 1763. Had his Lordship entirely forgot the
success of his former experiment, perhaps a trial of the same wretched trick
over again, might have appeared less rediculous. I may indeed say, less
insulting to the lowest understanding. I would ask the most credulous votary
for making up the dispute, what possible grounds they perceive to found their
expectation of a permanent reconciliation upon? Has any thing lately turned up,
which has indicated a change of disposition in the Prince or his favorites?
Can a majority, which have been secured from one seven years to another, by
pure force of corruption, be depended on to remain firm to a slaughtering,
plundering and desolating court, and share the detestation of present and
future ages, for mere nothing? Has the court resolved to cast Bernard,
Hutchinson and daughter, Richardson the Murderer, crazy John Malcom, and
Richardson the recent volunteer, out on the common? I tell you, nay! You have a
fresh instance of the firmness of the cabinet, in adding another three thousand
pound pensioner to the list, in a conjuncture, when all mankind will confess
there is need of saving. These burdensome pensions must come from some part of
the dominions! If Great Britain and Ireland have conceived such a mortal hatred
to America, that they can hug her most inveterate enemies in their bosoms, and
vote them such munificent rewards for drawher into so destructive a civil war,
we cannot be safe in the power of such enemies. If they abound in resources as
largely as Mr. Wedderburne and others boast they do, let them cease complaining
of their poverty, and contentedly discharge their own national debt, rather
than go on augmenting it, by their efforts to saddle it, with an unlimited
pension list, on America. Does the nation bear the weight of the present
unnatural quarrel with America on other terms, than a firm assurance of the
Court, that millions of leading men's dependants shall be provided for in
America, for whom places can by no means be found at home. Is not the very
genius of the people of Great Britain and Ireland corrupted, insomuch, that the
views of young fellows of education, or any connection with men of note, are
altogether set on public money? Can our peaceable men indulge a gleam of hope,
that this humor will alter, or that youths, bred in idleness and dissipation,
will become industrious and difinterested patriots? If not they must then be so
weak as to conceit, that ministers will become less fond of fingering the
public money, and securing themselves in places of power and profit by means of
it; indeed, that they will become more honest and saving of the national money
than those the constitution has appointed as a check upon them. It is no wonder
they tell of sending a formidable fleet and army to bring over terms of
reconciliation, when they are in no one article different from the terms they
first aimed to impose. Had the minister, or more properly the obstinate author
of all our troubles, had the remotest idea of favoring us with a government of
laws, which had any respect to the security of our lives and properties, he had
long since granted with a good grace, petitions, made and repeated with the
most dutiful and persevering affection, which asked for nothing more! Sed aut
Caesar aut nullus, seems the unalterable determination of the man, who soothed
our already elated expectations, by an inaugural declaration, that he gloried
in the name of Briton, at that time, a distinctive characteristic of the
patrons of universal liberty. If therefore the whole body of the governing, and
influential part of the governed in Great Britain, be unalterably set upon
extorting tribute from the Colonies; and the better to secure the laws, and
executors of those laws, dependant only on themselves for appointment,
continuance and support; and all these to be extended at their sole pleasure,
it may readily be determined in what condition, the absolutely passive subjects
of such an unnatural usurpation would quickly be. It is evident they have
concluded on two things, viz. to make a bold push for our entire subjection, as
their ends would be thereby more readily answered; but that being found
impracticable, we are to be tried with negotiation, in which all the craft,
duplicity and punic faith of administration is to be expected. Pray God it may
be wisely and firmly guarded againist! The worthy and honorable John Collins,
Esquire; of New-Port, Rhode Island, on the arrival of Lord North's last
conciliatory plan, observed, that notwithstanding the exposure of his large
estate, to whatever depredations the enemy saw fit to make upon it, he was more
concerned for the probable success of their arts than arms. Had the Americans
in general the wisdom and firmness of that gentleman, matters would not have
come to the present melancholy lengths we find them. However, in the great and
general plan of him who puts down and sets up states, this is doubtless
an indispensible part, and therefore not to be complained of; but it has amazed
me to contemplate the numerous instances of disappointment our enemies have met
with, in every plot they have laid for our destruction. How did Bernard and
Hutchinson flatter themselves with the number of friends they had in the
several towns of the Massachusetts, and thought that a very trifling force,
from the other side of the water, added to their minions, dependants and
expectants, would crush a little turbulent faction, who disturbed their darling
measures? Certainly men intoxicated with a lust of absolute power found
something in the appearance of things to tole them on to an object so grateful
to their fondest wishes; otherwise they would have been contented to augment
and confirm their power by such unperceived degrees that the happy days many
tell us we have enjoyed under a continual invading usurpation, would not yet
have been so sensibly interrupted. No less has the so often extolled Gov. Tryon
been disappointed in his benevolent intentions respecting New York. His band on
Long Island, and the east side of Hudson's river, with Sir John Johnson among
his vassals, gave great hopes of having matters in a fine train before the
invincible armada arrived in the spring; instead of which, it is probable the
active General Lee will so sortify that place, that all the force they can send
against it, will be insufficient to reduce it. Dunmore, with all his wanton
ravage, has done little more than exasperate the Virginians, and convinced that
brave colony, that they can be formidable to savages on the east, as well as
west side of their dominion. Carleton's Canadians make no such figure in the
harrangues of the pensioner as they did last year; and in case foreigners are
to be procured to be poured in upon us, the greatest opposers of our total
separation from Britain acknowledge, they would then no longer defer a
declaration of independancy, and application to other powers for their
protection. To this the whole scene appears rapidly advancing, in my view, as
hastily as infinite wisdom thinks proper to conduct it; and if this be his most
gracious design, he will work, and none shall hinder. Amen, Beneficent Jehovah!
Amen. Sic sperat

SINCERUS.

APPENDIX to COMMON SENSE.
The Necessity of INDEPENDANCY.
SINCE the publication of the first edition of this pamphlet, or rather on the
same day on which it came out, the King's Speech made its appearance in this
city. Had the spirit of prophecy directed the birth of this production, it
could not have brought it forth at a more seasonable juncture, or a more
necessary time. The bloody mindedness of the one, shows the necessity of
pursuing the doctrine of the other. Men read by way of revenge. And the Speech,
instead of terrifying, prepared a way for the manly principles of Independance.

Ceremony, and even silence, from whatever motive they may arise, have a
hurtful tendency, when they give the least degree of countenance to base and
wicked performances! wherefore if this maxim be admitted, it naturally follows,
that the King's Speech, as being a piece of finished villainy, deserved, and
still deserves, a general execration, both by the Congress and the people. Yet,
as the domestic tranquillity of a nation depends greatly on the chastity of what
may properly be called NATIONAL MANNERS, it is often better, to pass some
things over in silent disdain, than to make use of such new methods of dislike,
as might introduce the least innovation on that guardian of our peace and
safety. And perhaps, it is chiefly owing to this prudent delicacy, that the
King's Speech has not, before now, suffered a public execution. The speech, if
it may be called one, is nothing better than a wilful audacious libel against
the truth, the common good, and the existence of mankind; and is a formal and
pompous method of offering up human sacrifices to the pride of tyrants. But
this general massacre of mankind, is one of the privileges, and the certain
consequence of Kings; for as nature knows them not, they know not her, and
although they are beings of our own creating, they know not us, and are become
the gods of their creators. The speech has one good quality, which is, that it
is not calculated to deceive, neither can we, even if we would, be deceived by
it. Brutality and tyranny appear on the face of it. It leaves us at no loss:
And every line convinces, even in the moment of reading, that he, who hunts the
wood for prey, the naked and untutored Indian, in less a Savage than the King
of Britain.

Sir John Dalrymple, the putative father of a whining jesuitieal piece, fall
aciously called, " The address of the people of England, to the Inhabitants of
America," has, perhaps, from a vain supposition, that the people here were to
be frightened at the pomp and description of a king, giving, (though very
unwisely on his part) the real character of the present one: "But," says the
writer, "if you are inclined to pay compliments to an administration which we
do not complain of, (meaning the Marquis of Rockingham's at the repeal of the
Stamp act,) it is very unfair in you to withhold them from that prince by whose
NOD ALONE, they were permitted to do any thing." This is toryism with a
witness! Here is idolatry even without a mask: And he who can calmly hear and
digest such doctrine, has forfeited his claim to rationality -- an apostate
from the order of manhood, and ought to be considered -- as one, who has not
only given up the proper dignity of man, but sunk himself beneath the rank of
animals, and contemptibly crawl through the world like a worm.

However, it matters very little now, what the king of England either says or
does; he has wickedly broken through every moral and human obligation,
trampled nature and conscience beneath his feet; and by a steady and
constitutional spirit of insolence and cruelty, procured for himself an
universal hatred. It is now the interest of America to provide for herself, She
has already a large and young family, whom it is more her duty to take care
of, than to be granting away her property to support a power who is become a
reproach to the names of men and christians. YE, whose office it is to watch
over the morals of a nation, of whatsoever sect or denomination ye are, as well
as ye, who are more immediately the guardians of the public liberty, if ye wish
to preserve your native country uncontaminated by European corruption, ye must
in secret wish a separation -- But leaving the moral part to private
reflection, I shall chiefly confine my farther remarks to the following heads:
First, That it is the interest of America to be separated from Britain.
Secondly, Which is the easiest and most practicable plan, reconciliation or
independance? with some occasional remarks.


In support of the first, I could, if I judged it proper, produce the opinion
of some of the ablest and most experienced men on this continent; and whose
sentiments, on that head, are not yet publicly known. It is in reality a
self-evident position: For no nation, in a state of foreign dependence, limited
in its commerce, and cramped and fettered in its legislative powers, can ever
arrive at any material eminence. America does not yet know what opulence is;
and although the progress which she has made, stands unparalleled in the
history of other nations, it is but childhood, compared with what she would be
capable of arriving at, had she, as she ought to have, the legislative powers
in her own hands. England is, at this time, proudly coveting what would do her
no good, were she to accomplish it; and the continent hesitating on a matter,
which will be her final ruin if neglected. It is the commerce, and not the
conquest of America, by which England is to be benefited, and that would in a
great measure continue, were the countries as independent of each other as
France and Spain; because in many articles, neither can go to a better market.
But it is the independance of this country on Britain or any other, which is
now the main and only object worthy of contention, and which, like all other
truths discovered by necessity, will appear clearer and stronger every day.

First. Because it will come to that one time or other.

Secondly. Because the longer it is delayed, the harder it will be to
accomplish.

I have frequently amused myself both in public and private companies, with
silently remarking the specious errors of those who speak without reflecting.
And among the many which I have heard, the following seems the most general,
viz. that had this rupture happened forty or fifty years hence, instead of now,
the Continent would have been more able to have shaken off the dependence. To
which I reply, that our military ability at this time, arises from the
experience gained in the late war, and which in forty or fifty years time,
would have been totally extinct. The Continent would not, by that time, have
had a General, or even a military officer left; and we, or those who may
succeed us, would have been as ignorant of martial matters as the ancient
Indians: And this single position, closely attended to, will unanswerably
prove, that the present time is preferable to all others: The argument turns
thus: At the conclusion of the last war, we had experience, but wanted numbers;
and forty or fifty years hence, we should have numbers, without experience;
wherefore, the proper point of time must be some particular point between the
two extremes, in which a sufficiency of the former remains, and a proper
increase of the latter is obtained: And that point of time is the present time.

The reader will pardon this digression, as it does not properly come under the
head I first set out with, and to which I again return by the following
position, viz.

Should affairs be patched up with Britain, and she to remain the governing and
sovereign power of America, (which as matters are now circumstanced, is giving
up the point entirely) we shall deprive ourselves of the very means of sinking
the debt we have, or may contract. The value of the back lands, which some of
the provinces are clandestinely deprived of, by the unjust extention of the
limits of Canada, valued only at five pounds sterling per hundred acres, amount
to upwards of twenty five millions, Pennsylvania currency; and the quit-rents
at one penny sterling per acre, to two millions yearly.

It is by the sale of those lands, that the debt may be sunk, without burden
to any, and the quit rent reserved thereon, will always lessen, and in time
will wholly support the yearly expense of government. It matters not how long
the debt is in paying, so that the lands when sold, be applied to the discharge
of it, and for the execution of which, the Congress for the time being, will be
the continental trustees.

I proceed now to the second head, viz. Which is the easiest and most
practicable plan, Reconciliation or Independance; with some occasional remarks.

He who takes nature for his guide, is not easily beaten out of his argument,
and on that ground, I answer generally, That Independance being a single simple
line, contained within ourselves; and reconciliation, a matter exceedingly
perplexed and complicated, and in which, a treacherous capricious court is to
interfere, gives the answer without a doubt.

The present state of America is truly alarming to every man who is capable of
reflection. Without law, without government, without any other mode of power
than what is founded on, and granted by courtesy. Held together by an
unexampled concurrence of sentiment, which, is nevertheless subject to change,
and which, every secret enemy is endeavoring to dissolve. Our present
condition, is, Legislation without law, wisdom without a plan; a constitution
without a name; and, what is strangely astonishing, perfect Independance
contending for dependence. The instance is without a precedent; the case never
existed before; and who can tell what may be the event? The property of no man
is secure in the present unbraced system of things. The mind of the multitude
is left at random, and seeing no fixed object before them, they pursue such as
fancy or opinion starts. Nothing is criminal; there is no such thing as
treason; wherefore, every one thinks himself at liberty to act [as he pleases.
The Tories would not have dared to assemble offensively, had they known that
their lives, by that act, were forfeited to the laws of the state. A line of
distinction should be drawn, between English soldiers taken in battle, and
inhabitants of America taken in arms. The first are prisoners, but the latter
traitors. The one forfeits his liberty, the other his head.

Notwithstanding our wisdom, there is a visible feebleness in some of our
proceedings, which gives encouragement to dissentions. The Continental Belt is
too loosely buckled. And if something is not done in time, it will be too late
to do any thing, and we shall fall into a state in which, neither
Reconciliation not Independance will be practicable. The king and his worthless
adherents are got at the old game of dividing the Continent, and there are not
wanting among us, Printers, who will be busy in spreading specious falsehoods.
The artful and hypocritical letter, which appeared a few months ago, in two of
the New York papers, and likewise in two others, is an evidence, that there are
men who want either judgment or honesty.

It is easy getting into holes and corners, and talking of reconciliation: But
do such men seriously consider; how difficult the task is, and how dangerous it
may prove, should the Continent divide thereon. Do they take within their view,
all the various orders of men, whose situation and circumstances, as well as
their own, are to be considered therein. Do they put themselves in the place of
the sufferer, whose all is already gone, and of the soldier, who has quitted
all for the defense of his country. If their ill-judged moderation be suited to
their own private situations only, regardless of others, the event will
convince them, that "they are reckoning without their host."

Put us, say some, upon the footing we were on in sixty-three: To which I
answer, the request is not now in the power of Britain to comply with, neither
will she propose it; but if it were, and even should be granted, I ask, as a
reasonable question, By what means is such a corrupt and faithless court to be
kept to its engagements? Another parliament, nay, even the present, may
hereafter repeal the obligation, on the pretense of its being violently
obtained, or unwisely granted; and in that case, Where is our redress? -- No
going to law with nations; cannon are the barristers of crowns; and the sword,
not of justice, but of war decides the suit. To be on the footing of
sixty-three, it is not sufficient, that the laws only be put on the same state;
but that our circumstances, likewise be put on the same state; our burnt and
destroyed towns repaired or built up, our private losses made good, our public
debts (contracted for defense) discharged; otherwise we shall be millions worse
than we were at that enviable period. Such a request, had it been complied with
a year ago, would have won the heart and soul of the Continent, but now it is
too late. "The Rubicon is passed."

Besides, the taking up arms, merely to enforce the repeal of a pecuniary law,
seems as unwarrantable by the divine law, and as repugnant to human feelings,
as the taking up arms to enforce the obedience thereto. The object, on either
side, does not justify the means; for the lives of men are too valuable, to be
cast away on such trifles, It is the violence which is done and threatened to
our persons; the destruction of our property by an armed force; the invasion of
our country by fire and sword, which conscientiously qualifies the use of arms:
And the instant, in which such a mode of defense became necessary, all
subjection to Britain ought to have ceased; and the independancy of America,
should have been considered, as dating its era from, and published by, the
first musket that was fired against her. This line is a line of consistency;
neither drawn by caprice, nor extended by ambition; but produced by a chain of
events, of which the colonies were not the authors.

I shall conclude these remarks, with the following timely and well intended
hint. We ought to reflect, that there are three different ways, by which an
independancy may hereafter be offected; and that one of those three, will one
day or other, be the fate of America, viz. By the legal voice of the people in
Congress; by a military power; or by a mob: It may not always happen that our
soldiers are citizens, and the multitude a body of reasonable men; virtue, as I
have already remarked, is not hereditary, neither is it perpetual. Should an
independency be brought about by the first of those means, we have every
opportunity and every encouragement before us, to form the noblest purest
constitution on the face of the earth. We have it in our power to begin the
world over again. A situation, similar to the present, has not happened since
the days of Noah until now. The birth day of a new world is at hand, and a race
of men, perhaps as numerous as all Europe contains, are to receive their
portion of freedom from the event of a few months. The reflection is awful and
in this point of view, how trifling, how ridiculous, do the little paltry
cavillings, of a few weak or interested men appear, when weighed against the
business of a world.

Should we neglect the present favorable and inviting period, and an
inpependance be hereafter effected by other means, we must charge the
consequence to ourselves, or to those rather, whose narrow and perjudiced
souls, are habitually opposing the sures, without either inquiring or
reflecting. There are reasons to be given in support of independance, which men
should rather privately think of, than be publicly told of. We ought not now
to be debating whether we shall be independent or not, but, anxious to
accomplish it on a firm secure, and honorable basis, and uneasy rather that it
is not yet began upon. Every day convinces us of its necessity. Even the Tories
(if such beings yet remain among us) should, of all men, be the most solicitous
to promote it; for as the appointment of committees at first, protected them
from popular rage, so, a wise and well established form of government, will be
the only certain means of continuing it securely to them. Wherefore, if they
have not virtue enough to be WHIGS, they ought to have prudence enough to wish
for Independance.

In short, Independance is the only BOND that can tie and keep us together. We
shall then see our object, and our ears will be legally shut against the
schemes of an intriguing, as well as a cruel enemy. We shall then too be on a
proper footing to treat with Britain; for there is reason to conclude, that the
pride of that court will be less hurt by treating with the American states for
terms of peace, than with those she denominates "rebellious subjects," for
terms of accommodation. It is our delaying it that encourages her to hope for
conquest, and our backwardness tends only to prolong the war. As we have,
without any good effect therefrom, withheld our trade to obtain a redress of
our grievances, let us now try the alternative, by independantly redressing
them ourselves, and then offering to open the trade. The mercantile and
reasonable part in England will be still with us; because, peace with trade, is
preferable to war without it. And if this offer is not accepted, other courts
may be applied to. On these grounds I rest the matter. And as no offer has yet
been made to refute the doctrine contained in the former editions of this
pamphlet, it is a negative proof, that either the doctrine cannot be refuted,
or, that the party in favor of it are too numerous to be opposed. Wherefore,
instead of gazing at each other with suspicious or doubtful curiosity, let each
of us hold out to his neighbor the hearty hand of friendship, and unite in
drawing, a line, which, like an act of oblivion, shall bury in forgetfulness
every former dissension. Let the names of Whig and Tory be extinct; and let
none other be beard among us, than those of a good citizen, an open and
resolute friend, and a virtuous supporter of the rights of mankind and of the
free and independent states of America.

To the Representatives of the Religious Society of the People called Quakers,
or to so many of them as were concerned in publishing a late piece, entitled
The ANCIENT TESTIMONY and PRINCIPLES of the People called QUAKERS renewed, with
Respect to the KING and GOVERNMENT, and touching the COMMOTIONS now prevailing
in these and other parts of AMERICA, addressed to the People in General.
THE Writer of this, is one of those few, who never dishonors religion either
by ridiculing, or cavilling at any denomination whatsoever. To God and not to
man, are all men accountable on the score of religion. Wherefore, this epistle
is not so properly addressed to you as a religious, but as a political body,
dabbling in matters, which the professed Quietude of your Principles instruct
you not to meddle with.

As you have, without a proper authority for so doing, put yourselves in the
place of the whole body of the Quakers, so, the writer of this, in order to be
on an equal rank with yourselves, is under the necessity of putting himself in
the place of all those, who approve the very writings and principles, against
which, your testimony is directed: And he has chosen this singular situation,
in order, that you might discover in him that presumption of character which
you cannot see in yourselves. For neither he nor you can have any claim or
title to Political Representation.

When men have departed from the right way, it is no wonder that they stumble
and fall. And it is evident from the manner in which ye have managed your
testimony, that politics, (as a religious body of men) is not your proper Walk;
for however well adapted it might appear to you, it is, nevertheless, a jumble
of good and bad put unwisely together, and the conclusion drawn therefrom, both
unnatural and unjust.

The two first pages, (and the whole does not make four) we give you credit
for, and expect the same civility from you, because the love and desire of
peace is not confined to Quakerism, it is the natural, as well as, the
religious wish of all denominations of men. And on this ground, as men laboring
to establish an Independent Constitution of our own, do we exceed all others in
our hope, end, and aim. Our plan is peace forever. We are tired of contention
with Britain, and can see no real end to it but in a final separation. We act
consistently, because for the sake of introducing an endless and uninterrupted
peace, do we bear the evils and burdens of the present day. We are
endeavoring, and will still continue to endeavor, to separate and dissolve a
connection which has already filled our land with blood; and which, while the
name of it remains, will be the fatal cause of future mischiefs to both
countries.

We fight neither for revenge nor conquest; neither from pride nor passion; we
are not insulting the world with our fleets and armies, nor ravaging the globe
for plunder. Beneath the shade of our own vines are we attacked; in our own
houses, and on our own lands, is the violence committed against us. We view our
enemies in the character of highway men and house-breakers, and having no
defense for ourselves in the civil law, are obliged to punish them by the
military one, and apply the sword, in the very case, where you have before now
applied the halter -- Perhaps we feel for the ruined and insulted sufferers in
all and every part of the Continent, with a degree of tenderness which has not
yet made its way into some of your bosoms. But be ye sure that ye mistake not
the cause and ground of your testimony. Call not coldness of soul, religion;
nor put the Bigot in the place of the Christian.

O ye partial ministers of your own acknowledged principles. If the bearing
arms be sinful, the first going to war must be more so, by all the difference
between wilful attack and unavoidable defense. Wherefore, if ye really preach
from conscience, and mean not to make a political hobbyhorse of your religion,
convince the world thereof by proclaiming your doctrine to our enemies, for
they likewise bear arms. Give us proof of your sincerity by publishing it at
St. James's, to the Commanders in chief at Boston, to the Admirals and Captains
who are piratically ravaging our coasts, and to all the murdering miscreants
who are acting in authority under Him whom ye profess to serve. Had ye the
honest soul of Thou have tasted of prosperity and adversity; thou know what
it in to be banished thy native country, to be overruled as well as to rule,
and set upon the throne; and being oppressed, thou have reason to know how
hateful the oppressor is both to God and man: If after all these warnings and
advertisements, thou do not turn unto the Lord with all thy heart, but forget
him who remembered thee in thy distress, and give up thyself to follow lust and
vanity, surely great will be thy condemnation. -- Against which snare, as well
as the temptation of those who may or do feed thee, and prompt thee to evil,
the most excellent and prevalent remedy will be, to apply thyself to that light
of Christ, which shines in thy conscience, and which neither can, nor will
flatter thee, nor suffer thee to be at ease in thy sine. Barclay's Address to
Charles II.


BARCLAY, ye would preach repentance to your king: Ye would tell the Royal
Wretch his sins, and warn him of eternal ruin. Ye would not spend your partial
invectives against the injured and insulted only, but, like faithful ministers,
would cry aloud and spare none. Say not that ye are persecuted, neither
endeavor to make us the authors of that reproach which ye are bringing on
yourselves; for we testify unto all men, that we do not complain against you
because ye are Quakers, but because ye pretend to be and are not Quakers.

Alas! it seems by the particular tendency of some part of your testimony, and
other parts of your conduct, as if, all sin was reduced to, and comprehended
in, the act of bearing arms, and that by the people only. Ye appear to have
mistaken party for conscience; because the general tenor of your actions wants
uniformity: and it is exceedingly difficult to give credit to many of your
pretended scruples; because, we see them made by the same men, who, in the very
instant that they are exclaiming against the mammon of this world, are
nevertheless hunting after it with a step as steady as Time, and an appetite as
keen as Death.

The quotation which ye have made from Proverbs, in the third page of your
testimony, that, when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies
to be at peace with him, is very unwisely chosen on your part; because, it
amounts to a proof, that the king's ways (whom ye are so desirous of
supporting) do not please the Lord, otherwise, his reign would be in peace.

I now proceed to the latter part of your testimony and that, for which all the
foregoing seems only an introduction, viz.

"It has ever been our judgment and principle, since we were called to profess
the light of Christ Jesus, manifested in our consciences unto this day, that
the setting up and putting down kings and governments, is God's peculiar
prerogative; for causes best known to himself: And that it is not our business
to have any hand or contrivance therein; nor to be busy-bodies above our
station, much less to plot and contrive the ruin or overturn of any of them,
but to pray for the king, and safety of our nation, and good of all men: That
we may live a peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty; under the
government which God is pleased to set over us" -- If these are really your
principles why do you not abide by them? Why do you not leave that, which ye
call God's Work, to be managed by himself? These very principles instruct you
to wait with patience and humility, for the event of all public measures, and
to receive that event as the divine will toward you. Wherefore, what occasion
is there for your political testimony, if you fully believe what it contains?
And the very publishing it proves, that either; ye do not believe what ye
profess, or have not virtue enough to practice what ye believe.

The principles of Quakerism have a direct tendency to make a man the quiet and
inoffensive subject of any, and every government which is set over him. And if
the setting up and pulling down of kings and governments is God's peculiar
prerogative, he most certainly will not be robbed thereof by us; wherefore, the
principle itself leads you to approve of every thing, which ever happened, or
may happen to kings, as being his work. Oliver Cromwell thanks you. Charles,
then, died not by the hands of man; and should the present proud imitators of
him, come to the same untimely end, the writers and publishers of the
testimony, are bound by the doctrine it contains to applaud the fact. Kings are
not taken away by miracles, neither are changes in governments brought about by
any other means than such as are common and human; and such as we are now
using. Even the dispersion of the Jews, though foretold by our Savior, was
effected by arms. Wherefore, as you refuse to be the means on one side, ye
ought not to be meddlers on the other; but to wait the issue in silence? and
unless ye can produce divine authority, to prove, that the Almighty who created
and placed this new world at the greatest distance it could possibly stand,
east and west, from every part of the old, does, nevertheless, disapprove of
its being independent of the corrupt and abandoned court of Britain, unless, I
say, ye can show this, how can ye on the ground of your principles, justify the
exciting and stirring up the people firmly to unite in the abhorrence of all
such writings, and measures, as evidence a desire and design to break off the
happy connection we have hitherto enjoyed, with the kingdom of Great Britain,
and our just and necessary subordination to the king, and those who are
lawfully placed in authority under him. What a slap of the face is here! The
men, who in the very paragraph before, have quietly and passively resigned up
the ordering, altering, and disposal of kings and governments into the hands of
God, are now recalling their principles, and putting in for a share of the
business. Is it possible, that the conclusion, which is here justly quoted, can
any way follow from the doctrines laid down? The inconsistency is too glaring
not to be seen; the absurdity too great not to be laughed at; and such as could
only have been made by those, whose understandings were darkened by the narrow
and crabbed spirit of a despairing political party; for ye are not to be
considered as the whole body of the Quakers, but only as a factional and
fractional part thereof.

Here ends the examination of your testimony; (which I call upon no man to
abhor, as ye have done, but only to read and judge of fairly) to which I
subjoin the following remark; that the setting up and putting down of kings,
most certainly mean, the making him a king, who is yet not so, and the making
him no king who is already one. And pray what has this to do in the present
case? We neither mean to set up nor to pull down, neither to make nor to
unmake, but to have nothing to do with them. Wherefore, your testimony in
whatever light it is viewed, serves only to dishonor your judgment, and for
many other reasons had better been let alone than published.

First, Because it tends to the decrease and reproach of all religion whatever,
and is of the utmost danger to society, to make it a party in political
disputes.

Secondly, Because it exhibits a body of men, numbers of whom disavow the
publishing political testimonies, as being concerned therein and approvers
thereof.

Thirdly, Because it has a tendency to undo that Continental harmony and
friendship which yourselves by your late liberal and charatable donations has
lent a hand to establish; and the preservation of which, is of the utmost
consequence to us all.

And here without anger or resentment I bid you farewell. Sincerely wishing,
that as men and christians, ye may always fully and uninterruptedly enjoy every
civil and religious right; and be, in your turn, the means of securing it to
others; but that the example which ye have unwisely set, of mingling religion
with politics, may be disavowed and reprobated by every inhabitant of America.

From Entick's Naval History concerning Ship-building.
The charge of building a ship of each rate, and furnishing her with masts,
yards, sails and rigging, together with a proportion of eight months
boatswain's and carpenter's sea-stores, as calculated by Mr. Burchett,
Secretary to the Navy.

For a ship of 100 guns L. 35,553 For a ship of 90 guns L. 29,886 For a ship of
80 guns L. 23,638 For a ship of 70 guns L. 17,785 For a ship of 60 guns L.
14,197 For a ship of 50 guns L. 10,606 For a ship of 40 guns L. 7,558 For a
ship of 30 guns L. 5,846 For a ship of 20 guns L. 3,710

And from hence it is easy to sum up the value, or cost rather, of the whole
British navy, which in the year 1757, when it was at its greatest glory,
consisted of the following ships and guns.

Ships. Guns. Cost of one. Cost of all. 6 100 35,553 l. 213,318 l. 12 90 29,886
358,632 12 80 23,638 283,656 43 70 17,785 764,755 35 60 14,197 496,895 40 50
10,606 424,240 45 40 7,558 340,110 58 20 3,710 215,180 85 sloops, bombs, and
fireships, one with another, at 2,000 170,000 Cost 3,266,786 Remains for guns
233.214 Total 3,500,000


