part ii  a voyage to brobdingnag


chapter i


a great storm described the long boat sent to fetch water the author
goes with it to discover the country  he is left on shore is seized by
one of the natives and carried to a farmers house  his reception with
several accidents that happened there  a description of the inhabitants

having been condemned by nature and fortune to active and restless
life in two months after my return i again left my native country and
took shipping in the downs on the 20th day of june 1702 in the
adventure captain john nicholas a cornish man commander bound for
surat  we had a very prosperous gale till we arrived at the cape of
good hope where we landed for fresh water but discovering a leak we
unshipped our goods and wintered there for the captain falling sick of
an ague we could not leave the cape till the end of march  we then set
sail and had a good voyage till we passed the straits of madagascar but
having got northward of that island and to about five degrees south
latitude the winds which in those seas are observed to blow a constant
equal gale between the north and west from the beginning of december to
the beginning of may on the 19th of april began to blow with much
greater violence and more westerly than usual continuing so for twenty
days together during which time we were driven a little to the east of
the molucca islands and about three degrees northward of the line as
our captain found by an observation he took the 2nd of may at which time
the wind ceased and it was a perfect calm whereat i was not a little
rejoiced  but he being a man well experienced in the navigation of
those seas bid us all prepare against a storm which accordingly
happened the day following for the southern wind called the southern
monsoon began to set in

finding it was likely to overblow we took in our spritsail and stood
by to hand the foresail but making foul weather we looked the guns
were all fast and handed the mizen  the ship lay very broad off so we
thought it better spooning before the sea than trying or hulling  we
reefed the foresail and set him and hauled aft the foresheet the helm
was hard aweather  the ship wore bravely  we belayed the fore
downhaul but the sail was split and we hauled down the yard and got
the sail into the ship and unbound all the things clear of it  it was a
very fierce storm the sea broke strange and dangerous  we hauled off
upon the laniard of the whipstaff and helped the man at the helm  we
would not get down our topmast but let all stand because she scudded
before the sea very well and we knew that the topmast being aloft the
ship was the wholesomer and made better way through the sea seeing we
had searoom  when the storm was over we set foresail and mainsail
and brought the ship to  then we set the mizen maintopsail and the
foretopsail  our course was eastnortheast the wind was at
southwest  we got the starboard tacks aboard we cast off our
weatherbraces and lifts we set in the leebraces and hauled forward by
the weatherbowlings and hauled them tight and belayed them and hauled
over the mizen tack to windward and kept her full and by as near as she
would lie

during this storm which was followed by a strong wind westsouthwest
we were carried by my computation about five hundred leagues to the
east so that the oldest sailor on board could not tell in what part of
the world we were  our provisions held out well our ship was staunch
and our crew all in good health but we lay in the utmost distress for
water  we thought it best to hold on the same course rather than turn
more northerly which might have brought us to the northwest part of
great tartary and into the frozen sea

on the 16th day of june 1703 a boy on the topmast discovered land  on
the 17th we came in full view of a great island or continent for we
knew not whether on the south side whereof was a small neck of land
jutting out into the sea and a creek too shallow to hold a ship of above
one hundred tons  we cast anchor within a league of this creek and our
captain sent a dozen of his men well armed in the longboat with vessels
for water if any could be found  i desired his leave to go with them
that i might see the country and make what discoveries i could  when we
came to land we saw no river or spring nor any sign of inhabitants  our
men therefore wandered on the shore to find out some fresh water near the
sea and i walked alone about a mile on the other side where i observed
the country all barren and rocky  i now began to be weary and seeing
nothing to entertain my curiosity i returned gently down towards the
creek and the sea being full in my view i saw our men already got into
the boat and rowing for life to the ship  i was going to holla after
them although it had been to little purpose when i observed a huge
creature walking after them in the sea as fast as he could he waded not
much deeper than his knees and took prodigious strides but our men had
the start of him half a league and the sea thereabouts being full of
sharppointed rocks the monster was not able to overtake the boat  this
i was afterwards told for i durst not stay to see the issue of the
adventure but ran as fast as i could the way i first went and then
climbed up a steep hill which gave me some prospect of the country  i
found it fully cultivated but that which first surprised me was the
length of the grass which in those grounds that seemed to be kept for
hay was about twenty feet high

i fell into a high road for so i took it to be though it served to the
inhabitants only as a footpath through a field of barley  here i walked
on for some time but could see little on either side it being now near
harvest and the corn rising at least forty feet  i was an hour walking
to the end of this field which was fenced in with a hedge of at least
one hundred and twenty feet high and the trees so lofty that i could
make no computation of their altitude  there was a stile to pass from
this field into the next  it had four steps and a stone to cross over
when you came to the uppermost  it was impossible for me to climb this
stile because every step was sixfeet high and the upper stone about
twenty  i was endeavouring to find some gap in the hedge when i
discovered one of the inhabitants in the next field advancing towards
the stile of the same size with him whom i saw in the sea pursuing our
boat  he appeared as tall as an ordinary spire steeple and took about
ten yards at every stride as near as i could guess  i was struck with
the utmost fear and astonishment and ran to hide myself in the corn
whence i saw him at the top of the stile looking back into the next field
on the right hand and heard him call in a voice many degrees louder than
a speakingtrumpet but the noise was so high in the air that at first i
certainly thought it was thunder  whereupon seven monsters like
himself came towards him with reapinghooks in their hands each hook
about the largeness of six scythes  these people were not so well clad
as the first whose servants or labourers they seemed to be for upon
some words he spoke they went to reap the corn in the field where i lay
i kept from them at as great a distance as i could but was forced to
move with extreme difficulty for the stalks of the corn were sometimes
not above a foot distant so that i could hardly squeeze my body betwixt
them  however i made a shift to go forward till i came to a part of
the field where the corn had been laid by the rain and wind  here it was
impossible for me to advance a step for the stalks were so interwoven
that i could not creep through and the beards of the fallen ears so
strong and pointed that they pierced through my clothes into my flesh
at the same time i heard the reapers not a hundred yards behind me
being quite dispirited with toil and wholly overcome by grief and
dispair i lay down between two ridges and heartily wished i might there
end my days  i bemoaned my desolate widow and fatherless children  i
lamented my own folly and wilfulness in attempting a second voyage
against the advice of all my friends and relations  in this terrible
agitation of mind i could not forbear thinking of lilliput whose
inhabitants looked upon me as the greatest prodigy that ever appeared in
the world where i was able to draw an imperial fleet in my hand and
perform those other actions which will be recorded for ever in the
chronicles of that empire while posterity shall hardly believe them
although attested by millions  i reflected what a mortification it must
prove to me to appear as inconsiderable in this nation as one single
lilliputian would be among us  but this i conceived was to be the least
of my misfortunes for as human creatures are observed to be more savage
and cruel in proportion to their bulk what could i expect but to be a
morsel in the mouth of the first among these enormous barbarians that
should happen to seize me  undoubtedly philosophers are in the right
when they tell us that nothing is great or little otherwise than by
comparison  it might have pleased fortune to have let the lilliputians
find some nation where the people were as diminutive with respect to
them as they were to me  and who knows but that even this prodigious
race of mortals might be equally overmatched in some distant part of the
world whereof we have yet no discovery

scared and confounded as i was i could not forbear going on with these
reflections when one of the reapers approaching within ten yards of the
ridge where i lay made me apprehend that with the next step i should be
squashed to death under his foot or cut in two with his reapinghook
and therefore when he was again about to move i screamed as loud as
fear could make me whereupon the huge creature trod short and looking
round about under him for some time at last espied me as i lay on the
ground  he considered awhile with the caution of one who endeavours to
lay hold on a small dangerous animal in such a manner that it shall not
be able either to scratch or bite him as i myself have sometimes done
with a weasel in england  at length he ventured to take me behind by
the middle between his forefinger and thumb and brought me within
three yards of his eyes that he might behold my shape more perfectly  i
guessed his meaning and my good fortune gave me so much presence of
mind that i resolved not to struggle in the least as he held me in the
air above sixty feet from the ground although he grievously pinched my
sides for fear i should slip through his fingers  all i ventured was to
raise mine eyes towards the sun and place my hands together in a
supplicating posture and to speak some words in a humble melancholy
tone suitable to the condition i then was in for i apprehended every
moment that he would dash me against the ground as we usually do any
little hateful animal which we have a mind to destroy  but my good star
would have it that he appeared pleased with my voice and gestures and
began to look upon me as a curiosity much wondering to hear me pronounce
articulate words although he could not understand them  in the mean
time i was not able to forbear groaning and shedding tears and turning
my head towards my sides letting him know as well as i could how
cruelly i was hurt by the pressure of his thumb and finger  he seemed to
apprehend my meaning for lifting up the lappet of his coat he put me
gently into it and immediately ran along with me to his master who was
a substantial farmer and the same person i had first seen in the field

the farmer having as i suppose by their talk received such an account
of me as his servant could give him took a piece of a small straw about
the size of a walkingstaff and therewith lifted up the lappets of my
coat which it seems he thought to be some kind of covering that nature
had given me  he blew my hairs aside to take a better view of my face
he called his hinds about him and asked them as i afterwards learned
whether they had ever seen in the fields any little creature that
resembled me  he then placed me softly on the ground upon all fours but
i got immediately up and walked slowly backward and forward to let
those people see i had no intent to run away  they all sat down in a
circle about me the better to observe my motions  i pulled off my hat
and made a low bow towards the farmer  i fell on my knees and lifted up
my hands and eyes and spoke several words as loud as i could i took a
purse of gold out of my pocket and humbly presented it to him  he
received it on the palm of his hand then applied it close to his eye to
see what it was and afterwards turned it several times with the point of
a pin which he took out of his sleeve but could make nothing of it
whereupon i made a sign that he should place his hand on the ground  i
then took the purse and opening it poured all the gold into his palm
there were six spanish pieces of four pistoles each beside twenty or
thirty smaller coins  i saw him wet the tip of his little finger upon
his tongue and take up one of my largest pieces and then another but
he seemed to be wholly ignorant what they were  he made me a sign to put
them again into my purse and the purse again into my pocket which
after offering it to him several times i thought it best to do

the farmer by this time was convinced i must be a rational creature
he spoke often to me but the sound of his voice pierced my ears like
that of a watermill yet his words were articulate enough  i answered
as loud as i could in several languages and he often laid his ear within
two yards of me but all in vain for we were wholly unintelligible to
each other  he then sent his servants to their work and taking his
handkerchief out of his pocket he doubled and spread it on his left
hand which he placed flat on the ground with the palm upward making me
a sign to step into it as i could easily do for it was not above a foot
in thickness  i thought it my part to obey and for fear of falling
laid myself at full length upon the handkerchief with the remainder of
which he lapped me up to the head for further security and in this
manner carried me home to his house  there he called his wife and
showed me to her but she screamed and ran back as women in england do
at the sight of a toad or a spider  however when she had a while seen
my behaviour and how well i observed the signs her husband made she was
soon reconciled and by degrees grew extremely tender of me

it was about twelve at noon and a servant brought in dinner  it was
only one substantial dish of meat fit for the plain condition of a
husbandman in a dish of about fourandtwenty feet diameter  the
company were the farmer and his wife three children and an old
grandmother  when they were sat down the farmer placed me at some
distance from him on the table which was thirty feet high from the
floor  i was in a terrible fright and kept as far as i could from the
edge for fear of falling  the wife minced a bit of meat then crumbled
some bread on a trencher and placed it before me  i made her a low bow
took out my knife and fork and fell to eat which gave them exceeding
delight  the mistress sent her maid for a small dram cup which held
about two gallons and filled it with drink i took up the vessel with
much difficulty in both hands and in a most respectful manner drank to
her ladyships health expressing the words as loud as i could in
english which made the company laugh so heartily that i was almost
deafened with the noise  this liquor tasted like a small cider and was
not unpleasant  then the master made me a sign to come to his trencher
side but as i walked on the table being in great surprise all the time
as the indulgent reader will easily conceive and excuse i happened to
stumble against a crust and fell flat on my face but received no hurt
i got up immediately and observing the good people to be in much
concern i took my hat which i held under my arm out of good manners
and waving it over my head made three huzzas to show i had got no
mischief by my fall  but advancing forward towards my master as i shall
henceforth call him his youngest son who sat next to him an arch boy
of about ten years old took me up by the legs and held me so high in
the air that i trembled every limb but his father snatched me from him
and at the same time gave him such a box on the left ear as would have
felled an european troop of horse to the earth ordering him to be taken
from the table  but being afraid the boy might owe me a spite and well
remembering how mischievous all children among us naturally are to
sparrows rabbits young kittens and puppy dogs i fell on my knees and
pointing to the boy made my master to understand as well as i could
that i desired his son might be pardoned  the father complied and the
lad took his seat again whereupon i went to him and kissed his hand
which my master took and made him stroke me gently with it

in the midst of dinner my mistresss favourite cat leaped into her lap
i heard a noise behind me like that of a dozen stockingweavers at work
and turning my head i found it proceeded from the purring of that
animal who seemed to be three times larger than an ox as i computed by
the view of her head and one of her paws while her mistress was feeding
and stroking her  the fierceness of this creatures countenance
altogether discomposed me though i stood at the farther end of the
table above fifty feet off and although my mistress held her fast for
fear she might give a spring and seize me in her talons  but it
happened there was no danger for the cat took not the least notice of me
when my master placed me within three yards of her  and as i have been
always told and found true by experience in my travels that flying or
discovering fear before a fierce animal is a certain way to make it
pursue or attack you so i resolved in this dangerous juncture to show
no manner of concern  i walked with intrepidity five or six times before
the very head of the cat and came within half a yard of her whereupon
she drew herself back as if she were more afraid of me i had less
apprehension concerning the dogs whereof three or four came into the
room as it is usual in farmers houses one of which was a mastiff
equal in bulk to four elephants and another a greyhound somewhat taller
than the mastiff but not so large

when dinner was almost done the nurse came in with a child of a year old
in her arms who immediately spied me and began a squall that you might
have heard from londonbridge to chelsea after the usual oratory of
infants to get me for a plaything  the mother out of pure indulgence
took me up and put me towards the child who presently seized me by the
middle and got my head into his mouth where i roared so loud that the
urchin was frighted and let me drop and i should infallibly have broke
my neck if the mother had not held her apron under me  the nurse to
quiet her babe made use of a rattle which was a kind of hollow vessel
filled with great stones and fastened by a cable to the childs waist
but all in vain so that she was forced to apply the last remedy by
giving it suck  i must confess no object ever disgusted me so much as
the sight of her monstrous breast which i cannot tell what to compare
with so as to give the curious reader an idea of its bulk shape and
colour  it stood prominent six feet and could not be less than sixteen
in circumference  the nipple was about half the bigness of my head and
the hue both of that and the dug so varied with spots pimples and
freckles that nothing could appear more nauseous for i had a near sight
of her she sitting down the more conveniently to give suck and i
standing on the table  this made me reflect upon the fair skins of our
english ladies who appear so beautiful to us only because they are of
our own size and their defects not to be seen but through a magnifying
glass where we find by experiment that the smoothest and whitest skins
look rough and coarse and illcoloured

i remember when i was at lilliput the complexion of those diminutive
people appeared to me the fairest in the world and talking upon this
subject with a person of learning there who was an intimate friend of
mine he said that my face appeared much fairer and smoother when he
looked on me from the ground than it did upon a nearer view when i took
him up in my hand and brought him close which he confessed was at first
a very shocking sight  he said he could discover great holes in my
skin that the stumps of my beard were ten times stronger than the
bristles of a boar and my complexion made up of several colours
altogether disagreeable although i must beg leave to say for myself
that i am as fair as most of my sex and country and very little sunburnt
by all my travels  on the other side discoursing of the ladies in that
emperors court he used to tell me one had freckles another too wide
a mouth a third too large a nose nothing of which i was able to
distinguish  i confess this reflection was obvious enough which
however i could not forbear lest the reader might think those vast
creatures were actually deformed for i must do them the justice to say
they are a comely race of people and particularly the features of my
masters countenance although he was but a farmer when i beheld him
from the height of sixty feet appeared very well proportioned

when dinner was done my master went out to his labourers and as i
could discover by his voice and gesture gave his wife strict charge to
take care of me  i was very much tired and disposed to sleep which my
mistress perceiving she put me on her own bed and covered me with a
clean white handkerchief but larger and coarser than the mainsail of a
manofwar

i slept about two hours and dreamt i was at home with my wife and
children which aggravated my sorrows when i awaked and found myself
alone in a vast room between two and three hundred feet wide and above
two hundred high lying in a bed twenty yards wide  my mistress was gone
about her household affairs and had locked me in  the bed was eight
yards from the floor  some natural necessities required me to get down
i durst not presume to call and if i had it would have been in vain
with such a voice as mine at so great a distance from the room where i
lay to the kitchen where the family kept  while i was under these
circumstances two rats crept up the curtains and ran smelling backwards
and forwards on the bed  one of them came up almost to my face
whereupon i rose in a fright and drew out my hanger to defend myself
these horrible animals had the boldness to attack me on both sides and
one of them held his forefeet at my collar but i had the good fortune
to rip up his belly before he could do me any mischief  he fell down at
my feet and the other seeing the fate of his comrade made his escape
but not without one good wound on the back which i gave him as he fled
and made the blood run trickling from him  after this exploit i walked
gently to and fro on the bed to recover my breath and loss of spirits
these creatures were of the size of a large mastiff but infinitely more
nimble and fierce so that if i had taken off my belt before i went to
sleep i must have infallibly been torn to pieces and devoured  i
measured the tail of the dead rat and found it to be two yards long
wanting an inch but it went against my stomach to drag the carcass off
the bed where it lay still bleeding i observed it had yet some life
but with a strong slash across the neck i thoroughly despatched it

soon after my mistress came into the room who seeing me all bloody ran
and took me up in her hand  i pointed to the dead rat smiling and
making other signs to show i was not hurt whereat she was extremely
rejoiced calling the maid to take up the dead rat with a pair of tongs
and throw it out of the window  then she set me on a table where i
showed her my hanger all bloody and wiping it on the lappet of my coat
returned it to the scabbard  i was pressed to do more than one thing
which another could not do for me and therefore endeavoured to make my
mistress understand that i desired to be set down on the floor which
after she had done my bashfulness would not suffer me to express myself
farther than by pointing to the door and bowing several times  the
good woman with much difficulty at last perceived what i would be at
and taking me up again in her hand walked into the garden where she set
me down  i went on one side about two hundred yards and beckoning to
her not to look or to follow me i hid myself between two leaves of
sorrel and there discharged the necessities of nature

i hope the gentle reader will excuse me for dwelling on these and the
like particulars which however insignificant they may appear to
groveling vulgar minds yet will certainly help a philosopher to enlarge
his thoughts and imagination and apply them to the benefit of public as
well as private life which was my sole design in presenting this and
other accounts of my travels to the world wherein i have been chiefly
studious of truth without affecting any ornaments of learning or of
style  but the whole scene of this voyage made so strong an impression
on my mind and is so deeply fixed in my memory that in committing it
to paper i did not omit one material circumstance however upon a strict
review i blotted out several passages of less moment which were in my
first copy for fear of being censured as tedious and trifling whereof
travellers are often perhaps not without justice accused



chapter ii


a description of the farmers daughter  the author carried to a
markettown and then to the metropolis  the particulars of his journey

my mistress had a daughter of nine years old a child of towardly parts
for her age very dexterous at her needle and skilful in dressing her
baby  her mother and she contrived to fit up the babys cradle for me
against night the cradle was put into a small drawer of a cabinet and
the drawer placed upon a hanging shelf for fear of the rats  this was my
bed all the time i staid with those people though made more convenient
by degrees as i began to learn their language and make my wants known
this young girl was so handy that after i had once or twice pulled off
my clothes before her she was able to dress and undress me though i
never gave her that trouble when she would let me do either myself  she
made me seven shirts and some other linen of as fine cloth as could be
got which indeed was coarser than sackcloth and these she constantly
washed for me with her own hands  she was likewise my schoolmistress
to teach me the language when i pointed to any thing she told me the
name of it in her own tongue so that in a few days i was able to call
for whatever i had a mind to  she was very goodnatured and not above
forty feet high being little for her age  she gave me the name of
grildrig which the family took up and afterwards the whole kingdom
the word imports what the latins call nanunculus the italians
homunceletino and the english mannikin  to her i chiefly owe my
preservation in that country we never parted while i was there i called
her my glumdalclitch or little nurse and should be guilty of great
ingratitude if i omitted this honourable mention of her care and
affection towards me which i heartily wish it lay in my power to requite
as she deserves instead of being the innocent but unhappy instrument of
her disgrace as i have too much reason to fear

it now began to be known and talked of in the neighbourhood that my
master had found a strange animal in the field about the bigness of a
splacnuck but exactly shaped in every part like a human creature
which it likewise imitated in all its actions seemed to speak in a
little language of its own had already learned several words of theirs
went erect upon two legs was tame and gentle would come when it was
called do whatever it was bid had the finest limbs in the world and a
complexion fairer than a noblemans daughter of three years old  another
farmer who lived hard by and was a particular friend of my master came
on a visit on purpose to inquire into the truth of this story  i was
immediately produced and placed upon a table where i walked as i was
commanded drew my hanger put it up again made my reverence to my
masters guest asked him in his own language how he did and told him
he was welcome just as my little nurse had instructed me  this man
who was old and dimsighted put on his spectacles to behold me better
at which i could not forbear laughing very heartily for his eyes
appeared like the full moon shining into a chamber at two windows  our
people who discovered the cause of my mirth bore me company in
laughing at which the old fellow was fool enough to be angry and out of
countenance  he had the character of a great miser and to my
misfortune he well deserved it by the cursed advice he gave my master
to show me as a sight upon a marketday in the next town which was half
an hours riding about twoandtwenty miles from our house  i guessed
there was some mischief when i observed my master and his friend
whispering together sometimes pointing at me and my fears made me fancy
that i overheard and understood some of their words  but the next
morning glumdalclitch my little nurse told me the whole matter which
she had cunningly picked out from her mother  the poor girl laid me on
her bosom and fell a weeping with shame and grief  she apprehended some
mischief would happen to me from rude vulgar folks who might squeeze me
to death or break one of my limbs by taking me in their hands  she had
also observed how modest i was in my nature how nicely i regarded my
honour and what an indignity i should conceive it to be exposed for
money as a public spectacle to the meanest of the people  she said her
papa and mamma had promised that grildrig should be hers but now she
found they meant to serve her as they did last year when they pretended
to give her a lamb and yet as soon as it was fat sold it to a butcher
for my own part i may truly affirm that i was less concerned than my
nurse  i had a strong hope which never left me that i should one day
recover my liberty and as to the ignominy of being carried about for a
monster i considered myself to be a perfect stranger in the country and
that such a misfortune could never be charged upon me as a reproach if
ever i should return to england since the king of great britain himself
in my condition must have undergone the same distress

my master pursuant to the advice of his friend carried me in a box the
next marketday to the neighbouring town and took along with him his
little daughter my nurse upon a pillion behind him  the box was close
on every side with a little door for me to go in and out and a few
gimlet holes to let in air  the girl had been so careful as to put the
quilt of her babys bed into it for me to lie down on  however i was
terribly shaken and discomposed in this journey though it was but of
half an hour for the horse went about forty feet at every step and
trotted so high that the agitation was equal to the rising and falling
of a ship in a great storm but much more frequent  our journey was
somewhat farther than from london to st albans  my master alighted at
an inn which he used to frequent and after consulting awhile with the
innkeeper and making some necessary preparations he hired the
grultrud or crier to give notice through the town of a strange
creature to be seen at the sign of the green eagle not so big as a
splacnuck an animal in that country very finely shaped about six feet
long and in every part of the body resembling a human creature could
speak several words and perform a hundred diverting tricks

i was placed upon a table in the largest room of the inn which might be
near three hundred feet square  my little nurse stood on a low stool
close to the table to take care of me and direct what i should do  my
master to avoid a crowd would suffer only thirty people at a time to
see me  i walked about on the table as the girl commanded she asked me
questions as far as she knew my understanding of the language reached
and i answered them as loud as i could  i turned about several times to
the company paid my humble respects said they were welcome and used
some other speeches i had been taught  i took up a thimble filled with
liquor which glumdalclitch had given me for a cup and drank their
health i drew out my hanger and flourished with it after the manner of
fencers in england  my nurse gave me a part of a straw which i
exercised as a pike having learnt the art in my youth  i was that day
shown to twelve sets of company and as often forced to act over again
the same fopperies till i was half dead with weariness and vexation for
those who had seen me made such wonderful reports that the people were
ready to break down the doors to come in  my master for his own
interest would not suffer any one to touch me except my nurse and to
prevent danger benches were set round the table at such a distance as to
put me out of every bodys reach  however an unlucky schoolboy aimed a
hazel nut directly at my head which very narrowly missed me otherwise
it came with so much violence that it would have infallibly knocked out
my brains for it was almost as large as a small pumpkin but i had the
satisfaction to see the young rogue well beaten and turned out of the
room

my master gave public notice that he would show me again the next
marketday and in the meantime he prepared a convenient vehicle for me
which he had reason enough to do for i was so tired with my first
journey and with entertaining company for eight hours together that i
could hardly stand upon my legs or speak a word  it was at least three
days before i recovered my strength and that i might have no rest at
home all the neighbouring gentlemen from a hundred miles round hearing
of my fame came to see me at my masters own house  there could not be
fewer than thirty persons with their wives and children for the country
is very populous and my master demanded the rate of a full room
whenever he showed me at home although it were only to a single family
so that for some time i had but little ease every day of the week except
wednesday which is their sabbath although i were not carried to the
town

my master finding how profitable i was likely to be resolved to carry
me to the most considerable cities of the kingdom  having therefore
provided himself with all things necessary for a long journey and
settled his affairs at home he took leave of his wife and upon the 17th
of august 1703 about two months after my arrival we set out for the
metropolis situate near the middle of that empire and about three
thousand miles distance from our house  my master made his daughter
glumdalclitch ride behind him  she carried me on her lap in a box tied
about her waist  the girl had lined it on all sides with the softest
cloth she could get well quilted underneath furnished it with her
babys bed provided me with linen and other necessaries and made
everything as convenient as she could  we had no other company but a boy
of the house who rode after us with the luggage

my masters design was to show me in all the towns by the way and to
step out of the road for fifty or a hundred miles to any village or
person of qualitys house where he might expect custom  we made easy
journeys of not above seven or eight score miles aday for
glumdalclitch on purpose to spare me complained she was tired with the
trotting of the horse  she often took me out of my box at my own
desire to give me air and show me the country but always held me fast
by a leadingstring  we passed over five or six rivers many degrees
broader and deeper than the nile or the ganges and there was hardly a
rivulet so small as the thames at londonbridge  we were ten weeks in
our journey and i was shown in eighteen large towns besides many
villages and private families

on the 26th day of october we arrived at the metropolis called in their
language lorbrulgrud or pride of the universe  my master took a
lodging in the principal street of the city not far from the royal
palace and put out bills in the usual form containing an exact
description of my person and parts  he hired a large room between three
and four hundred feet wide  he provided a table sixty feet in diameter
upon which i was to act my part and pallisadoed it round three feet from
the edge and as many high to prevent my falling over  i was shown ten
times aday to the wonder and satisfaction of all people  i could now
speak the language tolerably well and perfectly understood every word
that was spoken to me  besides i had learnt their alphabet and could
make a shift to explain a sentence here and there for glumdalclitch had
been my instructor while we were at home and at leisure hours during our
journey  she carried a little book in her pocket not much larger than a
sansons atlas it was a common treatise for the use of young girls
giving a short account of their religion out of this she taught me my
letters and interpreted the words



chapter iii


the author sent for to court  the queen buys him of his master the
farmer and presents him to the king  he disputes with his majestys
great scholars  an apartment at court provided for the author  he is in
high favour with the queen  he stands up for the honour of his own
country  his quarrels with the queens dwarf

the frequent labours i underwent every day made in a few weeks a very
considerable change in my health the more my master got by me the more
insatiable he grew  i had quite lost my stomach and was almost reduced
to a skeleton  the farmer observed it and concluding i must soon die
resolved to make as good a hand of me as he could  while he was thus
reasoning and resolving with himself a sardral or gentlemanusher
came from court commanding my master to carry me immediately thither for
the diversion of the queen and her ladies  some of the latter had
already been to see me and reported strange things of my beauty
behaviour and good sense  her majesty and those who attended her were
beyond measure delighted with my demeanour  i fell on my knees and
begged the honour of kissing her imperial foot but this gracious
princess held out her little finger towards me after i was set on the
table which i embraced in both my arms and put the tip of it with the
utmost respect to my lip  she made me some general questions about my
country and my travels which i answered as distinctly and in as few
words as i could  she asked whether i could be content to live at
court  i bowed down to the board of the table and humbly answered
that i was my masters slave but if i were at my own disposal i
should be proud to devote my life to her majestys service  she then
asked my master whether he was willing to sell me at a good price
he who apprehended i could not live a month was ready enough to part
with me and demanded a thousand pieces of gold which were ordered him
on the spot each piece being about the bigness of eight hundred
moidores but allowing for the proportion of all things between that
country and europe and the high price of gold among them was hardly so
great a sum as a thousand guineas would be in england  i then said to
the queen since i was now her majestys most humble creature and
vassal i must beg the favour that glumdalclitch who had always tended
me with so much care and kindness and understood to do it so well might
be admitted into her service and continue to be my nurse and
instructor

her majesty agreed to my petition and easily got the farmers consent
who was glad enough to have his daughter preferred at court and the poor
girl herself was not able to hide her joy  my late master withdrew
bidding me farewell and saying he had left me in a good service to
which i replied not a word only making him a slight bow

the queen observed my coldness and when the farmer was gone out of the
apartment asked me the reason  i made bold to tell her majesty that i
owed no other obligation to my late master than his not dashing out the
brains of a poor harmless creature found by chance in his fields which
obligation was amply recompensed by the gain he had made in showing me
through half the kingdom and the price he had now sold me for  that the
life i had since led was laborious enough to kill an animal of ten times
my strength  that my health was much impaired by the continual drudgery
of entertaining the rabble every hour of the day and that if my master
had not thought my life in danger her majesty would not have got so
cheap a bargain  but as i was out of all fear of being illtreated under
the protection of so great and good an empress the ornament of nature
the darling of the world the delight of her subjects the phoenix of the
creation so i hoped my late masters apprehensions would appear to be
groundless for i already found my spirits revive by the influence of
her most august presence

this was the sum of my speech delivered with great improprieties and
hesitation  the latter part was altogether framed in the style peculiar
to that people whereof i learned some phrases from glumdalclitch while
she was carrying me to court

the queen giving great allowance for my defectiveness in speaking was
however surprised at so much wit and good sense in so diminutive an
animal  she took me in her own hand and carried me to the king who was
then retired to his cabinet  his majesty a prince of much gravity and
austere countenance not well observing my shape at first view asked the
queen after a cold manner how long it was since she grew fond of a
splacnuck for such it seems he took me to be as i lay upon my breast
in her majestys right hand  but this princess who has an infinite deal
of wit and humour set me gently on my feet upon the scrutoire and
commanded me to give his majesty an account of myself which i did in a
very few words and glumdalclitch who attended at the cabinet door and
could not endure i should be out of her sight being admitted confirmed
all that had passed from my arrival at her fathers house

the king although he be as learned a person as any in his dominions had
been educated in the study of philosophy and particularly mathematics
yet when he observed my shape exactly and saw me walk erect before i
began to speak conceived i might be a piece of clockwork which is in
that country arrived to a very great perfection contrived by some
ingenious artist  but when he heard my voice and found what i delivered
to be regular and rational he could not conceal his astonishment  he
was by no means satisfied with the relation i gave him of the manner i
came into his kingdom but thought it a story concerted between
glumdalclitch and her father who had taught me a set of words to make me
sell at a better price  upon this imagination he put several other
questions to me and still received rational answers no otherwise
defective than by a foreign accent and an imperfect knowledge in the
language with some rustic phrases which i had learned at the farmers
house and did not suit the polite style of a court

his majesty sent for three great scholars who were then in their weekly
waiting according to the custom in that country  these gentlemen after
they had a while examined my shape with much nicety were of different
opinions concerning me  they all agreed that i could not be produced
according to the regular laws of nature because i was not framed with a
capacity of preserving my life either by swiftness or climbing of
trees or digging holes in the earth  they observed by my teeth which
they viewed with great exactness that i was a carnivorous animal yet
most quadrupeds being an overmatch for me and field mice with some
others too nimble they could not imagine how i should be able to
support myself unless i fed upon snails and other insects which they
offered by many learned arguments to evince that i could not possibly
do  one of these virtuosi seemed to think that i might be an embryo or
abortive birth  but this opinion was rejected by the other two who
observed my limbs to be perfect and finished and that i had lived
several years as it was manifest from my beard the stumps whereof they
plainly discovered through a magnifying glass  they would not allow me
to be a dwarf because my littleness was beyond all degrees of
comparison for the queens favourite dwarf the smallest ever known in
that kingdom was near thirty feet high  after much debate they
concluded unanimously that i was only relplum scalcath which is
interpreted literally lusus naturæ a determination exactly agreeable
to the modern philosophy of europe whose professors disdaining the old
evasion of occult causes whereby the followers of aristotle endeavoured
in vain to disguise their ignorance have invented this wonderful
solution of all difficulties to the unspeakable advancement of human
knowledge

after this decisive conclusion i entreated to be heard a word or two  i
applied myself to the king and assured his majesty that i came from a
country which abounded with several millions of both sexes and of my own
stature where the animals trees and houses were all in proportion
and where by consequence i might be as able to defend myself and to
find sustenance as any of his majestys subjects could do here which i
took for a full answer to those gentlemens arguments  to this they
only replied with a smile of contempt saying that the farmer had
instructed me very well in my lesson  the king who had a much better
understanding dismissing his learned men sent for the farmer who by
good fortune was not yet gone out of town  having therefore first
examined him privately and then confronted him with me and the young
girl his majesty began to think that what we told him might possibly be
true he desired the queen to order that a particular care should be
taken of me and was of opinion that glumdalclitch should still continue
in her office of tending me because he observed we had a great affection
for each other  a convenient apartment was provided for her at court
she had a sort of governess appointed to take care of her education a
maid to dress her and two other servants for menial offices but the
care of me was wholly appropriated to herself  the queen commanded her
own cabinetmaker to contrive a box that might serve me for a
bedchamber after the model that glumdalclitch and i should agree upon
this man was a most ingenious artist and according to my direction in
three weeks finished for me a wooden chamber of sixteen feet square and
twelve high with sashwindows a door and two closets like a london
bedchamber  the board that made the ceiling was to be lifted up and
down by two hinges to put in a bed ready furnished by her majestys
upholsterer which glumdalclitch took out every day to air made it with
her own hands and letting it down at night locked up the roof over me
a nice workman who was famous for little curiosities undertook to make
me two chairs with backs and frames of a substance not unlike ivory
and two tables with a cabinet to put my things in  the room was quilted
on all sides as well as the floor and the ceiling to prevent any
accident from the carelessness of those who carried me and to break the
force of a jolt when i went in a coach  i desired a lock for my door
to prevent rats and mice from coming in  the smith after several
attempts made the smallest that ever was seen among them for i have
known a larger at the gate of a gentlemans house in england  i made a
shift to keep the key in a pocket of my own fearing glumdalclitch might
lose it  the queen likewise ordered the thinnest silks that could be
gotten to make me clothes not much thicker than an english blanket
very cumbersome till i was accustomed to them  they were after the
fashion of the kingdom partly resembling the persian and partly the
chinese and are a very grave and decent habit

the queen became so fond of my company that she could not dine without
me  i had a table placed upon the same at which her majesty ate just at
her left elbow and a chair to sit on  glumdalclitch stood on a stool on
the floor near my table to assist and take care of me  i had an entire
set of silver dishes and plates and other necessaries which in
proportion to those of the queen were not much bigger than what i have
seen in a london toyshop for the furniture of a babyhouse these my
little nurse kept in her pocket in a silver box and gave me at meals as
i wanted them always cleaning them herself  no person dined with the
queen but the two princesses royal the eldest sixteen years old and the
younger at that time thirteen and a month  her majesty used to put a bit
of meat upon one of my dishes out of which i carved for myself and her
diversion was to see me eat in miniature for the queen who had indeed
but a weak stomach took up at one mouthful as much as a dozen english
farmers could eat at a meal which to me was for some time a very
nauseous sight  she would craunch the wing of a lark bones and all
between her teeth although it were nine times as large as that of a
fullgrown turkey and put a bit of bread into her mouth as big as two
twelvepenny loaves  she drank out of a golden cup above a hogshead at
a draught  her knives were twice as long as a scythe set straight upon
the handle  the spoons forks and other instruments were all in the
same proportion  i remember when glumdalclitch carried me out of
curiosity to see some of the tables at court where ten or a dozen of
those enormous knives and forks were lifted up together i thought i had
never till then beheld so terrible a sight

it is the custom that every wednesday which as i have observed is
their sabbath the king and queen with the royal issue of both sexes
dine together in the apartment of his majesty to whom i was now become a
great favourite and at these times my little chair and table were
placed at his left hand before one of the saltcellars  this prince
took a pleasure in conversing with me inquiring into the manners
religion laws government and learning of europe wherein i gave him
the best account i was able  his apprehension was so clear and his
judgment so exact that he made very wise reflections and observations
upon all i said  but i confess that after i had been a little too
copious in talking of my own beloved country of our trade and wars by
sea and land of our schisms in religion and parties in the state the
prejudices of his education prevailed so far that he could not forbear
taking me up in his right hand and stroking me gently with the other
after a hearty fit of laughing asked me whether i was a whig or tory
then turning to his first minister who waited behind him with a white
staff near as tall as the mainmast of the royal sovereign he observed
how contemptible a thing was human grandeur which could be mimicked by
such diminutive insects as i and yet says he i dare engage these
creatures have their titles and distinctions of honour they contrive
little nests and burrows that they call houses and cities they make a
figure in dress and equipage they love they fight they dispute they
cheat they betray  and thus he continued on while my colour came and
went several times with indignation to hear our noble country the
mistress of arts and arms the scourge of france the arbitress of
europe the seat of virtue piety honour and truth the pride and envy
of the world so contemptuously treated

but as i was not in a condition to resent injuries so upon mature
thoughts i began to doubt whether i was injured or no  for after having
been accustomed several months to the sight and converse of this people
and observed every object upon which i cast mine eyes to be of
proportionable magnitude the horror i had at first conceived from their
bulk and aspect was so far worn off that if i had then beheld a company
of english lords and ladies in their finery and birthday clothes acting
their several parts in the most courtly manner of strutting and bowing
and prating to say the truth i should have been strongly tempted to
laugh as much at them as the king and his grandees did at me  neither
indeed could i forbear smiling at myself when the queen used to place
me upon her hand towards a lookingglass by which both our persons
appeared before me in full view together and there could be nothing more
ridiculous than the comparison so that i really began to imagine myself
dwindled many degrees below my usual size

nothing angered and mortified me so much as the queens dwarf who being
of the lowest stature that was ever in that country for i verily think
he was not full thirty feet high became so insolent at seeing a
creature so much beneath him that he would always affect to swagger and
look big as he passed by me in the queens antechamber while i was
standing on some table talking with the lords or ladies of the court and
he seldom failed of a smart word or two upon my littleness against which
i could only revenge myself by calling him brother challenging him to
wrestle and such repartees as are usually in the mouths of court pages
one day at dinner this malicious little cub was so nettled with
something i had said to him that raising himself upon the frame of her
majestys chair he took me up by the middle as i was sitting down not
thinking any harm and let me drop into a large silver bowl of cream and
then ran away as fast as he could  i fell over head and ears and if i
had not been a good swimmer it might have gone very hard with me for
glumdalclitch in that instant happened to be at the other end of the
room and the queen was in such a fright that she wanted presence of
mind to assist me  but my little nurse ran to my relief and took me
out after i had swallowed above a quart of cream  i was put to bed
however i received no other damage than the loss of a suit of clothes
which was utterly spoiled  the dwarf was soundly whipt and as a farther
punishment forced to drink up the bowl of cream into which he had thrown
me neither was he ever restored to favour for soon after the queen
bestowed him on a lady of high quality so that i saw him no more to my
very great satisfaction for i could not tell to what extremities such a
malicious urchin might have carried his resentment

he had before served me a scurvy trick which set the queen alaughing
although at the same time she was heartily vexed and would have
immediately cashiered him if i had not been so generous as to intercede
her majesty had taken a marrowbone upon her plate and after knocking
out the marrow placed the bone again in the dish erect as it stood
before the dwarf watching his opportunity while glumdalclitch was gone
to the sideboard mounted the stool that she stood on to take care of me
at meals took me up in both hands and squeezing my legs together
wedged them into the marrow bone above my waist where i stuck for some
time and made a very ridiculous figure  i believe it was near a minute
before any one knew what was become of me for i thought it below me to
cry out  but as princes seldom get their meat hot my legs were not
scalded only my stockings and breeches in a sad condition  the dwarf
at my entreaty had no other punishment than a sound whipping

i was frequently rallied by the queen upon account of my fearfulness and
she used to ask me whether the people of my country were as great cowards
as myself  the occasion was this the kingdom is much pestered with
flies in summer and these odious insects each of them as big as a
dunstable lark hardly gave me any rest while i sat at dinner with their
continual humming and buzzing about mine ears  they would sometimes
alight upon my victuals and leave their loathsome excrement or spawn
behind which to me was very visible though not to the natives of that
country whose large optics were not so acute as mine in viewing smaller
objects  sometimes they would fix upon my nose or forehead where they
stung me to the quick smelling very offensively and i could easily
trace that viscous matter which our naturalists tell us enables those
creatures to walk with their feet upwards upon a ceiling  i had much ado
to defend myself against these detestable animals and could not forbear
starting when they came on my face  it was the common practice of the
dwarf to catch a number of these insects in his hand as schoolboys do
among us and let them out suddenly under my nose on purpose to frighten
me and divert the queen  my remedy was to cut them in pieces with my
knife as they flew in the air wherein my dexterity was much admired

i remember one morning when glumdalclitch had set me in a box upon a
window as she usually did in fair days to give me air for i durst not
venture to let the box be hung on a nail out of the window as we do with
cages in england after i had lifted up one of my sashes and sat down
at my table to eat a piece of sweet cake for my breakfast above twenty
wasps allured by the smell came flying into the room humming louder
than the drones of as many bagpipes  some of them seized my cake and
carried it piecemeal away others flew about my head and face
confounding me with the noise and putting me in the utmost terror of
their stings  however i had the courage to rise and draw my hanger and
attack them in the air  i dispatched four of them but the rest got
away and i presently shut my window  these insects were as large as
partridges i took out their stings found them an inch and a half long
and as sharp as needles  i carefully preserved them all and having
since shown them with some other curiosities in several parts of
europe upon my return to england i gave three of them to gresham
college and kept the fourth for myself



chapter iv


the country described  a proposal for correcting modern maps  the
kings palace and some account of the metropolis  the authors way of
travelling  the chief temple described

i now intend to give the reader a short description of this country as
far as i travelled in it which was not above two thousand miles round
lorbrulgrud the metropolis  for the queen whom i always attended
never went farther when she accompanied the king in his progresses and
there staid till his majesty returned from viewing his frontiers  the
whole extent of this princes dominions reaches about six thousand miles
in length and from three to five in breadth whence i cannot but
conclude that our geographers of europe are in a great error by
supposing nothing but sea between japan and california for it was ever
my opinion that there must be a balance of earth to counterpoise the
great continent of tartary and therefore they ought to correct their
maps and charts by joining this vast tract of land to the northwest
parts of america wherein i shall be ready to lend them my assistance

the kingdom is a peninsula terminated to the northeast by a ridge of
mountains thirty miles high which are altogether impassable by reason
of the volcanoes upon the tops neither do the most learned know what
sort of mortals inhabit beyond those mountains or whether they be
inhabited at all  on the three other sides it is bounded by the ocean
there is not one seaport in the whole kingdom and those parts of the
coasts into which the rivers issue are so full of pointed rocks and the
sea generally so rough that there is no venturing with the smallest of
their boats so that these people are wholly excluded from any commerce
with the rest of the world  but the large rivers are full of vessels
and abound with excellent fish for they seldom get any from the sea
because the sea fish are of the same size with those in europe and
consequently not worth catching whereby it is manifest that nature in
the production of plants and animals of so extraordinary a bulk is
wholly confined to this continent of which i leave the reasons to be
determined by philosophers  however now and then they take a whale that
happens to be dashed against the rocks which the common people feed on
heartily  these whales i have known so large that a man could hardly
carry one upon his shoulders and sometimes for curiosity they are
brought in hampers to lorbrulgrud i saw one of them in a dish at the
kings table which passed for a rarity but i did not observe he was
fond of it for i think indeed the bigness disgusted him although i
have seen one somewhat larger in greenland

the country is well inhabited for it contains fiftyone cities near a
hundred walled towns and a great number of villages  to satisfy my
curious reader it may be sufficient to describe lorbrulgrud  this city
stands upon almost two equal parts on each side the river that passes
through  it contains above eighty thousand houses and about six hundred
thousand inhabitants  it is in length three glomglungs which make
about fiftyfour english miles and two and a half in breadth as i
measured it myself in the royal map made by the kings order which was
laid on the ground on purpose for me and extended a hundred feet i
paced the diameter and circumference several times barefoot and
computing by the scale measured it pretty exactly

the kings palace is no regular edifice but a heap of buildings about
seven miles round the chief rooms are generally two hundred and forty
feet high and broad and long in proportion  a coach was allowed to
glumdalclitch and me wherein her governess frequently took her out to
see the town or go among the shops and i was always of the party
carried in my box although the girl at my own desire would often take
me out and hold me in her hand that i might more conveniently view the
houses and the people as we passed along the streets  i reckoned our
coach to be about a square of westminsterhall but not altogether so
high however i cannot be very exact  one day the governess ordered our
coachman to stop at several shops where the beggars watching their
opportunity crowded to the sides of the coach and gave me the most
horrible spectacle that ever a european eye beheld  there was a woman
with a cancer in her breast swelled to a monstrous size full of holes
in two or three of which i could have easily crept and covered my whole
body  there was a fellow with a wen in his neck larger than five
woolpacks and another with a couple of wooden legs each about twenty
feet high  but the most hateful sight of all was the lice crawling on
their clothes  i could see distinctly the limbs of these vermin with my
naked eye much better than those of a european louse through a
microscope and their snouts with which they rooted like swine  they
were the first i had ever beheld and i should have been curious enough
to dissect one of them if i had had proper instruments which i
unluckily left behind me in the ship although indeed the sight was so
nauseous that it perfectly turned my stomach

besides the large box in which i was usually carried the queen ordered a
smaller one to be made for me of about twelve feet square and ten high
for the convenience of travelling because the other was somewhat too
large for glumdalclitchs lap and cumbersome in the coach it was made
by the same artist whom i directed in the whole contrivance  this
travellingcloset was an exact square with a window in the middle of
three of the squares and each window was latticed with iron wire on the
outside to prevent accidents in long journeys  on the fourth side
which had no window two strong staples were fixed through which the
person that carried me when i had a mind to be on horseback put a
leathern belt and buckled it about his waist  this was always the
office of some grave trusty servant in whom i could confide whether i
attended the king and queen in their progresses or were disposed to see
the gardens or pay a visit to some great lady or minister of state in
the court when glumdalclitch happened to be out of order for i soon
began to be known and esteemed among the greatest officers i suppose
more upon account of their majesties favour than any merit of my own
in journeys when i was weary of the coach a servant on horseback would
buckle on my box and place it upon a cushion before him and there i had
a full prospect of the country on three sides from my three windows  i
had in this closet a fieldbed and a hammock hung from the ceiling
two chairs and a table neatly screwed to the floor to prevent being
tossed about by the agitation of the horse or the coach  and having been
long used to seavoyages those motions although sometimes very violent
did not much discompose me

whenever i had a mind to see the town it was always in my
travellingcloset which glumdalclitch held in her lap in a kind of open
sedan after the fashion of the country borne by four men and attended
by two others in the queens livery  the people who had often heard of
me were very curious to crowd about the sedan and the girl was
complaisant enough to make the bearers stop and to take me in her hand
that i might be more conveniently seen

i was very desirous to see the chief temple and particularly the tower
belonging to it which is reckoned the highest in the kingdom
accordingly one day my nurse carried me thither but i may truly say i
came back disappointed for the height is not above three thousand feet
reckoning from the ground to the highest pinnacle top which allowing
for the difference between the size of those people and us in europe is
no great matter for admiration nor at all equal in proportion if i
rightly remember to salisbury steeple  but not to detract from a
nation to which during my life i shall acknowledge myself extremely
obliged it must be allowed that whatever this famous tower wants in
height is amply made up in beauty and strength for the walls are near a
hundred feet thick built of hewn stone whereof each is about forty feet
square and adorned on all sides with statues of gods and emperors cut
in marble larger than the life placed in their several niches  i
measured a little finger which had fallen down from one of these statues
and lay unperceived among some rubbish and found it exactly four feet
and an inch in length  glumdalclitch wrapped it up in her handkerchief
and carried it home in her pocket to keep among other trinkets of which
the girl was very fond as children at her age usually are

the kings kitchen is indeed a noble building vaulted at top and about
six hundred feet high  the great oven is not so wide by ten paces as
the cupola at st pauls for i measured the latter on purpose after my
return  but if i should describe the kitchen grate the prodigious pots
and kettles the joints of meat turning on the spits with many other
particulars perhaps i should be hardly believed at least a severe
critic would be apt to think i enlarged a little as travellers are often
suspected to do  to avoid which censure i fear i have run too much into
the other extreme and that if this treatise should happen to be
translated into the language of brobdingnag which is the general name of
that kingdom and transmitted thither the king and his people would
have reason to complain that i had done them an injury by a false and
diminutive representation

his majesty seldom keeps above six hundred horses in his stables they
are generally from fiftyfour to sixty feet high  but when he goes
abroad on solemn days he is attended for state by a military guard of
five hundred horse which indeed i thought was the most splendid sight
that could be ever beheld till i saw part of his army in battalia
whereof i shall find another occasion to speak



chapter v


several adventurers that happened to the author  the execution of a
criminal  the author shows his skill in navigation

i should have lived happy enough in that country if my littleness had
not exposed me to several ridiculous and troublesome accidents some of
which i shall venture to relate  glumdalclitch often carried me into the
gardens of the court in my smaller box and would sometimes take me out
of it and hold me in her hand or set me down to walk  i remember
before the dwarf left the queen he followed us one day into those
gardens and my nurse having set me down he and i being close together
near some dwarf apple trees i must needs show my wit by a silly
allusion between him and the trees which happens to hold in their
language as it does in ours  whereupon the malicious rogue watching
his opportunity when i was walking under one of them shook it directly
over my head by which a dozen apples each of them near as large as a
bristol barrel came tumbling about my ears one of them hit me on the
back as i chanced to stoop and knocked me down flat on my face but i
received no other hurt and the dwarf was pardoned at my desire because
i had given the provocation

another day glumdalclitch left me on a smooth grassplot to divert
myself while she walked at some distance with her governess  in the
meantime there suddenly fell such a violent shower of hail that i was
immediately by the force of it struck to the ground and when i was
down the hailstones gave me such cruel bangs all over the body as if i
had been pelted with tennisballs however i made a shift to creep on
all fours and shelter myself by lying flat on my face on the leeside
of a border of lemonthyme but so bruised from head to foot that i
could not go abroad in ten days  neither is this at all to be wondered
at because nature in that country observing the same proportion
through all her operations a hailstone is near eighteen hundred times as
large as one in europe which i can assert upon experience having been
so curious as to weigh and measure them

but a more dangerous accident happened to me in the same garden when my
little nurse believing she had put me in a secure place which i often
entreated her to do that i might enjoy my own thoughts and having left
my box at home to avoid the trouble of carrying it went to another part
of the garden with her governess and some ladies of her acquaintance
while she was absent and out of hearing a small white spaniel that
belonged to one of the chief gardeners having got by accident into the
garden happened to range near the place where i lay the dog following
the scent came directly up and taking me in his mouth ran straight to
his master wagging his tail and set me gently on the ground  by good
fortune he had been so well taught that i was carried between his teeth
without the least hurt or even tearing my clothes  but the poor
gardener who knew me well and had a great kindness for me was in a
terrible fright he gently took me up in both his hands and asked me how
i did but i was so amazed and out of breath that i could not speak a
word  in a few minutes i came to myself and he carried me safe to my
little nurse who by this time had returned to the place where she left
me and was in cruel agonies when i did not appear nor answer when she
called  she severely reprimanded the gardener on account of his dog
but the thing was hushed up and never known at court for the girl was
afraid of the queens anger and truly as to myself i thought it would
not be for my reputation that such a story should go about

this accident absolutely determined glumdalclitch never to trust me
abroad for the future out of her sight  i had been long afraid of this
resolution and therefore concealed from her some little unlucky
adventures that happened in those times when i was left by myself  once
a kite hovering over the garden made a stoop at me and if i had not
resolutely drawn my hanger and run under a thick espalier he would have
certainly carried me away in his talons  another time walking to the
top of a fresh molehill i fell to my neck in the hole through which
that animal had cast up the earth and coined some lie not worth
remembering to excuse myself for spoiling my clothes  i likewise broke
my right shin against the shell of a snail which i happened to stumble
over as i was walking alone and thinking on poor england

i cannot tell whether i were more pleased or mortified to observe in
those solitary walks that the smaller birds did not appear to be at all
afraid of me but would hop about within a yards distance looking for
worms and other food with as much indifference and security as if no
creature at all were near them  i remember a thrush had the confidence
to snatch out of my hand with his bill a of cake that glumdalclitch had
just given me for my breakfast  when i attempted to catch any of these
birds they would boldly turn against me endeavouring to peck my
fingers which i durst not venture within their reach and then they
would hop back unconcerned to hunt for worms or snails as they did
before  but one day i took a thick cudgel and threw it with all my
strength so luckily at a linnet that i knocked him down and seizing
him by the neck with both my hands ran with him in triumph to my nurse
however the bird who had only been stunned recovering himself gave me
so many boxes with his wings on both sides of my head and body though i
held him at armslength and was out of the reach of his claws that i
was twenty times thinking to let him go  but i was soon relieved by one
of our servants who wrung off the birds neck and i had him next day
for dinner by the queens command  this linnet as near as i can
remember seemed to be somewhat larger than an english swan

the maids of honour often invited glumdalclitch to their apartments and
desired she would bring me along with her on purpose to have the
pleasure of seeing and touching me  they would often strip me naked from
top to toe and lay me at full length in their bosoms wherewith i was
much disgusted because to say the truth a very offensive smell came
from their skins which i do not mention or intend to the disadvantage
of those excellent ladies for whom i have all manner of respect but i
conceive that my sense was more acute in proportion to my littleness and
that those illustrious persons were no more disagreeable to their lovers
or to each other than people of the same quality are with us in england
and after all i found their natural smell was much more supportable
than when they used perfumes under which i immediately swooned away  i
cannot forget that an intimate friend of mine in lilliput took the
freedom in a warm day when i had used a good deal of exercise to
complain of a strong smell about me although i am as little faulty that
way as most of my sex but i suppose his faculty of smelling was as nice
with regard to me as mine was to that of this people  upon this point
i cannot forbear doing justice to the queen my mistress and
glumdalclitch my nurse whose persons were as sweet as those of any lady
in england

that which gave me most uneasiness among these maids of honour when my
nurse carried me to visit then was to see them use me without any
manner of ceremony like a creature who had no sort of consequence for
they would strip themselves to the skin and put on their smocks in my
presence while i was placed on their toilet directly before their naked
bodies which i am sure to me was very far from being a tempting sight
or from giving me any other emotions than those of horror and disgust
their skins appeared so coarse and uneven so variously coloured when i
saw them near with a mole here and there as broad as a trencher and
hairs hanging from it thicker than packthreads to say nothing farther
concerning the rest of their persons  neither did they at all scruple
while i was by to discharge what they had drank to the quantity of at
least two hogsheads in a vessel that held above three tuns  the
handsomest among these maids of honour a pleasant frolicsome girl of
sixteen would sometimes set me astride upon one of her nipples with
many other tricks wherein the reader will excuse me for not being over
particular  but i was so much displeased that i entreated glumdalclitch
to contrive some excuse for not seeing that young lady any more

one day a young gentleman who was nephew to my nurses governess came
and pressed them both to see an execution  it was of a man who had
murdered one of that gentlemans intimate acquaintance  glumdalclitch
was prevailed on to be of the company very much against her inclination
for she was naturally tenderhearted and as for myself although i
abhorred such kind of spectacles yet my curiosity tempted me to see
something that i thought must be extraordinary  the malefactor was fixed
in a chair upon a scaffold erected for that purpose and his head cut off
at one blow with a sword of about forty feet long  the veins and
arteries spouted up such a prodigious quantity of blood and so high in
the air that the great jet deau at versailles was not equal to it for
the time it lasted and the head when it fell on the scaffold floor
gave such a bounce as made me start although i was at least half an
english mile distant

the queen who often used to hear me talk of my seavoyages and took all
occasions to divert me when i was melancholy asked me whether i
understood how to handle a sail or an oar and whether a little exercise
of rowing might not be convenient for my health  i answered that i
understood both very well for although my proper employment had been to
be surgeon or doctor to the ship yet often upon a pinch i was forced
to work like a common mariner  but i could not see how this could be
done in their country where the smallest wherry was equal to a
firstrate man of war among us and such a boat as i could manage would
never live in any of their rivers  her majesty said if i would contrive
a boat her own joiner should make it and she would provide a place for
me to sail in  the fellow was an ingenious workman and by my
instructions in ten days finished a pleasureboat with all its
tackling able conveniently to hold eight europeans  when it was
finished the queen was so delighted that she ran with it in her lap to
the king who ordered it to be put into a cistern full of water with me
in it by way of trial where i could not manage my two sculls or little
oars for want of room  but the queen had before contrived another
project  she ordered the joiner to make a wooden trough of three hundred
feet long fifty broad and eight deep which being well pitched to
prevent leaking was placed on the floor along the wall in an outer
room of the palace  it had a cock near the bottom to let out the water
when it began to grow stale and two servants could easily fill it in
half an hour  here i often used to row for my own diversion as well as
that of the queen and her ladies who thought themselves well entertained
with my skill and agility  sometimes i would put up my sail and then my
business was only to steer while the ladies gave me a gale with their
fans and when they were weary some of their pages would blow my sail
forward with their breath while i showed my art by steering starboard or
larboard as i pleased  when i had done glumdalclitch always carried
back my boat into her closet and hung it on a nail to dry

in this exercise i once met an accident which had like to have cost me
my life for one of the pages having put my boat into the trough the
governess who attended glumdalclitch very officiously lifted me up to
place me in the boat but i happened to slip through her fingers and
should infallibly have fallen down forty feet upon the floor if by the
luckiest chance in the world i had not been stopped by a corkingpin
that stuck in the good gentlewomans stomacher the head of the pin
passing between my shirt and the waistband of my breeches and thus i was
held by the middle in the air till glumdalclitch ran to my relief

another time one of the servants whose office it was to fill my trough
every third day with fresh water was so careless as to let a huge frog
not perceiving it slip out of his pail  the frog lay concealed till i
was put into my boat but then seeing a restingplace climbed up and
made it lean so much on one side that i was forced to balance it with
all my weight on the other to prevent overturning  when the frog was
got in it hopped at once half the length of the boat and then over my
head backward and forward daubing my face and clothes with its odious
slime  the largeness of its features made it appear the most deformed
animal that can be conceived  however i desired glumdalclitch to let me
deal with it alone  i banged it a good while with one of my sculls and
at last forced it to leap out of the boat

but the greatest danger i ever underwent in that kingdom was from a
monkey who belonged to one of the clerks of the kitchen  glumdalclitch
had locked me up in her closet while she went somewhere upon business
or a visit  the weather being very warm the closetwindow was left
open as well as the windows and the door of my bigger box in which i
usually lived because of its largeness and conveniency  as i sat
quietly meditating at my table i heard something bounce in at the
closetwindow and skip about from one side to the other whereat
although i was much alarmed yet i ventured to look out but not stirring
from my seat and then i saw this frolicsome animal frisking and leaping
up and down till at last he came to my box which he seemed to view with
great pleasure and curiosity peeping in at the door and every window  i
retreated to the farther corner of my room or box but the monkey
looking in at every side put me in such a fright that i wanted presence
of mind to conceal myself under the bed as i might easily have done
after some time spent in peeping grinning and chattering he at last
espied me and reaching one of his paws in at the door as a cat does
when she plays with a mouse although i often shifted place to avoid him
he at length seized the lappet of my coat which being made of that
country silk was very thick and strong and dragged me out  he took me
up in his right forefoot and held me as a nurse does a child she is
going to suckle just as i have seen the same sort of creature do with a
kitten in europe and when i offered to struggle he squeezed me so hard
that i thought it more prudent to submit  i have good reason to believe
that he took me for a young one of his own species by his often stroking
my face very gently with his other paw  in these diversions he was
interrupted by a noise at the closet door as if somebody were opening
it whereupon he suddenly leaped up to the window at which he had come
in and thence upon the leads and gutters walking upon three legs and
holding me in the fourth till he clambered up to a roof that was next to
ours  i heard glumdalclitch give a shriek at the moment he was carrying
me out  the poor girl was almost distracted that quarter of the palace
was all in an uproar the servants ran for ladders the monkey was seen
by hundreds in the court sitting upon the ridge of a building holding
me like a baby in one of his forepaws and feeding me with the other by
cramming into my mouth some victuals he had squeezed out of the bag on
one side of his chaps and patting me when i would not eat whereat many
of the rabble below could not forbear laughing neither do i think they
justly ought to be blamed for without question the sight was
ridiculous enough to every body but myself  some of the people threw up
stones hoping to drive the monkey down but this was strictly forbidden
or else very probably my brains had been dashed out

the ladders were now applied and mounted by several men which the
monkey observing and finding himself almost encompassed not being able
to make speed enough with his three legs let me drop on a ridge tile
and made his escape  here i sat for some time five hundred yards from
the ground expecting every moment to be blown down by the wind or to
fall by my own giddiness and come tumbling over and over from the ridge
to the eaves but an honest lad one of my nurses footmen climbed up
and putting me into his breeches pocket brought me down safe

i was almost choked with the filthy stuff the monkey had crammed down my
throat but my dear little nurse picked it out of my mouth with a small
needle and then i fell avomiting which gave me great relief  yet i
was so weak and bruised in the sides with the squeezes given me by this
odious animal that i was forced to keep my bed a fortnight  the king
queen and all the court sent every day to inquire after my health and
her majesty made me several visits during my sickness  the monkey was
killed and an order made that no such animal should be kept about the
palace

when i attended the king after my recovery to return him thanks for his
favours he was pleased to rally me a good deal upon this adventure  he
asked me what my thoughts and speculations were while i lay in the
monkeys paw how i liked the victuals he gave me his manner of feeding
and whether the fresh air on the roof had sharpened my stomach  he
desired to know what i would have done upon such an occasion in my own
country  i told his majesty that in europe we had no monkeys except
such as were brought for curiosity from other places and so small that
i could deal with a dozen of them together if they presumed to attack
me  and as for that monstrous animal with whom i was so lately engaged
it was indeed as large as an elephant if my fears had suffered me to
think so far as to make use of my hanger looking fiercely and
clapping my hand on the hilt as i spoke when he poked his paw into my
chamber perhaps i should have given him such a wound as would have made
him glad to withdraw it with more haste than he put it in  this i
delivered in a firm tone like a person who was jealous lest his courage
should be called in question  however my speech produced nothing else
beside a loud laughter which all the respect due to his majesty from
those about him could not make them contain  this made me reflect how
vain an attempt it is for a man to endeavour to do himself honour among
those who are out of all degree of equality or comparison with him  and
yet i have seen the moral of my own behaviour very frequent in england
since my return where a little contemptible varlet without the least
title to birth person wit or common sense shall presume to look with
importance and put himself upon a foot with the greatest persons of the
kingdom

i was every day furnishing the court with some ridiculous story and
glumdalclitch although she loved me to excess yet was arch enough to
inform the queen whenever i committed any folly that she thought would
be diverting to her majesty  the girl who had been out of order was
carried by her governess to take the air about an hours distance or
thirty miles from town  they alighted out of the coach near a small
footpath in a field and glumdalclitch setting down my travelling box i
went out of it to walk  there was a cowdung in the path and i must
need try my activity by attempting to leap over it  i took a run but
unfortunately jumped short and found myself just in the middle up to my
knees  i waded through with some difficulty and one of the footmen
wiped me as clean as he could with his handkerchief for i was filthily
bemired and my nurse confined me to my box till we returned home where
the queen was soon informed of what had passed and the footmen spread it
about the court so that all the mirth for some days was at my expense



chapter vi


several contrivances of the author to please the king and queen  he
shows his skill in music  the king inquires into the state of england
which the author relates to him  the kings observations thereon

i used to attend the kings levee once or twice a week and had often
seen him under the barbers hand which indeed was at first very terrible
to behold for the razor was almost twice as long as an ordinary scythe
his majesty according to the custom of the country was only shaved
twice aweek  i once prevailed on the barber to give me some of the suds
or lather out of which i picked forty or fifty of the strongest stumps
of hair  i then took a piece of fine wood and cut it like the back of a
comb making several holes in it at equal distances with as small a
needle as i could get from glumdalclitch  i fixed in the stumps so
artificially scraping and sloping them with my knife toward the points
that i made a very tolerable comb which was a seasonable supply my own
being so much broken in the teeth that it was almost useless neither
did i know any artist in that country so nice and exact as would
undertake to make me another

and this puts me in mind of an amusement wherein i spent many of my
leisure hours  i desired the queens woman to save for me the combings
of her majestys hair whereof in time i got a good quantity and
consulting with my friend the cabinetmaker who had received general
orders to do little jobs for me i directed him to make two chairframes
no larger than those i had in my box and to bore little holes with a
fine awl round those parts where i designed the backs and seats through
these holes i wove the strongest hairs i could pick out just after the
manner of cane chairs in england  when they were finished i made a
present of them to her majesty who kept them in her cabinet and used to
show them for curiosities as indeed they were the wonder of every one
that beheld them  the queen would have me sit upon one of these chairs
but i absolutely refused to obey her protesting i would rather die than
place a dishonourable part of my body on those precious hairs that once
adorned her majestys head  of these hairs as i had always a mechanical
genius i likewise made a neat little purse about five feet long with
her majestys name deciphered in gold letters which i gave to
glumdalclitch by the queens consent  to say the truth it was more for
show than use being not of strength to bear the weight of the larger
coins and therefore she kept nothing in it but some little toys that
girls are fond of

the king who delighted in music had frequent concerts at court to
which i was sometimes carried and set in my box on a table to hear them
but the noise was so great that i could hardly distinguish the tunes  i
am confident that all the drums and trumpets of a royal army beating and
sounding together just at your ears could not equal it  my practice was
to have my box removed from the place where the performers sat as far as
i could then to shut the doors and windows of it and draw the window
curtains after which i found their music not disagreeable

i had learned in my youth to play a little upon the spinet
glumdalclitch kept one in her chamber and a master attended twice aweek
to teach her i called it a spinet because it somewhat resembled that
instrument and was played upon in the same manner  a fancy came into my
head that i would entertain the king and queen with an english tune upon
this instrument  but this appeared extremely difficult for the spinet
was near sixty feet long each key being almost a foot wide so that with
my arms extended i could not reach to above five keys and to press them
down required a good smart stroke with my fist which would be too great
a labour and to no purpose  the method i contrived was this i prepared
two round sticks about the bigness of common cudgels they were thicker
at one end than the other and i covered the thicker ends with pieces of
a mouses skin that by rapping on them i might neither damage the tops
of the keys nor interrupt the sound  before the spinet a bench was
placed about four feet below the keys and i was put upon the bench  i
ran sideling upon it that way and this as fast as i could banging the
proper keys with my two sticks and made a shift to play a jig to the
great satisfaction of both their majesties but it was the most violent
exercise i ever underwent and yet i could not strike above sixteen keys
nor consequently play the bass and treble together as other artists do
which was a great disadvantage to my performance

the king who as i before observed was a prince of excellent
understanding would frequently order that i should be brought in my box
and set upon the table in his closet he would then command me to bring
one of my chairs out of the box and sit down within three yards distance
upon the top of the cabinet which brought me almost to a level with his
face  in this manner i had several conversations with him  i one day
took the freedom to tell his majesty that the contempt he discovered
towards europe and the rest of the world did not seem answerable to
those excellent qualities of mind that he was master of that reason did
not extend itself with the bulk of the body on the contrary we observed
in our country that the tallest persons were usually the least provided
with it that among other animals bees and ants had the reputation of
more industry art and sagacity than many of the larger kinds and
that as inconsiderable as he took me to be i hoped i might live to do
his majesty some signal service  the king heard me with attention and
began to conceive a much better opinion of me than he had ever before
he desired i would give him as exact an account of the government of
england as i possibly could because as fond as princes commonly are of
their own customs for so he conjectured of other monarchs by my former
discourses he should be glad to hear of any thing that might deserve
imitation

imagine with thyself courteous reader how often i then wished for the
tongue of demosthenes or cicero that might have enabled me to celebrate
the praise of my own dear native country in a style equal to its merits
and felicity

i began my discourse by informing his majesty that our dominions
consisted of two islands which composed three mighty kingdoms under one
sovereign beside our plantations in america  i dwelt long upon the
fertility of our soil and the temperature of our climate  i then spoke
at large upon the constitution of an english parliament partly made up
of an illustrious body called the house of peers persons of the noblest
blood and of the most ancient and ample patrimonies  i described that
extraordinary care always taken of their education in arts and arms to
qualify them for being counsellors both to the king and kingdom to have
a share in the legislature to be members of the highest court of
judicature whence there can be no appeal and to be champions always
ready for the defence of their prince and country by their valour
conduct and fidelity  that these were the ornament and bulwark of the
kingdom worthy followers of their most renowned ancestors whose honour
had been the reward of their virtue from which their posterity were
never once known to degenerate  to these were joined several holy
persons as part of that assembly under the title of bishops whose
peculiar business is to take care of religion and of those who instruct
the people therein  these were searched and sought out through the whole
nation by the prince and his wisest counsellors among such of the
priesthood as were most deservedly distinguished by the sanctity of their
lives and the depth of their erudition who were indeed the spiritual
fathers of the clergy and the people

that the other part of the parliament consisted of an assembly called the
house of commons who were all principal gentlemen freely picked and
culled out by the people themselves for their great abilities and love
of their country to represent the wisdom of the whole nation  and that
these two bodies made up the most august assembly in europe to whom in
conjunction with the prince the whole legislature is committed

i then descended to the courts of justice over which the judges those
venerable sages and interpreters of the law presided for determining
the disputed rights and properties of men as well as for the punishment
of vice and protection of innocence  i mentioned the prudent management
of our treasury the valour and achievements of our forces by sea and
land  i computed the number of our people by reckoning how many
millions there might be of each religious sect or political party among
us  i did not omit even our sports and pastimes or any other particular
which i thought might redound to the honour of my country  and i
finished all with a brief historical account of affairs and events in
england for about a hundred years past

this conversation was not ended under five audiences each of several
hours and the king heard the whole with great attention frequently
taking notes of what i spoke as well as memorandums of what questions he
intended to ask me

when i had put an end to these long discources his majesty in a sixth
audience consulting his notes proposed many doubts queries and
objections upon every article  he asked what methods were used to
cultivate the minds and bodies of our young nobility and in what kind of
business they commonly spent the first and teachable parts of their
lives  what course was taken to supply that assembly when any noble
family became extinct  what qualifications were necessary in those who
are to be created new lords whether the humour of the prince a sum of
money to a court lady or a design of strengthening a party opposite to
the public interest ever happened to be the motive in those
advancements  what share of knowledge these lords had in the laws of
their country and how they came by it so as to enable them to decide
the properties of their fellowsubjects in the last resort  whether they
were always so free from avarice partialities or want that a bribe or
some other sinister view could have no place among them  whether those
holy lords i spoke of were always promoted to that rank upon account of
their knowledge in religious matters and the sanctity of their lives
had never been compliers with the times while they were common priests
or slavish prostitute chaplains to some nobleman whose opinions they
continued servilely to follow after they were admitted into that
assembly

he then desired to know what arts were practised in electing those whom
i called commoners whether a stranger with a strong purse might not
influence the vulgar voters to choose him before their own landlord or
the most considerable gentleman in the neighbourhood  how it came to
pass that people were so violently bent upon getting into this assembly
which i allowed to be a great trouble and expense often to the ruin of
their families without any salary or pension because this appeared such
an exalted strain of virtue and public spirit that his majesty seemed to
doubt it might possibly not be always sincere  and he desired to know
whether such zealous gentlemen could have any views of refunding
themselves for the charges and trouble they were at by sacrificing the
public good to the designs of a weak and vicious prince in conjunction
with a corrupted ministry  he multiplied his questions and sifted me
thoroughly upon every part of this head proposing numberless inquiries
and objections which i think it not prudent or convenient to repeat

upon what i said in relation to our courts of justice his majesty
desired to be satisfied in several points and this i was the better able
to do having been formerly almost ruined by a long suit in chancery
which was decreed for me with costs  he asked what time was usually
spent in determining between right and wrong and what degree of expense
whether advocates and orators had liberty to plead in causes manifestly
known to be unjust vexatious or oppressive  whether party in religion
or politics were observed to be of any weight in the scale of justice
whether those pleading orators were persons educated in the general
knowledge of equity or only in provincial national and other local
customs  whether they or their judges had any part in penning those
laws which they assumed the liberty of interpreting and glossing upon
at their pleasure  whether they had ever at different times pleaded
for and against the same cause and cited precedents to prove contrary
opinions  whether they were a rich or a poor corporation  whether they
received any pecuniary reward for pleading or delivering their opinions
and particularly whether they were ever admitted as members in the lower
senate

he fell next upon the management of our treasury and said he thought
my memory had failed me because i computed our taxes at about five or
six millions ayear and when i came to mention the issues he found they
sometimes amounted to more than double for the notes he had taken were
very particular in this point because he hoped as he told me that the
knowledge of our conduct might be useful to him and he could not be
deceived in his calculations  but if what i told him were true he was
still at a loss how a kingdom could run out of its estate like a private
person  he asked me who were our creditors and where we found money
to pay them  he wondered to hear me talk of such chargeable and
expensive wars that certainly we must be a quarrelsome people or live
among very bad neighbours and that our generals must needs be richer
than our kings  he asked what business we had out of our own islands
unless upon the score of trade or treaty or to defend the coasts with
our fleet  above all he was amazed to hear me talk of a mercenary
standing army in the midst of peace and among a free people  he said
if we were governed by our own consent in the persons of our
representatives he could not imagine of whom we were afraid or against
whom we were to fight and would hear my opinion whether a private mans
house might not be better defended by himself his children and family
than by halfadozen rascals picked up at a venture in the streets for
small wages who might get a hundred times more by cutting their
throats

he laughed at my odd kind of arithmetic as he was pleased to call it
in reckoning the numbers of our people by a computation drawn from the
several sects among us in religion and politics  he said he knew no
reason why those who entertain opinions prejudicial to the public
should be obliged to change or should not be obliged to conceal them
and as it was tyranny in any government to require the first so it was
weakness not to enforce the second for a man may be allowed to keep
poisons in his closet but not to vend them about for cordials

he observed that among the diversions of our nobility and gentry i had
mentioned gaming he desired to know at what age this entertainment was
usually taken up and when it was laid down how much of their time it
employed whether it ever went so high as to affect their fortunes
whether mean vicious people by their dexterity in that art might not
arrive at great riches and sometimes keep our very nobles in dependence
as well as habituate them to vile companions wholly take them from the
improvement of their minds and force them by the losses they received
to learn and practise that infamous dexterity upon others

he was perfectly astonished with the historical account gave him of our
affairs during the last century protesting it was only a heap of
conspiracies rebellions murders massacres revolutions banishments
the very worst effects that avarice faction hypocrisy perfidiousness
cruelty rage madness hatred envy lust malice and ambition could
produce

his majesty in another audience was at the pains to recapitulate the
sum of all i had spoken compared the questions he made with the answers
i had given then taking me into his hands and stroking me gently
delivered himself in these words which i shall never forget nor the
manner he spoke them in my little friend grildrig you have made a most
admirable panegyric upon your country you have clearly proved that
ignorance idleness and vice are the proper ingredients for qualifying
a legislator that laws are best explained interpreted and applied by
those whose interest and abilities lie in perverting confounding and
eluding them  i observe among you some lines of an institution which
in its original might have been tolerable but these half erased and
the rest wholly blurred and blotted by corruptions  it does not appear
from all you have said how any one perfection is required toward the
procurement of any one station among you much less that men are
ennobled on account of their virtue that priests are advanced for their
piety or learning soldiers for their conduct or valour judges for
their integrity senators for the love of their country or counsellors
for their wisdom  as for yourself continued the king who have spent
the greatest part of your life in travelling i am well disposed to hope
you may hitherto have escaped many vices of your country  but by what i
have gathered from your own relation and the answers i have with much
pains wrung and extorted from you i cannot but conclude the bulk of your
natives to be the most pernicious race of little odious vermin that
nature ever suffered to crawl upon the surface of the earth



chapter vii


the authors love of his country  he makes a proposal of much advantage
to the king which is rejected  the kings great ignorance in politics
the learning of that country very imperfect and confined  the laws and
military affairs and parties in the state

nothing but an extreme love of truth could have hindered me from
concealing this part of my story  it was in vain to discover my
resentments which were always turned into ridicule and i was forced to
rest with patience while my noble and beloved country was so injuriously
treated  i am as heartily sorry as any of my readers can possibly be
that such an occasion was given but this prince happened to be so
curious and inquisitive upon every particular that it could not consist
either with gratitude or good manners to refuse giving him what
satisfaction i was able  yet thus much i may be allowed to say in my own
vindication that i artfully eluded many of his questions and gave to
every point a more favourable turn by many degrees than the strictness
of truth would allow  for i have always borne that laudable partiality
to my own country which dionysius halicarnassensis with so much
justice recommends to an historian i would hide the frailties and
deformities of my political mother and place her virtues and beauties in
the most advantageous light  this was my sincere endeavour in those many
discourses i had with that monarch although it unfortunately failed of
success

but great allowances should be given to a king who lives wholly secluded
from the rest of the world and must therefore be altogether unacquainted
with the manners and customs that most prevail in other nations the want
of which knowledge will ever produce many prejudices and a certain
narrowness of thinking from which we and the politer countries of
europe are wholly exempted  and it would be hard indeed if so remote a
princes notions of virtue and vice were to be offered as a standard for
all mankind

to confirm what i have now said and further to show the miserable
effects of a confined education i shall here insert a passage which
will hardly obtain belief  in hopes to ingratiate myself further into
his majestys favour i told him of an invention discovered between
three and four hundred years ago to make a certain powder into a heap
of which the smallest spark of fire falling would kindle the whole in a
moment although it were as big as a mountain and make it all fly up in
the air together with a noise and agitation greater than thunder  that
a proper quantity of this powder rammed into a hollow tube of brass or
iron according to its bigness would drive a ball of iron or lead with
such violence and speed as nothing was able to sustain its force  that
the largest balls thus discharged would not only destroy whole ranks of
an army at once but batter the strongest walls to the ground sink down
ships with a thousand men in each to the bottom of the sea and when
linked together by a chain would cut through masts and rigging divide
hundreds of bodies in the middle and lay all waste before them  that we
often put this powder into large hollow balls of iron and discharged
them by an engine into some city we were besieging which would rip up
the pavements tear the houses to pieces burst and throw splinters on
every side dashing out the brains of all who came near  that i knew the
ingredients very well which were cheap and common i understood the
manner of compounding them and could direct his workmen how to make
those tubes of a size proportionable to all other things in his
majestys kingdom and the largest need not be above a hundred feet long
twenty or thirty of which tubes charged with the proper quantity of
powder and balls would batter down the walls of the strongest town in
his dominions in a few hours or destroy the whole metropolis if ever it
should pretend to dispute his absolute commands  this i humbly offered
to his majesty as a small tribute of acknowledgment in turn for so many
marks that i had received of his royal favour and protection

the king was struck with horror at the description i had given of those
terrible engines and the proposal i had made  he was amazed how so
impotent and grovelling an insect as i these were his expressions
could entertain such inhuman ideas and in so familiar a manner as to
appear wholly unmoved at all the scenes of blood and desolation which i
had painted as the common effects of those destructive machines
whereof he said some evil genius enemy to mankind must have been
the first contriver  as for himself he protested that although few
things delighted him so much as new discoveries in art or in nature yet
he would rather lose half his kingdom than be privy to such a secret
which he commanded me as i valued any life never to mention any more

a strange effect of narrow principles and views that a prince possessed
of every quality which procures veneration love and esteem of strong
parts great wisdom and profound learning endowed with admirable
talents and almost adored by his subjects should from a nice
unnecessary scruple whereof in europe we can have no conception let
slip an opportunity put into his hands that would have made him absolute
master of the lives the liberties and the fortunes of his people
neither do i say this with the least intention to detract from the many
virtues of that excellent king whose character i am sensible will on
this account be very much lessened in the opinion of an english reader
but i take this defect among them to have risen from their ignorance by
not having hitherto reduced politics into a science as the more acute
wits of europe have done  for i remember very well in a discourse one
day with the king when i happened to say there were several thousand
books among us written upon the art of government it gave him directly
contrary to my intention a very mean opinion of our understandings  he
professed both to abominate and despise all mystery refinement and
intrigue either in a prince or a minister  he could not tell what i
meant by secrets of state where an enemy or some rival nation were not
in the case  he confined the knowledge of governing within very narrow
bounds to common sense and reason to justice and lenity to the speedy
determination of civil and criminal causes with some other obvious
topics which are not worth considering  and he gave it for his opinion
that whoever could make two ears of corn or two blades of grass to
grow upon a spot of ground where only one grew before would deserve
better of mankind and do more essential service to his country than the
whole race of politicians put together

the learning of this people is very defective consisting only in
morality history poetry and mathematics wherein they must be allowed
to excel  but the last of these is wholly applied to what may be useful
in life to the improvement of agriculture and all mechanical arts so
that among us it would be little esteemed  and as to ideas entities
abstractions and transcendentals i could never drive the least
conception into their heads

no law in that country must exceed in words the number of letters in
their alphabet which consists only of two and twenty  but indeed few of
them extend even to that length  they are expressed in the most plain
and simple terms wherein those people are not mercurial enough to
discover above one interpretation and to write a comment upon any law
is a capital crime  as to the decision of civil causes or proceedings
against criminals their precedents are so few that they have little
reason to boast of any extraordinary skill in either

they have had the art of printing as well as the chinese time out of
mind but their libraries are not very large for that of the king which
is reckoned the largest does not amount to above a thousand volumes
placed in a gallery of twelve hundred feet long whence i had liberty to
borrow what books i pleased  the queens joiner had contrived in one of
glumdalclitchs rooms a kind of wooden machine fiveandtwenty feet
high formed like a standing ladder the steps were each fifty feet long
it was indeed a moveable pair of stairs the lowest end placed at ten
feet distance from the wall of the chamber  the book i had a mind to
read was put up leaning against the wall i first mounted to the upper
step of the ladder and turning my face towards the book began at the
top of the page and so walking to the right and left about eight or ten
paces according to the length of the lines till i had gotten a little
below the level of mine eyes and then descending gradually till i came
to the bottom after which i mounted again and began the other page in
the same manner and so turned over the leaf which i could easily do
with both my hands for it was as thick and stiff as a pasteboard and in
the largest folios not above eighteen or twenty feet long

their style is clear masculine and smooth but not florid for they
avoid nothing more than multiplying unnecessary words or using various
expressions  i have perused many of their books especially those in
history and morality  among the rest i was much diverted with a little
old treatise which always lay in glumdalclitchs bed chamber and
belonged to her governess a grave elderly gentlewoman who dealt in
writings of morality and devotion  the book treats of the weakness of
human kind and is in little esteem except among the women and the
vulgar  however i was curious to see what an author of that country
could say upon such a subject  this writer went through all the usual
topics of european moralists showing how diminutive contemptible and
helpless an animal was man in his own nature how unable to defend
himself from inclemencies of the air or the fury of wild beasts how
much he was excelled by one creature in strength by another in speed by
a third in foresight by a fourth in industry  he added that nature
was degenerated in these latter declining ages of the world and could
now produce only small abortive births in comparison of those in ancient
times  he said it was very reasonable to think not only that the
species of men were originally much larger but also that there must have
been giants in former ages which as it is asserted by history and
tradition so it has been confirmed by huge bones and skulls casually
dug up in several parts of the kingdom far exceeding the common dwindled
race of men in our days  he argued that the very laws of nature
absolutely required we should have been made in the beginning of a size
more large and robust not so liable to destruction from every little
accident of a tile falling from a house or a stone cast from the hand
of a boy or being drowned in a little brook  from this way of
reasoning the author drew several moral applications useful in the
conduct of life but needless here to repeat  for my own part i could
not avoid reflecting how universally this talent was spread of drawing
lectures in morality or indeed rather matter of discontent and repining
from the quarrels we raise with nature  and i believe upon a strict
inquiry those quarrels might be shown as illgrounded among us as they
are among that people

as to their military affairs they boast that the kings army consists of
a hundred and seventysix thousand foot and thirtytwo thousand horse
if that may be called an army which is made up of tradesmen in the
several cities and farmers in the country whose commanders are only the
nobility and gentry without pay or reward  they are indeed perfect
enough in their exercises and under very good discipline wherein i saw
no great merit for how should it be otherwise where every farmer is
under the command of his own landlord and every citizen under that of
the principal men in his own city chosen after the manner of venice by
ballot

i have often seen the militia of lorbrulgrud drawn out to exercise in a
great field near the city of twenty miles square  they were in all not
above twentyfive thousand foot and six thousand horse but it was
impossible for me to compute their number considering the space of
ground they took up  a cavalier mounted on a large steed might be
about ninety feet high  i have seen this whole body of horse upon a
word of command draw their swords at once and brandish them in the air
imagination can figure nothing so grand so surprising and so
astonishing it looked as if ten thousand flashes of lightning were
darting at the same time from every quarter of the sky

i was curious to know how this prince to whose dominions there is no
access from any other country came to think of armies or to teach his
people the practice of military discipline  but i was soon informed
both by conversation and reading their histories for in the course of
many ages they have been troubled with the same disease to which the
whole race of mankind is subject the nobility often contending for
power the people for liberty and the king for absolute dominion  all
which however happily tempered by the laws of that kingdom have been
sometimes violated by each of the three parties and have more than once
occasioned civil wars the last whereof was happily put an end to by this
princes grandfather in a general composition and the militia then
settled with common consent has been ever since kept in the strictest
duty



chapter viii


the king and queen make a progress to the frontiers  the author attends
them  the manner in which he leaves the country very particularly
related  he returns to england

i had always a strong impulse that i should some time recover my liberty
though it was impossible to conjecture by what means or to form any
project with the least hope of succeeding  the ship in which i sailed
was the first ever known to be driven within sight of that coast and the
king had given strict orders that if at any time another appeared it
should be taken ashore and with all its crew and passengers brought in a
tumbril to lorbrulgrud  he was strongly bent to get me a woman of my own
size by whom i might propagate the breed but i think i should rather
have died than undergone the disgrace of leaving a posterity to be kept
in cages like tame canarybirds and perhaps in time sold about the
kingdom to persons of quality for curiosities  i was indeed treated
with much kindness i was the favourite of a great king and queen and
the delight of the whole court but it was upon such a foot as ill became
the dignity of humankind  i could never forget those domestic pledges i
had left behind me  i wanted to be among people with whom i could
converse upon even terms and walk about the streets and fields without
being afraid of being trod to death like a frog or a young puppy  but my
deliverance came sooner than i expected and in a manner not very common
the whole story and circumstances of which i shall faithfully relate

i had now been two years in this country and about the beginning of the
third glumdalclitch and i attended the king and queen in a progress to
the south coast of the kingdom  i was carried as usual in my
travellingbox which as i have already described was a very convenient
closet of twelve feet wide  and i had ordered a hammock to be fixed by
silken ropes from the four corners at the top to break the jolts when a
servant carried me before him on horseback as i sometimes desired and
would often sleep in my hammock while we were upon the road  on the
roof of my closet not directly over the middle of the hammock i ordered
the joiner to cut out a hole of a foot square to give me air in hot
weather as i slept which hole i shut at pleasure with a board that drew
backward and forward through a groove

when we came to our journeys end the king thought proper to pass a few
days at a palace he has near flanflasnic a city within eighteen english
miles of the seaside  glumdalclitch and i were much fatigued i had
gotten a small cold but the poor girl was so ill as to be confined to
her chamber  i longed to see the ocean which must be the only scene of
my escape if ever it should happen  i pretended to be worse than i
really was and desired leave to take the fresh air of the sea with a
page whom i was very fond of and who had sometimes been trusted with
me  i shall never forget with what unwillingness glumdalclitch
consented nor the strict charge she gave the page to be careful of me
bursting at the same time into a flood of tears as if she had some
forboding of what was to happen  the boy took me out in my box about
half an hours walk from the palace towards the rocks on the seashore
i ordered him to set me down and lifting up one of my sashes cast many
a wistful melancholy look towards the sea  i found myself not very well
and told the page that i had a mind to take a nap in my hammock which i
hoped would do me good  i got in and the boy shut the window close
down to keep out the cold  i soon fell asleep and all i can conjecture
is while i slept the page thinking no danger could happen went among
the rocks to look for birds eggs having before observed him from my
window searching about and picking up one or two in the clefts  be that
as it will i found myself suddenly awaked with a violent pull upon the
ring which was fastened at the top of my box for the conveniency of
carriage  i felt my box raised very high in the air and then borne
forward with prodigious speed  the first jolt had like to have shaken me
out of my hammock but afterward the motion was easy enough  i called
out several times as loud as i could raise my voice but all to no
purpose  i looked towards my windows and could see nothing but the
clouds and sky  i heard a noise just over my head like the clapping of
wings and then began to perceive the woful condition i was in that some
eagle had got the ring of my box in his beak with an intent to let it
fall on a rock like a tortoise in a shell and then pick out my body
and devour it for the sagacity and smell of this bird enables him to
discover his quarry at a great distance though better concealed than i
could be within a twoinch board

in a little time i observed the noise and flutter of wings to increase
very fast and my box was tossed up and down like a sign in a windy day
i heard several bangs or buffets as i thought given to the eagle for
such i am certain it must have been that held the ring of my box in his
beak and then all on a sudden felt myself falling perpendicularly
down for above a minute but with such incredible swiftness that i
almost lost my breath  my fall was stopped by a terrible squash that
sounded louder to my ears than the cataract of niagara after which i
was quite in the dark for another minute and then my box began to rise
so high that i could see light from the tops of the windows  i now
perceived i was fallen into the sea  my box by the weight of my body
the goods that were in and the broad plates of iron fixed for strength
at the four corners of the top and bottom floated about five feet deep
in water  i did then and do now suppose that the eagle which flew away
with my box was pursued by two or three others and forced to let me
drop while he defended himself against the rest who hoped to share in
the prey  the plates of iron fastened at the bottom of the box for
those were the strongest preserved the balance while it fell and
hindered it from being broken on the surface of the water every joint of
it was well grooved and the door did not move on hinges but up and down
like a sash which kept my closet so tight that very little water came
in  i got with much difficulty out of my hammock having first ventured
to draw back the slipboard on the roof already mentioned contrived on
purpose to let in air for want of which i found myself almost stifled

how often did i then wish myself with my dear glumdalclitch from whom
one single hour had so far divided me  and i may say with truth that in
the midst of my own misfortunes i could not forbear lamenting my poor
nurse the grief she would suffer for my loss the displeasure of the
queen and the ruin of her fortune  perhaps many travellers have not
been under greater difficulties and distress than i was at this juncture
expecting every moment to see my box dashed to pieces or at least
overset by the first violent blast or rising wave  a breach in one
single pane of glass would have been immediate death nor could any thing
have preserved the windows but the strong lattice wires placed on the
outside against accidents in travelling  i saw the water ooze in at
several crannies although the leaks were not considerable and i
endeavoured to stop them as well as i could  i was not able to lift up
the roof of my closet which otherwise i certainly should have done and
sat on the top of it where i might at least preserve myself some hours
longer than by being shut up as i may call it in the hold  or if i
escaped these dangers for a day or two what could i expect but a
miserable death of cold and hunger  i was four hours under these
circumstances expecting and indeed wishing every moment to be my last

i have already told the reader that there were two strong staples fixed
upon that side of my box which had no window and into which the servant
who used to carry me on horseback would put a leathern belt and buckle
it about his waist  being in this disconsolate state i heard or at
least thought i heard some kind of grating noise on that side of my box
where the staples were fixed and soon after i began to fancy that the
box was pulled or towed along the sea for i now and then felt a sort of
tugging which made the waves rise near the tops of my windows leaving
me almost in the dark  this gave me some faint hopes of relief although
i was not able to imagine how it could be brought about  i ventured to
unscrew one of my chairs which were always fastened to the floor and
having made a hard shift to screw it down again directly under the
slippingboard that i had lately opened i mounted on the chair and
putting my mouth as near as i could to the hole i called for help in a
loud voice and in all the languages i understood  i then fastened my
handkerchief to a stick i usually carried and thrusting it up the hole
waved it several times in the air that if any boat or ship were near
the seamen might conjecture some unhappy mortal to be shut up in the box

i found no effect from all i could do but plainly perceived my closet to
be moved along and in the space of an hour or better that side of the
box where the staples were and had no windows struck against something
that was hard  i apprehended it to be a rock and found myself tossed
more than ever  i plainly heard a noise upon the cover of my closet
like that of a cable and the grating of it as it passed through the
ring  i then found myself hoisted up by degrees at least three feet
higher than i was before  whereupon i again thrust up my stick and
handkerchief calling for help till i was almost hoarse  in return to
which i heard a great shout repeated three times giving me such
transports of joy as are not to be conceived but by those who feel them
i now heard a trampling over my head and somebody calling through the
hole with a loud voice in the english tongue if there be any body
below let them speak  i answered i was an englishman drawn by ill
fortune into the greatest calamity that ever any creature underwent and
begged by all that was moving to be delivered out of the dungeon i was
in  the voice replied i was safe for my box was fastened to their
ship and the carpenter should immediately come and saw a hole in the
cover large enough to pull me out  i answered that was needless and
would take up too much time for there was no more to be done but let
one of the crew put his finger into the ring and take the box out of the
sea into the ship and so into the captains cabin  some of them upon
hearing me talk so wildly thought i was mad others laughed for indeed
it never came into my head that i was now got among people of my own
stature and strength  the carpenter came and in a few minutes sawed a
passage about four feet square then let down a small ladder upon which
i mounted and thence was taken into the ship in a very weak condition

the sailors were all in amazement and asked me a thousand questions
which i had no inclination to answer  i was equally confounded at the
sight of so many pigmies for such i took them to be after having so
long accustomed mine eyes to the monstrous objects i had left  but the
captain mr thomas wilcocks an honest worthy shropshire man observing
i was ready to faint took me into his cabin gave me a cordial to
comfort me and made me turn in upon his own bed advising me to take a
little rest of which i had great need  before i went to sleep i gave
him to understand that i had some valuable furniture in my box too good
to be lost a fine hammock a handsome fieldbed two chairs a table
and a cabinet that my closet was hung on all sides or rather quilted
with silk and cotton that if he would let one of the crew bring my
closet into his cabin i would open it there before him and show him my
goods  the captain hearing me utter these absurdities concluded i was
raving however i suppose to pacify me he promised to give order as i
desired and going upon deck sent some of his men down into my closet
whence as i afterwards found they drew up all my goods and stripped
off the quilting but the chairs cabinet and bedstead being screwed to
the floor were much damaged by the ignorance of the seamen who tore
them up by force  then they knocked off some of the boards for the use
of the ship and when they had got all they had a mind for let the hull
drop into the sea which by reason of many breaches made in the bottom
and sides sunk to rights  and indeed i was glad not to have been a
spectator of the havoc they made because i am confident it would have
sensibly touched me by bringing former passages into my mind which i
would rather have forgot

i slept some hours but perpetually disturbed with dreams of the place i
had left and the dangers i had escaped  however upon waking i found
myself much recovered  it was now about eight oclock at night and the
captain ordered supper immediately thinking i had already fasted too
long  he entertained me with great kindness observing me not to look
wildly or talk inconsistently and when we were left alone desired i
would give him a relation of my travels and by what accident i came to
be set adrift in that monstrous wooden chest  he said that about
twelve oclock at noon as he was looking through his glass he spied it
at a distance and thought it was a sail which he had a mind to make
being not much out of his course in hopes of buying some biscuit his
own beginning to fall short  that upon coming nearer and finding his
error he sent out his longboat to discover what it was that his men
came back in a fright swearing they had seen a swimming house  that he
laughed at their folly and went himself in the boat ordering his men to
take a strong cable along with them  that the weather being calm he
rowed round me several times observed my windows and wire lattices that
defended them  that he discovered two staples upon one side which was
all of boards without any passage for light  he then commanded his men
to row up to that side and fastening a cable to one of the staples
ordered them to tow my chest as they called it toward the ship  when
it was there he gave directions to fasten another cable to the ring
fixed in the cover and to raise up my chest with pulleys which all the
sailors were not able to do above two or three feet  he said they saw
my stick and handkerchief thrust out of the hole and concluded that some
unhappy man must be shut up in the cavity  i asked whether he or the
crew had seen any prodigious birds in the air about the time he first
discovered me  to which he answered that discoursing this matter with
the sailors while i was asleep one of them said he had observed three
eagles flying towards the north but remarked nothing of their being
larger than the usual size which i suppose must be imputed to the great
height they were at and he could not guess the reason of my question  i
then asked the captain how far he reckoned we might be from land  he
said by the best computation he could make we were at least a hundred
leagues  i assured him that he must be mistaken by almost half for i
had not left the country whence i came above two hours before i dropped
into the sea  whereupon he began again to think that my brain was
disturbed of which he gave me a hint and advised me to go to bed in a
cabin he had provided  i assured him i was well refreshed with his
good entertainment and company and as much in my senses as ever i was in
my life  he then grew serious and desired to ask me freely whether i
were not troubled in my mind by the consciousness of some enormous crime
for which i was punished at the command of some prince by exposing me
in that chest as great criminals in other countries have been forced
to sea in a leaky vessel without provisions for although he should be
sorry to have taken so ill a man into his ship yet he would engage his
word to set me safe ashore in the first port where we arrived  he
added that his suspicions were much increased by some very absurd
speeches i had delivered at first to his sailors and afterwards to
himself in relation to my closet or chest as well as by my odd looks
and behaviour while i was at supper

i begged his patience to hear me tell my story which i faithfully did
from the last time i left england to the moment he first discovered me
and as truth always forces its way into rational minds so this honest
worthy gentleman who had some tincture of learning and very good sense
was immediately convinced of my candour and veracity  but further to
confirm all i had said i entreated him to give order that my cabinet
should be brought of which i had the key in my pocket for he had
already informed me how the seamen disposed of my closet  i opened it in
his own presence and showed him the small collection of rarities i made
in the country from which i had been so strangely delivered  there was
the comb i had contrived out of the stumps of the kings beard and
another of the same materials but fixed into a paring of her majestys
thumbnail which served for the back  there was a collection of needles
and pins from a foot to half a yard long four wasp stings like
joiners tacks some combings of the queens hair a gold ring which one
day she made me a present of in a most obliging manner taking it from
her little finger and throwing it over my head like a collar  i desired
the captain would please to accept this ring in return for his
civilities which he absolutely refused  i showed him a corn that i had
cut off with my own hand from a maid of honours toe it was about the
bigness of kentish pippin and grown so hard that when i returned
england i got it hollowed into a cup and set in silver  lastly i
desired him to see the breeches i had then on which were made of a
mouses skin

i could force nothing on him but a footmans tooth which i observed him
to examine with great curiosity and found he had a fancy for it  he
received it with abundance of thanks more than such a trifle could
deserve  it was drawn by an unskilful surgeon in a mistake from one of
glumdalclitchs men who was afflicted with the toothache but it was as
sound as any in his head  i got it cleaned and put it into my cabinet
it was about a foot long and four inches in diameter

the captain was very well satisfied with this plain relation i had given
him and said he hoped when we returned to england i would oblige the
world by putting it on paper and making it public  my answer was
that we were overstocked with books of travels that nothing could now
pass which was not extraordinary wherein i doubted some authors less
consulted truth than their own vanity or interest or the diversion of
ignorant readers that my story could contain little beside common
events without those ornamental descriptions of strange plants trees
birds and other animals or of the barbarous customs and idolatry of
savage people with which most writers abound  however i thanked him
for his good opinion and promised to take the matter into my thoughts

he said he wondered at one thing very much which was to hear me speak
so loud asking me whether the king or queen of that country were thick
of hearing  i told him it was what i had been used to for above two
years past and that i admired as much at the voices of him and his men
who seemed to me only to whisper and yet i could hear them well enough
but when i spoke in that country it was like a man talking in the
streets to another looking out from the top of a steeple unless when i
was placed on a table or held in any persons hand  i told him i had
likewise observed another thing that when i first got into the ship
and the sailors stood all about me i thought they were the most little
contemptible creatures i had ever beheld  for indeed while i was in
that princes country i could never endure to look in a glass after
mine eyes had been accustomed to such prodigious objects because the
comparison gave me so despicable a conceit of myself  the captain said
that while we were at supper he observed me to look at every thing with
a sort of wonder and that i often seemed hardly able to contain my
laughter which he knew not well how to take but imputed it to some
disorder in my brain  i answered it was very true and i wondered how
i could forbear when i saw his dishes of the size of a silver
threepence a leg of pork hardly a mouthful a cup not so big as a
nutshell and so i went on describing the rest of his householdstuff
and provisions after the same manner  for although he queen had
ordered a little equipage of all things necessary for me while i was in
her service yet my ideas were wholly taken up with what i saw on every
side of me and i winked at my own littleness as people do at their own
faults  the captain understood my raillery very well and merrily
replied with the old english proverb that he doubted mine eyes were
bigger than my belly for he did not observe my stomach so good although
i had fasted all day and continuing in his mirth protested he would
have gladly given a hundred pounds to have seen my closet in the eagles
bill and afterwards in its fall from so great a height into the sea
which would certainly have been a most astonishing object worthy to have
the description of it transmitted to future ages and the comparison of
phaëton was so obvious that he could not forbear applying it although i
did not much admire the conceit

the captain having been at tonquin was in his return to england driven
northeastward to the latitude of 44 degrees and longitude of 143  but
meeting a tradewind two days after i came on board him we sailed
southward a long time and coasting new holland kept our course
westsouthwest and then southsouthwest till we doubled the cape of
good hope  our voyage was very prosperous but i shall not trouble the
reader with a journal of it  the captain called in at one or two ports
and sent in his longboat for provisions and fresh water but i never
went out of the ship till we came into the downs which was on the third
day of june 1706 about nine months after my escape  i offered to leave
my goods in security for payment of my freight but the captain protested
he would not receive one farthing  we took a kind leave of each other
and i made him promise he would come to see me at my house in redriff  i
hired a horse and guide for five shillings which i borrowed of the
captain

as i was on the road observing the littleness of the houses the trees
the cattle and the people i began to think myself in lilliput  i was
afraid of trampling on every traveller i met and often called aloud to
have them stand out of the way so that i had like to have gotten one or
two broken heads for my impertinence

when i came to my own house for which i was forced to inquire one of
the servants opening the door i bent down to go in like a goose under
a gate for fear of striking my head  my wife run out to embrace me
but i stooped lower than her knees thinking she could otherwise never be
able to reach my mouth  my daughter kneeled to ask my blessing but i
could not see her till she arose having been so long used to stand with
my head and eyes erect to above sixty feet and then i went to take her
up with one hand by the waist  i looked down upon the servants and one
or two friends who were in the house as if they had been pigmies and i a
giant  i told my wife she had been too thrifty for i found she had
starved herself and her daughter to nothing  in short i behaved myself
so unaccountably that they were all of the captains opinion when he
first saw me and concluded i had lost my wits  this i mention as an
instance of the great power of habit and prejudice

in a little time i and my family and friends came to a right
understanding but my wife protested i should never go to sea any more
although my evil destiny so ordered that she had not power to hinder me
as the reader may know hereafter  in the mean time i here conclude the
second part of my unfortunate voyages