THE HISTORY OF THE NUN; OR, THE FAIR VOW-BREAKER.




INTRODUCTION.

 To the Most Illustrious Princess,
  The Dutchess of Mazarine.

  Madam,

There are none of an Illustrious Quality, who have not been made, by
some Poet or other, the Patronesses of his Distress’d Hero, or
Unfortunate Damsel; and such Addresses are Tributes, due only to the
most Elevated, where they have always been very well receiv’d, since
they are the greatest Testimonies we can give, of our Esteem and
Veneration.

Madam, when I survey’d the whole Toor of Ladies at Court, which was
adorn’d by you, who appear’d there with a Grace and Majesty, peculiar to
Your Great Self only, mix’d with an irresistible Air of Sweetness,
Generosity, and Wit, I was impatient for an Opportunity, to tell Your
Grace, how infinitely one of Your own Sex ador’d You, and that, among
all the numerous Conquest, Your Grace has made over the Hearts of Men,
Your Grace had not subdu’d a more entire Slave; I assure you, Madam,
there is neither Compliment nor Poetry, in this humble Declaration, but
a Truth, which has cost me a great deal of Inquietude, for that Fortune
has not set me in such a Station, as might justifie my Pretence to the
honour and satisfaction of being ever near Your Grace, to view eternally
that lovely Person, and hear that surprizing Wit; what can be more
grateful to a Heart, than so great, and so agreeable, an Entertainment?
And how few Objects are there, that can render it so entire a Pleasure,
as at once to hear you speak, and to look upon your Beauty? A Beauty
that is heighten’d, if possible, with an air of Negligence, in Dress,
wholly Charming, as if your Beauty disdain’d those little Arts of your
Sex, whose Nicety alone is their greatest Charm, while yours, Madam,
even without the Assistance of your exalted Birth, begets an Awe and
Reverence in all that do approach you, and every one is proud, and
pleas’d, in paying you Homage their several ways, according to their
Capacities and Talents; mine, Madam, can only be exprest by my Pen,
which would be infinitely honour’d, in being permitted to celebrate your
great Name for ever, and perpetually to serve, where it has so great an
inclination.

In the mean time, Madam, I presume to lay this little Trifle at your
Feet; the Story is true, as it is on the Records of the Town, where it
was transacted; and if my fair unfortunate VOW-BREAKER do not deserve
the honour of your Graces Protection, at least, she will be found worthy
of your Pity; which will be a sufficient Glory, both for her, and,

    Madam,
  Your Graces most humble,
      and most obedient Servant,
          A. BEHN.




THE HISTORY OF THE NUN; or, The Fair Vow-Breaker.


Of all the sins, incident to Human Nature, there is none, of which
Heaven has took so particular, visible, and frequent Notice, and
Revenge, as on that of _Violated Vows_, which never go unpunished; and
the _Cupids_ may boast what they will, for the encouragement of their
Trade of Love, that Heaven never takes cognisance of Lovers broken Vows
and Oaths, and that ’tis the only Perjury that escapes the Anger of the
_Gods_; But I verily believe, if it were search’d into, we should find
these frequent Perjuries, that pass in the World for so many Gallantries
only, to be the occasion of so many unhappy Marriages, and the cause of
all those Misfortunes, which are so frequent to the Nuptiall’d Pair. For
not one of a Thousand, but, either on his side, or on hers, has been
perjur’d, and broke Vows made to some fond believing Wretch, whom they
have abandon’d and undone. What Man that does not boast of the Numbers
he has thus ruin’d, and, who does not glory in the shameful Triumph?
Nay, what Woman, almost, has not a pleasure in Deceiving, taught,
perhaps, at first, by some dear false one, who had fatally instructed
her Youth in an Art she ever after practis’d, in Revenge on all those
she could be too hard for, and conquer at their own Weapons? For,
without all dispute, Women are by Nature more Constant and Just, than
Men, and did not their first Lovers teach them the trick of Change, they
would be _Doves_, that would never quit their Mate, and, like _Indian_
Wives, would leap alive into the Graves of their deceased Lovers, and be
buried quick with ’em. But Customs of Countries change even Nature her
self, and long Habit takes her place: The Women are taught, by the Lives
of the Men, to live up to all their Vices, and are become almost as
inconstant; and ’tis but Modesty that makes the difference, and, hardly,
inclination; so deprav’d the nicest Appetites grow in time, by bad
Examples.

But, as there are degrees of Vows, so there are degrees of Punishments
for Vows, there are solemn Matrimonial Vows, such as contract and are
the most effectual Marriage, and have the most reason to be so; there
are a thousand Vows and Friendships, that pass between Man and Man, on a
thousand Occasions; but there is another Vow, call’d a _Sacred Vow_,
made to God only; and, by which, we oblige our selves eternally to serve
him with all Chastity and Devotion: This Vow is only taken, and made, by
those that enter into Holy Orders, and, of all broken Vows, these are
those, that receive the most severe and notorious Revenges of God; and I
am almost certain, there is not one Example to be produc’d in the World,
where Perjuries of this nature have past unpunish’d, nay, that have not
been persu’d with the greatest and most rigorous of Punishments. I could
my self, of my own knowledge, give an hundred Examples of the fatal
Consequences of the Violation of Sacred Vows; and who ever make it their
business, and are curious in the search of such Misfortunes, shall find,
as I say, that they never go unregarded.

The young Beauty therefore, who dedicates her self to Heaven, and weds
her self for ever to the service of God, ought, first, very well to
consider the Self-denial she is going to put upon her youth, her fickle
faithless deceiving Youth, of one Opinion to day, and of another to
morrow; like Flowers, which never remain in one state or fashion, but
bud to day, and blow by insensible degrees, and decay as imperceptibly.
The Resolution, we promise, and believe we shall maintain, is not in our
power, and nothing is so deceitful as human Hearts.

I once was design’d an humble Votary in the House of Devotion, but
fancying my self not endu’d with an obstinacy of Mind, great enough to
secure me from the Efforts and Vanities of the World, I rather chose to
deny my self that Content I could not certainly promise my self, than to
languish (as I have seen some do) in a certain Affliction; tho’
possibly, since, I have sufficiently bewailed that mistaken and
inconsiderate Approbation and Preference of the false ungrateful World,
(full of nothing but Nonsense, Noise, false Notions, and Contradiction)
before the Innocence and Quiet of a Cloyster; nevertheless, I could
wish, for the prevention of abundance of Mischiefs and Miseries, that
Nunneries and Marriages were not to be enter’d into, ’till the Maid, so
destin’d, were of a mature Age to make her own Choice; and that Parents
would not make use of their justly assum’d Authority to compel their
Children, neither to the one or the other; but since I cannot alter
Custom, nor shall ever be allow’d to make new Laws, or rectify the old
ones, I must leave the Young Nuns inclos’d to their best Endeavours, of
making a Virtue of Necessity; and the young Wives, to make the best of a
bad Market.

In _Iper_, a Town, not long since, in the Dominions of the King of
_Spain_, and now in possession of the King of _France_, there liv’d a
Man of Quality, of a considerable Fortune, call’d, Count _Henrick de
Vallary_, who had a very beautiful Lady, by whom, he had one Daughter,
call’d _Isabella_, whose Mother dying when she was about two years old
to the unspeakable Grief of the Count, her Husband, he resolv’d never to
partake of any Pleasure more, that this transitory World could court him
with, but determin’d, with himself, to dedicate his Youth, and future
Days, to Heaven, and to take upon him Holy Orders; and, without
considering, that, possibly, the young _Isabella_, when she grew to
Woman, might have Sentiments contrary to those that now possest him, he
design’d she should also become a Nun; However, he was not so positive
in that Resolution, as to put the matter wholly out of her Choice, but
divided his Estate; one half he carried with him to the Monastery of
_Jesuits_, of which number, he became one; and the other half, he gave
with _Isabella_, to the Monastery, of which, his only Sister was Lady
_Abbess_, of the Order of St. _Augustine_; but so he ordered the matter,
that if, at the Age of Thirteen, _Isabella_ had not a mind to take
Orders, or that the Lady _Abbess_ found her Inclination averse to a
Monastick Life, she should have such a proportion of the Revenue, as
should be fit to marry her to a Noble Man, and left it to the discretion
of the Lady _Abbess_, who was a Lady of known Piety, and admirable
strictness of Life, and so nearly related to _Isabella_, that there was
no doubt made of her Integrity and Justice.

The little _Isabella_ was carried immediately (in her Mourning for her
dead Mother) into the Nunnery, and was receiv’d as a very diverting
Companion by all the young Ladies, and, above all, by her Reverend Aunt,
for she was come just to the Age of delighting her Parents; she was the
prettiest forward Pratler in the World, and had a thousand little Charms
to please, besides the young Beauties that were just budding in her
little Angel Face: So that she soon became the dear lov’d Favourite of
the whole House; and as she was an Entertainment to them all, so they
made it their study to find all the Diversions they could for the pretty
_Isabella_; and as she grew in Wit and Beauty every day, so they fail’d
not to cultivate her Mind; and delicate Apprehension, in all that was
advantageous to her Sex, and whatever Excellency any one abounded in,
she was sure to communicate it to the young _Isabella_, if one could
Dance, another Sing, another play on this Instrument, and another on
that; if this spoke one Language, and that another; if she had Wit, and
she Discretion, and a third, the finest Fashion and Manners; all joyn’d
to compleat the Mind and Body of this beautiful young Girl; Who, being
undiverted with the less noble, and less solid, Vanities of the World,
took to these Virtues, and excell’d in all; and her Youth and Wit being
apt for all Impressions, she soon became a greater Mistress of their
Arts, than those who taught her; so that at the Age of eight or nine
Years, she was thought fit to receive and entertain all the great Men
and Ladies, and the Strangers of any Nation, at the _Grate_; and that
with so admirable a Grace, so quick and piercing a Wit, and so
delightful and sweet a Conversation, that she became the whole Discourse
of the Town, and Strangers spread her Fame, as prodigious, throughout
the Christian World; for Strangers came daily to hear her talk, and
sing, and play, and to admire her Beauty; and Ladies brought their
Children, to shame ’em into good Fashion and Manners, with looking on
the lovely young _Isabella_.

The Lady _Abbess_, her Aunt, you may believe, was not a little proud of
the Excellencies and Virtues of her fair _Niece_, and omitted nothing
that might adorn her Mind; because, not only of the vastness of her
Parts and Fame, and the Credit she would do her House, by residing there
for ever; but also, being very loth to part with her considerable
Fortune, which she must resign, if she returned into the World, she us’d
all her Arts and Stratagems to make her become a _Nun_, to which all the
fair Sisterhood contributed their Cunning, but it was altogether
needless; her Inclination, the strictness of her Devotion, her early
Prayers, and those continual, and innate Stedfastness, and Calm, she was
Mistress of; her Ignorance of the World’s Vanities, and those that
uninclos’d young Ladies count Pleasures and Diversions, being all
unknown to her, she thought there was no Joy out of a _Nunnery_, and no
Satisfactions on the other side of a _Grate_.

The Lady _Abbess_, seeing, that of her self she yielded faster than she
could expect; to discharge her Conscience to her Brother, who came
frequently to visit his Darling _Isabella_, would very often discourse
to her of the Pleasures of the World, telling her, how much happier she
would think her self, to be the Wife of some gallant young Cavalier, and
to have Coaches and Equipages; to see the World, to behold a thousand
Rarities she had never seen, to live in Splendor, to eat high, and wear
magnificent Clothes, to be bow’d to as she pass’d, and have a thousand
Adorers, to see in time a pretty Offspring, the products of Love, that
should talk, and look, and delight, as she did, the Heart of their
Parents; but to all, her Father and the Lady _Abbess_ could say of the
World, and its Pleasures, _Isabella_ brought a thousand Reasons and
Arguments, so Pious, so Devout, that the _Abbess_ was very well pleased,
to find her (purposely weak) Propositions so well overthrown; and gives
an account of her daily Discourses to her Brother, which were no less
pleasing to him; and tho’ _Isabella_ went already dress’d as richly as
her Quality deserv’d, yet her Father, to try the utmost that the World’s
Vanity could do, upon her young Heart, orders the most Glorious Clothes
should be bought her, and that the Lady _Abbess_ should suffer her to go
abroad with those Ladies of Quality, that were her Relations, and her
Mother’s Acquaintance; that she should visit and go on the Toore, (that
is, the Hide Park there) that she should see all that was diverting, to
try, whether it were not for want of Temptation to Vanity, that made her
leave the World, and love an inclos’d Life.

As the Count had commanded, all things were performed; and _Isabella_
arriving at her Thirteenth Year of Age, and being pretty tall of
Stature, with the finest Shape that Fancy can create, with all the
Adornment of a perfect brown-hair’d Beauty, Eyes black and lovely,
Complexion fair; to a Miracle, all her Features of the rarest
proportion, the Mouth red, the Teeth white, and a thousand Graces in her
Meen and Air; she came no sooner abroad, but she had a thousand Persons
fighting for love of her; the Reputation her Wit had acquir’d, got her
Adorers without seeing her, but when they saw her, they found themselves
conquer’d and undone; all were glad she was come into the World, of whom
they had heard so much, and all the Youth of the Town dress’d only for
_Isabella de Valerie_, that rose like a new Star that Eclips’d all the
rest, and which set the World a-gazing. Some hop’d, and some despair’d,
but all lov’d, while _Isabella_ regarded not their Eyes, their distant
darling Looks of Love, and their signs of Adoration; she was civil and
affable to all, but so reserv’d, that none durst tell her his Passion,
or name that strange and abhorr’d thing, _Love_, to her; the Relations
with whom she went abroad every day, were fein to force her out, and
when she went, ’twas the motive of Civility, and not Satisfaction, that
made her go; whatever she saw, she beheld with no admiration, and
nothing created wonder in her, tho’ never so strange and Novel. She
survey’d all things with an indifference, that tho’ it was not sullen,
was far from Transport, so that her evenness of Mind was infinitely
admir’d and prais’d. And now it was, that, young as she was, her Conduct
and Discretion appear’d equal to her Wit and Beauty, and she encreas’d
daily in Reputation, insomuch, that the Parents of abundance of young
Noble Men, made it their business to endeavour to marry their Sons to so
admirable and noble a Maid, and one, whose Virtues were the Discourse of
all the World; the _Father_, the Lady _Abbess_, and those who had her
abroad, were solicited to make an Alliance; for the Father, he would
give no answer, but left it to the discretion of _Isabella_, who could
not be persuaded to hear any thing of that nature; so that for a long
time she refus’d her company to all those, who propos’d any thing of
Marriage to her; she said, she had seen nothing in the World that was
worth her Care, or the venturing the losing of Heaven for, and therefore
was resolv’d to dedicate her self to that; that the more she saw of the
World, the worse she lik’d it, and pity’d the Wretches that were
condemn’d to it; that she had consider’d it, and found no one
Inclination that forbad her immediate Entrance into a Religious Life; to
which, her Father, after using all the Arguments he could, to make her
take good heed of what she went about, to consider it well; and had
urg’d all the Inconveniencies of Severe Life, Watchings, Midnight
Risings in all Weathers and Seasons to Prayers, hard Lodging, course
Diet, and homely Habit, with a thousand other things of Labour and Work
us’d among the _Nuns_; and finding her still resolv’d and inflexible to
all contrary persuasions, he consented, kiss’d her, and told her, She
had argu’d according to the wish of his Soul, and that he never believ’d
himself truly happy, till this moment that he was assur’d, she would
become a Religious.

This News, to the Heart-breaking of a thousand Lovers, was spread all
over the Town, and there was nothing but Songs of Complaint, and of her
retiring, after she had shewn her self to the World, and vanquish’d so
many Hearts; all Wits were at work on this Cruel Subject, and one begat
another, as is usual in such Affairs. Amongst the number of these
Lovers, there was a young Gentleman, Nobly born, his name was
_Villenoys_, who was admirably made, and very handsom, had travell’d and
accomplish’d himself, as much as was possible for one so young to do; he
was about Eighteen, and was going to the Siege of _Candia_, in a very
good Equipage, but, overtaken by his Fate, surpris’d in his way to
Glory, he stopt at _Ipers_, so fell most passionately in love with this
Maid of Immortal Fame; but being defeated in his hopes by this News, was
the Man that made the softest Complaints to this fair Beauty, and whose
violence of Passion oppress’d him to that degree, that he was the only
Lover, who durst himself tell her, he was in love with her; he writ
Billets so soft and tender, that she had, of all her Lovers, most
compassion for _Villenoys_, and dain’d several times, in pity of him, to
send him answers to his Letters, but they were such, as absolutely
forbad him to love her; such as incited him to follow Glory, the
Mistress that could noblest reward him; and that, for her part, her
Prayers should always be, that he might be victorious, and the Darling
of that Fortune he was going to court; and that she, for her part, had
fix’d her Mind on Heaven, and no Earthly Thought should bring it down;
but she should ever retain for him all Sisterly Respect, and begg’d, in
her Solitudes, to hear, whether her Prayers had prov’d effectual or not,
and if Fortune were so kind to him, as she should perpetually wish.

When _Villenoys_ found she was resolv’d, he design’d to persue his
Journy, but could not leave the Town, till he had seen the fatal
Ceremony of _Isabella’s_ being made a _Nun_, which was every day
expected; and while he stay’d, he could not forbear writing daily to
her, but receiv’d no more Answers from her, she already accusing her
self of having done too much, for a Maid in her Circumstances; but she
confess’d, of all she had seen, she lik’d _Villenoys_ the best; and if
she ever could have lov’d, she believ’d it would have been _Villenoys_,
for he had all the good Qualities, and grace, that could render him
agreeable to the Fair; besides, that he was only Son to a very rich and
noble Parent, and one that might very well presume to lay claim to a
Maid of _Isabella’s_ Beauty and Fortune.

As the time approach’d, when he must eternally lose all hope, by
_Isabella’s_ taking Orders, he found himself less able to bear the
Efforts of that Despair it possess’d him with, he languished with the
thought, so that it was visible to all his Friends, the decays it
wrought on his Beauty and Gaiety: So that he fell at last into a Feaver;
and ’twas the whole Discourse of the Town, That _Villenoys_ was dying
for the Fair _Isabella_; his Relations, being all of Quality, were
extreamly afflicted at his Misfortune, and joyn’d their Interests yet,
to dissuade this fair young Victoress from an act so cruel, as to
inclose herself in a _Nunnery_, while the finest of all the youths of
Quality was dying for her, and ask’d her, If it would not be more
acceptable to Heaven to save a Life, and perhaps a Soul, than to go and
expose her own to a thousand Tortures? They assur’d her, _Villenoys_ was
dying, and dying Adoring her; that nothing could save his Life, but her
kind Eyes turn’d upon the fainting Lover; a Lover, that could breath
nothing, but her Name in Sighs; and find satisfaction in nothing, but
weeping and crying out, ‘I dye for Isabella!’ This Discourse fetch’d
abundance of Tears from the fair Eyes of this tender Maid; but, at the
same time, she besought them to believe, these Tears ought not to give
them hope, she should ever yield to save his Life, by quitting her
Resolution, of becoming a _Nun_; but, on the contrary, they were Tears,
that only bewail’d her own Misfortune, in having been the occasion of
the death of any Man, especially, a Man, who had so many Excellencies,
as might have render’d him entirely Happy and Glorious for a long race
of Years, had it not been his ill fortune to have seen her unlucky Face.
She believ’d, it was for her Sins of Curiosity, and going beyond the
Walls of the Monastery, to wander after the Vanities of the foolish
World, that had occasion’d this Misfortune to the young Count of
_Villenoys_, and she would put a severe Penance on her Body, for the
Mischiefs her Eyes had done him; she fears she might, by something in
her looks, have intic’d his Heart, for she own’d she saw him, with
wonder at his Beauty, and much more she admir’d him, when she found the
Beauties of his Mind; she confess’d, she had given him hope, by
answering his Letters; and that when she found her Heart grow a little
more than usually tender, when she thought on him, she believ’d it a
Crime, that ought to be check’d by a Virtue, such as she pretended to
profess, and hop’d she should ever carry to her Grave; and she desired
his Relations to implore him, in her Name, to rest contented, in knowing
he was the first, and should be the last, that should ever make an
impression on her Heart; that what she had conceiv’d there, for him,
should remain with her to her dying day, and that she besought him to
live, that she might see, he both deserv’d this Esteem she had for him,
and to repay it her, otherwise he would dye in her debt, and make her
Life ever after reposeless.

This being all they could get from her, they return’d with Looks that
told their Message; however, they render’d those soft things _Isabella_
had said, in so moving a manner, as fail’d not to please, and while he
remain’d in this condition, the Ceremonies were compleated, of making
_Isabella_ a _Nun_; which was a Secret to none but _Villenoys_, and from
him it was carefully conceal’d, so that in a little time he recover’d
his lost health, at least, so well, as to support the fatal News, and
upon the first hearing it, he made ready his Equipage, and departed
immediately for _Candia_; where he behav’d himself very gallantly, under
the Command of the Duke De _Beaufort_, and, with him, return’d to
_France_, after the loss of that noble City to the _Turks_.

In all the time of his absence, that he might the sooner establish his
Repose, he forbore sending to the fair Cruel _Nun_, and she heard no
more of _Villenoys_ in above two years; so that giving her self wholly
up to Devotion, there was never seen any one, who led so Austere and
Pious a Life, as this young _Votress_; she was a Saint in the Chapel,
and an Angel at the _Grate_: She there laid by all her severe Looks, and
mortify’d Discourse, and being at perfect peace and tranquility within,
she was outwardly all gay, sprightly, and entertaining, being satisfy’d,
no Sights, no Freedoms, could give any temptations to worldly desires;
she gave a loose to all that was modest, and that Virtue and Honour
would permit, and was the most charming Conversation that ever was
admir’d; and the whole World that pass’d through _Iper_; of Strangers,
came directed and recommended to the lovely _Isabella_; I mean, those of
Quality: But however Diverting she was at the _Grate_, she was most
exemplary Devout in the Cloister, doing more Penance, and imposing a
more rigid Severity and Task on her self, than was requir’d, giving such
rare Examples to all the _Nuns_ that were less Devout, that her Life was
a Proverb, and a President, and when they would express a very Holy
Woman indeed, they would say, ‘She was a very _ISABELLA_.’

There was in this _Nunnery_, a young _Nun_, call’d, Sister _Katteriena_,
Daughter to the Grave _Vanhenault_, that is to say, an Earl, who liv’d
about six Miles from the Town, in a noble _Villa_; this Sister
_Katteriena_ was not only a very beautiful Maid, but very witty, and had
all the good qualities to make her be belov’d, and had most wonderfully
gain’d upon the Heart of the fair _Isabella_, she was her Chamber-Fellow
and Companion in all her Devotions and Diversions, so that where one
was, there was the other, and they never went but together to the
_Grate_, to the Garden, or to any place, whither their _Affairs_ call’d
either. This young _Katteriena_ had a Brother, who lov’d her intirely,
and came every day to see her, he was about twenty Years of Age, rather
tall than middle Statur’d, his Hair and Eyes brown, but his Face
exceeding beautiful, adorn’d with a thousand Graces, and the most nobly
and exactly made, that ’twas possible for Nature to form; to the
Fineness and Charms of his Person, he had an Air in his Meen and
Dressing, so very agreeable, besides rich, that ’twas impossible to look
on him, without wishing him happy, because he did so absolutely merit
being so. His Wit and his Manner was so perfectly Obliging, a Goodness
and Generosity so Sincere and Gallant, that it would even have aton’d
for Ugliness. As he was eldest Son to so great a Father, he was kept at
home, while the rest of his Brothers were employ’d in Wars abroad; this
made him of a melancholy Temper, and fit for soft Impressions; he was
very Bookish, and had the best Tutors that could be got, for Learning
and Languages, and all that could compleat a Man; but was unus’d to
Action, and of a temper Lazy, and given to Repose, so that his Father
could hardly ever get him to use any Exercise, or so much as ride
abroad, which he would call, Losing Time from his Studies: He car’d not
for the Conversation of Men, because he lov’d not Debauch, as they
usually did; so that for Exercise, more than any Design, he came on
Horseback every day to _Iper_ to the _Monastery_, and would sit at the
_Grate_, entertaining his Sister the most part of the Afternoon, and, in
the Evening, retire; he had often seen and convers’d with the lovely
_Isabella_, and found from the first sight of her, he had more Esteem
for her, than any other of her Sex: But as Love very rarely takes Birth
without Hope; so he never believ’d that the Pleasure he took in
beholding her, and in discoursing with her, was Love, because he
regarded her, as a Thing consecrate to Heaven, and never so much as
thought to wish, she were a Mortal fit for his Addresses; yet he found
himself more and more fill’d with Reflections on her which was not usual
with him; he found she grew upon his Memory, and oftner came there, than
he us’d to do, that he lov’d his Studies less, and going to _Iper_ more;
and, that every time he went, he found a new Joy at his Heart that
pleas’d him; he found, he could not get himself from the _Grate_,
without Pain; nor part from the sight of that all-charming Object,
without Sighs; and if, while he was there, any persons came to visit
her, whose Quality she could not refuse the honour of her sight to, he
would blush, and pant with uneasiness, especially, if they were handsom,
and fit to make Impressions: And he would check this Uneasiness in
himself, and ask his Heart, what it meant, by rising and beating in
those Moments, and strive to assume an Indifferency in vain, and depart
dissatisfy’d, and out of humour.

On the other side, _Isabella_ was not so Gay as she us’d to be, but, on
the sudden, retir’d her self more from the _Grate_ than she us’d to do,
refus’d to receive Visits every day, and her Complexion grew a little
pale and languid; she was observ’d not to sleep, or eat, as she us’d to
do, nor exercise in those little Plays they made, and diverted
themselves with, now and then; she was heard to sigh often, and it
became the Discourse of the whole House, that she was much alter’d: The
Lady _Abbess_, who lov’d her with a most tender Passion, was infinitely
concern’d at this Change, and endeavour’d to find out the Cause, and
’twas generally believ’d, she was too Devout, for now she redoubled her
Austerity; and in cold Winter Nights, of Frost and Snow, would be up at
all Hours, and lying upon the cold Stones, before the Altar, prostrate
at Prayers: So that she receiv’d Orders from the Lady _Abbess_, not to
harass her self so very much, but to have a care of her Health, as well
as her Soul; but she regarded not these Admonitions, tho’ even persuaded
daily by her _Katteriena_, whom she lov’d every day more and more.

But, one Night, when they were retir’d to their Chamber, amongst a
thousand things that they spoke of, to pass away a tedious Evening, they
talk’d of Pictures and Likenesses, and _Katteriena_ told _Isabella_,
that before she was a _Nun_, in her more happy days, she was so like her
Brother _Bernardo Henault_, (who was the same that visited them every
day) that she would, in Men’s Clothes, undertake, she should not have
known one from t’other, and fetching out his _Picture_, she had in a
Dressing-Box, she threw it to _Isabella_, who, at the first sight of it,
turns as pale as Ashes, and, being ready to swound, she bid her take it
away, and could not, for her Soul, hide the sudden surprise the
_Picture_ brought: _Katteriena_ had too much Wit, not to make a just
Interpretation of this Change, and (as a Woman) was naturally curious to
pry farther, tho’ Discretion should have made her been silent, for
Talking, in such cases, does but make the Wound rage the more; ‘Why, my
dear Sister, (said _Katteriena_) is the likeness of my Brother so
offensive to you?’ _Isabella_ found by this, she had discover’d too
much, and that Thought put her by all power of excusing it; she was
confounded with Shame, and the more she strove to hide it, the more it
disorder’d her; so that she (blushing extremely) hung down her Head,
sigh’d, and confess’d all by her Looks. At last, after a considering
Pause, she cry’d, ‘My dearest Sister, I do confess, I was surpriz’d at
the sight of Monsieur _Henault_, and much more than ever you have
observ’d me to be at the sight of his Person, because there is scarce a
day wherein I do not see that, and know beforehand I shall see him; I am
prepar’d for the Encounter, and have lessen’d my Concern, or rather
Confusion, by that time I come to the _Grate_, so much Mistress I am of
my Passions, when they give me warning of their approach, and sure I can
withstand the greatest assaults of Fate, if I can but foresee it; but if
it surprize me, I find I am as feeble a Woman, as the most unresolv’d;
you did not tell me, you had this Picture, nor say, you would shew me
such a Picture; but when I least expect to see that Face, you shew it
me, even in my Chamber.’

‘Ah, my dear Sister! (reply’d _Katteriena_) I believe, that Paleness,
and those Blushes, proceed from some other cause, than the Nicety of
seeing the Picture of a Man in your Chamber’:

‘You have too much Wit, (reply’d _Isabella_) to be impos’d on by such an
Excuse, if I were so silly to make it; but oh! my dear Sister! it was in
my Thoughts to deceive you; could I have concealed my Pain and
Sufferings, you should never have known them; but since I find it
impossible, and that I am too sincere to make use of Fraud in any thing,
’tis fit I tell you, from what cause my change of Colour proceeds, and
to own to you, I fear, ’tis Love, if ever therefore, oh gentle pitying
Maid! thou wert a Lover? If ever thy tender Heart were touch’d with that
Passion? Inform me, oh! inform me, of the nature of that cruel Disease,
and how thou found’st a Cure?’

While she was speaking these words, she threw her Arms about the Neck of
the fair _Katteriena_, and bath’d her Bosom (where she hid her Face)
with a shower of Tears; _Katteriena_, embracing her with all the
fondness of a dear Lover, told her, with a Sigh, that she could deny her
nothing, and therefore confess’d to her, she had been a Lover, and that
was the occasion of her being made a _Nun_, her Father finding out the
Intrigue, which fatally happened to be with his own Page, a Youth of
extraordinary Beauty. ‘I was but Young, (said she) about Thirteen, and
knew not what to call the new-known Pleasure that I felt; when e’re I
look’d upon the young _Arnaldo_, my Heart would heave, when e’re he came
in view, and my disorder’d Breath came doubly from my Bosom; a Shivering
seiz’d me, and my Face grew wan; my Thought was at a stand, and Sense it
self, for that short moment, lost its Faculties; But when he touch’d me,
oh! no hunted Deer, tir’d with his flight, and just secur’d in Shades,
pants with a nimbler motion than my Heart; at first, I thought the Youth
had had some Magick Art, to make one faint and tremble at his touches;
but he himself, when I accus’d his Cruelty, told me, he had no Art, but
awful Passion, and vow’d that when I touch’d him, he was so; so
trembling, so surprized, so charm’d, so pleas’d. When he was present,
nothing could displease me, but when he parted from me; then ’twas
rather a soft silent Grief, that eas’d itself by sighing, and by hoping,
that some kind moment would restore my joy. When he was absent, nothing
could divert me, howe’re I strove, howe’re I toyl’d for Mirth; no Smile,
no Joy, dwelt in my Heart or Eyes; I could not feign, so very well I
lov’d, impatient in his absence, I would count the tedious parting
Hours, and pass them off like useless Visitants, whom we wish were gon;
these are the Hours, where Life no business has, at least, a Lover’s
Life. But, oh! what Minutes seem’d the happy Hours, when on his Eyes I
gaz’d, and he on mine, and half our Conversation lost in Sighs, Sighs,
the soft moving Language of a Lover!’

‘No more, no more, (reply’d _Isabella_, throwing her Arms again about
the Neck of the transported _Katteriena_) thou blow’st my Flame by thy
soft Words, and mak’st me know my Weakness, and my Shame: I love!
I love! and feel those differing Passions!’--Then pausing a moment, she
proceeded,--‘Yet so didst thou, but hast surmounted it. Now thou hast
found the Nature of my Pain, oh! tell me thy saving Remedy?’ ‘Alas!
(reply’d _Katteriena_) tho’ there’s but one Disease, there’s many
Remedies: They say, possession’s one, but that to me seems a Riddle;
Absence, they say, another, and that was mine; for _Arnaldo_ having by
chance lost one of my Billets, discover’d the Amour, and was sent to
travel, and my self forc’d into this Monastery, where at last, Time
convinc’d me, I had lov’d below my Quality, and that sham’d me into Holy
Orders.’ ‘And is it a Disease, (reply’d _Isabella_) that People often
recover?’ ‘Most frequently, (said _Katteriena_) and yet some dye of the
Disease, but very rarely.’ ‘Nay then, (said _Isabella_) I fear, you will
find me one of these Martyrs; for I have already oppos’d it with the
most severe Devotion in the World: But all my Prayers are vain, your
lovely Brother persues me into the greatest Solitude; he meets me at my
very Midnight Devotions, and interrupts my Prayers; he gives me a
thousand Thoughts, that ought not to enter into a Soul dedicated to
Heaven; he ruins all the Glory I have achiev’d, even above my Sex, for
Piety of Life, and the Observation of all Virtues. Oh _Katteriena_! he
has a Power in his Eyes, that transcends all the World besides: And, to
shew the weakness of Human Nature, and how vain all our Boastings are,
he has done that in one fatal Hour, that the persuasions of all my
Relations and Friends, Glory, Honour, Pleasure, and all that can tempt,
could not perform in Years; I resisted all but _Henault’s_ Eyes, and
they were Ordain’d to make me truly wretched; But yet with thy
Assistance, and a Resolution to see him no more, and my perpetual Trust
in Heaven, I may, perhaps, overcome this Tyrant of my Soul, who,
I thought, had never enter’d into holy Houses, or mix’d his Devotions
and Worship with the true Religion; but, oh! no Cells, no Cloysters, no
Hermitages, are secur’d from his Efforts.’

This Discourse she ended with abundance of Tears, and it was resolv’d,
since she was devoted for ever to a Holy Life, That it was best for her
to make it as easy to her as was possible; in order to it, and the
banishing this fond and useless Passion from her Heart, it was very
necessary, she should see _Henault_ no more: At first, _Isabella_ was
afraid, that, in refusing to see him, he might mistrust her Passion; but
_Katteriena_ who was both Pious and Discreet, and endeavour’d truly to
cure her of so violent a Disease, which must, she knew, either end in
her death or destruction, told her, She would take care of that matter,
that it should not blemish her Honour; and so leaving her a while, after
they had resolved on this, she left her in a thousand Confusions, she
was now another Woman than what she had hitherto been; she was quite
alter’d in every Sentiment, thought and Notion; she now repented, she
had promis’d not to see _Henault_; she trembled and even fainted, for
fear she should see him no more; she was not able to bear that thought,
it made her rage within, like one possest, and all her Virtue could not
calm her; yet since her word was past, and, as she was, she could not,
without great Scandal, break it in that point, she resolv’d to dye a
thousand Deaths, rather than not perform her Promise made to
_Katteriena_; but ’tis not to be express’d what she endur’d; what Fits,
Pains, and Convulsions, she sustain’d; and how much ado she had to
dissemble to Dame _Katteriena_, who soon return’d to the afflicted Maid;
the next day, about the time that _Henault_ was to come, as he usually
did, about two or three a Clock after Noon, ’tis impossible to express
the uneasiness of _Isabella_; she ask’d, a thousand times, ‘What, is not
your Brother come?’ When Dame _Katteriena_ would reply, ‘Why do you
ask?’ She would say, ‘Because I would be sure not to see him’: ‘You need
not fear, Madam, (reply’d _Katteriena_) for you shall keep your
Chamber.’ She need not have urg’d that, for _Isabella_ was very ill
without knowing it, and in a Feaver.

At last, one of the _Nuns_ came up, and told Dame _Katteriena_, that her
Brother was at the _Grate_, and she desired, he should be bid come about
to the Private _Grate_ above stairs, which he did, and she went to him,
leaving _Isabella_ even dead on the Bed, at the very name of _Henault_:
But the more she conceal’d her Flame, the more violently it rag’d, which
she strove in vain by Prayers, and those Recourses of Solitude to
lessen; all this did but augment the Pain, and was Oyl to the Fire, so
that she now could hope, that nothing but Death would put an end to her
Griefs, and her Infamy. She was eternally thinking on him, how handsome
his Face, how delicate every Feature, how charming his Air, how graceful
his Meen, how soft and good his Disposition, and how witty and
entertaining his Conversation. She now fancy’d, she was at the _Grate_,
talking to him as she us’d to be, and blest those happy Hours she past
then, and bewail’d her Misfortune, that she is no more destin’d to be so
Happy, then gives a loose to Grief; Griefs, at which, no Mortals, but
Despairing Lovers, can guess, or how tormenting they are; where the most
easie Moments are, those, wherein one resolves to kill ones self, and
the happiest Thought is Damnation; but from these Imaginations, she
endeavours to fly, all frighted with horror; but, alas! whither would
she fly, but to a Life more full of horror? She considers well, she
cannot bear Despairing Love, and finds it impossible to cure her
Despair; she cannot fly from the Thoughts of the Charming _Henault_, and
’tis impossible to quit ’em; and, at this rate, she found, Life could
not long support it self, but would either reduce her to Madness, and so
render her an hated Object of Scorn to the Censuring World, or force her
Hand to commit a Murder upon her self. This she had found, this she had
well consider’d, nor could her fervent and continual Prayers, her
nightly Watchings, her Mortifications on the cold Marble in long Winter
Season, and all her Acts of Devotion abate one spark of this shameful
Feaver of Love, that was destroying her within. When she had rag’d and
struggled with this unruly Passion, ’till she was quite tir’d and
breathless, finding all her force in vain, she fill’d her fancy with a
thousand charming _Ideas_ of the lovely _Henault_, and, in that soft
fit, had a mind to satisfy her panting Heart, and give it one Joy more,
by beholding the Lord of its Desires, and the Author of its Pains:
Pleas’d, yet trembling, at this Resolve, she rose from the Bed where she
was laid, and softly advanc’d to the Stair-Case, from whence there
open’d that Room where Dame _Katteriena_ was, and where there was a
private _Grate_, at which, she was entertaining her _Brother_; they were
earnest in Discourse, and so loud, that _Isabella_ could easily hear all
they said, and the first words were from _Katteriena_, who, in a sort of
Anger, cry’d, ‘Urge me no more! My Virtue is too nice, to become an
Advocate for a Passion, that can tend to nothing but your Ruin; for,
suppose I should tell the fair _Isabella_, you dye for her, what can it
avail you? What hope can any Man have, to move the Heart of a Virgin, so
averse to Love? A Virgin, whose Modesty and Virtue is so very curious,
it would fly the very word, Love, as some monstrous Witchcraft, or the
foulest of Sins, who would loath me for bringing so lewd a Message, and
banish you her Sight, as the Object of her Hate and Scorn; is it unknown
to you, how many of the noblest Youths of _Flanders_ have address’d
themselves to her in vain, when yet she was in the World? Have you been
ignorant, how the young Count de _Villenoys_ languished, in vain, almost
to Death for her? And, that no Persuasions, no Attractions in him, no
wordly Advantages, or all his Pleadings, who had a Wit and Spirit
capable of prevailing on any Heart, less severe and harsh, than hers? Do
you not know, that all was lost on this insensible fair one, even when
she was a proper Object for the Adoration of the Young and Amorous? And
can you hope, now she has so entirely wedded her future days to
Devotion, and given all to Heaven; nay, lives a Life here more like a
Saint, than a Woman; rather an Angel, than a mortal Creature? Do you
imagin, with any Rhetorick you can deliver, now to turn the Heart, and
whole Nature, of this Divine Maid, to consider your Earthly Passion? No,
’tis fondness, and an injury to her Virtue, to harbour such a Thought;
quit it, quit it, my dear Brother! before it ruin your Repose.’ ‘Ah,
Sister! (replied the dejected _Henault_) your Counsel comes too late,
and your Reasons are of too feeble force, to rebate those Arrows, the
Charming _Isabella’s_ Eyes have fix’d in my Heart and Soul; and I am
undone, unless she know my Pain, which I shall dye, before I shall ever
dare mention to her; but you, young Maids, have a thousand Familiarities
together, can jest, and play, and say a thousand things between Railery
and Earnest, that may first hint what you would deliver, and insinuate
into each others Hearts a kind of Curiosity to know more; for naturally,
(my dear Sister) Maids, are curious and vain; and however Divine the
Mind of the fair _Isabella_ may be, it bears the Tincture still of
Mortal Woman.’

‘Suppose this true, how could this Mortal part about her Advantage you,
(said _Katteriena_) all that you can expect from this Discovery, (if she
should be content to hear it, and to return you pity) would be, to make
her wretched, like your self? What farther can you hope?’ ‘Oh! talk not,
(replied _Henault_) of so much Happiness! I do not expect to be so
blest, that she should pity me, or love to a degree of Inquietude; ’tis
sufficient, for the ease of my Heart, that she know its Pains, and what
it suffers for her; that she would give my Eyes leave to gaze upon her,
and my Heart to vent a Sigh now and then; and, when I dare, to give me
leave to speak, and tell her of my Passion; This, this, is all, my
Sister.’ And, at that word, the Tears glided down his Cheeks, and he
declin’d his Eyes, and set a Look so charming, and so sad, that
_Isabella_, whose Eyes were fix’d upon him, was a thousand times ready
to throw her self into the Room, and to have made a Confession, how
sensible she was of all she had heard and seen: But, with much ado, she
contain’d and satisfy’d her self, with knowing, that she was ador’d by
him whom she ador’d, and, with Prudence that is natural to her, she
withdrew, and waited with patience the event of their Discourse. She
impatiently long’d to know, how _Katteriena_ would manage this Secret
her Brother had given her, and was pleas’d, that the Friendship and
Prudence of that Maid had conceal’d her Passion from her Brother; and
now contented and joyful beyond imagination, to find her self belov’d,
she knew she could dissemble her own Passion and make him the first
Aggressor; the first that lov’d, or at least, that should seem to do so.
This Thought restores her so great a part of her Peace of Mind, that she
resolv’d to see him, and to dissemble with _Katteriena_ so far, as to
make her believe, she had subdu’d that Passion, she was really asham’d
to own; she now, with her Woman’s Skill, begins to practise an Art she
never before understood, and has recourse to Cunning, and resolves to
seem to reassume her former Repose: But hearing _Katteriena_ approach,
she laid her self again on her Bed, where she had left her, but compos’d
her Face to more chearfulness, and put on a Resolution that indeed
deceiv’d the Sister, who was extreamly pleased, she said, to see her
look so well: When _Isabella_ reply’d, ‘Yes, I am another Woman now;
I hope Heaven has heard, and granted, my long and humble Supplications,
and driven from my Heart this tormenting God, that has so long disturb’d
my purer Thoughts.’ ‘And are you sure, (said Dame _Katteriena_) that
this wanton Deity is repell’d by the noble force of your Resolutions? Is
he never to return?’ ‘No, (replied _Isabella_) never to my Heart.’ ‘Yes,
(said _Katteriena_) if you should see the lovely Murderer of your
Repose, your Wound would bleed anew.’ At this, _Isabella_ smiling with a
little Disdain, reply’d, ‘Because you once to love, and _Henault’s_
Charms defenceless found me, ah! do you think I have no Fortitude? But
so in Fondness lost, remiss in Virtue, that when I have resolv’d, (and
see it necessary for my after-Quiet) to want the power of keeping that
Resolution? No, scorn me, and despise me then, as lost to all the
Glories of my Sex, and all that Nicety I’ve hitherto preserv’d.’ There
needed no more from a Maid of _Isabella’s_ Integrity and Reputation, to
convince any one of the Sincerity of what she said, since, in the whole
course of her Life, she never could be charg’d with an Untruth, or an
Equivocation; and _Katteriena_ assur’d her, she believ’d her, and was
infinitely glad she had vanquish’d a Passion, that would have prov’d
destructive to her Repose: _Isabella_ reply’d, She had not altogether
vanquish’d her Passion, she did not boast of so absolute a power over
her soft Nature, but had resolv’d things great, and Time would work the
Cure; that she hop’d, _Katteriena_ would make such Excuses to her
Brother, for her not appearing at the _Grate_ so gay and entertaining as
she us’d, and, by a little absence, she should retrieve the Liberty she
had lost: But she desir’d, such Excuses might be made for her, that
young _Henault_ might not perceive the Reason. At the naming him, she
had much ado not to shew some Concern extraordinary, and _Katteriena_
assur’d her, She had now a very good Excuse to keep from the _Grate_,
when he was at it; ‘For, (said she) now you have resolv’d, I may tell
you, he is dying for you, raving in Love, and has this day made me
promise to him, to give you some account of his Passion, and to make you
sensible of his Languishment: I had not told you this, (reply’d
_Katteriena_) but that I believe you fortify’d with brave Resolution and
Virtue, and that this knowledge will rather put you more upon your
Guard, than you were before.’ While she spoke, she fixed her Eyes on
_Isabella_, to see what alteration it would make in her Heart and Looks;
but the Master-piece of this young Maid’s Art was shewn in this minute,
for she commanded her self so well, that her very Looks dissembled and
shew’d no concern at a Relation, that made her Soul dance with Joy; but
it was, what she was prepar’d for, or else I question her Fortitude.
But, with a Calmness, which absolutely subdu’d _Katteriena_, she
reply’d, ‘I am almost glad he has confess’d a Passion for me, and you
shall confess to him, you told me of it, and that I absent my self from
the _Grate_, on purpose to avoid the sight of a Man, who durst love me,
and confess it; and I assure you, my dear Sister! (continued she,
dissembling) You could not have advanc’d my Cure by a more effectual
way, than telling me of his Presumption.’ At that word, _Katteriena_
joyfully related to her all that had pass’d between young _Henault_ and
her self, and how he implor’d her Aid in this Amour; at the end of which
Relation, _Isabella_ smil’d, and carelesly reply’d, ‘I pity him’: And so
going to their Devotion, they had no more Discourse of the Lover.

In the mean time, young _Henault_ was a little satisfy’d, to know, his
Sister would discover his Passion to the lovely _Isabella_; and though
he dreaded the return, he was pleas’d that she should know, she had a
Lover that ador’d her, though even without hope; for though the thought
of possessing _Isabella_, was the most ravishing that could be; yet he
had a dread upon him, when he thought of it, for he could not hope to
accomplish that, without Sacrilege; and he was a young Man, very Devout,
and even bigotted in Religion; and would often question and debate
within himself, that, if it were possible, he should come to be belov’d
by this Fair Creature, and that it were possible for her, to grant all
that Youth in Love could require, whether he should receive the Blessing
offer’d? And though he ador’d the Maid, whether he should not abhor the
_Nun_ in his Embraces? ’Twas an undetermin’d Thought, that chill’d his
Fire as often as it approach’d; but he had too many that rekindled it
again with the greater Flame and Ardor.

His impatience to know, what Success _Katteriena_ had, with the Relation
she was to make to _Isabella_ in his behalf, brought him early to _Iper_
the next day. He came again to the private _Grate_, where his Sister
receiving him, and finding him, with a sad and dejected Look, expect
what she had to say; she told him, That Look well became the News she
had for him, it being such, as ought to make him, both Griev’d, and
Penitent; for, to obey him, she had so absolutely displeas’d _Isabella_,
that she was resolv’d never to believe her her Friend more, ‘Or to see
you, (said she) therefore, as you have made me commit a Crime against my
Conscience, against my Order, against my Friendship, and against my
Honour, you ought to do some brave thing; take some noble Resolution,
worthy of your Courage, to redeem all; for your Repose, I promis’d,
I would let Isabella know you lov’d, and, for the mitigation of my
Crime, you ought to let me tell her, you have surmounted your Passion,
as the last Remedy of Life and Fame.’

At these her last words, the Tears gush’d from his Eyes, and he was able
only, a good while, to sigh; at last, cry’d, ‘What! see her no more! see
the Charming _Isabella_ no more!’ And then vented the Grief of his Soul
in so passionate a manner, as his Sister had all the Compassion
imaginable for him, but thought it great Sin and Indiscretion to cherish
his Flame: So that, after a while, having heard her Counsel, he reply’d,
‘And is this all, my Sister, you will do to save a Brother?’ ‘All!
(reply’d she) I would not be the occasion of making a _NUN_ violate her
Vow, to save a Brother’s Life, no, nor my own; assure your self of this,
and take it as my last Resolution: Therefore, if you will be content
with the Friendship of this young Lady, and so behave your self, that we
may find no longer the Lover in the Friend, we shall reassume our former
Conversation, and live with you, as we ought; otherwise, your Presence
will continually banish her from the _Grate_, and, in time, make both
her you love, and your self, a Town Discourse.’

Much more to this purpose she said, to dissuade him, and bid him retire,
and keep himself from thence, till he could resolve to visit them
without a Crime; and she protested, if he did not do this, and master
his foolish Passion, she would let her Father understand his Conduct,
who was a Man of temper so very precise, that should he believe, his Son
should have a thought of Love to a Virgin vow’d to Heaven, he would
abandon him to Shame, and eternal Poverty, by disinheriting him of all
he could: Therefore, she said, he ought to lay all this to his Heart,
and weigh it with his unheedy Passion. While the Sister talk’d thus
wisely, _Henault_ was not without his Thoughts, but consider’d as she
spoke, but did not consider in the right place; he was not considering,
how to please a Father, and save an Estate, but how to manage the matter
so, to establish himself, as he was before with _Isabella_; for he
imagin’d, since already she knew his Passion, and that if after that she
would be prevail’d with to see him, he might, some lucky Minute or
other, have the pleasure of speaking for himself, at least, he should
again see and talk to her, which was a joyful Thought in the midst of so
many dreadful ones: And, as if he had known what pass’d in _Isabella’s_
Heart, he, by a strange sympathy, took the same measures to deceive
_Katteriena_, a well-meaning young Lady, and easily impos’d on from her
own Innocence, he resolv’d to dissemble Patience, since he must have
that Virtue, and own’d, his Sister’s Reasons were just, and ought to be
persu’d; that she had argu’d him into half his Peace, and that he would
endeavour to recover the rest; that Youth ought to be pardon’d a
thousand Failings, and Years would reduce him to a condition of laughing
at his Follies of Youth, but that grave Direction was not yet arriv’d:
And so desiring, she would pray for his Conversion, and that she would
recommend him to the Devotions of the Fair _Isabella_, he took his
leave, and came no more to the _Nunnery_ in ten Days; in all which time,
none but Impatient Lovers can guess, what Pain and Languishments
_Isabella_ suffer’d, not knowing the Cause of his Absence, nor daring to
enquire; but she bore it out so admirably, that Dame _Katteriena_ never
so much as suspected she had any Thoughts of that nature that perplex’d
her, and now believ’d indeed she had conquer’d all her Uneasiness: And
one day, when _Isabella_ and she were alone together, she ask’d that
fair Dissembler, if she did not admire at the Conduct and Resolution of
her Brother? ‘Why!’ (reply’d _Isabella_ unconcernedly, while her Heart
was fainting within, for fear of ill News:) With that, _Katteriena_ told
her the last Discourse she had with her Brother, and how at last she had
persuaded him (for her sake) to quit his Passion; and that he had
promis’d, he would endeavour to surmount it; and that, that was the
reason he was absent now, and they were to see him no more, till he had
made a Conquest over himself. You may assure your self, this News was
not so welcom to _Isabella_, as _Katteriena_ imagin’d; yet still she
dissembled, with a force, beyond what the most cunning Practitioner
could have shewn, and carry’d her self before People, as if no Pressures
had lain upon her Heart; but when alone retir’d, in order to her
Devotion, she would vent her Griefs in the most deplorable manner, that
a distress’d distracted Maid could do, and which, in spite of all her
severe Penances, she found no abatement of.

At last _Henault_ came again to the _Monastery_, and, with a Look as gay
as he could possibly assume, he saw his Sister, and told her, He had
gain’d an absolute Victory over his Heart; and desir’d, he might see
_Isabella_, only to convince, both her, and _Katteriena_, that he was no
longer a Lover of that fair Creature, that had so lately charm’d him;
that he had set Five thousand Pounds a Year, against a fruitless
Passion, and found the solid Gold much the heavier in the Scale: And he
smil’d, and talk’d the whole Day of indifferent things, with his Sister,
and ask’d no more for _Isabella_; nor did _Isabella_ look, or ask, after
him, but in her Heart. Two Months pass’d in this Indifference, till it
was taken notice of, that Sister _Isabella_ came not to the _Grate_,
when _Henault_ was there, as she us’d to do; this being spoken to Dame
_Katteriena_, she told it to _Isabella_, and said, ‘The _NUNS_ would
believe, there was some Cause for her Absence, if she did not appear
again’: That if she could trust her Heart, she was sure she could trust
her Brother, for he thought no more of her, she was confident; this, in
lieu of pleasing, was a Dagger to the Heart of _Isabella_, who thought
it time to retrieve the flying Lover, and therefore told _Katteriena_,
She would the next Day entertain at the Low _Grate_, as she was wont to
do, and accordingly, as soon as any People of Quality came, she appear’d
there, where she had not been two Minutes, but she saw the lovely
_Henault_, and it was well for both, that People were in the Room, they
had else both sufficiently discover’d their Inclinations, or rather
their not to be conceal’d Passions; after the General Conversation was
over, by the going away of the Gentlemen that were at the _Grate_,
_Katteriena_ being employ’d elsewhere, _Isabella_ was at last left alone
with _Henault_; but who can guess the Confusion of these two Lovers, who
wish’d, yet fear’d, to know each others Thoughts? She trembling with a
dismal Apprehension, that he lov’d no more; and he almost dying with
fear, she should Reproach or Upbraid him with his Presumption; so that
both being possess’d with equal Sentiments of Love, Fear, and Shame,
they both stood fix’d with dejected Looks and Hearts, that heav’d with
stifled Sighs. At last, _Isabella_, the softer and tender-hearted of the
two, tho’ not the most a Lover perhaps, not being able to contain her
Love any longer within the bounds of Dissimulation or Discretion, being
by Nature innocent, burst out into Tears, and all fainting with pressing
Thoughts within, she fell languishly into a Chair that stood there,
while the distracted _Henault_, who could not come to her Assistance,
and finding Marks of Love, rather than Anger or Disdain, in that
Confusion of _Isabella’s_, throwing himself on his Knees at the _Grate_,
implor’d her to behold him, to hear him, and to pardon him, who dy’d
every moment for her, and who ador’d her with a violent Ardor; but yet,
with such an one, as should (tho’ he perish’d with it) be conformable to
her Commands; and as he spoke, the Tears stream’d down his dying Eyes,
that beheld her with all the tender Regard that ever Lover was capable
of; she recover’d a little, and turn’d her too beautiful Face to him,
and pierc’d him with a Look, that darted a thousand Joys and Flames into
his Heart, with Eyes, that told him her Heart was burning and dying for
him; for which Assurances, he made Ten thousand Asseverations of his
never-dying Passion, and expressing as many Raptures and Excesses of
Joy, to find her Eyes and Looks confess, he was not odious to her, and
that the knowledge he was her Lover, did not make her hate him: In fine,
he spoke so many things all soft and moving, and so well convinc’d her
of his Passion, that she at last was compell’d by a mighty force,
absolutely irresistible, to speak.

‘Sir, (said she) perhaps you will wonder, where I, a Maid, brought up in
the simplicity of Virtue, should learn the Confidence, not only to hear
of Love from you, but to confess I am sensible of the most violent of
its Pain my self; and I wonder, and am amazed at my own Daring, that I
should have the Courage, rather to speak, than dye, and bury it in
silence; but such is my Fate. Hurried by an unknown Force, which I have
endeavoured always, in vain, to resist, I am compell’d to tell you,
I love you, and have done so from the first moment I saw you; and you
are the only Man born to give me Life or Death, to make me Happy or
Blest; perhaps, had I not been confin’d, and, as it were, utterly forbid
by my Vow, as well as my Modesty, to tell you this, I should not have
been so miserable to have fallen thus low, as to have confess’d my
Shame; but our Opportunities of Speaking are so few, and Letters so
impossible to be sent without discovery, that perhaps this is the only
time I shall ever have to speak with you alone.’ And, at that word the
Tears flow’d abundantly from her Eyes, and gave _Henault_ leave to
speak. ‘Ah Madam! (said he) do not, as soon as you have rais’d me to the
greatest Happiness in the World, throw me with one word beneath your
Scorn, much easier ’tis to dye, and know I am lov’d, than never, never,
hope to hear that blessed sound again from that beautiful Mouth: Ah,
Madam! rather let me make use of this one opportunity our happy Luck has
given us, and contrive how we may for ever see, and speak, to each
other; let us assure one another, there are a thousand ways to escape a
place so rigid, as denies us that Happiness; and denies the fairest Maid
in the World, the privilege of her Creation, and the end to which she
was form’d so Angelical.’ And seeing _Isabella_ was going to speak, lest
she should say something, that might dissuade from an Attempt so
dangerous and wicked, he persu’d to tell her, it might be indeed the
last moment Heaven would give ’em, and besought her to answer him what
he implor’d, whether she would fly with him from the _Monastery_? At
this Word, she grew pale, and started, as at some dreadful Sound, and
cry’d, ‘Hah! what is’t you say? Is it possible, you should propose a
thing so wicked? And can it enter into your Imagination, because I have
so far forget my Virtue, and my Vow, to become a Lover, I should
therefore fall to so wretched a degree of Infamy and Reprobation? No,
name it to me no more, if you would see me; and if it be as you say,
a Pleasure to be belov’d by me; for I will sooner dye, than yield to
what . . . Alas! I but too well approve!’ These last words, she spoke
with a fainting Tone, and the Tears fell anew from her fair soft Eyes.
‘If it be so,’ said he, (with a Voice so languishing, it could scarce be
heard) ‘If it be so, and that you are resolv’d to try, if my Love be
eternal without Hope, without expectation of any other Joy, than seeing
and adoring you through the _Grate_; I am, and must, and will be
contented, and you shall see, I can prefer the Sighing to these cold
Irons, that separate us, before all the Possessions of the rest of the
World; that I chuse rather to lead my Life here, at this cruel Distance
from you, for ever, than before the Embrace of all the Fair; and you
shall see, how pleas’d I will be, to languish here; but as you see me
decay, (for surely so I shall) do not triumph o’re my languid Looks, and
laugh at my Pale and meager Face; but, Pitying, say, How easily I might
have preserv’d that Face, those Eyes, and all that Youth and Vigour, now
no more, from this total Ruine I now behold it in, and love your Slave
that dyes, and will be daily and visibly dying, as long as my Eyes can
gaze on that fair Object, and my Soul be fed and kept alive with her
Charming Wit and Conversation; if Love can live on such Airy Food, (tho’
rich in it self, yet unfit, alone, to sustain Life) it shall be for ever
dedicated to the lovely _ISABELLA_: But, oh! that time cannot be long!
Fate will not lend her Slave many days, who loves too violently, to be
satisfy’d to enjoy the fair Object of his Desires, no otherwise than at
a _Grate_.’

He ceas’d speaking, for Sighs and Tears stopt his Voice, and he begg’d
the liberty to sit down; and his Looks being quite alter’d, _ISABELLA_
found her self touch’d to the very Soul, with a concern the most tender,
that ever yielding Maid was oppress’d with: She had no power to suffer
him to Languish, while she by one soft word could restore him, and being
about to say a thousand things that would have been agreeable to him,
she saw herself approach’d by some of the _Nuns_, and only had time to
say, ‘If you love me, live and hope.’ The rest of the _Nuns_ began to
ask _Henault_ of News, for he always brought them all that was Novel in
the Town, and they were glad still of his Visits, above all other, for
they heard, how all Amours and Intrigues pass’d in the World, by this
young Cavalier. These last words of _Isabella’s_ were a Cordial to his
Soul, and he, from that, and to conceal the present Affair, endeavour’d
to assume all the Gaity he could, and told ’em all he could either
remember, or invent, to please ’em, tho’ he wish’d them a great way off
at that time.

Thus they pass’d the day, till it was a decent hour for him to quit the
_Grate_, and for them to draw the Curtain; all that Night did _Isabella_
dedicate to Love, she went to Bed, with a Resolution, to think over all
she had to do, and to consider, how she should manage this great Affair
of her Life: I have already said, she had try’d all that was possible in
Human Strength to perform, in the design of quitting a Passion so
injurious to her Honour and Virtue, and found no means possible to
accomplish it: She had try’d Fasting long, Praying fervently, rigid
Penances and Pains, severe Disciplines, all the Mortification, almost to
the destruction of Life it self, to conquer the unruly Flame; but still
it burnt and rag’d but the more; so, at last, she was forc’d to permit
that to conquer her, she could not conquer, and submitted to her Fate,
as a thing destin’d her by Heaven it self; and after all this
opposition, she fancy’d it was resisting even Divine Providence, to
struggle any longer with her Heart; and this being her real Belief, she
the more patiently gave way to all the Thoughts that pleas’d her.

As soon as she was laid, without discoursing (as she us’d to do) to
_Katteriena_, after they were in Bed, she pretended to be sleepy, and
turning from her, setled her self to profound Thinking, and was resolv’d
to conclude the Matter, between her Heart, and her Vow of Devotion, that
Night, and she, having no more to determine, might end the Affair
accordingly, the first opportunity she should have to speak to
_Henault_, which was, to fly, and marry him; or, to remain for ever
fix’d to her Vow of Chastity. This was the Debate; she brings Reason on
both sides: Against the first, she sets the Shame of a Violated Vow, and
considers, where she shall shew her Face after such an Action; to the
Vow, she argues, that she was born in Sin, and could not live without
it; that she was Human, and no Angel, and that, possibly, that Sin might
be as soon forgiven, as another; that since all her devout Endeavours
could not defend her from the Cause, Heaven ought to execute the Effect;
that as to shewing her Face, so she saw that of _Henault_ always turned
(Charming as it was) towards her with love; what had she to do with the
World, or car’d to behold any other?

Some times, she thought, it would be more Brave and Pious to dye, than
to break her Vow; but she soon answer’d that, as false Arguing, for
Self-Murder was the worst of Sins, and in the Deadly Number. She could,
after such an Action, live to repent, and, of two Evils, she ought to
chuse the least; she dreads to think, since she had so great a
Reputation for Virtue and Piety, both in the _Monastery_, and in the
World, what they both would say, when she should commit an Action so
contrary to both these, she posest; but, after a whole Night’s Debate,
Love was strongest, and gain’d the Victory. She never went about to
think, how she should escape, because she knew it would be easy, the
keeping of the Key of the _Monastery_, [was] often intrusted in her
keeping, and was, by turns, in the hands of many more, whose Virtue and
Discretion was Infallible, and out of Doubt; besides, her Aunt being the
Lady _Abbess_, she had greater privilege than the rest; so that she had
no more to do, she thought, than to acquaint _Henault_ with her Design,
as soon as she should get an opportunity. Which was not quickly; but, in
the mean time, _Isabella’s_ Father dy’d, which put some little stop to
our Lover’s Happiness, and gave her a short time of Grief; but Love,
who, while he is new and young, can do us Miracles, soon wip’d her Eyes,
and chas’d away all Sorrows from her Heart, and grew every day more and
more impatient, to put her new Design in Execution, being every day more
resolv’d. Her Father’s Death had remov’d one Obstacle, and secur’d her
from his Reproaches; and now she only wants Opportunity, first, to
acquaint _Henault_, and then to fly.

She waited not long, all things concurring to her desire; for
_Katteriena_ falling sick, she had the good luck, as she call’d it then,
to entertain _Henault_ at the _Grate_ oftentimes alone; the first moment
she did so, she entertain’d him with the good News, and told him, She
had at last vanquish’d her Heart in favour of him, and loving him above
all things, Honour, her Vow or Reputation, had resolv’d to abandon her
self wholly to him, to give her self up to love and serve him, and that
she had no other Consideration in the World; but _Henault_, instead of
returning her an Answer, all Joy and Satisfaction, held down his Eyes,
and Sighing, with a dejected Look, he cry’d, ‘Ah, Madam! Pity a Man so
wretched and undone, as not to be sensible of this Blessing as I ought.’
She grew pale at this Reply, and trembling, expected he would proceed:
‘’Tis not (continued he) that I want Love, tenderest Passion, and all
the desire Youth and Love can inspire; But, Oh, Madam! when I consider,
(for raving mad in Love as I am for your sake, I do consider) that if I
should take you from this Repose, Nobly Born and Educated, as you are;
and, for that Act, should find a rigid Father deprive me of all that
ought to support you, and afford your Birth, Beauty, and Merits, their
due, what would you say? How would you Reproach me?’ He sighing,
expected her Answer, when Blushes overspreading her Face, she reply’d,
in a Tone all haughty and angry, ‘Ah, _Henault_! Am I then refus’d,
after having abandon’d all things for you? Is it thus, you reward my
Sacrific’d Honour, Vows, and Virtue? Cannot you hazard the loss of
Fortune to possess _Isabella_, who loses all for you!’ Then bursting
into Tears, at her misfortune of Loving, she suffer’d him to say, ‘Oh,
Charming fair one! how industrious is your Cruelty, to find out new
Torments for an Heart, already press’d down with the Severities of Love?
Is it possible, you can make so unhappy a Construction of the tenderest
part of my Passion? And can you imagin it want of Love in me, to
consider, how I shall preserve and merit the vast Blessing Heaven has
given me? Is my Care a Crime? And would not the most deserving Beauty of
the World hate me, if I should, to preserve my Life, and satisfy the
Passion of my fond Heart, reduce her to the Extremities of Want and
Misery? And is there any thing, in what I have said, but what you ought
to take for the greatest Respect and tenderness!’ ‘Alas! (reply’d
_Isabella_ sighing) young as I am, all unskilful in Love I find, but
what I feel, that Discretion is no part of it; and Consideration,
inconsistent with the Nobler Passion, who will subsist of its own
Nature, and Love unmixed with any other Sentiment? And ’tis not pure, if
it be otherwise: I know, had I mix’d Discretion with mine, my Love must
have been less, I never thought of living, but my Love; and, if I
consider’d at all, it was, that Grandure and Magnificence were useless
Trifles to Lovers, wholly needless and troublesom. I thought of living
in some loanly Cottage, far from the noise of crowded busie Cities, to
walk with thee in Groves, and silent Shades, where I might hear no Voice
but thine; and when we had been tir’d, to sit us done by some cool
murmuring Rivulet, and be to each a World, my Monarch thou, and I thy
Sovereign Queen, while Wreaths of Flowers shall crown our happy Heads,
some fragrant Bank our Throne, and Heaven our Canopy: Thus we might
laugh at Fortune, and the Proud, despise the duller World, who place
their Joys in mighty Shew and Equipage. Alas! my Nature could not bear
it, I am unus’d to Wordly Vanities, and would boast of nothing but my
_Henault_; no Riches, but his Love; no Grandure, but his Presence.’ She
ended speaking, with Tears, and he reply’d, ‘Now, now, I find, my
_Isabella_ loves indeed, when she’s content to abandon the World for my
sake; Oh! thou hast named the only happy Life that suits my quiet
Nature, to be retir’d, has always been my Joy! But to be so with thee!
Oh! thou hast charm’d me with a Thought so dear, as has for ever
banish’d all my Care, but how to receive thy Goodness! Please think no
more what my angry Parent may do, when he shall hear, how I have
dispos’d of my self against his Will and Pleasure, but trust to Love and
Providence; no more! be gone all Thoughts, but those of _Isabella_!’

As soon as he had made an end of expressing his Joy, he fell to
consulting how, and when, she should escape; and since it was uncertain,
when she should be offer’d the Key, for she would not ask for it, she
resolv’d to give him notice, either by word of Mouth, or a bit of Paper
she would write in, and give him through the _Grate_ the first
opportunity; and, parting for that time, they both resolv’d to get up
what was possible for their Support, till Time should reconcile Affairs
and Friends, and to wait the happy hour.

_Isabella’s_ dead Mother had left Jewels, of the value of 2000_l._ to
her Daughter, at her Decease, which Jewels were in the possession, now,
of the Lady _Abbess_, and were upon Sale, to be added to the Revenue of
the _Monastery_; and as _Isabella_ was the most Prudent of her Sex, at
least, had hitherto been so esteem’d, she was intrusted with all that
was in possession of the Lady _Abbess_, and ’twas not difficult to make
her self Mistress of all her own Jewels; as also, some 3 or 400_l._ in
Gold, that was hoarded up in her Ladyship’s Cabinet, against any
Accidents that might arrive to the _Monastery_; these _Isabella_ also
made her own, and put up with the Jewels; and having acquainted
_Henault_, with the Day and Hour of her Escape, he got together what he
could, and waiting for her, with his Coach, one Night, when no body was
awake but her self, when rising softly, as she us’d to do, in the Night,
to her Devotion, she stole so dexterously out of the _Monastery_, as no
body knew any thing of it; she carry’d away the Keys with her, after
having lock’d all the Doors, for she was intrusted often with all. She
found _Henault_ waiting in his Coach, and trusted none but an honest
Coachman that lov’d him; he receiv’d her with all the Transports of a
truly ravish’d Lover, and she was infinitely charm’d with the new
Pleasure of his Embraces and Kisses.

They drove out of Town immediately, and because she durst not be seen in
that Habit, (for it had been immediate Death for both) they drove into a
Thicket some three Miles from the Town, where _Henault_ having brought
her some of his younger Sister’s Clothes, he made her put off her Habit,
and put on those; and, rending the other, they hid them in a Sand-pit,
covered over with Broom, and went that Night forty Miles from _Iper_, to
a little Town upon the River _Rhine_, where, changing their Names, they
were forthwith married, and took a House in a Country Village, a Farm,
where they resolv’d to live retir’d, by the name of _Beroone_, and drove
a Farming Trade; however, not forgetting to set Friends and Engines at
work, to get their Pardon, as Criminals, first, that had trangress’d the
Law; and, next, as disobedient Persons, who had done contrary to the
Will and Desire of their Parents: _Isabella_ writ to her Aunt the most
moving Letters in the World, so did _Henault_ to his Father; but she was
a long time, before she could gain so much as an answer from her Aunt,
and _Henault_ was so unhappy, as never to gain one from his Father; who
no sooner heard the News that was spread over all the Town and Country,
that young _Henault_ was fled with the so fam’d _Isabella_, a _Nun_, and
singular for Devotion and Piety of Life, but he immediately setled his
Estate on his younger Son, cutting _Henault_ off with all his
Birthright, which was 5000_l._ a Year. This News, you may believe, was
not very pleasing to the young Man, who tho’ in possession of the
loveliest Virgin, and now Wife, that ever Man was bless’d with; yet when
he reflected, he should have children by her, and these and she should
come to want, (he having been magnificently Educated, and impatient of
scanty Fortune) he laid it to Heart, and it gave him a thousand
Uneasinesses in the midst of unspeakable Joys; and the more be strove to
hide his Sentiments from _Isabella_, the more tormenting it was within;
he durst not name it to her, so insuperable a Grief it would cause in
her, to hear him complain; and tho’ she could live hardly, as being bred
to a devout and severe Life, he could not, but must let the Man of
Quality shew it self; even in the disguise of an humbler Farmer: Besides
all this, he found nothing of his Industry thrive, his Cattel still dy’d
in the midst of those that were in full Vigour and Health of other
Peoples; his Crops of Wheat and Barly, and other Grain, tho’ manag’d by
able and knowing Husbandmen, were all, either Mildew’d, or Blasted, or
some Misfortune still arriv’d to him; his Coach-Horses would fight and
kill one another, his Barns sometimes be fir’d; so that it became a
Proverb all over the Country, if any ill Luck had arriv’d to any body,
they would say, ‘They had Monsieur _BEROONE’S_ Luck.’ All these
Reflections did but add to his Melancholy, and he grew at last to be in
some want, insomuch, that _Isabella_, who had by her frequent Letters,
and submissive Supplications, to her Aunt, (who lov’d her tenderly)
obtain’d her Pardon, and her Blessing; she now press’d her for some
Money, and besought her to consider, how great a Fortune she had brought
to the _Monastery_, and implor’d, she would allow her some Sallary out
of it, for she had been marry’d two Years, and most of what she had was
exhausted. The Aunt, who found, that what was done, could not be undone,
did, from time to time, supply her so, as one might have liv’d very
decently on that very Revenue; but that would not satisfy the great
Heart of _Henault_. He was now about three and twenty Years old, and
_Isabella_ about eighteen, too young, and too lovely a Pair, to begin
their Misfortunes so soon; they were both the most Just and Pious in the
World; they were Examples of Goodness, and Eminent for Holy Living, and
for perfect Loving, and yet nothing thriv’d they undertook; they had no
Children, and all their Joy was in each other; at last, one good Fortune
arriv’d to them, by the Solicitations of the Lady _Abbess_, and the
_Bishop_, who was her near Kinsman, they got a Pardon for _Isabella’s_
quitting the _Monastery_, and marrying, so that she might now return
to her own Country again. _Henault_ having also his Pardon, they
immediately quit the place, where they had remain’d for two Years, and
came again into _Flanders_, hoping, the change of place might afford ’em
better Luck.

_Henault_ then began again to solicit his Cruel Father, but nothing
would do, he refus’d to see him, or to receive any Letters from him;
but, at last, he prevail’d so far with him, as that he sent a Kinsman to
him, to assure him, if he would leave his Wife, and go into the _French_
Campagn, he would Equip him as well as his Quality requir’d, and that,
according as he behav’d himself, he should gain his Favour; but if he
liv’d Idly at home, giving up his Youth and Glory to lazy Love, he would
have no more to say to him, but race him out of his Heart, and out of
his Memory.

He had setled himself in a very pretty House, furnished with what was
fitting for the Reception of any Body of Quality that would live a
private Life, and they found all the Respect that their Merits deserv’d
from all the World, every body entirely loving and endeavouring to serve
them; and _Isabella_ so perfectly had the Ascendent over her Aunt’s
Heart, that she procur’d from her all that she could desire, and much
more than she could expect. She was perpetually progging and saving all
that she could, to enrich and advance her, and, at last, pardoning and
forgiving _Henault_, lov’d him as her own Child; so that all things
look’d with a better Face than before, and never was so dear and fond a
Couple seen, as _Henault_ and _Isabella_; but, at last, she prov’d with
Child, and the Aunt, who might reasonably believe, so young a Couple
would have a great many Children, and foreseeing there was no Provision
likely to be made them, unless he pleas’d his Father, for if the Aunt
should chance to dye, all their Hope was gone; she therefore daily
solicited him to obey his Father, and go to the Camp; and that having
atchiev’d Fame and Renown, he would return a Favourite to his Father,
and Comfort to his Wife: After she had solicited in vain, for he was not
able to endure the thought of leaving _Isabella_, melancholy as he was
with his ill Fortune; the _Bishop_, kinsman to _Isabella_, took him to
task, and urg’d his Youth and Birth, and that he ought not to wast both
without Action, when all the World was employ’d; and, that since his
Father had so great a desire he should go into a Campagn, either to
serve the _Venetian_ against the _Turks_, or into the _French_ Service,
which he lik’d best; he besought him to think of it; and since he had
satisfy’d his Love, he should and ought to satisfy his Duty, it being
absolutely necessary for the wiping off the Stain of his Sacrilege, and
to gain him the favour of Heaven, which, he found, had hitherto been
averse to all he had undertaken: In fine, all his Friends, and all who
lov’d him, joyn’d in this Design, and all thought it convenient, nor was
he insensible of the Advantage it might bring him; but Love, which every
day grew fonder and fonder in his Heart, oppos’d all their Reasonings,
tho’ he saw all the Brave Youth of the Age preparing to go, either to
one Army, or the other.

At last, he lets _Isabella_ know, what Propositions he had made him,
both by his Father, and his Relations; at the very first Motion, she
almost fainted in his Arms, while he was speaking, and it possess’d her
with so intire a Grief, that she miscarry’d, to the insupportable
Torment of her tender Husband and Lover, so that, to re-establish her
Repose, he was forc’d to promise not to go; however, she consider’d all
their Circumstances, and weigh’d the Advantages that might redound both
to his Honour and Fortune, by it; and, in a matter of a Month’s time,
with the Persuasions and Reasons of her Friends, she suffer’d him to
resolve upon going, her self determining to retire to the _Monastery_,
till the time of his Return; but when she nam’d the _Monastery_, he grew
pale and disorder’d, and obliged her to promise him, not to enter into
it any more, for fear they should never suffer her to come forth again;
so that he resolv’d not to depart, till she had made a Vow to him, never
to go again within the Walls of a Religious House, which had already
been so fatal to them. She promis’d, and he believ’d.

_Henault_, at last, overcame his Heart, which pleaded so for his Stay,
and sent his Father word, he was ready to obey him, and to carry the
first Efforts of his Arms against the common Foes of Christendom, the
_Turks_; his Father was very well pleas’d at this, and sent him Two
thousand Crowns, his Horses and Furniture sutable to his Quality, and a
Man to wait on him; so that it was not long e’re he got himself in order
to be gone, after a dismal parting.

He made what hast he could to the _French_ Army, then under the Command
of the Monsignior, the Duke of _Beaufort_, then at _Candia_, and put
himself a Voluntier under his Conduct; in which Station was _Villenoys_,
who, you have already heard, was so passionate a Lover of _Isabella_,
who no sooner heard of _Henault’s_ being arriv’d, and that he was
Husband to _Isabella_, but he was impatient to learn, by what strange
Adventure he came to gain her, even from her Vow’d Retreat, when he,
with all his Courtship, could not be so happy, tho’ she was then free in
the World, and Unvow’d to Heaven.

As soon as he sent his Name to _Henault_, he was sent for up, for
_Henault_ had heard of _Villenoys_, and that he had been a Lover of
_Isabella_; they receiv’d one another with all the endearing Civility
imaginable for the aforesaid Reason, and for that he was his
Country-man, tho’ unknown to him, _Villenoys_ being gone to the Army,
just as _Henault_ came from the _Jesuits_ College. A great deal of
Endearment pass’d between them, and they became, from that moment, like
two sworn Brothers, and he receiv’d the whole Relation from _Henault_,
of his Amour.

It was not long before the Siege began anew, for he arriv’d at the
beginning of the Spring, and, as soon as he came, almost, they fell to
Action; and it happen’d upon a day, that a Party of some Four hundred
Men resolv’d to sally out upon the Enemy, as, when ever they could, they
did; but as it is not my business to relate the History of the War,
being wholly unacquainted with the Terms of Battels, I shall only say,
That these Men were led by _Villenoys_, and that _Henault_ would
accompany him in this Sally, and that they acted very Noble, and great
Things, worthy of a Memory in the History of that Siege; but this day,
particularly, they had an occasion to shew their Valour, which they did
very much to their Glory; but, venturing too far, they were ambush’d, in
the persuit of the Party of the Enemies, and being surrounded,
_Villenoys_ had the unhappiness to see his gallant Friend fall, fighting
and dealing of Wounds around him, even as he descended to the Earth, for
he fell from his Horse at the same moment that he kill’d a _Turk_; and
_Villenoys_ could neither assist him, nor had he the satisfaction to be
able to rescue his dead Body from under the Horses, but, with much ado,
escaping with his own Life, got away, in spite of all that follow’d him,
and recover’d the Town, before they could overtake him: He passionately
bewail’d the Loss of this brave young Man, and offer’d any Recompence to
those, that would have ventur’d to have search’d for his dead Body among
the Slain; but it was not fit to hazard the Living, for unnecessary
Services to the Dead; and tho’ he had a great mind to have Interr’d him,
he rested content with what he wish’d to pay his Friends Memory, tho’ he
could not: So that all the Service now he could do him, was, to write to
_Isabella_, to whom he had not writ, tho’ commanded by her so to do, in
three Years before, which was never since she took Orders. He gave her
an Account of the Death of her Husband, and how Gloriously he fell
fighting for the Holy Cross, and how much Honour he had won, if it had
been his Fate to have outliv’d that great, but unfortunate, Day, where,
with 400 Men, they had kill’d 1500 of the Enemy. The General _Beaufort_
himself had so great a Respect and Esteem for this young Man, and
knowing him to be of Quality, that he did him the honour to bemoan him,
and to send a Condoling Letter to _Isabella_, how much worth her Esteem
he dy’d, and that he had Eterniz’d his Memory with the last Gasp of his
Life.

When this News arriv’d, it may be easily imagin’d, what Impressions, or
rather Ruins, it made in the Heart of this fair Mourner; the Letters
came by his Man, who saw him fall in Battel, and came off with those few
that escap’d with _Villenoys_; he brought back what Money he had, a few
Jewels, with _Isabella’s_ Picture that he carry’d with him and had left
in his Chamber in the Fort at _Candia_, for fear of breaking it in
Action. And now _Isabella’s_ Sorrow grew to the Extremity, she thought,
she could not suffer more than she did by his Absence, but she now found
a Grief more killing; she hung her Chamber with Black, and liv’d without
the Light of Day: Only Wax Lights, that let her behold the Picture of
this Charming Man, before which she sacrific’d Floods of Tears. He had
now been absent about ten Months, and she had learnt just to live
without him, but Hope preserv’d her then; but now she had nothing, for
which to wish to live. She, for about two Months after the News arriv’d,
liv’d without seeing any Creature but a young Maid, that was her Woman;
but extream Importunity oblig’d her to give way to the Visits of her
Friends, who endeavour’d to restore her Melancholy Soul to its wonted
Easiness; for, however it was oppress’d within, by _Henault’s_ Absence,
she bore it off with a modest Chearfulness; but now she found, that
Fortitude and Virtue fail’d her, when she was assur’d, he was no more:
She continu’d thus Mourning, and thus inclos’d, the space of a whole
Year, never suffering the Visit of any Man, but of a near Relation; so
that she acquir’d a Reputation, such as never any young Beauty had, for
she was now but Nineteen, and her Face and Shape more excellent than
ever; she daily increas’d in Beauty, which, joyn’d to her Exemplary
Piety, Charity, and all other excellent Qualities, gain’d her a
wonderous Fame, and begat an Awe and Reverence in all that heard of her,
and there was no Man of any Quality, that did not Adore her. After her
Year was up, she went to the Churches, but would never be seen any where
else abroad, but that was enough to procure her a thousand Lovers; and
some, who had the boldness to send her Letters, which, if she receiv’d,
she gave no Answer to, and many she sent back unread and unseal’d: So
that she would encourage none, tho’ their Quality was far beyond what
she could hope; but she was resolv’d to marry no more, however her
Fortune might require it.

It happen’d, that, about this time, _Candia_ being unfortunately taken
by the _Turks_, all the brave Men that escap’d the Sword, return’d,
among them, _Villenoys_, who no sooner arriv’d, but he sent to let
_Isabella_ know of it, and to beg the Honour of waiting on her; desirous
to learn what Fate befel her dear Lord, she suffer’d him to visit her,
where he found her, in her Mourning, a thousand times more Fair,
(at least, he fancy’d so) than ever she appear’d to be; so that if he
lov’d her before, he now ador’d her; if he burnt then, he rages now; but
the awful Sadness, and soft Languishment of her Eyes, hinder’d him from
the presumption of speaking of his Passion to her, tho’ it would have
been no new thing; and his first Visit was spent in the Relation of
every Circumstance of _Henault’s_ Death; and, at his going away, he
begg’d leave to visit her sometimes, and she gave him permission: He
lost no time, but made use of the Liberty she had given him; and when
his Sister, who was a great Companion of _Isabella’s_, went to see her,
he would still wait on her; so that, either with his own Visits, and
those of his Sister’s, he saw _Isabella_ every day, and had the good
luck to see, he diverted her, by giving her Relations of Transactions of
the Siege, and the Customs and Manners of the _Turks_: All he said, was
with so good a Grace, that he render’d every thing agreeable; he was,
besides, very Beautiful, well made, of Quality and Fortune, and fit to
inspire Love.

He made his Visits so often, and so long, that, at last, he took the
Courage to speak of his Passion, which, at first, _Isabella_ would by no
means hear of, but, by degrees, she yielded more and more to listen to
his tender Discourse; and he liv’d thus with her two Years, before he
could gain any more upon her Heart, than to suffer him to speak of Love
to her; but that, which subdu’d her quite was, That her Aunt, the Lady
_Abbess_, dy’d, and with her, all the Hopes and Fortune of _Isabella_,
so that she was left with only a Charming Face and Meen, a Virtue, and a
Discretion above her Sex, to make her Fortune within the World; into a
Religious House, she was resolv’d not to go, because her Heart deceiv’d
her once, and she durst not trust it again, whatever it promis’d.

The death of this Lady made her look more favourably on _Villenoys_; but
yet, she was resolv’d to try his Love to the utmost, and keep him off,
as long as ’twas possible she could subsist, and ’twas for Interest she
married again, tho’ she lik’d the Person very well; and since she was
forc’d to submit her self to be a second time a Wife, she thought, she
could live better with _Villenoys_, than any other, since for him she
ever had a great Esteem; and fancy’d the Hand of Heaven had pointed out
her Destiny, which she could not avoid, without a Crime.

So that when she was again importun’d by her impatient Lover, she told
him, She had made a Vow to remain three Years, at least, before she
would marry again, after the Death of the best of Men and Husbands, and
him who had the Fruits of her early Heart; and, notwithstanding all the
Solicitations of _Villenoys_, she would not consent to marry him, till
her Vow of Widowhood was expir’d.

He took her promise, which he urg’d her to give him, and to shew the
height of his Passion in his obedience; he condescends to stay her
appointed time, tho’ he saw her every day, and all his Friends and
Relations made her Visits upon this new account, and there was nothing
talk’d on, but this design’d Wedding, which, when the time was expir’d,
was perform’d accordingly with great Pomp and Magnificence, for
_Villenoys_ had no Parents to hinder his Design; or if he had, the
Reputation and Virtue of this Lady would have subdu’d them.

The Marriage was celebrated in this House, where she liv’d ever since
her Return from _Germany_, from the time she got her Pardon; and when
_Villenoys_ was preparing all things in a more magnificent Order at his
Villa, some ten Miles from the City, she was very melancholy, and would
often say, She had been us’d to such profound Retreat, and to live
without the fatigue of Noise and Equipage, that, she fear’d, she should
never endure that Grandeur, which was proper for his Quality; and tho’
the House, in the Country, was the most beautifully Situated in all
_Flanders_, she was afraid of a numerous Train, and kept him, for the
most part, in this pretty City Mansion, which he Adorn’d and Enlarg’d,
as much as she would give him leave; so that there wanted nothing, to
make this House fit to receive the People of the greatest Quality,
little as it was: But all the Servants and Footmen, all but one _Valet_,
and the Maid, were lodg’d abroad, for _Isabella_, not much us’d to the
sight of Men about her, suffer’d them as seldom as possible, to come in
her Presence, so that she liv’d more like a _Nun_ still, than a Lady of
the World; and very rarely any Maids came about her, but _Maria_, who
had always permission to come, when ever she pleas’d, unless forbidden.

As _Villenoys_ had the most tender and violent Passion for his Wife, in
the World, he suffer’d her to be pleas’d at any rate, and to live in
what Method she best lik’d, and was infinitely satisfy’d with the
Austerity and manner of her Conduct, since in his Arms, and alone, with
him, she wanted nothing that could Charm; so that she was esteemed the
fairest and best of Wives, and he the most happy of all Mankind. When
she would go abroad, she had her Coaches Rich and Gay, and her Livery
ready to attend her in all the Splendour imaginable; and he was always
buying one rich Jewel, or Necklace, or some great Rarity or other, that
might please her; so that there was nothing her Soul could desire, which
it had not, except the Assurance of Eternal Happiness, which she
labour’d incessantly to gain. She had no Discontent, but because she was
not bless’d with a Child; but she submits to the pleasure of Heaven, and
endeavour’d, by her good Works, and her Charity, to make the Poor her
Children, and was ever doing Acts of Virtue, to make the Proverb good,
_That more are the Children of the Barren, than the Fruitful Woman_. She
liv’d in this Tranquility, belov’d by all, for the space of five Years,
and Time (and perpetual Obligations from _Villenoys_, who was the most
indulgent and indearing Man in the World) had almost worn out of her
Heart the Thought of _Henault_, or if she remember’d him, it was in her
Prayers, or sometimes with a short sigh, and no more, tho’ it was a
great while, before she could subdue her Heart to that Calmness; but she
was prudent, and wisely bent all her Endeavours to please, oblige, and
caress, the deserving Living, and to strive all she could, to forget the
unhappy Dead, since it could not but redound to the disturbance of her
Repose, to think of him; so that she had now transferr’d all that
Tenderness she had for him, to _Villenoys_.

_Villenoys_, of all Diversions, lov’d Hunting, and kept, at his Country
House, a very famous Pack of Dogs, which he us’d to lend, sometimes, to
a young Lord, who was his dear Friend, and his Neighbour in the Country,
who would often take them, and be out two or three days together, where
he heard of Game, and oftentimes _Villenoys_ and he would be a whole
Week at a time exercising in this Sport, for there was no Game near at
hand. This young Lord had sent him a Letter, to invite him fifteen Miles
farther than his own _Villa_, to hunt, and appointed to meet him at his
Country House, in order to go in search of this promis’d Game; So that
_Villenoys_ got about a Week’s Provision, of what Necessaries he thought
he should want in that time; and taking only his _Valet_, who lov’d the
Sport, he left _Isabella_ for a Week to her Devotion, and her other
innocent Diversions of fine Work, at which she was Excellent, and left
the Town to go meet this young Challenger.

When _Villenoys_ was at any time out, it was the custom of _Isabella_ to
retire to her Chamber, and to receive no Visits, not even the Ladies, so
absolutely she devoted her self to her Husband: All the first day she
pass’d over in this manner, and Evening being come, she order’d her
Supper to be brought to her Chamber, and, because it was Washing-day the
next day, she order’d all her Maids to go very early to Bed, that they
might be up betimes, and to leave only _Maria_ to attend her; which was
accordingly done. This _Maria_ was a young Maid, that was very discreet,
and, of all things in the World, lov’d her Lady, whom she had liv’d
with, ever since she came from the _Monastery_.

When all were in Bed, and the little light Supper just carry’d up to the
Lady, and only, as I said, _Maria_ attending, some body knock’d at the
Gate, it being about Nine of the Clock at Night; so _Maria_ snatching up
a Candle, went to the Gate, to see who it might be; when she open’d the
Door, she found a Man in a very odd Habit, and a worse Countenance, and
asking, Who he would speak with? He told her, Her Lady: My Lady (reply’d
_Maria_) does not use to receive Visits at this hour; Pray, what is your
Business? He reply’d, That which I will deliver only to your Lady, and
that she may give me Admittance, pray, deliver her this Ring: And
pulling off a small Ring, with _Isabella’s_ Name and Hair in it, he gave
it _Maria_, who, shutting the Gate upon him, went in with the Ring; as
soon as _Isabella_ saw it, she was ready to swound on the Chair where
she sate, and cry’d, Where had you this? _Maria_ reply’d, An old rusty
Fellow at the Gate gave it me, and desired, it might be his Pasport to
you; I ask’d his Name, but he said, You knew him not, but he had great
News to tell you. _Isabella_ reply’d, (almost swounding again) Oh,
_Maria!_ I am ruin’d. The Maid, all this while, knew not what she meant,
nor, that that was a Ring given to _Henault_ by her Mistress, but
endeavouring to recover her, only ask’d her, What she should say to the
old Messenger? _Isabella_ bid her bring him up to her, (she had scarce
Life to utter these last words) and before she was well recover’d,
_Maria_ enter’d with the Man; and _Isabella_ making a Sign to her, to
depart the Room, she was left alone with him.

_Henault_ (for it was he) stood trembling and speechless before her,
giving her leisure to take a strict Survey of him; at first finding no
Feature nor Part of _Henault_ about him, her Fears began to lessen, and
she hop’d, it was not he, as her first Apprehensions had suggested; when
he (with the Tears of Joy standing in his Eyes, and not daring suddenly
to approach her, for fear of encreasing that Disorder he saw in her pale
Face) began to speak to her, and cry’d, Fair Creature! is there no
Remains of your _Henault_ left in this Face of mine, all o’regrown with
Hair? Nothing in these Eyes, sunk with eight Years Absence from you, and
Sorrows? Nothing in this Shape, bow’d with Labour and Griefs, that can
inform you? I was once that happy Man you lov’d! At these words, Tears
stop’d his Speech, and _Isabella_ kept them Company, for yet she wanted
Words. Shame and Confusion fill’d her Soul, and she was not able to lift
her Eyes up, to consider the Face of him, whose Voice she knew so
perfectly well. In one moment, she run over a thousand Thoughts. She
finds, by his Return, she is not only expos’d to all the Shame
imaginable; to all the Upbraiding, on his part, when he shall know she
is marry’d to another; but all the Fury and Rage of _Villenoys_, and the
Scorn of the Town, who will look on her as an Adulteress: She sees
_Henault_ poor, and knew, she must fall from all the Glory and
Tranquility she had for five happy Years triumph’d in; in which time,
she had known no Sorrow, or Care, tho’ she had endur’d a thousand with
_Henault_. She dyes, to think, however, that he should know, she had
been so lightly in Love with him, to marry again; and she dyes, to
think, that _Villenoys_ must see her again in the Arms of _Henault_;
besides, she could not recal her Love, for Love, like Reputation, once
fled, never returns more. ’Tis impossible to love, and cease to love,
(and love another) and yet return again to the first Passion, tho’ the
Person have all the Charms, or a thousand times more than it had, when
it first conquer’d. This Mistery in Love, it may be, is not generally
known, but nothing is more certain. One may a while suffer the Flame to
languish, but there may be a reviving Spark in the Ashes, rak’d up, that
may burn anew; but when ’tis quite extinguish’d, it never returns or
rekindles.

’Twas so with the Heart of _Isabella_; had she believ’d, _Henault_ had
been living, she had lov’d to the last moment of their Lives; but, alas!
the Dead are soon forgotten, and she now lov’d only _Villenoys_.

After they had both thus silently wept, with very different sentiments,
she thought ’twas time to speak; and dissembling as well as she could,
she caress’d him in her Arms, and told him, She could not express her
Surprize and Joy for his Arrival. If she did not Embrace him heartily,
or speak so Passionately as she us’d to do, he fancy’d it her Confusion,
and his being in a condition not so fit to receive Embraces from her;
and evaded them as much as ’twas possible for him to do, in respect to
her, till he had dress’d his Face, and put himself in order; but the
Supper being just brought up, when he knock’d, she order’d him to sit
down and Eat, and he desir’d her not to let _Maria_ know who he was, to
see how long it would be, before she knew him or would call him to mind.
But _Isabella_ commanded _Maria_, to make up a Bed in such a Chamber,
without disturbing her Fellows, and dismiss’d her from waiting at Table.
The Maid admir’d, what strange, good, and joyful News, this Man had
brought her Mistress, that he was so Treated, and alone with her, which
never any Man had yet been; but she never imagin’d the Truth, and knew
her Lady’s Prudence too well, to question her Conduct. While they were
at Supper, _Isabella_ oblig’d him to tell her, How he came to be
reported Dead; of which, she receiv’d Letters, both from Monsieur
_Villenoys_, and the Duke of _Beaufort_, and by his Man the News, who
saw him Dead? He told her, That, after the Fight, of which, first, he
gave her an account, he being left among the Dead, when the Enemy came
to Plunder and strip ’em, they found, he had Life in him, and appearing
as an Eminent Person, they thought it better Booty to save me,
(continu’d he) and get my Ransom, than to strip me, and bury me among
the Dead; so they bore me off to a Tent, and recover’d me to Life; and,
after that, I was recover’d of my Wounds, and sold, by the Soldier that
had taken me, to a Spahee, who kept me a Slave, setting a great Ransom
on me, such as I was not able to pay. I writ several times, to give you,
and my Father, an account of my Misery, but receiv’d no Answer, and
endur’d seven Years of Dreadful Slavery: When I found, at last, an
opportunity to make my Escape, and from that time, resolv’d, never to
cut the Hair of this Beard, till I should either see my dearest
_Isabella_ again, or hear some News of her. All that I fear’d, was, That
she was Dead; and, at that word, he fetch’d a deep Sigh; and viewing all
things so infinitely more Magnificent than he had left ’em, or,
believ’d, she could afford; and, that she was far more Beautiful in
Person, and Rich in Dress, than when he left her: He had a thousand
Torments of Jealousie that seiz’d him, of which, he durst not make any
mention, but rather chose to wait a little, and see, whether she had
lost her Virtue: He desir’d, he might send for a Barber, to put his Face
in some handsomer Order, and more fit for the Happiness ’twas that Night
to receive; but she told him, No Dress, no Disguise, could render him
more Dear and Acceptable to her, and that to morrow was time enough, and
that his Travels had render’d him more fit for Repose, than Dressing. So
that after a little while, they had talk’d over all they had a mind to
say, all that was very indearing on his side, and as much Concern as she
could force, on hers; she conducted him to his Chamber, which was very
rich, and which gave him a very great addition of Jealousie: However, he
suffer’d her to help him to Bed, which she seem’d to do, with all the
tenderness in the World; and when she had seen him laid, she said, She
would go to her Prayers, and come to him as soon as she had done, which
being before her usual Custom, it was not a wonder to him she stay’d
long, and he, being extreamly tir’d with his Journy, fell asleep. ’Tis
true, _Isabella_ essay’d to Pray, but alas! it was in vain, she was
distracted with a thousand Thoughts what to do, which the more she
thought, the more it distracted her; she was a thousand times about to
end her Life, and, at one stroke, rid her self of the Infamy, that, she
saw, must inevitably fall upon her; but Nature was frail, and the
Tempter strong: And after a thousand Convulsions, even worse than Death
it self, she resolv’d upon the Murder of _Henault_, as the only means of
removing all the obstacles to her future Happiness; she resolv’d on
this, but after she had done so, she was seiz’d with so great Horror,
that she imagin’d, if she perform’d it, she should run Mad; and yet, if
she did not, she should be also Frantick, with the Shames and Miseries
that would befal her; and believing the Murder the least Evil, since she
could never live with him, she fix’d her Heart on that; and causing her
self to be put immediately to Bed, in her own Bed, she made _Maria_ go
to hers, and when all was still, she softly rose, and taking a Candle
with her, only in her Night-Gown and Slippers, she goes to the Bed of
the Unfortunate _Henault_, with a Penknife in her hand; but considering,
she knew not how to conceal the Blood, should she cut his Throat, she
resolves to Strangle him, or Smother him with a Pillow; that last
thought was no sooner borne, but put in Execution; and, as he soundly
slept, she smother’d him without any Noise, or so much as his Strugling:
But when she had done this dreadful Deed, and saw the dead Corps of her
once-lov’d Lord, lye Smiling (as it were) upon her, she fell into a
Swound with the Horror of the Deed, and it had been well for her she had
there dy’d; but she reviv’d again, and awaken’d to more and new Horrors,
she flyes all frighted from the Chamber, and fancies, the Phantom of her
dead Lord persues her; she runs from Room to Room, and starts and
stares, as if she saw him continually before her. Now all that was ever
Soft and Dear to her, with him, comes into her Heart, and, she finds, he
conquers anew, being Dead, who could not gain her Pity, while Living.

While she was thus flying from her Guilt, in vain, she hears one knock
with Authority at the Door: She is now more affrighted, if possible, and
knows not whither to fly for Refuge; she fancies, they are already the
Officers of Justice, and that Ten thousand Tortures and Wrecks are
fastening on her, to make her confess the horrid Murder; the knocking
increases, and so loud, that the Laundry Maids believing it to be the
Woman that us’d to call them up, and help them to Wash, rose, and,
opening the Door, let in _Villenoys_; who having been at his Country
_Villa_, and finding there a Footman, instead of his Friend, who waited
to tell him, His Master was fallen sick of the Small Pox, and could not
wait on him, he took Horse, and came back to his lovely _Isabella_; but
running up, as he us’d to do, to her Chamber, he found her not, and
seeing a Light in another Room, he went in, but found _Isabella_ flying
from him, out at another Door, with all the speed she could, he admires
at this Action, and the more, because his Maid told him Her Lady had
been a Bed a good while; he grows a little Jealous, and persues her, but
still she flies; at last he caught her in his Arms, where she fell into
a swound, but quickly recovering, he set her down in a Chair, and,
kneeling before her, implor’d to know what she ayl’d, and why she fled
from him, who ador’d her? She only fix’d a ghastly Look upon him, and
said, She was not well: ‘Oh! (said he) put not me off with such poor
Excuses, _Isabella_ never fled from me, when Ill, but came to my Arms,
and to my Bosom, to find a Cure; therefore, tell me, what’s the matter?’
At that, she fell a weeping in a most violent manner, and cry’d, She was
for ever undone: He, being mov’d with Love and Compassion, conjur’d her
to tell what she ayl’d: ‘Ah! (said she) thou and I, and all of us, are
undone!’ At this, he lost all Patience and rav’d, and cry’d, Tell me,
and tell me immediately, what’s the matter? When she saw his Face pale,
and his Eyes fierce, she fell on her knees, and cry’d, ‘Oh! you can
never Pardon me, if I should tell you, and yet, alas! I am innocent of
Ill, by all that’s good, I am.’ But her Conscience accusing her at that
word, she was silent. If thou art Innocent, said _Villenoys_, taking her
up in his Arms, and kissing her wet Face, ‘By all that’s Good, I Pardon
thee, what ever thou hast done.’ ‘Alas! (said she) Oh! but I dare not
name it, ’till you swear.’ ‘By all that’s Sacred, (reply’d he) and by
whatever Oath you can oblige me to; by my inviolable Love to thee, and
by thy own dear Self, I swear, whate’re it be, I do forgive thee;
I know, thou art too good to commit a Sin I may not with Honour,
pardon.’

With this, and hearten’d by his Caresses, she told him, That _Henault_
was return’d; and repeating to him his Escape, she said, She had put him
to Bed, and when he expected her to come, she fell on her Knees at the
Bedside, and confess’d, She was married to _Villenoys_; at that word
(said she) he fetch’d a deep Sigh or two, and presently after, with a
very little struggling, dy’d; and, yonder, he lyes still in the Bed.
After this, she wept so abundantly, that all _Villenoys_ could do, could
hardly calm her Spirits; but after, consulting what they should do in
this Affair, _Villenoys_ ask’d her, Who of the House saw him? She said,
Only _Maria_, who knew not who he was; so that, resolving to save
_Isabella’s_ Honour, which was the only Misfortune to come, _Villenoys_
himself propos’d the carrying him out to the Bridge, and throwing him
into the River, where the Stream would carry him down to the Sea, and
lose him; or, if he were found, none could know him. So _Villenoys_ took
a Candle, and went and look’d on him, and found him altogether chang’d,
that no Body would know who he was; he therefore put on his Clothes,
which was not hard for him to do, for he was scarce yet cold, and
comforting again _Isabella_, as well as he could, he went himself into
the Stable, and fetched a Sack, such as they us’d for Oats, a new Sack,
whereon stuck a great Needle, with a Pack-thread in it; this Sack he
brings into the House, and shews to _Isabella_, telling her, He would
put the Body in there, for the better convenience of carrying it on his
Back. _Isabella_ all this while said but little, but, fill’d with
Thoughts all Black and Hellish, she ponder’d within, while the Fond and
Passionate _Villenoys_ was endeavouring to hide her Shame, and to make
this an absolute Secret: She imagin’d, that could she live after a Deed
so black, _Villenoys_ would be eternal reproaching her, if not with his
Tongue, at least with his Heart, and embolden’d by one Wickedness, she
was the readier for another, and another of such a Nature, as has, in my
Opinion, far less Excuse, than the first; but when Fate begins to
afflict, she goes through stitch with her Black Work.

When _Villenoys_, who would, for the Safety of _Isabella’s_ Honour, be
the sole Actor in the disposing of this Body; and since he was Young,
Vigorous, and Strong, and able to bear it, would trust no one with the
Secret, he having put up the Body, and ty’d it fast, set it on a Chair,
turning his Back towards it, with the more conveniency to take it upon
his Back, bidding _Isabella_ give him the two Corners of the Sack in his
Hands; telling her, They must do this last office for the Dead, more, in
order to the securing their Honour and Tranquility hereafter, than for
any other Reason, and bid her be of good Courage, till he came back, for
it was not far to the Bridge, and it being the dead of the Night, he
should pass well enough. When he had the Sack on his Back, and ready to
go with it, she cry’d, Stay, my Dear, some of his Clothes hang out,
which I will put in; and with that, taking the Pack-needle with the
Thread, sew’d the Sack, with several strong Stitches, to the Collar of
_Villenoy’s_ Coat, without his perceiving it, and bid him go now; and
when you come to the Bridge, (said she) and that you are throwing him
over the Rail, (which is not above Breast high) be sure you give him a
good swing, least the Sack should hang on any thing at the side of the
Bridge, and not fall into the Stream; I’le warrant you, (said
_Villenoys_) I know how to secure his falling. And going his way with
it, Love lent him Strength, and he soon arriv’d at the Bridge; where,
turning his Back to the Rail, and heaving the Body over, he threw
himself with all his force backward, the better to swing the Body into
the River, whose weight (it being made fast to his Collar) pull’d
_Villenoys_ after it, and both the live and the dead Man falling into
the River, which, being rapid at the Bridge, soon drown’d him,
especially when so great a weight hung to his Neck; so that he dy’d,
without considering what was the occasion of his Fate.

_Isabella_ remain’d the most part of the Night sitting in her Chamber,
without going to Bed, to see what would become of her Damnable Design;
but when it was towards Morning, and she heard no News, she put herself
into Bed, but not to find Repose or Rest there, for that she thought
impossible, after so great a Barbarity as she had committed; No, (said
she) it is but just I should for ever wake, who have, in one fatal
Night, destroy’d two such Innocents. Oh! what Fate, what Destiny, is
mine? Under what cursed Planet was I born, that Heaven it self could not
divert my Ruine? It was not many Hours since I thought my self the most
happy and blest of Women, and now am fallen to the Misery of one of the
worst Fiends of Hell.

Such were her Thoughts, and such her Cryes, till the Light brought on
new Matter for Grief; for, about Ten of the Clock, News was brought,
that Two Men were found dead in the River, and that they were carry’d to
the Town-Hall, to lye there, till they were own’d: Within an hour after,
News was brought in, that one of these Unhappy Men was _Villenoys_; his
_Valet_, who, all this while, imagin’d him in Bed with his Lady, ran to
the Hall, to undeceive the People, for he knew, if his Lord were gone
out, he should have been call’d to Dress him; but finding it, as ’twas
reported, he fell a weeping, and wringing his Hands, in a most miserable
manner, he ran home with the News; where, knocking at his Lady’s Chamber
Door, and finding it fast lock’d, he almost hop’d again, he was
deceiv’d; but _Isabella_ rising, and opening the Door, _Maria_ first
enter’d weeping, with the News, and then brought the _Valet_, to testify
the fatal Truth of it. _Isabella_, tho’ it were nothing but what she
expected to hear, almost swounded in her Chair; nor did she feign it,
but felt really all the Pangs of Killing Grief; and was so alter’d with
her Night’s Watching and Grieving, that this new Sorrow look’d very
Natural in her. When she was recover’d, she asked a thousand Questions
about him, and question’d the Possibility of it; for (said she) he went
out this Morning early from me, and had no signs, in his Face, of any
Grief or Discontent. Alas! (said the _Valet_) Madam, he is not his own
Murderer, some one has done it in Revenge; and then told her, how he was
found fasten’d to a Sack, with a dead strange Man ty’d up within it; and
every body concludes, that they were both first murder’d, and then drawn
to the River, and thrown both in. At the Relation of this Strange Man,
she seem’d more amaz’d than before, and commanding the _Valet_ to go to
the Hall, and to take Order about the Coroner’s sitting on the Body of
_Villenoys_, and then to have it brought home: She called _Maria_ to
her, and, after bidding her shut the Door, she cry’d, Ah, _Maria_! I
will tell thee what my Heart imagins; but first, (said she) run to the
Chamber of the Stranger, and see, if he be still in Bed, which I fear he
is not; she did so, and brought word, he was gone; then (said she) my
Forebodings are true. When I was in Bed last night, with _Villenoys_
(and at that word, she sigh’d as if her Heart-Strings had broken) I told
him, I had lodg’d a Stranger in my House, who was by, when my first Lord
and Husband fell in Battel; and that, after the Fight, finding him yet
alive, he spoke to him, and gave him that Ring you brought me last
Night; and conjur’d him, if ever his Fortune should bring him to
_Flanders_, to see me, and give me that Ring, and tell me--(with that,
she wept, and could scarce speak) a thousand tender and endearing
things, and then dy’d in his Arms. For my dear _Henault’s_ sake (said
she) I us’d him nobly, and dismiss’d you that Night, because I was
asham’d to have any Witness of the Griefs I paid his Memory: All this I
told to _Villenoys_ whom I found disorder’d; and, after a sleepless
Night, I fancy he got up, and took this poor Man, and has occasion’d his
Death: At that, she wept anew, and _Maria_, to whom, all that her
Mistress said, was Gospel, verily believ’d it so, without examining
Reason; and _Isabella_ conjuring her, since none of the House knew of
the old Man’s being there, (for Old he appear’d to be) that she would
let it for ever be a Secret, and, to this she bound her by an Oath; so
that none knowing _Henault_, altho’ his Body was expos’d there for three
Days to Publick View: When the Coroner had Set on the Bodies, he found,
they had been first Murder’d some way or other, and then afterwards
tack’d together, and thrown into the River, they brought the Body of
_Villenoys_ home to his House, where, it being laid on a Table, all the
House infinitely bewail’d it; and _Isabella_ did nothing but swound
away, almost as fast as she recover’d Life; however, she would, to
compleat her Misery, be led to see this dreadful Victim of her Cruelty,
and, coming near the Table, the Body, whose Eyes were before close shut,
now open’d themselves wide, and fix’d them upon _Isabella_, who, giving
a great Schreek, fell down in a swound, and the Eyes clos’d again; they
had much ado to bring her to Life, but, at last, they did so, and led
her back to her Bed, where she remain’d a good while. Different Opinions
and Discourses were made, concerning the opening of the Eyes of the Dead
Man, and viewing _Isabella_; but she was a Woman of so admirable a Life
and Conversation, of so undoubted a Piety and Sanctity of Living, that
not the least Conjecture could be made, of her having a hand in it,
besides the improbability of it; yet the whole thing was a Mystery,
which, they thought, they ought to look into: But a few Days after, the
Body of _Villenoys_ being interr’d in a most magnificent manner, and, by
Will all he had, was long since setled on _Isabella_, the World, instead
of Suspecting her, Ador’d her the more, and every Body of Quality was
already hoping to be next, tho’ the fair Mourner still kept her Bed, and
Languish’d daily.

It happen’d, not long after this, there came to the Town a _French_
Gentleman, who was taken at the Siege of _Candia_, and was Fellow-Slave
with _Henault_, for seven Years, in _Turky_, and who had escap’d with
_Henault_, and came as far as _Liege_ with him, where, having some
Business and Acquaintance with a Merchant, he stay’d some time; but when
he parted with _Henault_, he ask’d him, Where he should find him in
_Flanders_? _Henault_ gave him a Note, with his Name, and Place of
Abode, if his Wife were alive; if not, to enquire at his Sister’s, or
his Father’s. This _French_ Man came at last, to the very House of
_Isabella_, enquiring for this Man, and receiv’d a strange Answer, and
was laugh’d at; He found, that was the House, and that the Lady; and
enquiring about the Town, and speaking of _Henault’s_ Return, describing
the Man, it was quickly discover’d, to be the same that was in the Sack:
He had his Friend taken up (for he was buried) and found him the same,
and, causing a _Barber_ to Trim him, when his bushy Beard was off,
a great many People remember’d him; and the _French_ Man affirming, he
went to his own Home, all _Isabella’s_ Family, and her self, were cited
before the Magistrate of Justice, where, as soon as she was accus’d, she
confess’d the whole Matter of Fact, and, without any Disorder, deliver’d
her self in the Hands of Justice, as the Murderess of two Husbands (both
belov’d) in one Night: The whole World stood amaz’d at this; who knew
her Life a Holy and Charitable Life, and how dearly and well she had
liv’d with her Husbands, and every one bewail’d her Misfortune, and she
alone was the only Person, that was not afflicted for her self; she was
Try’d, and Condemn’d to lose her Head; which Sentence, she joyfully
receiv’d, and said, Heaven, and her Judges, were too Merciful to her,
and that her Sins had deserv’d much more.

While she was in Prison, she was always at Prayers, and very Chearful
and Easie, distributing all she had amongst, and for the Use of, the
Poor of the Town, especially to the Poor Widows; exhorting daily, the
Young, and the Fair, that came perpetually to visit her, never to break
a Vow: for that was first the Ruine of her, and she never since
prosper’d, do whatever other good Deeds she could. When the day of
Execution came, she appear’d on the Scaffold all in Mourning, but with a
Meen so very Majestick and Charming, and a Face so surprizing Fair,
where no Languishment or Fear appear’d, but all Chearful as a Bride,
that she set all Hearts a flaming, even in that mortifying Minute of
Preparation for Death: She made a Speech of half an Hour long, so
Eloquent, so admirable a warning to the _Vow-Breakers_, that it was as
amazing to hear her, as it was to behold her.

After she had done with the help of _Maria_, she put off her Mourning
Vail, and, without any thing over her Face, she kneel’d down, and the
Executioner, at one Blow, sever’d her Beautiful Head from her Delicate
Body, being then in her Seven and Twentieth Year. She was generally
Lamented, and Honourably Bury’d.

  _FINIS._
