JOHN BULL Still In His SENSES: BEING THE THIRD PART OF Law is a Bottomless-Pit.

Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry
Polesworth: And Published (as well as the two former Parts) by the Author of
the New Atalantis.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near Stationer's-Hall, 1712. (Price 4d.)

THE CONTENTS.
THE Publisher's Preface CHAP. I. The Character of John Bull's Mother. CHAP.
II. The Character of John Bull's Sister Peg; with the Quarrels that happened
between Master and Miss in their Childhood. CHAP. III Jack's Charms, or the
Method by which he gained Peg's Heart. CHAP. IV. How the Relations Reconciled
John and his Sister Peg, and what Return Peg made John's Message. CHAP. V. Of
some Quarrels that happened after Peg was taken into the Family. CHAP. VI. The
Conversation between John Bull and his Wife. CHAP. VII. Of the hard Shifts Mrs.
Bull was put to, to preserve the Manor of Bullocks-Hatch, with Sir Roger's
Method of keeping off importunate Duns. CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the
Conversation between John Bull and his Wife. CHAP. IX. A Copy of Nic. Frog's
Letter to John Bull. CHAP. X. Of some extraordinary Things that passed at the
Salutation Tavern, in the Conference between Bull, Frog, Esquire South and
Lewis Baboon.
The Publisher's PREFACE.
THE World is much indebted to the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth, for his
ingenious and impartial Account of John Bull's Lawsuit; yet there is just
Cause of Complaint against him, in that he retails it only by Parcels, and
will not give us the whole Work; This forces me, who am only the Publisher, to
bespeak the Assistance of his Friends and Acquaintance, to engage him to lay
aside that stingy Humor, and gratify the Curiosity of the Public, at once. He
pleads in excuse, that they are only private Memoirs, wrote for his own Use, in
a loose Style, to serve as a help to his ordinary Conversation. I represented
to him the good Reception the two first Parts had met, that though they had been
calculated by him, only for the Meridian of Grubstreet, yet they were taken
Notice of by the better sort; that the World was now sufficiently acquainted
with John Bull, and interested it self in his little Concerns. He Answered with
a Smile, that he had indeed some trifling Things to impart that concerned John
Bull's Relations and Domestic Affairs; if these would satisfy me, he gave me
free leave to make use of them, because they would serve to make the History of
the Lawsuit more intelligible. When I had looked over the Manuscript, I found
likewise some further Account of the Composition, which perhaps may not be
unacceptable to such as have read the two former Parts.

CHAP. I. The Character of John Bull's Mother.
JOHN had a Mother, whom he Loved and Honored extremely, a Discreet, Grave,
Sober Good Conditioned, Cleanly Old Gentlewoman, as ever lived; she was none of
your Cross-grained termagant scolding Jades, that one had as good be hanged as
live in the House with, such as are always censuring the Conduct, and telling
scandalous Stories of their Neighbors, extolling their own good Qualities, and
undervaluing those of others. On the contrary, she was of a Meek Spirit, and as
she was strictly Virtuous her self, so she always put the best Construction
upon the Words and Actions of her Neighbors, except where they were
irreconcilable to the Rules of Honesty and Decency. She was neither one of
your precise Prudes, nor one of your fantastical old Belles, that Dress
themselves like Girls of Fifteen; as she neither wore a Ruff, Forehead Cloth,
nor High-crown'd Hat, so she had laid aside Feathers, Flowers, and crimpt
Ribons in her Head-dress, Furbulow Scarfs and Hoop'd Petticoats. She scorned to
Patch and Paint, yet she loved to keep her Hands and her Face Clean. Though she
wore no flaunting laced Ruffles, she would not keep her self in a constant
Sweat with greasy Flannel: Though her Hair was not stuck with Jewels, she was not
ashamed of a Diamond Cross; she was not like some Ladies, hung about with Toys
and Trinkets, Twiser Cases, Pocket-Glasses and Essence Bottles; she used only a
Gold Watch and an Almanac, to mark the Hours and the Holy Days. Her Furniture
was neat and genteel, well fancied with a bon Goust. As she affected not the
Grandeur of a State with a Canopy, she thought there was no Offense in an Elbow
Chair; she had laid aside your Carving, Gilding and Japan Work, as being too
apt to gather Dirt, but she never could be prevailed upon to part with plain
Wainscot and clean Hangings. There are some Ladies that affect to smell a stink
in every Thing; they are always highly perfumed, and continually burning
Frankincense in their Rooms; she was above such Affectation, yet she never
would lay aside the Use of Brooms and scrubbing Brushes, and scrupled not to
lay her Linen in fresh Lavender: She was no less genteel in her Behavior,
well-bred without Affectation, in the due mean between one of your affected
Cursying pieces of Formality, and your Romps that have no regard to the common
Rules of Civility. There are some Ladies that affect a Mighty regard for their
Relations; We must not Eat to Day, for my Uncle Tom, or my Cousin Betty died
this time ten Years; Let Us have a Ball to Night, it is my Neighbor such a ones
Birthday; she looked upon all this as Grimace; yet she constantly observed her
Husband's Birthday, her Wedding Day, and some few more. Though she was a truly
good Woman, and had a sincere Motherly Love for her Son John, yet there wanted
not those who endeavored to create a Misunderstanding between them, and they
had so far prevailed with him once, that he turned her out of Doors to his
geeat Sorrow, as he found afterward, for his Affairs went all at sixes and
sevens. She was no less Judicious in the turn of her Conversation and Choice of
her Studies, in which she far exceeded all her Sex; your Rakes that hate the
Company of all sober, grave Gentlewomen, would bear hers, and she would by her
handsome manner of proceeding sooner reclaim than some that were more sower and
reserved; she was a zealous Preacher up of Chastity, and Conjugal Fidelity in
Wives, and by no means a Friend to the new-fangl'd Doctrine of the
Indispensible Duty of Cuckoldom: Tho she advanced her Opinions with a becoming
Assurance, yet she never ushered them in, as some positive Creatures will do,
with dogmatical Assertions, This is infallible; I cannot be mistaken; none but
a Rogue can deny it. It has been observed that such People are oftener in the
Wrong than any Body; though she had a thousand good Qualities, she was not
without her Faults, amongst which one might perhaps reckon too great Lenity to
her Servants, to whom she always gave good Counsel, but often too gentle
Correction. I thought I could not say less of John Bull's Mother, because she
bears a part in the following Transactions.

CHAP. II. The Character of John Bull's Sister Peg, with the Quarrels that
happened between Master and Miss, in their Childhood.
JOHN had a Sister a poor Girl that had been starved at Nurse; any Body would
have guessed Miss to have been bred up under the Influence of a cruel
Step-Dame, and John to be the Fondling of a tender Mother. John looked ruddy
and plump, with a pair of Cheeks like a Trumpeter; Miss looked pale and wan, as
if she had the Green Sickness; and no wonder for John was the Darling, he had
all the good Bits, was crammed with good Pullet, Chicken, Pig, Goose and Capon;
while Miss had only a little Oatmeal and Water, or a dry Crust without Butter.
John had his golden Pippens, Peaches and Nectarnes; poor Miss a Crap Apple,
Sloe or Blackberry. Master lay in the best Apartment, with his Bed Chamber
toward the South Sun. Miss lodged in a Garret, exposed to the North Wind, which
shrevel'd her Countenance; however, this Usage tho it stunted the poor Girl in
her Growth, gave her a hardy Constitution; she had Life and Spirit in
abundance, and knew when she was ill used; Now and then she would seize upon
John's Commons, snatch a Leg of a Pullet, or a bit of good Beef, for which they
were sure to go to Fisticuffs. Master was indeed too strong for her, but Miss
would not yield in the least Point, but even when Master had got her down, she
would scratch and bite like a Tiger; when he gave her a Cuff on the Ear, she
would prick him with her Knitting-Needle. John brought a great Chain one Day to
tie her to the Bed Post, for which Affront Miss aimed a Penknife at his Heart:
In short, these Quarrels grew up to rooted Aversions, they gave one another
Nicknames, she called him Gundyguts, and he called her Lousy Peg: Though the Girl
was a right clever Wench as any was, and through her pale Looks, you might
discern Spirit and Vivacity, which made her not indeed a perfect Beauty, but
something that was agreeable. It was barbarous in Parents not to take Notice of
these early Quarrels, and make them live better together, such Domestic Fewds
proving afterward the occasion of Misfortunes to them both. Peg had indeed
some odd Humors and comical Antipathy, for which John would jeer her. What
think you of my Sister Peg ( says he) that faints at the Sound of an Organ, and
yet will dance and frisk at the Noise of a Bagpipe? What Is that to you,
Gundy-guts, (quoth Peg) every Body's to choose their own Music.' Then Peg had
taken a Fancy not to say her Paternoster, which made People imagine strange
things of her. Of the three Brothers that have made such a Clutter in the
World, Lord Peter, Martin and Jack; Jack had of late been her Inclinations;
Lord Peter she detested; nor did Martin stand much better in her good Graces,
but Jack had found the way to her Heart. I have often admired what Charms she
discovered in that awkward Booby, till I talked with a Person that was
acquainted with the Intrigue, who gave me the following Account of it.

CHAP. III. Jack's Charms, or the Method by which he gained Peg's Heart.
IN the first place, Jack was a very young Fellow, by much the youngest of the
three Brothers, and People indeed wondered how such a young upstart Jackanapes
should grow so pert and saucy, and take so much upon him. (2.) Jack bragged of
greater Abilities than other Men; he was well gifted, as he pretended; I need
not tell you what secret Influence that has upon the Ladies. (3.) Jack had a
most scandalous Tongue, and persuaded Peg that all Mankind besides himself were
pox'd by that scarletfac'd Whore Signiora Bubonia. As for his Brother Lord
Peter, the Tokens were evident in him Blotches, Scabs, and the Corona: His
Brother Martin though he was not quite so bad, had some nocturnal Pains, which
his Friends pretended were only Scorbutical; but, he was sure, proceeded from a
worse Cause. By such malicious Insinuations, he had possessed the Lady, that he
was the only Man in the World, of a sound, pure, and untainted Constitution:
Though there were some that stuck not to say, that Signiora Bubonia and Jack
railed at one another, only the better to hide an Intrigue; and, that Jack had
been found with Signiora under his Cloak, carrying her home in a dark stormy
Night. (4.) Jack was a prodigious Ogler; he would Ogle you the outside of his
Eye inward, and the White upward. (5.) Jack gave himself out for a Man of great
Estate in the Fortunate Islands, of which the sole Property was vested in his
Person; by this Trick he cheated abundance of poor People of small Sums,
pretending to make over Plantations in the said Islands; but, when the poor
Wretches came there with Jack's Grant, they were beat, mocked, and turned out
of Doors. (6.) I told you that Peg was whimsical, and loved any thing that was
particular: In that way Jack was her Man; for he neither thought, spoke,
dressed, nor acted like other Mortals: He was for your bold Strokes; he railed
at Fops, though himself the most affected in the World; instead of the common
Fashion, he would visit his Mistress in a Mourning Cloak, Band, short Cuffs,
and a peaked Beard. He invented a way of coming into a Room backwards, which he
said showed more Humility, and less Affectation: where other People stood, he
sat; where they sat, he stood; when he went to Court, he used to kick away the
State, and sit down by his Prince Cheek by Choul, Confound these States (says
he) they are a modern Invention; when he spoke to his Prince he always turned
his Br^ch upon him; if he was advised to fast for his Health he would eat Roast
beef; if he was allowed a more plentiful Diet, then he would be sure that Day
to live upon Watergruel; he would cry at a Wedding, laugh and make Jests at a
Funeral. He was no less singular in his Opinions; you would have burst your
sides to hear him talk Politics: All Governments (says he) is founded upon the
right Distribution of Punishments; decent Executions keep the World in awe; for
that Reason the Majority of Mankind ought to be hanged every Year; for Example,
I suppose, the Magistrate ought to pass an irreversible Sentence upon all
blue-ey'd Children from the Cradle; but that there may be some show of Justice
in his proceeding, these Children ought to be Trained up, by Masters appointed
for that purpose, to all sorts of Villainy, that they may deserve their Fate,
and the Execution of them may serve as an Object of Terror to the rest of
Mankind. As to the giving of Pardons he had this singular Method, That when
these Wretches had the Ropes about their Necks, it should be enquired, who
believed they should be hanged, and who not? The first were to be Pardoned, the
last hanged outright: Such as were once pardoned, were never to be hanged
afterward, for any Crime whatsoever. He had such Skill in Physiognomy, that he
would pronounce peremptorily upon a Man's Face, That Fellow (says he) do what he
will, can*t avoid Hanging; he has a hanging Look. By the same Art, he would
prognosticate a Principality to a Scoundrel. He was no less particular in the
Choice of his Studies; they were generally bent toward exploded Chimera's, the
perpetum Mobile, the circular Shot, Philosopher's Stone, and silent Gunpowder,
making Chains for Flea's, Nets for Flies, and Instruments to unrevel Cobwebs,
and split Hairs. Thus, I think, I have given you a distinct Account of the
Methods he practiced upon Peg. Her Brother would now and then ask her. What a
Devil do thou see in that pragmatical Coxcomb, to make thee so in Love with
him? He is a fit Match for a Tailor or a Shoemaker's Daughter, but not for you
that are a Gentlewoman. Fancy is free (quoth Peg) I Will take my awn way, do you
take yours; I do no care for your flaunting Beaus, that gang with their Breasts
open, and their Sarks over their Waistcoats, that accost me with set Speeches
out of Sidney's Arcadia, or, The Academy of Compliments. Jack is a sober grave
Youngman; though he has none of your studied Harangues, his Meaning is sincere:
He has a great Regard to his Father's Will; and he that shows himself a good
Son, will make a good Husband; besides, I know he has the Original Deed of
Conveyance to the Fortunate Islands; the others are Counterfeits. There is
nothing so obstinate as young Ladies in their Amors; the more you Cross them,
the Worse they are.

CHAP. IV. How the Relations reconciled John and his Sister Peg, and what
return Peg made to John's Message.
JOHN BULL, otherwise a good natured Man, was very hard-hearted to his Sister
Peg, chiefly from an Aversion he had conceived in his Infancy. While he
flourished, kept a warm House, and drove a plentiful Trade, poor Peg was forced
to go hawking and pedling about the Streets, selling Knives, Scissars and
Shoe-buckles; now and then carried a Basket of Fish to the Market; sowed, spun
and knit for a poor Livelihood, till her Fingers-end were sore; and when she
could not get Bread for her Family, she was forced to hire 'em out at
Journey-work to her Neighbors; Yet in these her poor Circumstances, she still
preserved the Air and Mien of a Gentlewoman; a certain decent Pride, that
extorted Respect from the haughtiest of her Neighbors; when she came into any
full Assembly, she would not yield the pas to the best of them. If one asked
her, Are not you related to John Bull? Yes (says she) he has the Honor to be
my Brother. So Peg's Affairs went, till all the Relations cried out shame upon
John, for his barbarous Usage of his own Flesh and Blood; that it was an easy
matter for him to put her in a credible way of living, not only without Hurt,
but with Advantage to himself, being she was an industrious Person, and might
be serviceable to him in his way of Business. Hang her, Jade, (quoth John) I
cannot endure her, as long as she keeps that Rascal Jack's Company. They told
him, the way to reclaim her was to take her into his House; that by
Conversation, the childish Humors of their younger days might be worn out.
These Arguments were enforced by a certain Incident. It happened that John was
at that time about making his Will, and entailing his Estate, the very same in
which Nic. Frog is nam*d Executor. Now his Sister Peg's Name being in the
Entail, he could not make a thorough Settlement without her Consent. There was
indeed a malicious Story went about as if John's last Wife had fallen in love
with Jack, as he was eating Custard a Horseback; that she persuaded John to
take his Sister Peg into the House the better to drive on her Intrigue with
Jack, concluding he would follow his Mistress Peg. All I can infer from this
Story is, that when one has got a bad Character in the World, People will
report and believe any thing of them, true or false. But to return to my Story;
when Peg received John's Message, she huff'd and stormed like the Devil: My
Brother John (quoth she) is grown wondrous kind hearted all of a sudden, but I
meikle doubt, whether it be not mair for his awn Convenience than my good; he
draws up his Weits and his Deeds forsooth, and I mun set my Hand to them,
unsight unseen. I like the young Man he has settled upon well enough, but I
think I ought to have a valuable Consideration for my Consent: He wants my poor
little Farm, because it makes a Nook in his Park Wall; ye may even tell him, he
has mair than he makes good use of; he gangs up and down drinking, roaring and
quarrelling through all the Country Merkats making foolish Bargins in his
Cups, which he repents when he is sober; like a thriftless Wretch, spending the
Goods and Gear that his Forefathers won with the Sweat of their Brows; light
come, light go* he cares not a Farthing: But why should I stand Surety for his
silly contracts? the little I have is free, and I can call it my own; Hame's
hame be it never so hamely; I ken him well enough, he could never abide me, and
when he has his ends he will even use me as he did before; I Am sure I shall be
treated like a poor Drudge; I shall be set to tend the Bairns, darn the Hose,
and mend the Linen. Then there is no living with that auld Carline his Mother,
she rails at Jack and Jack's an honester man than any of her Kin: I shall be
plagued with her Spells and her Paternosters and silly auld world Ceremonies: I
mun never pair my Nails on a Friday, nor begin a Journey on Childermas day, and
I mun stand becking and binging as I gang out and into the Hall: Tell him he
may even began his get, I Will have nothing to do with him, I Will stay like the poor
Country Mouse, in my own Habitation. So Peg talked; but for all that, by the
Interposition of good Friends, and by many a bonny thing that were sent and
many more that were promised Peg, the matter was concluded, and Peg taken into
the House upon certain Articles; one of which was, That she might have the
Freedom of Jack's Conversation, and might take him for Better and for Worse, if
she pleased; provided always, he did not come into the House at unseasonable
Hours, and disturb the Rest of the Old Woman, John's Mother.

CHAP. V. Of some Quarrels that happened after Peg was taken into the Family.
IT is an old Observation, that the Qnarrels of Relations are harder to
reconcile than any other; Injuries from Friends fret and gall more and the
Memory of them is not so easily obliterated: This is cunningly represented by
one of your old Sages, called Aesop, in the Story of the Bird, that was grieved
extremely, for being wounded with an Arrow feathered with his own Wing; as also
of the Oak that let many a heavy Groan, when he was cleft with a Wedge of his
own Timber. There was no Man in the World less subject to Rancour than John
Bull, considering how often his good Nature had been Abused; yet I don't know,
but he was too apt to hearken to tatling People, that carried Tales between him
and his Sister Peg, on purpose to sow Jealousies, and set them together by the
^ars: They say that there were some Hardships put upon (...), that had been
better let alone; but it was the Business of good People to restrain the
Injuries on one side, and moderate the Resentments on the other; a good Friend
acts both parts, the one without the other will not do. The Purchase-Money of
Peg's Farm was ill paid; then Peg loved a little good Liquor, and the Servants
shut up the Wine-Cellar, but for that Peg found a Trick, for she made a false
Key; Peg's Servants complained that they were debarred from all manner of
Business, and never suffered to touch the least thing within the House; if they
offered to come into the Warehouse, then strait went the Yard slap over their
Noddle; if they ventured into the Counting-Room, a Fellow would throw an Ink
bottle at their Head; if they came into the best Apartment, to set any thing
there in order, they were saluted with a Broom; if they meddl'd with any thing
in the Kitchen, it was odds but the Cook laid them over the Pate with a Ladle;
one that would have got into the Stables, was met by two Rascals, who fell to
work with him with a Brush and a Curry-comb; some climbing up into the Coach
box, were told, that one of their Companions had been there before that could
not drive, then slap went the long Whip about their Ears: On the other Hand it
was complained, that Peg's Servants were always asking for Drink-Money, that
they had more than their share of the Christmas-box; to say the Truth, Peg's
Lads bustl'd pretty hard for that, for when they were endeavoring to Lock it
up, they got in their great Fists, and pulled out Handfuls of Half-Crowns, some
Shillings and Six-pences, others in the Scramble picked up Guineas and
Broad-pieces. But there happened a worse thing than all this, it was complained
that Peg's Servants had great Stomachs, and brought too many of their Friends
and Acquaintance to the Table; that John's Family was like to be Eat out of
House and Home. Instead of regulating this Matter as it ought to be, Peg's
young Men were thrust away from the Table; then there was the Devil and all to
do, Spoons, Plates and Dishes, flew about the Room like mad, and Sir Roger, who
was now Major Domo, had enough to do to quiet them. Peg said this was contrary
to Agreement, whereby she was in all things to be treated like a Child of the
Family; then she called upon those that had made her such fair Promises, and
undertook for her Brother John's good Behavior; but alas! to her Cost, she
found that they were the first and readiest to do her the Injury. John at last
agreed to this Regulation, that Peg's Footme^ might sit with his Book-keeper,
Journey-men and Apprentices; and Peg*s better sort of Servants might sit with
his Footmen, if they pleased.

Then they began to order-Plumb Porridge and Minced Pies for Peg's Dinner: Peg
told them she had an Aversion to that sort of Food; that upon forcing down a
Mess of it some Years ago, it threw her into a Fit, 'till she brought it up
again: Some alleged it was nothing but Humor, that the same Mess should be
serv*d up again for Supper, and Breakfast next Morning; others would have made
use of a Horn, but the Wiser sort bid let her alone, and she might take to it
of her own Accord.

CHAP. VI. The Conversation between John Bull and his Wife.
Mrs. Bull. THOUGH our Affairs, Honey are in a bad Condition. I have a better
Opinion of them since you seem to be convinced of the Ill Course you have been
in, and are resolved to submit to proper Remedies. But when I consider your
immense Debts* your foolish Bargains and the general Disorder of your Business,
I have a Curiosity to know what Fate or Chance has brought you into this
Condition.


J. Bull. I wish you would talk of some other Subject, the Thoughts of it make
me mad, our Family must have their run.


Mrs. Bull. But such a strange thing as this, never happened to any of your
Family before; they have had Law Suits, but though they spent the Income, they
never Mortgaged the Stock: Sure you must have some of the (...) or the Norfolk
Blood in you; prithee give me some Account of thse Matters.


J. Bull. Who could help it? There lives not such a Fellow by Bread, as that
Old Lewis Baboon, it is the cheatingest, contentious Rogue, upon the Face of
the Earth. You must know, one Day as Nic. Frog and I were over a Bottle making
up an old Quarrel, the old Knave would needs have us drink a Bottle of his
Champaigne, and so one after another, till my Friend Nic. and I, not being used
to such heady Stuff got bloody Drunk. Lewis all the while, either by the
Strength of his Brain, or Flinching his Glass, kept himself sober as a Judge.
My worthy Friends (quoth Lewis) henceforth let us live Neighbourly, I am as
peaceable and quiet as a Lamb, of my own Temper, but it has been my Misfortune
to live among quarrelsom Neighbors. There is but one thing can make us fall
out, and that is the Inheritance of Lord Strutt*s Estate; I am content, for
Peace sake to wave my Right, and submit to any Expedient to prevent a Lawsuit;
I think an equal Division will be the fairest way. Well moved Old Lewis (quoth
Frog) and I hope my Friend John here will not be Refractory. At the same time
he clapped me on the Back, and slabber*d me all over from Cheek to Cheek, with
his great Tongue. Do as you please, Gentlemen (quoth I) it is all one to John
Bull. We agreed to part that Night, and next Morning to meet at the Corner of
Lord Strutt's Park Wall, with our surveying Instruments, which accordingly we
did. Old Lewis carried a Chain and a Semicircle, Nic Paper, Rulers and a Lead
Pencil, and I followed at some distance with a long Pole. We began first with
surveying the Meadow-Grounds, afterward we measured the Corn Fields Close by
Close, then we proceeded to the Wood-Lands, the Copper and Tin Mines. All this
while Nic. laid down every thing exactly upon Paper, calculated the Acres and
Roods to a great Nicety. When we had finished the Land, we were going to break
into the House and Gardens, to take an Inventory of his Plate, Pictures, and
other Furniture.


Mrs. Bull. What said Lord Strutt to all this?


J. Bull. As we had almost finished our Concern, we were accosted by some of
Lord Strutt's Servants: Hey day, what is here? What a Devils the meaning of all
these Trangams and Gimcracks, Gentlemen? What, in the name of Wonder, are you
go^ng about, jumping over my Master's Hedges, and running your Lines cross his
Grounds? If you are at any Field-Pastime, you might have asked leave, my Master
is a civil well-bred Person as any is.


Mrs. Bull. What could you Answer to this?


J. Bull. Why truly my Neighbor Frog and I were still hotheaded; we told him
his Master was an Old doting Puppy that minded nothing of his own Business;
that we were Surveying his Estate, and settling it for him, since he would not
do it himself. Upon this there happened a Qurrrel but we being stronger than
they, sent them away with a Flea in their Ear. They went home, and told their
Master, My Lord (say they) there are three odd sort of Fellows going about your
Grounds with the strangest Machines that ever we beheld in our Life; I suppose
they are going to Rob your Orchard, fell your Trees, or drive away your Cattle;
they told us strange things of settling your Estate: One is a lusty old Fellow,
in a black Wig, with a black Beard, without Teeth; there is another thick squat
Fellow in Trunk-Hose; the third is a little long Nosed, thin Man. (I was then
Lean, being just come out of a fit of Sickness.) I suppose it is fit to send
after them, lest they carry something away.


Mrs. Bull. I fancy this put the Old Fellow in a rare Tweag.


John Bull. Weak as he was, he called for his long Toledo swore and bounc'd
about the Room, Sdeath! what am I come to, to be Affronted so by my Tradesmen?
I know the Rascals! my Barber, Clothier and Linnen-Draper, dispose of my
Estate! bring hither my Blunderbuss I Will warrant ye you shall see Daylight
through them. Scoundrels! Dogs! the Scum of the Earth! Frog, that was my
Fathers Kitchenboy, he pretend to meddle with my Estate! with my Will! Ah poor
Strutt, what art thou come to at last, thou have lived too long in the World,
to see thy Age and Infirmity so despised? How will the Ghosts of my noble
Ancestors receive these Tidings? They cannot, must not sleep quietly in their
Graves. In short, the Old Gentleman was carried off in a Fainting Fit, and
after bleeding in both Arms hardly recover*d.


Mrs. Bull. Really this was a very extraordinary way of Proceeding: I long to
hear the rest of it.


J. Bull. After we had come back to the Tavern, and taken the other Bottle of
Champaigne, we quarreled a little about the Division of the Estate; Lewis
hall'd and pulled the Map on one side, and Frog and I on the other, till we had
like to have tore the Parchment to pieces. At last Lewis pulled out a pair of
great Taylor's Shears and clipped off a Corner for himself, which he said was a
Manor that lay convenient for him, and left Frog and me the rest to dispose
of, as we pleased. We were overjoyed, to think Lewis was contented with so
little, not smelling what was at the bottom of the Plot. There happened,
indeed, an Incident, that gave us some Disturbance; A Cunning Fellow, one of my
Servants, two Days after, peeping through the Keyhole, observed that Old Lewis
had stole away our part of the Map, and saw him fiddling and turning the Map
from one Corner to the other, trying to join the two pieces together again: He
was muttering something to himself, which he did not well hear, only these
Words, It Is great Pity, it is great Pity! My Servant added, that he believed
this had some ill-meaning; I told him he was a Coxcomb, always pretending to be
Wiser than his Companions; Lewis and I are good Friends, he is an honest Fellow,
and, I dare say, will stand to his Bargain. The Sequel of the Story proved this
Fellow's Suspicion to be too well-grounded; for Lewis reveal*d our whole Secret
to the Deceased Lord Strutt, who, in Reward to his Treachery, and Revenge to
Frog and me, settled his whole Estate upon the present Philip Baboon: Then we
understood what he meant by piecing the Map together.


Mrs. Bull. And was you surprised at this? Had not Lord Strutt reason to be
Angry? Would you have been contented to have been so used your self?


J. Bull. Why, truly Wife, it was not easily reconciled to the common Methods,
but then it was the Fashion to do such things: I have read of your Golden Age,
your Silver Age, etc. one might justly call this the Age of the Lawyers. There
was hardly a Man of Substance in all the Country, but had (...) Counterfeit
that pretended to his Estate: As the Philosophers say, that there is a
Duplicate of every Terrestrial Animal at Sea, so it was in this Age of the
Lawyers, there was at least two of every thing; nay, of my Conscience, I think
there were three Esquire Hackums at one time. Lewis Baboon entertain*d a Fellow
that called himself John Bull's Heir; I knew him no more than the Child unborn,
yet he brought me into some Trouble and Expense. There was another that
pretended to be Esquire. South; and two Lord Strutts, you know. In short, it was
usual for a parcel of Fellows to meet, and dispose of the whole Estates in the
Country: This lies convenient for me Tom; Thou would do more good with that
Dick, than the Old Fellow that has it* So to Law they went with the true
Owners; the Lawyers got well by it, every Body else was undone. It was a common
thing for an honest Man, when he came Home at Night, to find another Fellow
domineering in his Family, hectoring his Servants, calling for Supper, and
pretending to go to Bed to his Wife. In every House you might observe two
Sofia's quarrelling who was Master: For my own part, I am still afraid of the
same Treatment, that I should find some Body behind my Counter selling my Broad
Cloth.


Mrs Bull. There are a sort of Fellows that they call Banterers, and
Bambouzlers, that play such Tricks; but, it seems, these Fellows were in
earnest.


J. Bull. I begin to think that Justice is a better Rule than Convenience, for
all some People make so slight on it.


CHAP. VII. Of the hard Shifts Mrs. Bull was put to, to preserve the Manor of
Bullock's Hatch; with Sir Roger's Method to keep off importunate Duns.
AS John Bull and his Wife were talking together, they were surpriz*d with a
sudden knocking at the Door, those wicked Scriveners and Lawyers no doubt
(quoth John) and so it was; some asking for the Money he owed, and others
warning to prepare for the approaching Term: What a cursed Life do I lead
*quoth John)? Debt is like deadly Sin; for God-sake, Sir Roger, get me rid of
these Fellows. I Will warrant you (quoth Sir Roger) leave them to me. And in eed
it was pleasant enough to observe Sir Roger's Method with these importunate
Duns; his sincere Friendship for John Bull, made him submit to many things, for
his Service, which he would have scorn*d to have done for himself. Sometimes he
would stand at the Door with his long Poll to keep off the Duns, 'till John got
out at the Backdoor. When the Lawyers and Tradesmen brought extravagant Bills,
Sir Roger used to bargain before hand, for leave to cut off a quarter of a Yard
in any part of the Bill he pleased; he wore a pair of Scissars in his Pocket
for this purpose, and would snip it off so nicely, as you cannot imagine; like
a (...) Goldsmith he kept all your Holydays; there was not one wanting in his
Calendar; when ready Money was scarce, he would set them a telling a tho^^^^^
Pounds and Six-pences, Groats, and Three pe^^^ Pieces: It would have done your
Heart good to have seen him charge through an Army of Lawyers, Attorney's, Clerks
and Tradesmen; sometimes with Sword in Hand, at other times nuzling like an Eel
in the Mud: When a Fellow stuck like a Bur, that there was no shaking him off,
he (...) to be a mighty inquisitive about the Health of his Uncles and Aunts in
the Country; he could call them all by their Names, for he knew every Body, and
could talk to them in their own way. The extremely Impertinent he would send
away to see some strange Sight, as the Dragon at Hockley the Hole; or bid him
call the 30th of next February. Now and then you would see him in the Kitchen,
weighing the Beef and Butter, paying ready Money, that the Maids might not run
a-tick at the Market; and the Butchers, by bribing of them, sell Damag*d and
Light Meat. Another time he would slip into the Cellar, and gage the Casks: In
his leisure Minutes he was posting his Books, and gathering in his Debts; uch
frugal Methods were necessary where Money was so scarce, and Duns so numerous.
All this while John kept his Credit, could show his Head both at Change and
Westminister-Hall; no Man protested his Bill, nor refused his Bond, only the
Sharpers and the Scriveners; the Lawyers and other Clerks pelted Sir Roger as
he went along. The Squirters were at it with their Kennel-Water, for they were
mad for the loss of their Bubble, and that they could not get him to Mortgage
the Manor of Bullocks Hatch. Sir Roger shook his Ears and nuzled along,
well-satisfied within himself that he was doing a charitable Work, in rescuing
an honest Man from the Claws of Harpies and Blood-suckers. Mrs. Bull did all
that an affectionate Wife, and a good Housewife, could do; yet the Boundaries
of Virtues are indivisible Lines, it is impossible to march up close to the
Frontiers of Frugality, without entering the Territories of Parsimony. Your
good Housewifes, are apt to look into the minutest Things: Therefore some
blamed Mrs. Bull for new heel-piecing her Shoes, grudging a quarter of a Pound
of Soap and Sand to scowre the Rooms, but especially, that she would not allow
her Maids and Apprentices the Benefit of John Bunyan, the London-Apprentice, or
the Seven-Champions, in the Black Letter.

CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the Conversation betwixt John Bull and his Wife.
Mrs. Bull, IT is a most sad Life we lead, my Dear to be so teased paying
Interest for Old Debts, and still contracting new Ones. However I don't blame
you for vindicating your Honor and chastizing old Lewis; to curb the Insolent,
protect the Oppressed, recover ones own, and defend what one has, are good
Effects of the Law: The only thing I want to know is how you came to make an
End of your Money before you finished your Law Suit.


John Bull. I was told by the Learned in the Law, that my Suit stood upon three
firm Pillars: More Money for more Law, more Law for more Money, and no
Composition. More Money for more Law was plain Demonstration, for who can go to
Law without Money? and it was as plain, that any Man that has Money, may have Law
for it. The third was as Evident as the other two; for what Composition could
be made with a Rogue that never kept a Word he said?


Mrs. Bull. I think you are most likely to get out of this Labyrinth by the
second Door, by want of ready Money to purchase this precious Commodity: But
you seem not only to have bought too much of it, but have paid too dear for
what you have bought; else how was it possible to run so much in Debt, when, at
this very time the yearly Income of what is Mortgaged to those Usurers would
discharge Hocus's Bills, and give you your Belly full of Law, or all your Life,
without running one Six Pence in Debt? You have been bred up to Business; I
suppose you can Cipher, I wonder you never used your Pen and Ink.


J. Bull. Now you urge me too far; prithee, dear Wife, hold thy Tongue. Suppose
a young Heir, heedless, raw, and unexperienced, full of Spirit and Vigor, with
a favorite Passion, in the Hands of (...) Scriveners: Such Fellows are like
your Wire (...) Mills, if they get hold of a Man's Finger, (...) pull in his
whole Body at last, till they squeeze (...) Blood and Guts out of him. When I
wanted Mon^^, half a dozen of these Fellows were always waiting in my
Antichamber, with their Securities ready drawn. I was tempted with the Ready,
some Farm or other went to Pot. I received with one Hand, and paid it away with
the other, to Lawyers; that, like so many Hell hounds, were ready to devour me.
Then the Rogues would plead Poverty, and Scarcity of Money, that always ended
in receiving Ninety for the Hundred After they had got Possession of my best
Rents, they were able to supply me with my own Money. But what was worse, when I
looked into the Securities, there was no Clause of Redemption.


Mrs. Bull. No Clause of Redemption, say you; that is hard!


John Bull. No great matter, for I cannot pay them. They had got a worse Trick
than that; the same Man bought and Sold to himself, paid the Money, and gave the
Acquittance: The same Man was Butcher and Grasier, Brewer and Butler, Cook and
Poulterer. There is something still worse than all this; there came twenty
Bills upon me at once, which I had given Money to discharge; I was like to be
pulled to Pieces, by Brewer, Butcher, and Baker, even my Herb-Woman dun'd me as
I went along the Streets (thanks to my Friend Sir R^ger, else I must have gone
to Goal). When I askd the meaning of this, I was told, the Money went to the
Lawyers; Counsel will not tick, Sir; Hocus was urging; my Book-keeper sat Sotting
all Day, playing at Purt, and All-fours: In short, by griping Usurers,
devouring Lawyers, and negligent Servants, I am brought to this pass.


Mrs. Bull. This was hard usage! but methinks, the least reflection might have
retrieved you.


J. Bull. It Is true, yet consider my Circumstances, my Honor was engaged, and
I did not know how to get out; besides, I was for Five Years often Drunk,
always muddled, they carried me from Tavern to Tavern, to Alehouses and
Brandy-shops, brought me acquainted with such strange Dogs: There goes the
prittiest Fellow in the World (says one) for managing a Jury, make him yours.
There Is another can pick you up Witnesses. Sergeant such a one has a Silver
Tongue at the Bar. I believe, in time I should have retained every single
Person within the Inns of Court. The Night after a Trial, I treated the
Lawyers, their Wives and Daughters, with Fiddles, Hautboys, Drums and Trumpets.
I was always hotheaded; then they plac*d me in the middle, the Attorneys and
their Clerks dancing about me, hooping and hallowing, Long live John Bull, the
Glory and Support of the Law!


Mrs. Bull. Really, Husband, you went through a very notable Course.


John Bull. One of the things that first alarmed me was, that they showed a
Spite against my poor Old Mother; Lord (quoth I) what makes you so Jealous of a
poor, old, innocent Gentlewoman, that minds only her Prayers, and her Practice
of Piety, she never meddles in any of your Concerns? Foh (say they) to see a
handsome* brisk, genteel* young Fellow, so much governed by a doting old
Woman; why don't yo and suck the Bubby? Do you consider she keeps you of a good
Jointure? she has the best of your Estate settled upon her for Rentcharge:
Hang her, old Thief, turn her out of Doors, seize her Lands, and let her go to
Law if she dares. Soft and fair, Gentlemen (quoth I) my Mother's my Mother, our
Family are not of an unnatural Temper. Tho I don't take all her Advice, I will not
seize her Jointure; long may she enjoy it, good Woman, I don't grudge it her:
She allows me now and then a Brace of Hundreds for my Lawsuit; that is pretty
fair. About this time the old Gentlewoman fell ill of an odd sort of a
Distemper; it began with a Coldness and Numbness in her Limbs, which by degrees
affected the Nerves (I think the Physicians call them) seized the Brain, and at
last ended in a Lethargy. It betrayed it self at first in a sort of
Indifference and Carelessness in all her Actions, Coldness to her best Friends,
and an Aversion to stir or go about the common Offices of Life. She that was
the cleanliest Creature in the World, never shrunk now if you set a Close-stool
under her Nose. She that would sometimes rattle off her Servants pretty
sharply, now if she saw them drink, or heard them talk profanely, never took
any notice of it. Instead of her usual Charities to deserving Persons, she
threw away her Money upon roaring swearing Bullies, and randy Beggars, that
went about the Streets. What is the matter with the old Gentlewoman (said every
Body) she nev^^ used to do in this manner? At last the Distemper grew more
violent, and threw her downright into ravi^^ Fits; in which she shrieked out so
loud, that she d^^sturb'd the whole Neighborhood. In her Fits (...) called out
upon one Sir William. Oh! Sir William, (...) have betrayed me! killed me!
stabbed me! sold me (...) Cuckold of Dover! See, see, Clum with his bloody
Kni^^ seize him, seize him, stop him! Behold the the Fury, (...) her hissing
Snakes! Where Is my Son John! is he well! is he well! poor Man, I pity him! And
abundance of such strange Stuff, that no Body could make any thing of. I knew
little of the Matter, for when I inquired about her Health, the Answer was,
that she was in a good moderate way. Physicians were sent for in haste; Sir
Roger with great difficulty, brought R^ff; G^th came upon the first Message.
There were several others called in; but, as usual upon such Occasions, they
differed strangely at the Consultation. At last they divided into two Parties,
one sided with G^th, and the other with R^ff. Dr. G^th. This Case seems to me
to be plainly Hysterical; the Old Woman is Whimsical; it is a common thing for
your Old Women to be so: I Will pawn my Life, Blisters with the Steel Diet, will
recover her. Others suggested strong Purging and Letting of Blood because she
was Plethorick. Some went so far as to say the Old Woman was mad, and nothing
would do better than a little Corporal Correction. R^ff. Gentlemen, you are
mistaken in this Case, it is plainly an accute Distemper, and she cannot hold
out three Days, without she is supported with strong Cordials. I came into the
Room with a good deal of Concern, and asked them what they thought of my
Mother? In no manner of Danger, I vow to God (quoth G^th) the Old Woman is
Hysterical, Fanciful, Sir, I vow to God. I tell you, Sir (says R^ff) she cannot
live three Days to an end, unless there is some very effectual Course taken
with her, she has a Malignant Fever. Then Fool, Puppy, and Blockhead, was the
best Words they gave. I could hardly restrain them from throwing the
Ink-Bottles at one another's Heads. I forgot to tell you, that one Party of the
Physicians desired I would take my Sister Peg into the House to Nurse her, but
the Old Gentlewoman would not hear of that. At last one Physician asked if the
Lady had ever been used to take Laudanum; her Maid answered, not that she knew;
that indeed there was a High German Livery-Man of hers, one Van Ptschirnsooker,
that gave her a sort of a Quack Powder. The Physician desired to see it; Nay,
says he, there is Opium in this, I am sure.


Mrs. Bull. I hope you examined a little into this Matter.


John Bull. I did indeed, and discovered a great Mystery of Iniquity. The
Witnesses made Oath, That they had heard some of the Livery-men frequently
railing at their Mistress. They said, She was a troublesome fiddle faddle old
Woman, and so ceremonious that there was no bearing of her. They were so
plagued with bowing and cringing as they went in and out of the Room, that
their Backs ach'd; she used to scold at one for his dirty Shoes, at another for
his greasy Hair, and not combing his Head: Then she was so passionate and
fiery in her Temper, that there was no living with her; she wanted something to
sweeten her Blood; that they never had a quiet Night's rest, for getting up in
the Morning to early Sacraments; that they wished they could find some way or
another to keep the old Woman quiet in her Bed. Such Discourses were often
overheard among the Livery-men, that the said Van Ptschirnsooker had undertook
this Matter. A Maid made Affidavit, That she had seen the said Van
Ptschirnsooker one of the Livery-Men, frequently making up of Medicines and
administering them to all the Neighbors; that she saw him one Morning make up
the Powder which her Mistress took; that she had the Curiosity to ask him
whence he had the Ingredients? They come (says he) from several Parts of de
World; dis I have from Geneva, dat from Rome, this White Powder from Amsterdam,
and the Red from Edinburgh; but the chief Ingredient of all comes from Turkey.
It was likewise proved, that the said Van Ptschirnsooker had been frequently
seen at the Rose with Jack, who was known to bea^ an inveterate Spite to his
Mistress; That he brought (...) certain Powder to his Mistress, which the
Examina^^ believes to be the same, and spoke the following Word^* Madam, here
is grand Secret van de World; my sweetni^^ Powder, it does temperate de Humor,
despel de Wind^ and cure de Vapor; it lulleth and quieteth de Animal Sp^rits,
procuring Rest, and pleasant Dreams: It is the infall^ble Receipt for de
Scurvy, all Heass in de Bloodt, and Br^^^ing out upon de Skin; It is de true
Blood Stancher, stopping all Fluxes of de bloodt. If you do take dis, you will
never ail any ding; it will Cure you of all Diseases: And abundance more to
this purpose, which the Examinant does not remember.


John Bull was interrupted in his Story by a Porter, that brought him a Letter
from Nicholas Frog, which is as follows.

CHAP. IX. A Copy of Nic. Frog's Letter to John Bull. [John Bull Reads]
Friend John.
WHat ^^^^^lum is it that makes thee jealous of thy old Friend Nicholas? Have
thou forgot how some Years ago he took thee out of the Spunging House? ['Tis
true, my Friend Nic. did so, and I thank him; but he made me pay a swinging
Reckoning.] Thou begins now to repent the Bargain that thou wast so fond of;
and, if thou durst, would forswear thy own Hand and Seal. Thou say, that thou
have purchased me too great an Estate already; when at the same time thou
know I have only a Mortgage: It Is true, I have Possession, and the Tenants
own me for Master; but, has not Esquire South the Equity of Redemption? [No
doubt, and will redeem it very speedily; poor Nic. has only Possession, eleven
Points of the Law] As for the Turnpikes I have set up they are for other People
not for my Friand John: I have ordered my Servant constantly to attend to ^et
thy Carriages through without paying any thing: only I hope thou will not come
too heavy laden to spoil my Ways. Certainly I have just Cause of Offense
against thee my Friend, for supposing it possible that thou and I should ever
quarrel: What Hounsfoot is it that puts these Whims in thy Head? Ten Thousand
Last of Devils haul me if I don't love thee as I love my Life. [No question, as
the Devil loves Holy Water!] Does not thy own Hand and Seal oblige (...) to
purchase for me, till I say it is enough? Are not (...) Words plain. I say it
is not enough. Do thou think thy Fri^nd Nicholas Frog made a Child's Bargain?
Mark the Words of thy Contract, tota pecunia, with all thy Money. [Very well! I
have purchased with my own Money, my Childrens, and my Grand childrens Money,
is not that enough? Well tota pecunia let it be, for at present I have none at
all; He would not have me purchase with other Peoples Money sure, since tota
pecunia is the Bargain; I think it is plain, no more Money, no more Purchase.]
And whatever the World may say, Nicholas Frog is but a poor Man in comparison
of the rich, the opulent John Bull great Clothier of the World. I have had many
Losses, six of my best Sheep were drowned, and the Water has come into my
Cellar, and spoiled a Pipe of my best Brandy: It would be a more friendly Act
in thee to carry a Brief about the Country to repair the Losses of thy poor
Friend. Is it not evident to all the World, that I am still hemmed in by Lewis
Baboon? is he not just upon my Borders? [And so he will be if I Purchase a
thousand Acres more, unless he gets some Body betwixt them.] I tell thee Friend
John thou have Flatterers, that persuade thee that thou art a Man of Business;
do not believe them: If thou would still leave thy Affairs in my Hands thou
should see how handsomely I would deal by thee. That ever thou should be
dazzled with the enchanted Islands, and Mountains of Gold, that old Lewis
promises thee! 'Dswounds! Why do thou not lay out thy Money to Purchase a
Place at Court, of honest Israel? I tell thee, thou must not so much as think
of a Composition. [Not think of a Composition, that is hard indeed; I cannot help
thinking of it, if I would.] Thou complainst of want of Money, let thy Wife and
Daughter burn the God Lace upon their Petticoats, sell thy fat Cattle; retrench
but a Sirloin of Beef, and a Peck-Loaf in a Week from thy gormandizing Guts
[Retrench my Beef, a Dog! Retrench my Beef! then it is plain the Rascal has an
ill Design upon me, he would starve me.] Mortgage thy Manor of Bullocks Hatch,
or Pawn thy Crop for Ten Year. [A Rogue! Part with my Country Seat, my
Patrimony, all that I have left in the World, I*ll see him hanged first.] Why
have thou changed thy Attorney? Can any Man manage thy Cause better for thee?
[Very pleasant! because a Man has a good Attorney, he must never make an End of
his Lawsuit.] Ah John, John, I wish thou knevvest thy own Mind: Thou art as
fickle as the Wind. I tell thee thou had better let this Composition alone,
or leave it to thy Loving Friend,

Nic. Frog.

CHAP. X. Of some extraordinary Things that passed at the Salutation Tavern, in
the Conference between Bull, Frog, Esquire South, and Lewis Baboon.
Frog had given his Word, that he would meet the above mentioned Company at the
Salutation, to talk of this Agreement; though he durst not directly break his
Appointment, he made many a shuffling Excuse; one time he pretended to be
seized with the Gout in his right Knee; then he got a great Cold that had
struck him deaf of one Ear; afterward two of his Coach-Horses fell sick, and
he durst not go by Water, for fear of catching an Ague. John would take no
Excuse but hurried him away: Come Nic. ( says he) let us go and hear at least
what this old Fellow has to propose; I hope there is no hurt in that. Be it so (
quoth Nic.) but if I catch any harm, woe be to you; my Wife and Children will
curse you as long as they live. When they were come to the Salutation, John
concluded all was sure then, and that he should be troubled no more with Law
affairs; he thought every Body as plain and sincere as he was. Well Neighbors
(quoth he) let us now make an end of all Matters, and live peaceably together
for the time to come; if every body is as well inclined as I, we shall quickly
come to the upshot of our Affair: And so pointing to Frog to say something, to
the great surprise of all the Company, Frog was seizd with a dead Palsy in the
Tongue. John began to ask him some plain Questions, and hoop'd and hollowed in
his Ear. John Bull, Let Us come to the Point, Nic' Who would thou have to be
the Lord Strutt? Would thou have Philip Baboon? Nic, shook his head and said
nothing. John Bull Will thou then have Esquire South to be Lord Strutt? Nic.
shook his Head a second time. John Bull. Then who the Devil will thou have? say
something or another. Nic. open*d his Mouth, and pointed to his Tongue, and
cried A, a a, a! which was as much as to say, he could not speak. John Bull.
Shall I serve Philip Baboon with Broad cloth, and accept of the Composition
that he offers, with the Liberty of his Parks and Fishponds? Then Nic. roared
like a Bull, O, o, o, o! If thou will not let me have them, will thou take them
thy self? Then Nic. grin'd, cackled and laughed, till he was like to kill
himself, and seemed to be so pleased, that he fell a frisking and dancing about
the ^oom. John Bull. Shall I leave all this Matter to thy ^anagement, Nic. and
go about my Business? Then Nic. got up a Glass, and drank to John, shaking him
by the Hand till he had like to have shook his shoulder out of Joint. John
Bull. I understand thee, Nic. but I shall make thee speak before I go. Then
Nic. put his Finger in his Cheek, and made him cry Buck, which was as much as
to say, I care not a Farthing for thee. John Bull. I have done Nic. If thou will not speak, I Will make my own Terms with old Lewis here. Then Nic loll*d out
his Tongue, and turned up his Bumm to him; which was as much as to say, Kiss
(...). John perceiving that Frog would not speak, turns to old Lewis: Since we
cannot make this obstinate Fellow speak, Lewis pray condescend a little to his
Humor, and set down thy meaning upon Paper, (...) may answer it in another
Scrap. I am infinitely (...) (quoth Lewis) that it happens so unfortunately;
for playing a little at Cudgels the other Day, a Fellow has given me such a Rap
over the Right Arm, that I am quite Lame: (...) have lost the Use of my
Forefinger and Thumb, so that I (...) hold my Pen. John Bull, That Is all one,
let me (...) for you. Lewis. But I have a Misfortune, that I ^^nnot read any
bodies hand but my own. John Bull. Try what you can do with your Left Hand.
Lewis. That Is impossible; it will make such a Scrawl, that it will not be
legible. As they were talking of this Matter, in came Esquire South all dressed
up in Feathers and Ribbons, stark staring mad, brandishing his Sword, as if he
^^^ld have cut off their Heads; crying, Room, room, (...) for the grand Esquire
of the World! the Flower of ^^quires! What, covered in my Presence; I Will crush
your ^ouls, and crack you like Lice! With that he had like to ^ave struck John
Bull's Hat into the Fire; but John, (...) was pretty strong fisted, gave him
such a Squeeze, as made his Eyes Water. He went on still in his mad Pranks;
When I am Lord of the Universe, the sun shall (...) and adore me! Thou, Frog,
shall be my Bailiff; Lewis my Tailor, and thou, John Bull, shall be my Fool!
All this (...) Frog laugh*d in his Sleeve, gave the Esquire (...) Noggan of
Brandy, and clap*d him on the Back which made him ten times madder. Poor John
stood in amaze, talking thus to himself: Well John thou art got into rare
Company! One has a dumb Devil* the other a mad Devil, and the third a Spirit of
Infirmity. An honest Man has a fine time on*t amongst such Rogues. What art
thou asking of them after all? Some mighty Boon one would think! Only to sit
quietly at thy own Fireside. 'Sdeath, what have I to do with such Fellows! John
Bull after all (...) Losses and Cr^sses can live better without them, than they
can without him. Would to God I lived a thousand Leagues off them: But the
Devil's in it: John Bull is in, and John Bull must get out as well as be can. As
he was talking to himself, he observ*d Frog and Old Lewis edgng toward one
another to Whisper; so that John was forced to sit with his Arms a-kimbo, to
keep them asunder. Some People advised John to Blood Frog under the Ton(...)ue,
or take away his Bread and Butter, which would certainly make him speak; to
give Esquire South Hellebore; as for Lewis, some were for emollient Poltass,
others for opening his Arm with an Incision knife.

I could not obtain from Sir Humphry, at this time, a Copy of John*s Letter,
which he sent to his Nephew by the young Necromancer; wherein he advises him
not to eat Butter, Ham, and drink Old Hock in a Morning, with the Esquire and
Frog, for fear of giving him a sour Breath.

FINIS.

