THE MEMOIRS OF AN English Officer, Who served in the Dutch War in 1672. to the
Peace of Utrecht, in 1713.

Containing Several Remarkable TRANSACTIONS both by Sea and Land, and in diverse
Countries, but chiefly those wherein the Author was personally concerned.


Together with A DESCRIPTION of many Cities, Towns, and Countries, in which he
resided; their Manners and Customs, as well Religious as Civil, interspersed
with many curious OBSERVATIONS on their Monasteries and Nunneries, more
particularly of the famous one at Montserat. On the BULL-FEASTS, and other
public Diversions; as also on the Genius of the Spanish People, amongst whom
he continued several Years a Prisoner of War. No Part of which has before been
made public.


By Capt. GEORGE CARLETON.

LONDON, Printed for E. SIMON, over against the Royal Exchange, Cornhill.
MDCCXXVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Spencer Lord Wilmington, Knight of the Bath, and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
'TWAS my Fortune, my Lord, in my juvenile Years, Musas cum Mart commutare,
and truly I have Reason to blush, when I consider the small Advantage I have
reaped from that Change. But lest it should be imputed to my Want of Merit, I
have wrote these Memoirs, and leave the World to judge of my Deserts. They are
not set forth by any fictitious Stories, nor imbelished with rhetorical
Flourishes; plain Truth is certainly most becoming the Character of an old
Soldier. Yet let them be never so meritorious, if not protected by some noble
Patron, some Persons may think them to be of no Value.

To you therefore, my Lord, I present them; to you, who have so eminently
dishinguished your self, and whose Wisdom has been so conspicuous to the late
Representatives of Great Britain, that each revolving Age will speak in your
Praise; and if you vouchsafe to be the Mecaenas of these Memoirs, your Name
will give them sufficient Sanction.

An old Soldier I may truly call my self, and my Family allows me the Title of
a Gentleman; yet I have seen many Favorites of Fortune, without being able to
discern why they should be so happy, and my self so unfortunate; but let not
that discourage your Lordship from receiving these my Memoirs into your
Patronage; for the Unhappy cannot expect Favor but from those who are endued
with generous Souls.

Give me Leave, my Lord, to congratulate this good Fortune, that neither Whig
nor Tory (in this complaining Age) have found fault with your Conduct. Your
Family has produced Heroes, in defense of injured Kings; and you, when 'twas
necessary, have as nobly adhered to the Cause of Liberty.

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most obedient And most devoted Humble Servant, G.
CARLETON.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of these Memoirs began early to distinguish himself in martial
Affairs, otherwise he could not have seen suck Variety of Actions both by Sea
and Land. After the last Dutch War he went into Flanders, where he not only
served under the Command of his Highness the Prince of Orange, whilst he was
Generalissimo of the Dutch Forces, but likewise all the time he reigned King of
Great Britain. Most of the considerable Passages and Events, which happened
during that time, are contained in the former Part of this Book.

In the Year 1705. the Regiment in which he served as Captain was ordered to
embark for the West Indies; and he, having no, Inclination to go thither,
changed with an half-pay Captain; and being recommended to the Earl of
Peterborow by the late Lord Cutts, went with him upon that noble Expedition
into Spain.

When the Forces under his Lordship's Command were landed near Barcelona, the
Siege of that Place was thought by several impracticable, not only for want of
experienced Engineers, but that the Besieged were as numerous as the Besiegers;
yet the Courage of that brave Earl surmounted those Difficulties, and the Siege
was resolved upon.

Our Author having obtained, by his long Service, some Knowledge of the
practick Part of an Engineer, and seeing at that critical Time the great Want
of such, readily acted as one, which gave him the greater Opportunity of being
an Eyewitness of his Lordship's Actions; and consequently made him capable of
setting them forth in these his Memoirs.

It may not be perhaps improper to mention that the Author of these Memoirs was
born at Ewelme in Oxfordshire, descended from an ancient and an honorable
Family. The Lord Dudley Carleton, who died Secretary of State to King Charles
I. was his Great Uncle; and in the same Reign his Father was Envoy at the Court
of Madrid, whilst his Uncle, Sir Dudley Carleton, was Ambassador to the States
of Holland, Men in those Days respected both for their Abilities and Loyalty.

MEMOIRS OF AN English Officer, etc.
IN the Year one Thousand six Hundred seventy two, War being proclaimed with
Holland, it was looked upon, among Nobility and Gentry, as a Blemish, not to
attend the Duke of York aboard the Fleet, who was then declared Admiral. With
many others, I, at that Time about twenty Years of Age, entered my self a
Voluntier on board the London, commanded by Sir Edward Sprage, Vice Admiral of
the Red.

THE Fleet set Sail from the Buoy of the Nore about the beginning of May, in
order to join the French Fleet, then at Anchor in St. Hellen's Road, under the
Command of the Count de Estree. But in executing this Design we had a very
narrow Escape: For De Ruyter, the Admiral of the Dutch Fleet, having Notice of
our Intentions, waited to have intercepted us at the Mouth of the River, but by
the Assistance of a great Fog we passed Dover before he was aware of it; and
thus he miscarried, with the poor Advantage of taking only one small Tender.

A DAY or two after the joining of the English and French, we sailed directly
toward the Dutch Coast, where we soon got sight of their Fleet; a Sand called
the Galloper lying between. The Dutch seemed willing there to expect an Attack
from us: But in regard the Charles Man of War had been lost on those Sands the
War before; and that our Ships drawing more Water than those of the Enemy, an
Engagement might be rendered very disadvantagious; it was resolved in a Council
of War to avoid coming to a Battle for the present, and to sail directly for
Solebay, which was accordingly put in Execution.

WE had not been in Solebay above four or five Days, when De Ruyter, hearing of
it, made his Signal for sailing in order to surprise us; and he had certainly
had his Aim, had there been any Breeze of Wind to favor him. But though they
made use of all their Sails, there was so little Air stirring, that we could
see their Fleet making toward us long before they came up; notwithstanding
which, our Admirals found difficulty enough to form their Ships into a Line of
Battle, so as to be ready to receive the Enemy.

English and Dutch Fleets engaged in Solebay.
IT was about Four in the Morning of the 28th of May, being Tuesday in Whitson
Week, when we first made the Discovery; and about Eight the same Morning the
Blue Squadron, under the Command of the Earl of Sandwich, began to engage with
Admiral Van Ghent, who commanded the Amsterdam Squadron; and about Nine the
whole Fleets were under a general Engagement. The Fight lasted till Ten at
Night, and with equal Fury on all Sides, the French excepted, who appeared
stationed there rather as Spectators than Parties; and as unwilling to be too
much upon the Offensive, for fear of offending themselves.

DURING the Fight the English Admiral had two Ships disabled under him; and was
obliged about Four in the Afternoon to remove himself a third Time into the
London, where (...) remained all the rest of the Fight, and till next Morning.
Nevertheless, on his Entrance upon the London, which was the Ship I was in and
on our Hoisting the Standard, De Ruyter and his Squadron seemed to double their
Fire upon her, as if they resolved to blow her out of the Water.
Notwithstanding all which, the Duke of York remained all the time upon Quarter
Deck, and as the Bullets plentifully whizz'd around him, would often rub his
Hands, and cry, Sprage, Sprage, they follow us still. I am very sensible later
Times have not been over favorable in their Sentiments of that unfortunate
Prince's Valor, yet I cannot omit the doing a Piece of Justice to his Memory,
in relating a Matter of Fact, of which my own Eyes were Witnesses, and saying,
That if Intrepidity, and Undauntedness, may be reckoned any Parts of Courage,
no Man in the Fleet better deserved the Title of Courageous, or behaved himself
with more Gallantry than he did.

THE English lost the Royal James, commanded by the Earl of Sandwich, which
about Twelve (after the strenuous Endeavors of her Sailors to disengage her
from two Dutch Fire Ships placed on her, one athwart her Hawsers, the other on
her Star-board Side) took Fire, blew up, and perished; and with her a great
many brave Gentlemen, as well as Sailors; and amongst the rest the Earl
himself, concerning whom I shall further add, that in my Passage from Harwich
to the Brill, a Year or two after, the Master of the Packet Boat told me, That
having observed a great Flock of Gulls hovering in one particular Part of the
Sea, he ordered his Boat to make up to it; when discovering a Corpse, the
Sailors would have returned it to the Sea, as the Corpse of a Dutch Man; but
keeping it in his Boat, it proved to be that of the Earl of Sandwich. There was
found about him between twenty and thirty Guineas, some Silver, and his Gold
Watch; restoring which to his Lady, she kept the Watch, but rewarded their
Honesty with all the Gold and Silver.

THIS was the only Ship the English lost in this long Engagement. For although
the Katherine was taken, and her Commander, Sir John Chicheley, made Prisoner,
her Sailors soon after finding the Opportunity they had watched for, seized all
the Dutch Sailors, who had been put in upon them, and brought the Ship back to
our own Fleet, together with all the Dutch Men Prisoners; for which, as they
deserved, they were well rewarded. This is the same Ship which the Earl of
Mulgrave (afterward Duke of Buckingham) commanded the next Sea Fight, and has
caused to be painted in his House in St. James's Park.

I MUST not omit one very remarkable Occurrence which happened in this Ship,
There was a Gentleman aboard her, a Voluntier, of a very fine Estate, generally
known by the Name of Hodge Vaughan. This Person received, in the beginning of
the Fight, a considerable Wound, which the great Confusion, during the Battle,
would not give them leave to inquire into; so he was carried out of the Way,
and disposed of in the Hold. They had some Hogs aboard, which the Sailor, under
whose Care they were, had neglected to feed; these Hogs, hungry as they were,
found out, and fell upon the wounded Person, and between dead and alive eat him
up to his very Scull, which, after the Fight was over, and the Ship retaken, as
before, was all that could be found of him.

ANOTHER Thing, less to be accounted for, happened to a Gentleman Voluntier who
was aboard the same Ship with my self. He was of known personal Courage, in the
vulgar Notion of it, his Sword never having failed him in many private Duels.
But notwithstanding all his Landmettle, it was observed of him at Sea, that
when ever the Bullets whizz'd over his Head, or any way incommoded his Ears, he
immediately quitted the Deck, and ran down into the Hold. At first he was
gently reproached; but after many Repetitions he was laughed at, and began to
be despised; sensible of which, as a Testimonial of his Valor, he made it his
Request to be tied to the Main Mast. But had it been granted him, I cannot see
any Title he could have pleaded from hence, to true Magnanimity; since to be
tied from running away can import nothing less, than that he would have still
continued these Signs of Cowardice, if he had not been prevented. There is a
Bravery of Mind which I fansy few of those Gentlemen Duellists are possessed
of. True Courage cannot proceed from what Sir Walter Raleigh finely calls the
Art or Philosophy of Quarrel. No! It must be the Issue of Principle, and can
have no other Basis than a steady Tenet of Religion. This will appear more
plain, if those Artists in Murder will give themselves leave cooly to consider,
and answer me this Question, Why he that had ran so many Risques at his Sword's
Point, should be so shamefully intimidated at the Whiz of a Cannon Ball?

The Names of those English Gentlemen who lost their Lives, as I remember, in
this Engagement.
COMMISSIONER Cox, Captain of the Royal Prince, under the Command of the
Admiral; and Mr. Travanian, Gentleman to the Duke of York; Mr. Digby, Captain
of the Henry, second Son to the Earl of Bristol; Sir Fletchvile Hollis, Captain
of the Cambridge, who lost one of his Arms in the War before, and his Life in
this; Captain Saddleton, of the Dartmouth; the Lord Maidstone, Son to the Earl
of Winchelsea, a Voluntier on board the Charles, commanded by Sir John Harman,
Vice Admiral of the Red. SIR Philip Carteret, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Cotterel, Mr.
Peyton, Mr. Gose, with several other Gentlemen unknown to me, lost their Lives
with the Earl of Sandwich, on board the Royal James; Mr. Vaughan, on board the
Katherine, commanded by Sir John Chicheley. IN this Engagement, Sir George Rook
was youngest Lieutenant to Sir Edward Sprage; Mr. Russel, afterward Earl of
Orford, was Captain of a small Fifth Rate, called the Phoenix; Mr. Herbert,
afterward Earl of Torrington, was Captain of a small Fourth Rate, called the
Monck; Sir Harry Dutton Colt, who was on board the Victory, commanded by the
Earl of Oss^ry, is the only Man now living that I can remember was in this
Engagement.
BUT to proceed, the Dutch had one Man of War sunk, though so near the Shore,
that I saw some part of her Main Mast remain above Water; with their Admiral
Van Ghent, who was slain in the close Engagement with the Earl of Sandwich.
This Engagement lasted fourteen Hours, and was looked upon the greatest that
ever was fought between the English and the Hollander.

I CANNOT here omit one Thing, which to some may seem trifling; though I am apt
to think our Naturalists may have a different Opinion of it, and find it afford
their Fancies no undiverting Employment in more curious, and less perilous
Reflections. We had on board the London, where, as I have said, I was a
Voluntier, a great Number of Pigeons, of which our Commander was very fond.
These, on the first firing of our Cannon, dispersed, and flew away, and were
seen no where near us during the Fight. The next Day it blew a brisk Gale, and
drove our Fleet some Leagues to the Southward of the Place where they forsook
our Ship, yet the Day after they all returned safe aboard; not in one Flock,
but in small Parties of four or five at a Time. Some Persons at that Time
aboard the Ship admiring at the Manner of their Return, and speaking of it with
some Surprise, Sir Edward Sprage told them, That he brought those Pigeons with
him from the Streights; and that when, pursuant to his Order, he left the
Revenge Man of War, to go aboard the London, all those Pigeons, of their own
accord, and without the Trouble or Care of carrying, left the Revenge likewise,
and removed with the Sailors on board the London, where I saw them: All which
many of the Sailors afterward confirmed to me. What Sort of Instinct this
could proceed from, I leave to the Curious.

SOON after this Sea Engagement I left the Fleet. And the Parliament, the
Winter following, manifesting their Resentments against two of the
Plenipotentiaries, viz. Buckingham and Arlington, who had been sent over into
Holland; and expressing, withal, their great Umbrage taken at the prodigious
Progress of the French Arms in the United Provinces; and warmly remonstrating
the inevitable Danger attending England in their Ruin. King Charles from all
this, and for want of the expected Supplies, found himself under a Necessity of
clapping up a speedy Peace with Holland. Peace with Holland.


THIS Peace leaving those youthful Spirits, that had by the late Naval War been
raised into a generous Ferment, under a perfect Inactivity at Home; they found
themselves, to avoid a Sort of Life that was their Aversion, obliged to look
out for one more active, and more suitable to their vigorous Tempers Abroad.

I MUST acknowledge my self one of that Number; and therefore in the Year 1674,
I resolved to go into Flanders, in order to serve as Voluntier in the Army
commanded by his Highness the Prince of Orange. I took my Passage accordingly
at Dover for Calais, and so went by way of Dunkirk for Brussels.

ARRIVING at which Place, I was informed that the Army of the Confederates lay
encamped not far from Nivelle; and under the daily Expectation of an Engagement
with the Enemy. This News made me press forward to the Service; for which
Purpose I carried along with me proper Letters of Recommendation to Sir Walter
Vane, who was at that time a Major General. Upon further Enquiry I understood,
that a Party of Horse, which was to guard some Wagons that were going to Count
Montery's Army, were to set out next Morning; so I got an Irish Priest to
introduce me to the Commanding Officer, which he readily obliged me in; and
they, as I wished them, arrived in the Camp next Day.

I HAD scarce been there an Hour, when happened one of the most extraordinary
Accidents in Life. I observed in the East a strange dusty colored Cloud, of a
pretty large Extent, riding, not before the Wind (for it was a perfect Calm)
with such a precipitate Motion, that it was got over our Heads almost as soon
as seen. When the Skirts of that Cloud began to cover our Camp, there suddenly
arose such a terrible Hurricane, or Whirlwind, that all the Tents were carried
aloft with great Violence into the Air; and Soldiers Hats flew so high and
thick, that my Fansy can resemble it to nothing better than those Flights of
Rooks, which at Dusk of Evening, leaving the Fields, seek their roosting
Places. Trees were torn up by the very Roots; and the Roofs of all the Barns,
etc. belonging to the Prince's Quarters, were blown quite away. This lasted for
about half an Hour, until the Cloud was wholly past over us, when as suddenly
ensued the same pacifick Calm as before the Cloud's Approach. Its Course was
seemingly directly West; and yet we were soon after informed, that the fine
Dome of the great Church at Utrecht had greatly suffered by it the same Day.
And, if I am not much mistaken, Sir William Temple, in his Memoirs, mentions
somewhat of it, which he felt at Lillo, on his Return from the Prince of
Orange's Camp, where he had been a Day or two before.

AS soon after this, as I could get an Opportunity, I delivered, at his
Quarters, my recommendatory Letters to Sir Walter Vane; who received me very
kindly, telling me at the same time, that there were six or seven English
Gentlemen, who had entered themselves Volunteers in the Prince's own Company of
Guards: And added, that he would immediately recommend me to Count Solmes,
their Colonel. He was not worse than his Word, and I was entered accordingly.
Those six Gentlemen were as follows, -- Clavers, who since was better known by
the Title of Lord Dundee; Mr. Collier, now Lord Portmore; Mr. Rooke, since
Major General; Mr. Hales, who lately died, and was for a long time Governor of
Chelsea-Hospital; Mr. Venner, Son of that Venner remarkable for his being one
of the Fifth-Monarchy Men; and Mr. Boyce. The four first rose to be very
eminent; but Fortune is not to all alike favorable.

The Army marches toward Binch.
IN about a Week's Time after, it was resolved in a Council of War, to march
toward Binch, a small walled Town, about four Leagues from Nivelle; the better
to cut off the Provisions from coming to the Prince of Conde's Camp that Way.

ACCORDINGLY, on the first Day of August, being Saturday, we began our March;
and the English Volunteers had the Favor of a Baggage Wagon appointed them.
Count Souches, the Imperial General, with the Troops of that Nation, led the
Van; the main Body was composed of Dutch, under the Prince of Orange, as
Generalissimo; and the Spaniards, under Prince Vaudemont, with some
Detachments, made the Rear Guard.

AS we were upon our March, I being among those Detachments which made up the
Rear Guard, observed a great Party of the Enemy's Horse upon an Ascent, which,
I then imagined, as it after proved, to be the Prince of Conde taking a View of
our Forces under March. There were many Defiles, which our Army must
necessarily pass; through which that Prince politickly enough permitted the
Imperial and Dutch Forces to pass unmolested. But when Prince Vaudemont, with
the Spaniards, and our Detachments, thought to have done the like, the Prince
of Conde fell on our Rear Guard; Prince of Conde entirely routs the Rear of the
Confederate Army.
and, after a long and sharp Dispute, entirely routed 'em; the Marquess of
Assentar, a Spanish Lieutenant General, dying upon the Spot.

HAD the Prince of Conde contented himself with this Share of good Fortune, his
Victory had been uncontested: But being pushed forward by a vehement Heat of
Temper (which he was noted for) and flushed with this extraordinary Success, he
resolved to force the whole Confederate Army to a Battle. In order to which, he
immediately led his Forces between our Second Line, and our Line of Baggage; by
which means the latter were entirely cut off, and were subjected to the Will of
the Enemy, who fell directly to plunder; in which they were not a little
assisted by the routed Spaniards themselves, who did not disdain at that time
to share with the Enemy in the plundering of their Friends and Allies.

THE English Volunteers had their Share of this ill Fortune with the rest;
their Wagon appointed them being among those intercepted by the Enemy; and I,
for my Part, lost every Thing but Life, which yet was saved almost as
unaccountably as my Fellow Soldiers had lost theirs. The Baggage, as I have
said, being cut off, and at the Mercy of the Enemy, every one endeavored to
escape through, or over the Hedges. And as in all Cases of like Confusion, one
endeavors to save himself upon the Ruins of others: So here, he that found
himself stopped by another in getting over the Gap of a Hedge, pulled him back to
make way for himself, and perhaps met with the same Fortune from a Third, to
the Destruction of all. I was then in the Vigor of my Youth, and none of the
least active, and perceiving how it had fared with some before me, I clapped my
left Leg upon the Shoulders of one who was thus contending with another, and
with a Spring threw my self over both their Heads and the Hedge at the same
time. By this Means I not only saved my Life (for they were all cut to Pieces
that could not get over) but from an Eminence, which I soon after attained, I
had an Opportunity of seeing, and making my Observations upon the remaining
Part of that glorious Conflict.

IT was from that advantageous Situation, that I presently discovered that the
Imperialists, who led the Van, had now joined the main Body. And, I confess, it
was with an almost inexpressible Pleasure, that I beheld, about three a-Clock,
with what intrepid Fury they fell upon the Enemy. The Battle of Seneff.
In short, both Armies were universally engaged, and with great Obstinacy
disputed the Victory till Eleven at Night. At which Time the French, being
pretty well surfeited, made their Retreat. French quit the Field.
Nevertheless, to secure it by a Stratagem, they left their lighted Matches
hanging in the Hedges, and waving with the Air, to conceal it from the
Confederate Army.

Confederate Army drawn off.
ABOUT two Hours after, the Confederate Forces followed the Example of their
Enemies, and drew off. And though neither Army had much Reason to boast; yet as
the Prince of Orange remained last in the Field; and the French had lost what
they before had gained, the Glory of the Day fell to the Prince of Orange; who,
although but twenty-four Years of Age, had the Suffrage of Friend and Foe, of
having played the Part of an old and experienced Officer.

THERE were left that Day on the Field of Battle, by a general Computation, not
less than eighteen Thousand Men on both Sides, over and above those, who died
of their Wounds: The Loss being pretty equal, only the French carried off most
Prisoners. Prince Waldeck was shot through the Arm, which I was near enough to
be an Eyewitness of: And my much lamented Friend, Sir Walter Vane, was carried
off dead. A Wound in the Arm was all the Mark of Honor, that I as yet could
boast of, though our Cannon in the Defiles had slain many near me.

THE Prince of Conde (as we were next Day informed) lay all that Night under a
Hedge, wrapped in his Cloak: And either from the Mortification of being
disappointed in his Hopes of Victory; or from a Reflection of the Disservice,
which his own natural over Heat of Temper had drawn upon him, was almost
inconsolable many Days after. And thus ended the famous Battle of Seneff.

BUT though common Vogue has given it the Name of a Battle, in my weak Opinion,
it might rather deserve that of a confused Skirmish; all Things having been
forcibly carried on without Regularity, or even Design enough to allow it any
higher Denomination: For, as I have said before, notwithstanding I was
advantagiously stationed for Observation, I found it very often impossible to
distinguish one Party from another. Prince of Orange in the midst of the French
Army.
And this was more remarkably evident on the Part of the Prince of Orange, whose
Valor and Vigor having led him into the Middle of the Enemy, and being then
sensible of his Error, by a peculiar Presence of Mind, gave the Word of Command
in French, which he spoke perfectly well. But the French Soldiers, who took him
for one of their own Generals, making Answer, that their Powder was all spent,
it afforded Matter of Instruction to him to persist in his Attack; at the same
Time, that it gave him a Lesson of Caution, to withdraw himself, as soon as he
could, to his own Troops.

Marches to Quarignan.
HOWEVER, the Day after the Prince of Orange thought proper to march to
Quarignan, a Village within a League of Mons; where he remained some Days, till
he could be supplied from Brussels with those Necessaries which his Army stood
in need of.

Marches to Valenciennes; and besieges Oudenard.
FROM thence we marched to Valenciennes, where we again encamped, till we could
receive Things proper for a Siege. Upon the Arrival whereof, the Prince gave
Orders to decamp, and marched his Army with a Design to besiege Aeth. But
having Intelligence on our March, that the Marshall De Humiers had reinforced
that Garrison, we marched directly to Oudenard, and immediately invested it.

THIS Siege was carried on with such Application and Success, that the
Besiegers were in a few Days ready for a Storm; but the Prince of Conde
prevented them, by coming up to its Relief. Upon which the Prince of Orange,
pursuant to the Resolution of a Council of War the Night before, drew off his
Forces in order to give him Battle; and to that purpose, after the laborious
Work of filling up our Lines of Contravallation, that the Horse might pass more
freely, we lay upon our Arms all Night. Next Morning we expected the Imperial
General, Count Souches, to join us; but instead of that, he sent back some very
frivolous Excuses, of the Inconveniency of the Ground for a Battle; and after
that, instead of joining the Prince, marched off quite another way; the Prince
of Orange, with the Dutch and Spanish Troops, marched directly for Ghent;
exclaiming publicly against the Chicanery of Souches, and openly declaring,
That he had been advertised of a Conference between a French Capuchin and that
General, the Night before. Certain it is, that that General lay under the
Displeasure of his Master, the Emperor, for that Piece of Management; and the
Count de Sporck was immediately appointed General in his Place.

Prince of Orange to going to leave the Army in Disgust.
THE Prince of Orange was hereupon leaving the Army in great Disgust, till
prevailed upon by the Count de Montery, for the general Safety, to recede from
that Resolution. However, seeing no likelihood of any Thing further to be done,
while Souches was in Command, he resolved upon a Post of more Action, though
more dangerous; wherefore ordering ten Thousand Men to march before, he himself
soon after followed to the Siege of Grave.

Carries on the Siege of Grave.
THE Grave, a strong Place, and of the first Moment to the Hollanders, had been
blocked up by the Dutch Forces all the Summer; the Prince of Orange therefore
leaving the main Army under Prince Waldeck at Ghent, followed the Detachment he
had made for the Siege of that important Place, resolving to purchase it at any
Rate. On his Arrival before it, Things began to find new Motion; and as they
were carried on with the utmost Application and Fury, the Besieged found
themselves, in a little Time, obliged to change their haughty Summer Note for
one more suitable to the Season.

And takes it.
THE Prince, from his first coming, having kept those within hotly plied with
Ball, both from Cannon and Mortars, Monsieur Chamilly, the Governor, after a
few Days, being weary of such warm Work, desired to capitulate; upon which
Hostages were exchanged, and Articles agreed on next Morning. Pursuant to
which, the Garrison marched out with Drums beating and Colors flying, two Days
after, and were conducted to Charleroy.

BY the taking this Place, which made the Prince of Orange the more earnest
upon it, the French were wholly expelled their last Year's astonishing
Conquests in Holland. And yet there was another Consideration, that rendered
the Surrender of it much more considerable. For the French being sensible of
the great Strength of this Place, had there deposited all their Cannon and
Ammunition, taken from their other Conquests in Holland, which they never were
able to remove or carry off, with tolerable Prospect of Safety, after that
Prince's Army first took the Field.

THE Enemy being marched out, the Prince entered the Town, and immediately
ordered public Thanksgivings for its happy Reduction. Then having appointed a
Governor, and left a sufficient Garrison, he put an End to that Campaign, and
returned to the Hague, where he had not been long before he fell ill of the
Small Pox. The Consternation this threw the whole Country into, is not to be
expressed: Any one that had seen it would have thought, that the French had
made another Inundation greater than the former. But when the Danger was over,
their Joy and Satisfaction, for his Recovery, was equally beyond Expression.

Limburgh besieged and taken by the French.
THE Year 1675. yielded very little remarkable in our Army. Limburgh was
besieged by the French, under the Command of the Duke of Enguien, which the
Prince of Orange having Intelligence of, immediately decamped from his fine
Camp at Bethlem, near Louvain, in order to raise the Siege. But as we were on a
full March for that purpose, and had already reached Ruremond, Word was
brought, that the Place had surrendered the Day before. Upon which Advice, the
Prince, after a short Halt, made his little Army (for it consisted not of more
than thirty Thousand Men) march back to Brabant. Nothing of moment, after this,
occurred all that Campaign.

Maestrich besieged by the Prince of Orange.
IN the Year 1676. the Prince of Orange having, in concert with the Spaniards,
resolved upon the important Siege of Maestrich (the only Town in the Dutch
Provinces, then remaining in the Hands of the French) it was accordingly
invested about the middle of June, with an Army of twenty Thousand Men, under
the Command of his Highness Prince Waldeck, with the grand Army covering the
Siege. It was some Time before the heavy Cannon, which we expected up the Maes,
from Holland, arrived; which gave Occasion to a Piece of Raillery of Monsieur
Calvo, the Governor, which was as handsomely repartee'd. That Governor, by a
Messenger, intimating his Sorrow to find, we had pawned our Cannon for
Ammunition Bread. Answer was made, That in a few Days we hoped to give him a
Taste of the Loaves, which he should find would be sent him into the Town in
extraordinary plenty. I remember another Piece of Raillery, which passed some
Days after between the Rhingrave and the same Calvo. The former sending Word,
that he hoped within three Weeks to salute that Governor's Mistress within the
Place. Calvo replied, He Would give him leave to kiss her all over, if he kissed
her any where in three Months.

BUT our long expected Artillery being at last arrived, all this Jest and
Merriment was soon converted into earnest. Our Trenches were immediately opened
toward the Dauphin Bastion, against which were planted many Cannon, in order
to make a Breach; my self as a Probationer being twice put upon the forlorn
Hope to facilitate that difficult Piece of Service. Nor was it long before such
a Breach was effected, as was esteemed practicable, and therefore very soon
after it was ordered to be attacked.

THE Disposition for the Attack was thus ordered; two Sergeants with twenty
Grenadiers, a Captain with fifty Men, my self one of the Number; then a Party
carrying Wool Sacks, and after them two Captains with one Hundred Men more; the
Soldiers in the Trenches to be ready to sustain them, as Occasion should
require.

THE Signal being given, we left our Trenches accordingly, having about one
Hundred Yards to run, before we could reach the Breach, which we mounted with
some Difficulty and Loss; all our Batteries firing at the same instant to keep
our Action in countenance, and favor our Design. When we were in Possession of
the Bastion, the Enemy fired most furiously upon us with their small Cannon
through a thin brick Wall, by which, and their hand Grenadoes, we lost more Men
than we did in the Attack it self.

BUT well had it been had our ill Fortune stopped there; for as if Disaster
must needs be the Concomitant of Success, we soon lost what we had thus gotten,
by a small, but very odd Accident. Not being furnished with such Scoopes as our
Enemies made use of, in tossing their hand Grenadoes some distance off, one of
our own Soldiers aiming to throw one over the Wall into the Counterscarp among
the Enemy, it so happened that he unfortunately missed his Aim, and the Grenade
fell down again on our side the Wall, very near the Person who fired it. He
starting back to save himself, and some others who saw it fall, doing the like,
those who knew nothing of the Matter fell into a sudden Confusion, and
imagining some greater danger than there really was, every body was struck with
a panick Fear, and endeavored to be the first who should quit the Bastion, and
secure himself by a real Shame from an imaginary Evil. Thus was a Bastion, that
had been gloriously gained, inadvertently deserted; and that too, with the Loss
of almost as many Men in the Retreat, as had been slain in the Onset, and the
Enemy most triumphantly again took Possession of it.

AMONG the Slain on our Side in this Action, was an Ensign of Sir John
Fenwick's Regiment; and as an Approbation of my Services his Commission was
bestowed upon me.

A FEW Days after it was resolved again to storm that Bastion, as before; out
of three English, and one Scotch Regiment, then in the Camp, a Detachment was
selected for a fresh Attack. Those Regiments were under the Command of Sir John
Fenwick (who was afterward beheaded) Colonel Ralph Widdrington, and Colonel
Ashley, of the English; and Sir Alexander Collier, Father of the present Lord
Portmore, of the Scotch. Out of every of these four Regiments, as before, were
detached a Captain, a Lieutenant, and an Ensign, with fifty Men: Captain
Anthony Barnwell, of Sir John Fenwick's Regiment, who was now my Captain,
commanding that Attack.

AT break of Day the Attack was begun with great Resolution; and though
vigorously maintained, was attended with the desired Success. The Bastion was
again taken, and in it the commanding Officer, who in Service to himself, more
than to us, told us, that the Center of the Bastion would soon be blown up,
being to his Knowledge undermined for that purpose. But this Secret proved of
no other use, than to make us, by way of Precaution, to keep as much as we
could upon the Rampart. In this Attack Captain Barnwell lost his Life; and it
happened my new Commission was wetted (not, as too frequently is the Custom,
with a Debauch) but with a Bullet through my Hand, and the Breach of my Collar
Bone with the Stroke of a Halberd.

AFTER about half an Hour's Possession of the Bastion, the Mine under it, of
which the French Officer gave us warning, was sprung; the Enemy at the same
Time making a furious Sally upon us. The Mine did a little, though the less,
Execution, for being discovered; but the Sally no way answered their End, for
we beat them back, and immediately fixed our Lodgment; which we maintained
during the Time of the Siege. But to our double Surprise, a few Days after they
fired another Mine under, or aside, the former, in which they had placed a
quantity of Grenadoes, which did much more Execution than the other:
Notwithstanding all which, a Battery of Guns was presently erected upon that
Bastion, which very considerably annoyed the Enemy.

THE Breach for a general Storm was now rendered almost practicable; yet before
that could be advisably attempted, there was a strong Horn-work to be taken.
Upon this Exploit the Dutch Troops only were to signalize themselves; and they
answered the Confidence reposed in them; for though they were twice repulsed,
at the third Onset they were more successful, and took Possession; which they
likewise kept to the Raising of the Siege.

THERE was a Stratagem laid at this Time, which in its own Merit one would
have thought should not have failed of a good Effect; but to show the Vanity of
the highest human Wisdom, it miscarried. On the other side of the Maes,
opposite to Maestrich, lies the strong Fortress of Wyck, to which it is joined
by a stone Bridge of six fair Arches. The Design was, by a false Attack on that
regular Fortification to draw the Strength of the Garrison to its Defense,
which was but very natural to imagine would be the Consequence. Ready to attend
that well concerted false Attack, a large flat bottomed Boat, properly
furnished with Barrels of Gunpowder, and other Necessaries, was to fall down
under one of the middle Arches, and when fixed there, by firing the Powder to
have blown up the Bridge, and by that means to have prevented the Return of the
Garrison to oppose a real Attack at that instant of Time to be made upon the
Town of Maestrich by the whole Army.

THE false Attack on Wyck was accordingly made, which, as proposed, drew the
Main of the Garrison of Maestrich to its Defense, and the Boat so furnished
fell down the River as projected, but unfortunately, before it could reach the
Arch, from the Darkness of the Night, running upon a Shoal, it could not be got
off; for which Reason the Men in the Boat were glad to make a hasty Escape for
fear of being discovered; as the Boat was, next Morning, and the whole Design
laid open.

THIS Stratagem thus miscarrying, all Things were immediately got ready for a
general Storm, at the main Breach in the Town; and the rather, because the
Prince of Orange had received incontestable Intelligence, That Duke Schomberg,
at the Head of the French Army, was in full march to relieve the Place. But
before every Thing could be rightly got ready for the intended Storm (though
some there were who pretended to say, that a Dispute raised by the Spaniards
with the Dutch, about the Propriety of the Town, when taken, was the Cause of
that Delay) we heard at some distance several Guns fired as Signals of Relief;
upon which we precipitately, and, as most imagined, shamefully drew off from
before the Place, and joined the grand Army under Prince Waldeck. Prince of
Orange's Army retreats from before Maestrich.
But it was Matter of yet greater Surprise to most on the Spot, that when the
Armies were so joined, we did not stay to offer the Enemy Battle. The well
known Courage of the Prince, then Generalissimo, was so far from solving this
Riddle, that it rather puzzled all who thought of it; however, the prevailing
Opinion was, that it was occasioned by some great Misunderstanding between the
Spaniards and the Dutch. And Experience will evince, that this was not the only
Disappointment of that Nature, occasioned by imperfect Understandings.

BESIDES the Number of common Soldiers slain in this Attack, which was not
inconsiderable, we lost here the brave Rhingrave, a Person much lamented on
account of his many other excellent Qualifications, as well as that of a
General. Colonel Ralph Widdrington, and Colonel Doleman (who had not enjoyed
Widdrington's Commission above a Fortnight) Captain Douglas, Captain Barnwell,
and Captain Lee, were of the Slain among the English; who, indeed, had born the
whole brunt of the Attack upon the Dauphin's Bastion.

I REMEMBER the Prince of Orange, during the Siege, received a Shot through his
Arm; which giving an immediate Alarm to the Troops under his Command, he took
his Hat off his Head with the wounded Arm, and smiling, waved it, to show them
there was no danger. Thus, after the most gallant Defense against the most
courageous Onsets, ended the Siege of Maestrich; and with it all that was
material that Campaign.

Cambray and St. Omers besieged by the French.
EARLY in the Spring, in the Year 1677. the French Army, under the Duke of
Orleans, besieged at once, both Cambray and Saint Omers. This last the Prince
of Orange seemed very intent and resolute to relieve. In order to which, well
knowing by sad Experience, it would be to little purpose to wait the majestic
Motions of the Spaniards, that Prince got together what Forces he could, all in
Dutch Pay, and marching forward with all speed, resolved, even at the Hazard of
a Battle, to attempt the Raising the Siege. Prince of Orange attempts to raise
the Siege of St. Omers, but is forced to retreat.
Upon his appearing the Duke of Orleans, to whose particular Conduct the Care
of that Siege was committed, drew off from before the Place, leaving scarce
enough of his Men to defend the Trenches. The Prince was under the Necessity of
marching his Forces over a Morass; and the Duke, well knowing it, took care to
attack him near Mont Cassel, before half his little Army were got over. The
Dispute was very sharp, but the Prince being much out numbered, and his Troops
not able, by the Straitness of the Passage, to engage all at once, was obliged
at last to retreat, which he did in pretty good Order. I remember the Dutch
Troops did not all alike do their Duty; and the Prince seeing one of the
Officers on his fullest speed, called to him over and over to halt; which the
Officer in too much haste to obey, the Prince gave him a Slash over the Face,
saying, By this Mark I shall know you another Time. Soon after this Retreat of
the Prince, Saint Omers was surrendered. St. Omers surrenders.


UPON this Retreat the Prince marching back, lay for some Time among the Boors,
who from the good Discipline, which he took care to make his Troops observe,
did not give us their customary boorish Reception. And yet as secure as we
might think our selves, I met with a little Passage that confirmed in me the
Notions, which the generality, as well as I, had imbibed of the private
Barbarity of those People, whenever an Opportunity falls in their Way. I was
stroling at a Distance from my Quarters, all alone, when I found my self near
one of their Houses; into which, the Doors being open, I ventured to enter. I
saw no body when I came in, though the House was, for that Sort of People, well
enough furnished, and in pretty decent Order. I called, but no body answering,
I had the Curiosity to advance a little farther, when, at the Mouth of the
Oven, which had not yet wholly lost its Heat, I spied the Corpse of a Man so
bloated, swollen and parched, as left me little room to doubt, that the Oven had
been the Scene of his Destiny. I confess the Sight struck me with Horror; and
as much Courage and Security as I entered with, I withdrew in haste, and with
quite different Sentiments, and could not fansy my self out of Danger till I
had reached our Camp. A wise Man should not frame an Accusation on Conjectures;
but, on Inquiry, I was soon made sensible, that such barbarous Usage is too
common among those People; especially if they meet with a Straggler, of what
Nation soever.

THIS made me not very sorry when we decamped, and we soon after received
Orders to march and invest Charleroy; before which Place we stayed somewhat
above a Week, and then drew off. I remember very well, that I was not the only
Person then in the Camp that was at a Loss to dive into the Reason of this
Investiture and Decampment: But since I at that time, among the Politicians of
the Army, never heard a good one, I shall not venture to offer my Sentiments at
so great a Distance.

Army marches toward Mons.
WE, after this, marched toward Mons; and, in our March, passed over the very
Grounds on which the Battle of Seneff had been fought three Years before. It
was with no little Pleasure, that I re-survey'd a Place, that had once been of
so much Danger to me; and where my Memory and Fansy now repeated back all those
Observations I had then made under some unavoidable Confusion. Young as I was,
both in Years and Experience, from my own Reflections, and the Sentiments of
others, after the Fight was over, methought I saw visibly before me the well
ordered Disposition of the Prince of Conde; the inexpressible Difficulties
which the Prince of Orange had to encounter with; while at the same Moment I
could not omit to repay my Debt to the Memory of my first Patron, Sir Walter
Vane, who there loosing his Life, left me a solitary Wanderer to the wide World
of Fortune.

BUT these Thoughts soon gave place to new Objects, which every Hour presented
themselves in our continued March to Enghien, a Place famous for the finest
Gardens in all Flanders, near which we encamped, on the very same Ground which
the French chose some Years after at the Battle of Steenkirk: of which I shall
speak in its proper Place. Here the Prince of Orange left our Army, as we
afterward found, to pass into England; where he married the Princess Mary,
Daughter of the Duke of York. And after his Departure, that Campaign ended
without any thing further material.

Peace concluded.
NOW began the Year 1678, famous for the Peace, and no less remarkable for an
Action previous to it, which has not failed to employ the Talents of Men,
variously, as they stood affected. Our Army, under the Prince of Orange, lay
encamped at Soignies, where it was whispered that the Peace was concluded.
Notwithstanding which, two Days after, being Sunday the 17th Day of August, the
Army was drawn out, as most others as well as my self apprehended, in order to
a feux de Joye; but in lieu of that, we found our March ordered toward St.
Dennis, where the Duke of Luxemburg lay, as he imagined, safe in inaccessible
Entrenchments.

Prince of Orange arrives at St. Dennis, and begins the Attack.
ABOUT three of the Clock our Army arrived there, when we received Orders to
make the Attack. It began with a most vigorous Spirit, that promised no less
than the Success which ensued. The three English and three Scotch Regiments,
under the Command of the ever renowned Earl of Ossory, together with the Prince
of Orange's Guards, made their Attack at a Place called the Chateau; where the
French took their Refuge among a Parcel of Hop-Poles; but their Resource was as
weak as their Defense; and they were soon beaten out with a very great
Slaughter.

IT was here that a French Officer having his Pistol directed at the Breast of
the Prince, Monsieur D'Auverquerque interposed, and shot the Officer dead upon
the Spot.

Duke of Luxemburg defeated, and Peace proclaimed.
THE Fight lasted from three in the Afternoon till Nine at Night; when growing
dark, the Duke of Luxemburg forsook his Entrenchments, into which we marched
next Morning. And to see the sudden Change of Things! that very Spot of Ground,
where nothing but Fire and Fury appeared the Day before, the next saw solac'd
with the Proclamation of a Peace.

ABOUT an Hour before the Attack began, the Duke of Monmouth arrived in the
Army, being kindly received by the Prince of Orange, bravely fighting by his
Side all that Day. The Woods, and the Unevenness of the Ground, rendered the
Cavalry almost useless; yet I saw a Standard, among some others, which was
taken from the Enemy, being richly embroidered with Gold and Silver, bearing
the Sun in the Zodiac, with these haughty Words, Nihil obstabit eunte. On the
News of this unexpected Victory, the States of Holland sent to congratulate the
Prince; and to testify how much they valued his Preservation, they presented
Monsieur D'Auverquerque, who had so bravely rescued him, with a Sword, whose
Handle was of massy Gold set with Diamonds. I forgot to mention that this
Gentleman received a Shot on his Head at the Battle of Seneff; and truly in all
Actions, which were many, he nobly distinguished himself by his Bravery. He was
Father of this present Earl of Grantham.

The NAMES of the English Officers which I knew to be killed in this Action.
Lieut. Col. Archer, Capt. Charleton, Capt. Richardson, Capt. Fisher, Capt.
Pemfield, Lieut. Charleton, Lieut. Barton, Ensign Colvile. With several others,
whose Names I have forgot.
LIEUT. Col. Babington, who began the Attack, by beating the French out of the
Hop Garden, was taken Prisoner. Col. Hales, who was a long time Governor of
Chelsea College, being then a Captain, received a Shot on his Leg, of which he
went lame to his dying Day.

THE War thus ended by the Peace of Nimeugen, the Regiment in which I served,
was appointed to lie in Garrison at the Grave. We lay there near four Years,
our Soldiers being mostly employed about the Fortifications. It was here, and
by that Means, that I imbibed the Rudiments of Fortification, and the practick
Part of an Enginier, which in my more advanced Years was of no small Service to
me.

NEVERTHELESS, in the Year 1684, our Regiment received Orders to march to
Haren, near Brussels; where, with other Forces, we encamped, till we heard that
Luxemburg, invaded by the French, in a Time of the profoundest Peace, had
surrendered to them. Then we decamped, and marched to Mechlin; where we lay in
the Field till near November. Not that there was any War proclaimed; but as not
knowing, whether those who had committed such Acts of Hostility in time of
Peace, might not take it in their Heads to proceed yet further. In November we
marched into that Town, where Count Nivelle was Governor: The Marquess de
Grana, at the same time, governing the Netherlands in the Jurisdiction of Spain.

NOTHING of any Moment happened after this, till the Death of King Charles II.
The Summer after which, the three English and three Scotch Regiments received
Orders to pass over into England, upon the Occasion of Monmouth's Rebellion;
English and Scotch Regiments pass over into England.
where, upon our Arrival, we received Orders to encamp on Hounslow-Heath. But
that Rebellion being soon stifled, and King James having no farther Need of us,
those Regiments were ordered to return again to Holland, into the proper
Service of those who paid them.

THOUGH I am no stiff Adherer to the Doctrine of Predestination, yet to the full
Assurance of a Providence I never could fail to adhere. Thence came it, that my
natural Desire to serve my own native Country prevailed upon me to quit the
Service of another, though its Neighbor and Allie. Events are not always to
direct the Judgment; and therefore whether I did best in following those
fondling Dictates of Nature, I shall neither question nor determine.

HOWEVER, it was not long after my Arrival in England before I had a Commission
given me by King James, to be a Lieutenant in a new raised Regiment under the
Command of Colonel Tufton, Brother to the Earl of Thanet. Under this Commission
I sojourned out two peaceable Campaigns on Hounslow-Heath; where I was an
Eyewitness of one mock Siege of Buda: After which our Regiment was ordered to
Berwick, where I remained till the Revolution.

K. James abdicates the Throne.
KING James having abdicated the Throne, and the Prince of Orange accepting the
Administration, all Commissions were ordered to be renewed in his Name. The
Officers of our Regiment, as well as others, severally took out theirs
accordingly; a very few excepted, of which Number was our Colonel; who refusing
a Compliance, his Commission was given to Sir James Lesley.

Prince of Orange proclaimed King.
THE Prince of Orange presently after was declared and proclaimed King, and his
Princess Queen, with a conjunctive Power. Upon which our Regiment was ordered
into Scotland, where Affairs appeared under a Face of Disquietude. We had our
Quarters at Leith, till the Time the Castle of Edinburg, then under the Command
of the Duke of Gordon, had surrendered. After which, pursuant to fresh Orders,
we marched to Inverness, a Place of no great Strength, and as little Beauty;
though yet I think I may say, without the least Danger of an Hyperbole, that it
is as pleasant as most Places in that Country. Here we lay two long Winters,
perpetually harrass'd upon Parties, and hunting of somewhat wilder than their
wildest Game, namely, the Highlanders, who were, if not as nimble footed, yet
fully as hard to be found.

BUT General Mackay having received Orders to build a Fort at Inverlochy, our
Regiment, among others, was commanded to that Service. The two Regiments
appointed on the same Duty, with some few Dragoons, were already on their
March, which having joined, we marched together through Louquebar. This sure is
the wildest Country in the Highlands, if not in the World. I did not see one
House in all our March; and their Economy, if I may call it such, is much the
same with that of the Arabs or Tartars. Hutts, or Cabins of Trees and Trash,
are their Places of Habitation; in which they dwell, till their half-horn'd
Cattle have devoured the Grass, and then remove, staying no where longer than
that Convenience invites them.

IN this March, or rather, if you please, most dismal Peregrination, we could
but very rarely go two on a Breast; and oftener, like Geeze in a String, one
after another. So that our very little Army had sometimes, or rather most
commonly, an Extent of many Miles; our Enemy, the Highlanders, firing down upon
us from their Summits all the Way. Nor was it possible for our Men, or very
rarely at least, to return their Favors with any Prospect of Success; for as
they pop'd upon us always on a sudden, they never stayed long enough to allow
any of our Soldiers a Mark; or even time enough to fire: And for our Men to
march, or climb up those Mountains, which to them were natural Champion, would
have been as dangerous as it seemed to us impracticable. Nevertheless, under
all these disheartning Disadvantages, we arrived at Inverlochy, and there
performed the Task appointed, building a Fort on the same Spot where Cromwell
had raised one before. And which was not a little remarkable, we had with us
one Hill, a Colonel, who had been Governor in Oliver's Time, and who was now
again appointed Governor by General Mackay. Thus the Work on which we were sent
being effected, we marched back again by the Way of Gillycrancky, where that
memorable Battle under Dundee had been fought the Year before.

SOME time after, Sir Thomas Levingston, afterward Earl of Tiviot, having
received Intelligence that the Highlanders intended to fall down into the lower
Countries, in a considerable Body, got together a Party of about five Hundred
(the Dragoons, called the Scotch Greys, inclusive) with which he resolved, if
possible, to give them a Meeting. We left Inverness the last Day o^ April, and
encamped near a little Town called Forest, the Place where, as Tradition still
confidently avers, the Witches met Mackbeth, and greeted him with their
diabolical Auspices. But this Story is so naturally displayed in a Play of the
immortal Shakespeare, that I need not descend here to any farther Particulars.

HERE Sir Thomas received Intelligence, that the Highlanders designed to encamp
upon the Spey, near the Lord of Grant's Castle. Whereupon we began our March
about Noon; and the next Day, about the Break thereof, we came to that River,
where we soon discovered the Highlanders by their Fires. Sir Thomas
immediately, on Sight of it, issued his Orders for our fording the River, and
falling upon them as soon after as possible. Highlanders totally routed.
Both were accordingly performed, and with so good Order, Secrecy and Success,
that Cannon and Balfour, their Commanders, were obliged to make their Escape
naked.

THEY were about one Thousand in Number, of which were killed about three
Hundred; we pursued them, till they got up Crowdale-Hill, where we lost them in
a Fog. And, indeed, so high is that Hill, that they, who perfectly knew it,
assured me, that it never is without a little dark Fog hanging over it. And to
me, at that Instant of Time, they seemed rather to be People received up into
Clouds, than flying from an Enemy.

NEAR this there was an old Castle, called Lethendy, into which about Fifty of
them made their Retreat, most of them Gentlemen, resolving there to defend
themselves to the last. Sir Thomas sent a Messenger to them, with an Offer of
Mercy, if they would surrender: But they refused the profer'd Quarter, and
fired upon our Men, killing two of our Grenadiers, and wounding another. During
my Quarters at the Grave, having learnt to throw a Grenado, I took three or
four in a Bag, and crept down by the Side of a Ditch, or Dyke, to an old
thatched House near the Castle, imagining, on my mounting the same, I might be
near enough to throw them, so as to do execution. I found all Things answer my
Expectation; and the Castle wanting a Cover, I threw in a Grenado, which put
the Enemy immediately into Confusion. The Second had not so good Success,
falling short; and the Third burst as soon as it was well out of my Hand,
though without Damage to my self. But throwing the Fourth in at a Window, it so
increased the Confusion, which the first had put them into, that they
immediately called out to me, upon their Parole of Safety, to come to them.

ACCORDINGLY I went up to the Door, which they had barricaded, and made up with
great Stones; when they told me they were ready to surrender upon Condition of
obtaining Mercy. I returned to Sir Thomas; and telling him what I had done, and
the Consequence of it, and the Message they had desired me to deliver (a great
many of the Highland Gentlemen, not of this Party, being with him) Sir Thomas,
in a high Voice, and broad Scotch, best to be heard and understood, ordered me
back to tell 'em, He would cut them all to Pieces, for their Murder of two of
his Grenadiers, after his Profer of Quarter.

I WAS returning full of these melancholy Tidings, when Sir Thomas, advancing
after me a little Distance from the rest of the Company; Hark ye, Sir, says he,
I believe there may be among 'em some of our old Acquaintance (for we had
served together in the Service of the States in Flanders) therefore tell them
they shall have good Quarter. I very willingly carried back a Message so much
changed to my Mind; and upon delivering of it, without the least Hesitation,
they threw down the Barricado, opened the Door, and out came one Brody, who, as
he then told me, had had a Piece of his Nose taken off by one of my Grenadoes.
I carried him to Sir Thomas, who confirming my Message, they all came out, and
surrendered themselves Prisoners. This happened on May Day in the Morning; for
which Reason we returned to Inverness with our Prisoners, and Boughs in our
Hats; and the Highlanders never held up their Heads so high after this Defeat.

UPON this Success Sir Thomas wrote to Court, giving a full Account of the
whole Action. In which being pleased to make mention of my Behavior, with some
Particularities, I had soon after a Commission ordered me for a Company in the
Regiment under the Command of Brigadier Tiffin.

MY Commission being made out, signed, and sent to me, I repaired immediately
to Portsmouth, where the Regiment lay in Garrison. A few Days after I had been
there, Admiral Russel arrived with the Fleet, and anchored at St. Hellen's,
where he remained about a Week. On the 18th of May the whole Fleet set Sail;
and it being my Turn the same Day to mount the Main Guard, I was going the
Rounds very early, when I heard great shooting at Sea. I went directly to
acquaint the Governor, and told him my Sentiments, that the two contending
Fleets were actually engaged, which indeed proved true; for that very Night a
Pinnace, which came from our Fleet, brought News that Admiral Russel had
engaged the French Admiral Turvile; and, after a long and sharp Dispute, was
making after them to their own Coasts.

THE next Day, toward Evening, several other Expresses arrived, one after
another, all agreeing in the Defeat of the French Fleet, and in the Particulars
of the burning their Rising Sun, together with many other of their Men of War,
at la Hogue. All which Expresses were immediately forwarded to Court by Mr.
Gibson, our Governor.

ABOUT two Months after this, our Regiment, among many others, was, according
to Order, shipped off on a Secret Expedition, under the Command of the Duke of
Leinster, no Man knowing to what Place we were going, or on what Design; no,
not the Commander himself. However, when we were out at Sea, the General,
according to Instructions, opening his Commission, we were soon put out of our
Suspense, and informed, that our Orders were to attack Dunkirk. But what was so
grand a Secret to those concerned in the Expedition, having been entrusted to a
Female Politician on Land, it was soon discovered to the Enemy; for which
Reason our Orders were countermanded, before we reached the Place of Action,
and our Forces received Directions to land at Ostend.

Battle at Steenkirk.
SOON after this happened that memorable Battle at Steenkirk, which as very few
at that Time could dive into the Reason of, and mistaken Accounts of it have
passed for authentic, I will mention somewhat more particularly: The
Undertaking was bold; and, as many thought, bolder than was consistent with the
Character of the wise Undertaker. Nevertheless, the French having taken Namure;
and, as the Malcontents alleged, in the very Sight of a superior Army; and
nothing having been done by Land of any moment, Things were blown into such a
dangerous Fermentation, by a malicious and lying Spirit, that King William
found himself under a Necessity of attempting something that might appease the
Murmurs of the People. He knew very well, though spoke in the Senate, that it
was not true, that his Forces at the Siege of Namure exceeded those of the
Enemy; no Man could be more afflicted than he at the overflowing of the
Mehaigne, from the continual Rains, which obstructed the Relief he had designed
for that important Place; yet since his Maligners made an ill Use of these
false Topics, to insinuate that he had no Mind to put an End to the War, he
was resolved to evince the contrary, by showing them that he was not afraid to
venture his Life for the better obtaining what was so much desired.

TO that Purpose, receiving Intelligence that the Duke of Luxemburg lay
strongly encamped at Steenkirk, near Enghien (though he was sensible he must pass
through many Defiles to engage him; and that the many Thickets between the two
Armies would frequently afford him new Difficulties) he resolved there to
attack him. Our Troops at first were forced to hew out their Passage for the
Horse; and there was no one Difficulty that his Imagination had drawn that was
lessened by Experience; and yet so prosperous were his Arms at the Beginning,
that our Troops had made themselves Masters of several Pieces of the Enemy's
Cannon. But the farther he advanced, the Ground growing straiter, so strait as
not to admit his Army's being drawn up in Battalia, the Troops behind could not
give timely Succor to those engaged, and the Cannon we had taken was forcibly
left behind in order to make a good Retreat. The French had lost all their
Courage in the Onset; for though they had too fair an Opportunity, they did not
think fit to pursue it; or, at least, did it very languidly. However, the
Malcontents at Home, I remember, grew very well pleased after this; for so
long as they had but a Battle for their Money, like true Englishmen, lost or
won, they were contented.

SEVERAL Causes, I remember, were assigned for this Miscarriage, as they called
it: Some there were who were willing to lay it upon the Dutch; and allege a
Saying of one of their Generals, who receiving Orders to relieve some English
and Scotch that were overpowered, was heard to say, Dam 'em, since they love
Fighting let 'em have their Bellies full. But I should rather impute the
Disappointment to the great Loss of so many of our bravest Officers at the very
first Onset. General Mackay, Colonel Lanier, the Earl of Angus, with both his
Field-Officers, Sir Robert Douglas, Colonel Hodges, and many others falling, it
was enough to put a very considerable Army into Confusion. I remember one
particular Action of Sir Robert Douglas, that I should think my self to blame
should I omit: Seeing his Colors on the other Side the Hedge, in the Hands of
the Enemy, he leaped over, slew the Officer that had them, and then threw them
over the Hedge to his Company; redeeming his Colors at the Expense of his
Life. Thus the Scotch Commander improved upon the Roman General; for the brave
Posthumous cast his Standard in the Middle of the Enemy for his Soldiers to
retrieve, but Douglas retrieved his from the Middle of the Enemy, without any
Assistance, and cast it back to his Soldiers to retain, after he had so bravely
rescued it out of the Hands of the Enemy.

FROM hence our Regiment received Orders to march to Dixmuyd, where we lay some
time employed in fortifying that Place. While we were there, I had one Morning
steadfastly fixed my Eyes upon some Ducks, that were swimming in a large Water
before me; when all on a sudden, in the Midst of a perfect Calm, I observed
such a strange and strong Agitation in the Waters, that prodigiously surpised
me. I was at the same Moment seized with such a Giddiness in my Head, that, for
a Minute or two, I was scarce sensible, and had much a-do to keep on my Legs. I
had never felt any thing of an Earthquake before, which, as I soon after
understood from others, this was; and it left, indeed, very apparent Marks of
its Force in a great Rent in the Body of the great Church, which remains to
this Day.

HAVING brought the intended Fortifications into some tolerable Order, we
received a Command out of hand to reimbarque for England. And, upon our
Landing, Directions met us to march for Ipswich, where we had our Quarters all
that Winter From thence we were ordered up to London to do Duty in the Tower. I
had not been there long, before an Accident happened, a^ little to be accounted
for, without a divine Providence, as some would make that Providence to be,
that only can account for it.

A dangerous Accident at the Tower of London.
THERE was at that Time, as I was assured by my Lord Lucas, Constable of it,
upwards of twenty Thousand Barrels of Gunpowder, in that they call the
White-Tower, when all at once the middle Flooring did not only give way, or
shrink, but fell flat down upon other Barrels of Powder, together with many of
the same combustible Matter which had been placed upon it. It was a Providence
strangely neglected at that Time, and hardly thought of since: But let any
considerate Man consult the Consequences, if it had taken fire; perhaps to the
Destruction of the whole City, or, at least, as far as the Bridge and Parts
adjacent. Let his Thoughts proceed to examine, why or how, in that precipitate
Fall, not one Nail, nor one Piece of Iron, in that large Fabric, should afford
one little Spark to inflame that Mass of sulphurous Matter it was loaded with;
and if he is at a loss to find a Providence, I fear his Friends will be more at
a loss to find his Understanding. But the Battle of Landen happening while our
Regiment was here on Duty, we were soon removed to our Satisfaction from that
pacifick Station, to one more active in Flanders.

NOTWITHSTANDING that fatal Battle the Year preceding, namely, A. D. 1694. the
Confederate Army under King William lay encamped at Mont St. Andre, an open
Place, and much exposed; while the French were entrenched up to their very
Teeth, at Vignamont, a little Distance from us. This afforded Matter of great
Reflection to the Politicians of those Times, who could hardly allow, that if
the Confederate Army suffered so much, as it really did in the Battle of
Landen, it could consist with right Conduct to tempt, or rather dare a new
Engagement. But those sage Objectors had forgot the well-known Courage of that
brave Prince, and were as little capable of fathoming his Designs. The Enemy,
who to their Sorrow had by Experience been made better Judges, was resolved to
traverse both; for which Purpose they kept close within their Entrenchments; so
that after all his Efforts, King William finding he could no way draw them to a
Battle, suddenly decamped, and marched directly to Pont Espiers, by long
Marches, with a Design to pass the French Lines at that Place.

BUT notwithstanding our Army marched in a direct Line, to our great Surprise,
we found the Enemy had first taken possession of it. They gave this the Name of
the Long March, and very deservedly; for though our Army marched upon the
String, and the Enemy upon the Bow, sensible of the Importance of the Post, and
the Necessity of securing it, by double horseing with their Foot, and by
leaving their Weary and Weak in their Garrisons, and supplying their Places
with fresh Men out of them, they gained their Point in disappointing us. Though
certain it is, that March cost 'em as many Men and Horses as a Battle. However
their Master, the French King, was so pleased with their indefatigable and
auspicious Diligence, that he wrote, with his own Hand, a Letter of Thanks to
the Officers, for the great Zeal and Care they had taken to prevent the
Confederate Army from entering into French Flanders.

KING William, thus disappointed in that noble Design, gave immediate Orders
for his whole Army to march through Oudenard, and then encamped at Rosendale;
after some little Stay at that Camp we were removed to the Camerlins, between
Newport and Ostend, once more to take our Winter Quarters there among the Boors.

Namur invested by the Earl of Athlone.
WE were now in the Year 1695. when the strong Fortress of Namur, taken by the
French in 1692. and since made by them much stronger, was invested by the Earl
of Athlone. After very many vigorous Attacks, with the Loss of many Men, the
Town was taken, the Garrison retiring into the Castle. Into which soon after,
notwithstanding all the Circumspection of the Besiegers, Marefchal Bouflers
found means, with some Dragoons, to throw himself.

Prince Vaudemont's glorious Retreat.
WHILE King William was thus engaged in that glorious and important Siege,
Prince Vaudemont being posted at Watergaem, with about fifty Battallions, and
as many Squadrons, the Marshall Villeroy laid a Design to attack him with the
whole French Army. The Prince imagined no less, therefore he prepared
accordingly, giving us Orders to fortify our Camp, as well as the little time
we had for it would permit. Those Orders were pursued; nevertheless, I must
confess, it was beyond the Reach of my little Reason to account for our so long
Stay in the Sight of an Army so much superior to ours. The Prince in the Whole
could hardly muster thirty Thousand; and Villeroy was known to value himself
upon having one Hundred Thousand effective Men. However, the Prince
provisionally sent away all our Baggage that very Morning to Ghent, and still
made show as if he resolved to defend himself to the last Extremity in our
little Entrenchments. The Enemy on their Side began to surround us; and in
their Motions for that Purpose, blew up little Bags of Gunpowder, to give the
readier Notice how far they had accomplished it. Another Captain, with my self,
being placed on the Right, with one Hundred Men (where I found Monsieur Montal
endeavoring, if possible, to get behind us) I could easily observe, they had
so far attained their Aim of encompassing us, as to the very Fashion of a
Horse's Shoe. This made me fix my Eyes so intently upon the advancing Enemy,
that I never minded what my Friends were doing behind me; though I afterward
found that they had been fileing off so very artfully and privately, by that
narrow Opening of the Horse-Shoe, that when the Enemy imagined us past a
Possibility of Escape, our little Army at once, and of a sudden, was ready to
disappear. There was a large Wood on the Right of our Army, through which lay
the Road to Ghent, not broader than to admit of more than Four to march
abreast. Down this the Prince had slid his Forces, except to that very small
Party which the Captain and my self commanded, and which was designedly left to
bring up the Rear. Nor did we stir till Captain Collier, then Aid de Camp to
his Brother, now Earl of Portmore, came with the Word of Command for us to draw
off.

WHEN Villeroy was told of our Retreat, he was much surpised, as thinking it a
Thing utterly impossible. However, at last, being sensible of the Truth of it,
he gave Orders for our Rear to be attacked; but we kept fireing from Ditch to
Ditch, and Hedge to Hedge, till Night came upon us; and so our little Army got
clear of its gigantick Enemy with very inconsiderable Loss. However, the French
failed not, in their customary Way, to express the Sense of their Vexation, at
this Disappointment, with Fire and Sword in the Neighborhood round. Thus
Prince Vaudemont acquired more Glory by that Retreat than an entire Victory
could have given him; and it was not, I confess, the least Part of Satisfaction
in Life, that my self had a Share of Honor under him to bring off the Rear at
that his glorious Retreat at Arseel.

HOWEVER, in further Revenge of this political Chicane of the Prince of
Vaudemont, and to oblige, if possible, King William to raise the Siege from
before Namur, Villeroy entered into the Resolution of Bombarding Brussells.
Villeroy bombards Brussels.
In order to which he encamped at Anderleck, and then made his Approaches as
near as was convenient to the Town. There he caused to be planted thirty
Mortars, and raised a Battery of ten Guns to shoot hot Bullets into the Place.

BUT before they fired from either, Villeroy, in complement to the Duke of
Bavaria, sent a Messenger to know in what Part of the Town his Duchess chose
to reside, that they might, as much as possible, avoid incommoding her, by
directing their Fire to other Parts, Answer was returned that she was at her
usual Place of Residence, the Palace; and accordingly their fireing from
Battery or Mortars little incommoded them that Way.

FIVE Days the Bombardment continued; and with such Fury, that the Center of
that noble City was quite laid in Rubbish. Most of the Time of Bombarding I
was upon the Counterscarp, where I could best see and distinguish; and I have
often counted in the Air, at one time, more than twenty Bombs; for they shot
whole Vollies out of their Mortars all together. This, as it must needs be
terrible, threw the inhabitants into the utmost Confusion. Cartloads of Nuns,
that for many Years before had never been out of the Cloister, were now hurried
about from Place to Place, to find Retreats of some Security. In short, the
Groves, and Parts remote, were all crowded; and the most spacious Streets had
hardly a Spectator left to view their Ruins. Nothing was to be seen like that
Dexterity of our People in extinguishing the Fires; for where the red-hot
Bullets fell, and raised new Conflagrations, not Burghers only, but the vulgar
Sort, stood stareing, and with their Hands impocketted, beheld their Houses
gradually consume; and without offering prudent or charitable Hand to stop the
growing Flames.

Villeroy decamps.
BUT after they had almost thus destroyed that late fair City, Villeroy, finding
he could not raise the Siege of Namur, by that vigorous Attack upon Brussels,
decamped at last from before it, and put his Army on the March, to try if he
could have better Success by exposing to Show his Pageant of one Hundred
Thousand Men. Prince Vaudemont had timely Intelligence of the Duke's Resolution
and Motion; and resolved, if possible, to get there before him. Nor was the
Attempt fruitless: He fortunately succeeded, though with much Fatigue, and no
little Difficulty, after he had put a Trick upon the Spies of the Enemy, by
pretending to encamp, and so soon as they were gone ordering a full March.

THE Castle of Namur had been all this Time under the Fire of the Besieger's
Cannon; and soon after our little Army under the Prince was arrived, a Breach,
that was imagined practicable, being made in the Terra Nova (which, as the Name
imports, was a new Work, raised by the French, and added to the Fortifications,
since it fell into their Hands in 1692. and which very much increased the
Strength of the Whole) a Breach, as I have said, being made in this Terra Nova,
a Storm, in a Council of War, was resolved upon. Four entire Regiments, in
conjunction with some Draughts made out of several others, were ordered for
that Work, my self commanding that Part of 'em which had been drawn out of
Colonel Tiffin's. We were all to rendevouze at the Abbey of Salsines, under the
Command of the Lord Cutts; the Signal, when the Attack was to be made, being
agreed to be the blowing up of a Bag of Gunpowder upon the Bridge of Boats
that lay over the Sambre.

Lord Cutts storms the Castle of Namur; but obliged to retire.
SO soon as the Signal was made, we marched up to the Breach with a decent
Intrepidity, receiving all the Way we advanced the full Fire of the Coborn
Fort. But as soon as we came near enough to mount, we found it vastly steep and
rugged. Notwithstanding all which, several did get up, and entered the Breach;
but not being supported as they ought to have been, they were all made
Prisoners. Which, together with a Wound my Lord Cutts received, after we had
done all that was possible for us, necessitated us to retire with the Loss of
many of our Men.

VILLEROY all this while lay in sight, with his Army of One Hundred Thousand
Men, without making the least Offer to incommode the Besiegers; or even without
doing any thing more than make his Appearance in favor of the Besieged, and
reconnoitring our Encampment: And, at last, seeing, or imagining that he saw,
the Attempt would be to little purpose, with all the good Manners in the World,
in the Night, he withdrew that terrible Meteor, and relieved our poor Horses
from feeding on Leaves, the only Inconvenience he had put us to.

The Castle capitulates
THIS Retreat leaving the Garrison without all Hope of Relief, they in the
Castle immediately capitulated. But after one of the Gates had been, according
to Articles, delivered up, and Count Guiscard was marching out at the Head of
the Garrison, and Bouflers at the Head of the Dragoons; the latter was, by
order of King William, arrested, in reprize of the Garrison of Dixmuyd (who,
contrary to the Cartel, had been detained Prisoners) and remained under Arrest
till they were set free.

Assassination Plot.
AT the very Beginning of the Year 1696. was discovered a Plot, fit only to have
had its Origin from Hell or Rome. A Plot, which would have put Hottentots and
Barbarians out of Countenance. This was called the Assassination Plot, from the
Design of it, which was to have assassinated King William a little before the
Time of his usual leaving England to head the Army of the Confederates in
Flanders. And as nothing could give a nobler Idea of the great Character of
that Prince than such a nefarious Combination against him; so, with all
considerate Men nothing could more depreciate the Cause of his inconsiderate
Enemies. If I remember what I have read, the Sons of ancient Rome, though
Heathens, behaved themselves against an Enemy in a quite different Manner.
Their Historians afford us more Instances than a few of their generous
Intimations to Kings and Generals, under actual Hostilities, of barbarous
Designs upon their Lives. I proceed to this of our own Countrymen.

SOON after the Discovery had been made, by Persons actually engaged in that
inhuman Design, the Regiment, in which I served, with some others then in
Flanders, received Orders, with all Expedition, to embarque for England;
though, on our Arrival at Gravesend, fresh Orders met us to remain on board the
Transports, till we had further Directions.

ON my going to London, a few Days after, I was told, that two Regiments only
were now designed to come ashore; and that the rest would be remanded to
Flanders, the Danger apprehended being pretty well over. I was at White Hall
when I received this Notice; where meeting my Lord Cutts (who had ever since
the storming of the Terra Nova at Namur allowed me a Share in his Favor) he
expressed himself in the most obliging Manner; and at parting desired he might
not fail of seeing me next Morning at his House; for he had somewhat of an
extraordinary Nature to communicate to me.

AT the time appointed, I waited on his Lordship, where I met Mr. Steel (now
Sir Richard, and at that time his Secretary) who immediately introduced me. I
found in company with him three Gentlemen; and after common Salutations, his
Lordship delivered into my Hands, an Order from the King in Council to go along
with Captain Porter, Mr. de la Rue, and Mr. George Harris (who proved to be
those three with him) to search all the Transports at Gravesend, in order to
prevent any of the Conspirators getting out of England that Way. After
answering, that I was ready to pay Obedience, and receiving, in private, the
further necessary Instructions, we took our Leave, and Oars soon after for
Gravesend. 'Twas in our Passage down, that I understood that they had all been
of the Conspiracy, but now reluctant, were become Witnesses.

WHEN we came to Gravesend, I produced my Authority to the Commanding Officer,
who very readily paid Obedience, and gave Assistance: But after our most
diligent Search, finding nothing of what we looked for, we returned that very
Night to London.

NEXT Day a Proclamation was to come out for the apprehending three of four
Troopers, who were sent over by King James, with a thousand Pounds Reward for
each: Mr. George Harris, who was the fourth, being the only Evidence against
the other three. No sooner were we returned from Gravesend, but Harris had
Intelligence brought him, that Cassells, one of the three, was at Mr. Allens in
the Savoy, under the Name of Green. Upon which we went directly to the Place;
and enquiring for Mr. Green, we were told he lodged there, and was in his Room.

I WAS obliged by my Order to go along with them, and assist 'em; and very well
was it that I was so: For in consideration of the Reward in the Proclamation,
which, as I have said, was to come out the next Day, Harris and the rest were
for deferring his Seizure, till the coming out of that Proclamation; but making
answer, that in case of his Escape that Night, I must be responsible to my
Superiors; who, under the most favorable Aspect, would construe it a Neglect
of Duty, they were forced to comply; and so he was taken up, and his Name that
Night struck out of the Proclamation. It is very true, by this faithful
Discharge of my Trust, I did save the Government one Thousand Pounds; but it is
equally so, that I never had of my Governors one Farthing Consideration for
what others termed an over-officious Piece of Service; though in Justice it
must be owned a Piece of exact and disinterested Duty.

SOME few Days after, attending by Direction at the Secretary's Office, with
Mr. Harris, there came in a Dutchman, spluttering and making a great Noise,
that he was sure he could discover one of the Conspirators; but the Mein and
the Behavior of the Man, would not give any Body Leave to give him any Credit
or Regard. However, the Man persisting in his Assertions, I spoke to Mr. Harris
to take him aside, and ask him what Sort of a Person he was: Harris did so; and
the Dutchman describing him, says Harris, returning to me, I Will be hanged if it
be not Blackburn. Upon which we had him questioned somewhat more narrowly; when
having no room to doubt, and understanding where he was, Colonel Rivet of the
Guards was sent for, and ordered to go along with us to seize him. We went
accordingly; and it proving to be Blackburn, the Dutchman had five Hundred
Pounds, and the Colonel and others the Remainder. Cassels and Blackburn, if
still alive, are in Newgate, confined by Act of Parliament, one only Witness,
which was Harris, being producible against them.

WHEN Blackburn was seized, I found in the Chamber with him, one Davison, a
Watch-maker, living in Holbourn. I carried him along with me to the Secretary
of State; but nothing on his Examination appearing against him, he was
immediately discharged. He offered afterward to present me with a fine Watch
of his own making, which I refused; and he long after owned the Obligation.

SO soon as the Depth of this Plot was fathomed, and the intended Evil provided
against, as well as prevented, King William went over into Flanders, and our
Regiment thereupon received Orders for their immediate Return. Nothing of any
Moment occurred till our Arrival at our old Quarters, the Camerlins, where we
lay dispersed amongst the Country Boors or Farmers, as heretofore. However, for
our better Security in those Quarters, and to preserve us from the Excursions
of the neighboring Garrison of Furnes, we were obliged to keep an Out-guard at
a little Place called Shoerbeck. This Guard was every forty-eight Hours
changed, and remounted with a Captain, a Lieutenant, an Ensign, and threescore
Men.

WHEN it came to my Turn to relieve that Guard, and for that Purpose I was
arrived at my Post, it appeared to me with the Face of a Place of Debauch,
rather than Business; there being too visible Tokens, that the hard Duty of
both Officers and Soldiers had been that of hard Drinking, the foulest Error
that a Soldier can commit, especially when on his Guard.

TO confirm my Apprehensions, a little after I had taken Possession of my
Guard, the Man of the House related to me such Passages, and so many of 'em,
that satisfied me, that if ten sober Men had made the Attack, they might have
fairly knocked all my Predecessors of the last Guard on the Head, without much
Difficulty. However, his Account administered Matter of Caution to me, and put
me upon taking a narrower View of our Situation. In consequence whereof, at
Night I placed a Sentinel a Quarter of a Mile in the Rear, and such other
Sentinels as I thought necessary and convenient in other Places; with Orders,
that upon Sight of an Enemy the Sentinel near should fire; and that upon
hearing that, all the other Sentinels, as well as he, should hasten in to
strengthen our Main Guard.

WHAT my Jealousy, on my Landlord's Relation, had suggested, happened
accordingly: For about one in the Morning I was alarmed with the Cry of one of
my Sentinels, Turn out for God's sake; which he repeated, with Vehemence, three
or four times over. I took the Alarm, got up suddenly; and with no little
Difficulty got my Men into their Ranks, when the Person who made the Outcry
came running in, almost spent, and out of Breath. It was the Sentinel, that I
had luckily placed about a Quarter of a Mile off, who gave the Alarm, and his
Musket flashing in the Pan, without going off, he endeavored to supply with
his Voice the Defect of his Piece. I had just got my Men into their Ranks, in
order to receive the Enemy, when by the Moonlight, I discovered a Party
advancing upon us. My out Sentinel challenged 'em, and as I had precaution'd,
they answered, Hispanioli; though I knew 'em to be French.

HOWEVER, on my Survey of our Situa^ion by Daylight, having marked in my Mind
a proper Place for drawing up my Men in Case of an Attack, which was too ^arrow
to admit of more than two on a ^reast; and which would secure between ^s and
the Enemy a Ditch of Water: I re^lv'd to put in practice what had enter^in'd me
so well in the Theory. To that ^urpose I ordered my first Rank to keep ^eir
Post, stand still and face the Enemy, ^hile the other two Ranks stooping should
^llow me to gain the intended Station; which done, the first Rank had Orders to
^e off and fall behind. All was performed (...) excellent Order; and I confess
it was ^th no little Pleasure, that I beheld the ^emy, for the best Part of an
Hour, in Con^tation whether they should attack us or no. The Result,
nevertheless, of that Consultation ended in this; that, seeing us so well upon
our Guard, it was most advisable to draw off. They soon put their Resolution
into practice, which I was very glad to see; on Examination a little before
having found that my Predecessor, as in other Things, had failed of Conduct in
leaving me a Garrison without Ammunition.

NEXT Morning I was very pleasingly surpised with a handsome Present of Wine,
and some other necessary Refreshments. At first I made a little Scruple and
Hesitation whether or no to receive 'em; till the Bearer assured me, that they
were sent me from the Officers of the next Garrison, who had made me a Visit
the Night before, as a candid Acknowledgment of my Conduct and good Behavior.
I returned their Compliment, that I hoped I should never receive Men of Honor
otherwise than like a Man of Honor; which mightily pleased them. Every of
which Particulars the Ghent Gazettier the Week after published.

WE had little to do except Marching an^ Counter-marching all the Campaign
after^ till it was resolved in a Council of War, for the better preserving of
Brussels from suc^ Insults, as it had before sustained from the French, during
the Siege of Namur, t^ fortify Anderlech; upon which our Regiment, as well as
others, were commande^ from our more pacifick Posts to attend that Work. Our
whole Army was under Movement to cover that Resolution; and the Train fell to
my Care and Command in the March. There accompanied the Train a Fellow,
seemingly ordinary, yet very officious and courteous, being ready to do any
thing for any Person, from the Officer to the common Soldier. He traveled
along and moved with the Train, sometimes on Foot, and sometimes getting a Ride
in some one or other of the Wagons; but ever full of his Chit-chat and Stories
of Humor. By these insinuating Ways he had screwed himself into the general
good Opinion; but the Waggoners especially grew particularly fond of him. At
the End of our March all our Powder-Waggons were placed breast abreast, and so
close, that one miscarrying would leave little doubt of the Fate of all the
rest. This in the Camp we commonly call the Park; and here it was that our new
Guest, like another Phaeton, though under Pretense of Weariness, not Ambition,
got Leave of the very last Carter to the Train to take a Nap in his Wagon. One
who had entertained a Jealousy of him, and had watched him, gave Information
against him; An Incendiary taken and burnt in the Face of the Army.
upon which he was seized and brought to me as Captain of the Guard. I caused
him to be searched; and upon search, finding Match, Touchwood, and other
dangerous Materials upon him; I sent him and them away to the Provoe. Upon the
Whole, a Council of War was called, at which, upon a strict Examination, he
confessed himself a hired Incendiary; and as such received his Sentence to be
burnt in the Face of the Army. The Execution was a Day or two after: When on
the very Spot, he further acknowledged, that on Sight or Noise of the Blow, it
had been concerted, that the French Army should fall upon the Confederates
under those lamentable Circumstances.

Peace of Riswick.
THE Peace of Riswick soon after taking place, put an End to all Incendiarisms
of either Sort. So that nothing of a Military Kind, which was now become my
Province, happened of some Years after. Our Regiment was first ordered into
England; and presently after into Ireland: But as these Memoirs are not
designed for the Low Amuzement of a Tea-Table, but rather of the Cabinet, a
Series of inglorious Inactivity can furnish but very little toward 'em.

YET as little as I admired a Life of Inactivity, there are some Sorts of
Activity, to which a wise Man might almost give Supineness the Preference: Such
is that of barely encountering Elements, and wageing War with Nature; and such,
in my Opinion, would have been the spending my Commission, and very probably my
Life with it, in the West Indies. For though the Climate (as some would urge)
may afford a Chance for a very speedy Advance in Honor, yet, upon revolving in
my Mind, that those Rotations of the Wheel of Fortune are often so very quick,
as well as uncertain, that I my self might as well be the First as the Last;
the Whole of the Debate ended in somewhat like that Couplet of the excellent
Hudibras: Then he, that ran away and fled,
Must lie in Honor's Truckle-bed.


HOWEVER, my better Planets soon disannulled those melancholy Ideas, which a
Rumor of our being sent into the West Indies had crowded my Head and Heart
with: For being called over into England, upon the very Affairs of the
Regiment, I arrived there just after the Orders for their Transportation went
over; by which Means the Choice of going was put out of my Power, and the
Danger of Refusing, which was the Case of many, was very luckily avoided.

IT being judged, therefore, impossible for me to return soon enough to gain my
Passage, one in Power proposed to me, that I should resign to an Officer then
going over; and with some other contingent Advantages, to my great
Satisfaction, I was put upon the Half-pay List. This was more agreeable, for I
knew, or at least imagined my self wise enough to foretell, from the over hot
Debate of the House of Commons upon the Partition Treaty, that it could not be
long before the present Peace would, at least, require patching.

UNDER this Sort of uncertain Settlement I remained with the Patience of a Jew,
though not with Judaical Absurdity, a faithful Adherer to my Expectation. Nor
did the Consequence fail of answering, a War was apparent, and soon after
proclaimed. War Proclaimed.
Thus waiting for an Opportunity, which I flattered my self would soon present,
the little Diversions of Dublin, and the moderate Conversation of that People,
were not of Temptation enough to make my Stay in England look like a Burden.

BUT though the War was proclaimed, and Preparations accordingly made for it,
the Expectations from all received a sudden Damp, by the as sudden Death of
King William. K William dies.
That Prince, who had stared Death in the Face in many Sieges and Battles, met
with his Fate in the Midst of his Diversions, who seized his Prize in an Hour,
to human Thought, the least adapted to it. He was a Hunting (his customary
Diversion) when, by an unhappy Trip of his Horse, he fell to the Ground; and in
the Fall displaced his Collar-bone. The News of it immediately alarmed the
Court, and all around; and the sad Effects of it soon after gave all Europe the
like Alarm. France only, who had not disdained to seek it sooner by ungenerous
Means, received new Hope, from what gave others Motives for Despair. He
flattered himself, that that long lived Obstacle to his Ambition thus removed,
his Successor would never fall into those Measures, which he had wisely
concerted for the Liberties of Europe; but he, as well as others of his
Adherents, was gloriously deceived; that God-like Queen, with a Heart entirely
English, prosecuted her royal Predecessor's Counsels; and to remove all the
very Faces of Jealousy, immediately on her Accession dispatched to every Court
of the great Confederacy, Persons adequate to the Importance of the Message, to
give Assurances thereof.

THIS gave new Spirit to a Cause, that at first seemed to languish in its
Founder, as it struck its great Opposers with a no less mortifying Terror: And
well did the great Successes of her Arms answer the Prayers and Efforts of that
royal Soul of the Confederacies; together with the Wishes of all, that, like
her, had the Good, as well as the Honor of their Country at Heart, in which
the Liberties of Europe were included. The first Campaign gave a noble Earnest
of the Future. Bon, Keyserwaert, Venlo, and Ruremond, were found Forerunners
only of Donawert, Hochstet, and Blenheim. Such a March of English Forces to the
Support of the tottering Empire, as it gloriously manifested the ancient Genius
of a warlike People; so was it happily celebrated with a Success answerable to
the Glory of the Undertaking, which concluded in Statues and princely Donatives
to an English Subject, from the then only Emperor in Europe. A small Tribute,
it is true, for ransomed Nations and captived Armies, which justly enough
inverted the Exclamations of a Roman Emperor to the French Monarch, who
deprecated his Legions lost pretty near the same Spot; but to a much superior
Number, and on a much less glorious Occasion.

BUT my good Fortune not allowing me to participate in those glorious
Appendages of the English Arms in Flanders, nor on the Rhine, I was resolved to
make a Push for it the first Opportunity, and waste my Minutes no longer on
Court Attendances. And my Lord Cutts returning with his full Share of Laurels,
for his never to be forgotten Services at Venlo, Ruremond, and Hochstet, found
his active Genius now to be reposed, under the less agreeable Burden of
unhazardous Honor, where Quiet must provide a Tomb for one already past any
Danger of Oblivion; deep Wounds and glorious Actions having anticipated all
that could be said in Epitaphs or litteral Inscriptions. Soon after his Arrival
from Germany, he was appointed General of all her Majesty's Forces in Ireland;
upon which going to congratulate him, he was pleased to enquire of me several
Things relating to that Country; and particularly in what Part of Dublin I
would recommend his Residence; offering at the same time, if I would go over
with him, all the Services that should fall in his Way.

BUT Inactivity was a Thing I had too long lamented; therefore, after I had, as
decently as I could, declined the latter Part, I told his Lordship, that as to
a Place of Residence, I was Master of a House in Dublin, large enough, and
suitable to his great Quality, which should be at his Service, on any Terms he
thought fit. Adding withal, that I had a Mind to see Spain, where my Lord
Peterborow was now going; and that if his Lordship would favor me with a
Recommendation, it would suit my present Inclinations much better than any
further tedious Recess. His Lordship was so good to close with both my
Overtures; and spoke so effectually in my Favor, that the Earl of Peterborow,
then General of all the Forces ordered on that Expedition, bad me speedily
prepare my self; and so when all Things were ready I embarked with that noble
Lord for Spain, to pursue his well concerted Undertaking; which, in the Event,
will demonstrate to the World, that little Armies, under the Conduct of
auspicious Generals, may sometimes produce prodigious Effects.

THE Jews, in whatever Part of the World, are a People industrious in the
increasing of Mammon; and being accustomed to the universal Methods of Gain,
are always esteemed best qualified for any Undertaking, where that bears a
Probability of being a Perquisite. Providing Bread, and other Requisites for an
Army, was ever allowed to carry along with it a Profit answerable; and Spain
was not the first Country where that People had engaged in such an Undertaking.
Besides, on any likely Appearance of great Advantage, it is in the Nature as
well as Practice of that Race, strenuously to assist one another; and that with
the utmost Confidence and prodigious Alacrity. One of that Number, both
competent and willing enough to carry on an Undertaking of that kind,
fortunately came at that Juncture to solicit the Earl of Peterborow to be
employed as Proveditor to the Army and Troops, which were, or should be sent
into Spain.

IT will easily be admitted, that the Earl, under his present Exigencies, did
not decline to listen. And a very considerable Sum being offered, by way of
Advance, the Method common in like Cases was pursued, and the Sum proposed
accepted; by which Means the Earl of Peterborow found himself put into the
happy Capacity of proceeding upon his first concerted Project. The Name of the
Jew, who signed the Contract, was Curtisos; and he and his Friends, with great
Punctuality, advanced the expected Sum of One Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling,
or very near it; which was immediately ordered into the Hands of the Play Master
of the Forces. For though the Earl took Money of the Jews, it was not for his
own, but public Use. According to Agreement, Bills were drawn for the Value
from Lisbon, upon the Lord Godolphin (then Lord Treasurer) all which were, on
that Occasion, punctually complied with.

THE Earl of Peterborow having thus fortunately found Means to supply himself
with Money, and by that with some Horse, after he had obtained Leave of the
Lord Galoway to make an Exchange of two Regiments of Foot, received the
Archduke, and all those who would follow him, aboard the Fleet; and, at his
own Expense, transported him and his whole Retinue to Barcelona: For all which
prodigious Charge, as I have been very lately informed, from very good Hands,
that noble Earl never to this Day received any Consideration from the
Government, or any Person whatsoever.

WE sailed from Lisbon, in order to join the Squadron under Sir Cloudsley
Shovel: Meeting with which at the appointed Station off Tangier, the Men of War
and Transports thus united, made the best of their Way for Gibraltar. There we
stayed no longer than to take aboard two Regiments out of that Garrison, in
lieu of two out of our Fleet. Here we found the Prince of Hesse, who
immediately took a Resolution to follow the Archduke in this Expedition. He
was a Person of great Gallantry; and having been Viceroy of Catalonia, was
received on board the Fleet with the utmost Satisfaction, as being a Person
capable of doing great Service in a Country where he was well known, and as
well beloved.

SPEAKING Latin then pretty fluently, it gave me frequent Opportunities of
conversing with the two Father Confessors of the Duke of Austria; and upon that
Account I found my self honored with some Share in the Favor of the Archduke
himself. I mention this, not to gratify any vain Humor, but as a corroborating
Circumstance, that my Opportunities of Information, in Matters of Consequence,
could not thereby be supposed to be lessened; but that I might more reasonably
be imagined to arrive at Intelligence, that not very often, or at least not so
soon, came to the Knowledge of others.

FROM Gibraltar we sailed to the Bay of Altea, not far distant from the City of
Valencia, in the Road of which we continued for some Days. While we were there,
as I was very credibly informed, the Earl of Peterborow met with some fresh
Disappointment; but what it was, neither I nor any Body else, as far as I could
perceive, could ever dive into: Neither did it appear by any outward Tokens, in
that noble General, that it lay so much at his Heart, as those about him seemed
to assure me it did.

HOWEVER, while we lay in Altea Bay, two Bomb-Vessels, and a small Squadron,
were ordered against Denia, which had a small Castle; but rather fine than
strong. And accordingly, upon our Offer to bring to bear with our Cannon, and
preparing to fix our Bomb-Vessels, in order to bombard the Place, it
surrendered; Denia surrenders, and proclaims the Archduke K. of Spain
and acknowledged the Archduke as lawful King of Spain, and so proclaimed him.
From this time, therefore, speaking of that Prince, it shall be under that
Title. General Ramos was left Commander here; a Person who afterward acted a
very extraordinary Part in the War carried on in the Kingdom of Valencia.

BUT notwithstanding no positive Resolutions had been taken for the Operations
of the Campaign, before the Arch Duke's Departure from Lisbon, the Earl of
Peterborow, ever solicitous of the Honor of his Country, had premeditated
another Enterprise, which, had it been embraced, would, in all Probability,
have brought that War to a much more speedy Conclusion; and at the same time
have obviated all those Difficulties, which were but too apparent in the Siege
of Barcelona. He had justly and judiciously weighed, that there were no Forces
in the Middle Parts of Spain, all their Trrops being in the extreme Parts of
the Kingdom, either on the Frontiers of Portugal, or in the City of Barcelona;
that with King Philip, and the royal Family at Madrid, there were only some few
Horse, and those in a bad Condition, and which only served for Guards; if
therefore, as he rightly projected within himself, by the taking of Valencia,
or any Seaport Town, that might have secured his Landing, he had marched
directly for Madrid; what could have opposed him? But I shall have occasion to
dilate more upon this Head a few Pages hence; and therefore shall here only
say, that though that Project of his might have brought about a speedy and
wonderful Revolution, what he was by his Orders afterward obliged to, against
his Inclinations, to pursue, contributed much more to his great Reputation, as
it put him under a frequent Necessity of overcoming Difficulties, which, to any
other General, would have appeared unsurmountable.

Valencia described.
VALENCIA is a City toward the Center of Spain, to the Seaward, seated in a
rich and most populous Country, just fifty Leagues from Madrid. It abounds in
Horses and Mules; by reason of the great Fertility of its Lands, which they
can, to great Advantage, water when, and as they please. This City and Kingdom
was as much inclined to the Interest of King Charles as Catalonia it self; for
even on our first Appearance, great Numbers of People came down to the Bay of
Altea, with not only a bare Offer of their Services, but loaded with all Manner
of Provisions, and loud Acclamations of Viva Carlos tercero, Viva. There were
no regular Troops in any of the Places round about it, or in the City it self.
The nearest were those few Horse in Madrid, one hundred and fifty Miles
distant; nor any Foot nearer than Barcelona, or the Frontiers of Portugal.

Description of Barcelona.
ON the contrary, Barcelona is one of the largest and most populous Cities in
all Spain, fortified with Bastions; one Side thereof is secured by the Sea; and
the other by a strong Fortification, called Monjouick. The Place is of so large
a Circumference, that thirty thousand Men would scarce suffice to form the
Lines of Circumvallation. It once resisted for many Months an Army of that
Force; and is almost at the greatest Distance from England of any Place
belonging to that Monarchy.

THIS short Description of these two Places will appear highly necessary, if it
be considered, that no Person without it would be able to judge of the Design
which the Earl of Peterborow intended to pursue, when he first took the
Archduke aboard the Fleet. Nevertheless the Earl now found himself under a
Necessity of quitting that noble Design, upon his Receipt of Orders from
England, while he lay in the Bay of Altea, to proceed directly to Catalonia; to
which the Archduke, as well as many Sea and Land Officers, were most inclined;
and the Prince of Hesse more than all the rest.

ON receiving those Orders, the Earl of Peterborow seemed to be of Opinion,
that from an Attempt, which he thought under a Probability of Success, he was
condemned to undertake what was next to an Impossibility of effecting; since
nothing appeared to him so injudicious as an Attempt upon Barcelona. A Place at
such a Distance from receiving any Reinforcement or Relief; the only Place in
which the Spaniards had a Garrison of regular Forces; and those in Number
rather exceeding the Army he was to undertake the Siege with, was enough to
cool the Ardour of a Person of less Penetration and Zeal than what the Earl had
on all Occasions demonstrated. Whereas if the General, as he intended, had made
an immediate March to Madrid, after he had secured Valencia, and the Towns
adjacent, which were all ready to submit and declare for King Charles; or if
otherwise inclined, had it not in their Power to make any considerable
Resistance; to which, ^f it be added, that he could have had Mules and Horses
immediately provided for him, ^n what Number he pleased, together with
Carriages necessary for Artillery, Baggage, an^ Ammunition; in few Days he
could ^ave forced King Philip out of Madrid, where he had so little Force to
oppose him. And as there was nothing in his Way to ^revent or obstruct his
marching thither, it (...) hard to conceive any other Part King Philip could
have acted in such an Extre^ity, than to retire either toward Portu^al or
Catalonia. In either of which Cases ^e must have left all the middle Part of
Spain ^en to the Pleasure of the Enemy; who (...) the mean time would have had
it in their ^ower to prevent any Communication of ^ose Bodies at such opposite
Extremes of ^e Country, as were the Frontiers of Portugal and Barcelona, where
only, as I said before, were any regular Troops.

AND on the other Side, as the Forces of the Earl of Peterborow were more than
sufficient for an Attempt where there was so little Danger of Opposition; so if
their Army on the Frontiers of Portugal should have marched back upon him into
the Country; either the Portugueze Army could have entered into Spain without
Opposition; or, at worst, supposing the General had been forced to retire, his
Retreat would have been easy and safe into those Parts of Valencia and
Andaluzia, which he previously had secured. Besides, Gibraltar, the strongest
Place in Spain, if not in the whole World, was already in our Possession, and a
great Fleet at Hand ready to give Assistance in all Places near the Sea. From
all which it is pretty apparent, that in a little time the War on our Side
might have been supported without entering the Mediterranean; by which Means
all Reinforcements would have been much nearer at Hand, and the Expenses of
transporting Troops and Ammunition very considerably diminished.

BUT none of these Arguments, though every one of them is founded on solid
Reason, were of Force enough against the prevailing Opinion for an Attempt upon
Catalonia. Mr. Crow, Agent for the Queen in those Parts, had sent into England
most positive Assurances, that nothing would be wanting, if once our Fleet made
an Invasion amongst the Catalans: The Prince of Hesse likewise abounded in
mighty Offers and prodigious Assurances; all which enforced our Army to that
Part of Spain, and that gallant Prince to those Attempts in which he lost his
Life. Very much against the Inclination of our General, who foresaw all those
Difficulties, which were no less evident afterward to every one; and the Sense
of which occasioned those Delays, and that Opposition to any Effort upon
Barcelona, which ran through so many successive Councils of War.

HOWEVER, pursuant to his Instructions from England, the repeated Desires of
the Archduke, and the Importunities of the Prince of Hesse, our General gave
Orders to sail from Altea toward the Bay of Barcelona, the chief City of
Catalonia. Earl of Peterborow arrives in Barcelona Bay, and after some time
lands the Forces.
Nevertheless, when we arrived there, he was very unwilling to land any of the
Forces, till he saw some Probability of that Assistance and Succor so much
boasted of, and so often promised. But as nothing appeared but some small
Numbers of Men, very indifferently armed, and without either Gentlemen or
Officers at the Head of them; the Earl of Peterborow was of Opinion, this could
not be deemed sufficient Encouragement for him to engage in an Enterprise,
which carried so poor a Face of Probability of Success along with it. In answer
to this it was urged, that till a Descent was made, and the Affairs thoroughly
engaged in, it was not to be expected that any great Numbers would appear, or
that Persons of Condition would discover themselves. Upon all which it was
resolved the Troops should be landed.

ACCORDINGLY, our Forces were disembark'd, and immediately encamped;
notwithstanding which the Number of Succors increased very slowly, and that
after the first straggling Manner. Nor were those that did appear any way to be
depended on; coming when they thought fit, and going away when they pleased,
and not to be brought under any regular Discipline. It was then pretended, that
until they saw the Artillery landed as well as Forces, they would not believe
any Siege actually intended. This brought the General under a sort of Necessity
of complying in that also. Though certainly so to do must be allowed a little
unreasonable, while the Majority in all Councils of War declared the Design to
be impracticable; and the Earl of Peterborow had positive Orders to proceed
according to such Majorities.

AT last the Prince of Hesse was pleased to demand Pay for those Stragglers, as
Officers and Soldiers, endeavoring to maintain, that it could not be expected
that Men should venture their Lives for nothing. Thus we came to Catalonia upon
Assurances of universal Assistance; but found, when we came there, that we were
to have none unless we paid for it. And as we were sent thither without Money
to pay for any thing, it had certainly been for us more tolerable to have been
in a Country where we might have taken by Force what we could not obtain any
other Way.

HOWEVER, to do the Miquelets all possible Justice, I must say, that
notwithstanding the Number of 'em, which hovered about the Place, never much
exceeded fifteen Hundred Men; if sometimes more, oftener less; and though they
never came under any Command, but planted themselves where and as they pleased;
yet did they considerable Service in taking Possession of all the Country
Houses and Convents, that lay between the Hills and the Plain of Barcelona; by
means whereof they rendered it impossible for the Enemy to make any Sorties or
Sallies at any Distance from the Town.

AND now began all those Difficulties to bear, which long before by the General
had been apprehended. The Troops had continued under a State of Inactivity for
the Space of three Weeks, all which was spent in perpetual Contrivances and
Disputes amongst our selves, not with the Enemy. In six several Councils of War
the Siege of Barcelona, under the Circumstances we then lay, was rejected as a
Madness and Impossibility. And though the General and Brigadier Stanhope
(afterward Earl Stanhope) consented to some Effort, yet it was rather that some
Effort should be made to satisfy the Expectation of the World, than with any
Hopes of Success. However, no Consent at all could be obtained from any Council
of War; and the Dutch General in particular declared, that he would not obey
even the Commands of the Earl of Peterborow, if he should order the Sacrifice
of the Troops under him in so unjustifiable a Manner, without the Consent of a
Council of War.

AND yet all those Officers, who refused their Consent to the Siege of
Barcelona, offered to march into the Country, and attempt any other Place, that
was not provided with so strong and numerous a Garrison; taking it for granted,
that no Town in Catalonia, Barcelona excepted, could make long Resistance; and
in case the Troops in that Garrison should pursue them, they then might have an
Opportunity of fighting them at less Disadvantage in the open Field, than
behind the Walls of a Place of such Strength. And, indeed, should they have
issued out on any such Design, a Defeat of those Troops would have put the
Province of Catalonia, together with the Kingdoms of Aragon and Valencia, into
the Hands of King Charles more effectually than the taking of Barcelona it self.

LET it be observed, en passant, that by those Offers of the Land Officers in a
Council of War, it is easy to imagine what would have been the Success of our
Troops, had they marched directly from Valencia to Madrid. For if after two
Months Alarm, it was thought reasonable, as well as practicable, to march into
the open Country rather than attempt the Siege of Barcelona, where Forces
equal, if not superior in Number, were ready to follow us at the Heels; what
might not have been expected from an Invasion by our Troops when and where they
could meet with little Opposition? But leaving the Consideration of what might
have been, I shall now endeavor at least with great Exactness to set down some
of the most remarkable Events from our taking to the Relief of Barcelona.

THE repeated Refusals of the Councils of War for undertaking the Siege of so
strong a Place, with a Garrison so numerous, and those Refusals grounded upon
such solid Reasons, against a Design so rash, reduced the General to the utmost
Perplexity. The Court of King Charles was immerg'd in complaint; all belonging
to him lamenting the hard Fate of that Prince, to be brought into Catalonia
only to return again, without the Offer of any one Effort in his Favor. On the
other Hand, our own Officers and Soldiers were highly dissatisfied, that they
were reproached, because not disposed to enter upon and engage themselves in
Impossibilities. And, indeed, in the Manner that the Siege was proposed and
insisted upon by the Prince of Hesse, in every of the several Councils of War,
after the Loss of many Men, thrown away to no other purpose, but to avoid the
Shame (as the Expression ran) of coming like Fools and going away like Cowards,
it could have ended in nothing but a Retreat at last.

IT afforded but small Comfort to the Earl to have foreseen all these
Difficulties, and to have it in his Power to say, that he would never have
taken the Archduke on Board, nor have proposed to him the Hopes of a Recovery
of the Spanish Monarchy from King Philip, if he could have imagined it
probable, that he should not have been at liberty to pursue his own Design,
according to his own Judgment. It must be allowed very hard for him, who had
undertaken so great a Work, and that without any Orders from the Government;
and by so doing could have had no Justification but by Success; I say, it must
be allowed to be very hard (after the Undertaking had been approved in England)
that he should find himself to be directed in this Manner by those at a
Distance, upon ill grounded and confident Reports from Mr. Crow; and compelled,
as it were, though General, to follow the Sentiments of Strangers, who either
had private Views of Ambition, or had no immediate Care or Concern for the
Troops employed in this Expedition.

SUCH were the present unhappy Circumstanches of the Earl of Peterborow in the
Camp before Barcelona: Impossibilities proposed; no Expedients to be accepted;
a Court reproaching; Councils of War rejecting; and the Dutch General refusing
the Assistance of the Troops under his Command; and what surmounted all, a
Despair of bringing such Animosities and differing Opinions to any tolerable
Agreement. Yet all these Difficulties, instead of discouraging the Earl, set
every Faculty of his more afloat; and, at last, produced a lucky Thought, which
was happily attended with Events extraordinary, and Scenes of Success much
beyond his Expectation; such as the General himself was heard to confess, it
had been next to Folly to have looked for; as certainly, in prima facie, it
would hardly have born proposing, to take by Surprise a Place much stronger
than Barcelona it self. True it is, that his only Hope of succeeding consisted
in this: That no Person could suppose such an Enterprise could enter into the
Imagination of Man; and without doubt the General's chief Dependence lay upon
what he found true in the Sequel; that the Governor and Garrison of Monjouick,
by reason of their own Security, would be very negligent, and very little upon
their Guard.

HOWEVER, to make the Experiment, he took an Opportunity, unknown to any Person
but an Aid de Camp that attended him, and went out to view the Fortifications:
And there being no Horse in that strong Fortress; and the Miquelets being
possessed of all the Houses and Gardens in the Plain, it was not difficult to
give himself that Satisfaction, taking his Way by the Foot of the Hill. The
Observation he made of the Place it self, the Negligence and Supineness of the
Garrison, together with his own uneasy Circumstances, soon brought the Earl to
a Resolution of putting his first Conceptions in Execution, satisfied as he
was, from the Situation of the Ground between Monjouick and the Town, that if
the first was in our Possession, the Siege of the latter might be undertaken
with some Prospect of Success.

FROM what has been said, some may be apt to conclude that the Siege afterward
succeeding, when the Attack was made from the Side of Monjouick, it had not
been impossible to have prevailed, if the Effort had been made on the East Side
of the Town, where our Forces were at first encamped, and where only we could
have made our Approaches, if Monjouick had not been in our Power. But a few
Words will convince any of common Experience of the utter Impossibility of
Success upon the East Part of the Town, although many almost miraculous
Accidents made us succeed when we brought our Batteries to bear upon that Part
of Barcelona toward the West. The Ground to the East was a perfect Level for
many Miles, which would have necessitated our making our Approaches in a
regular Way; and consequently our Men must have been exposed to the full Fire
of their whole Artillery. Besides, the Town is on that Side much stronger than
any other; there is an Out-work just under the Walls of the Town, flanked by
the Courtin and the Faces of two Bastions, which might have cost us half our
Troops to possess, before we could have raised a Battery against the Walls. Or
supposing, after all, a competent Breach had been made, what a wise Piece of
Work must it have been to have attempted a Storm against double the Number of
regular Troops within?

ON the contrary, we were so favored by the Situation, when we made the Attack
from the Side of Monjouick, that the Breach was made and the Town taken without
opening of Trenches, or without our being at all incommoded by any Sallies of
the Enemy; as in truth they made not one during the whole Siege. Our great
Battery, which consisted of upwards of fifty heavy Cannon, supplied from the
Ships, and managed by the Seamen, were placed upon a Spot of rising Ground,
just large enough to contain our Guns, with two deep hollow Ways on each Side
the Field, at each End whereof we had raised a little Redoubt, which served to
preserve our Men from the Shot of the Town. Those little Redoubts, in which we
had some Field Pieces, flanked the Battery, and rendered it entirely secure
from any Surprise of the Enemy. There were several other smaller Batteries
raised upon the Hills adjacent, in Places not to be approached, which, in a
manner, rendered all the Artillery of the Enemy useless, by reason their Men
could not ply 'em, but with the utmost Danger; whereas ours were secure, very
few being killed, and those mostly by random Shot.

BUT to return to the General; forced, as he was, to take this extraordinary
Resolution, he concluded, the readiest Way to surprise his Enemies was to elude
his Friends. He therefore called a Council of War ashore, of the Land Officers;
and aboard, of the Admirals and Sea Officers: In both which it was resolved,
that in case the Siege of Barcelona was judged impracticable, and that the
Troops should be re-imbark'd by a Day appointed, an Effort should be made upon
the Kingdom of Naples. Accordingly, the Day affixed being come, the heavy
Artillery landed for the Siege was returned aboard the Ships, and every thing
in appearance prepared for a Re-imbarkment. During which, the General was
obliged to undergo all the Reproaches of a dissatisfied Court; and what was
more uneasy to him, the Murmurings of the Sea Officers, who, not so competent
Judges in what related to Sieges, were one and all inclined to a Design upon
Barcelona; and the rather, because as the Season was so far spent, it was
thought altogether improper to engage the Fleet in any new Undertaking.
However, all Things were so well disguised by our seeming Preparations for a
Retreat, that the very Night our Troops were in March toward the Attack of
Monjouick, there were public Entertainments and Rejoicings in the Town for the
raising of the Siege.

THE Prince of Hesse had taken large Liberties in complaining against all the
Proceedings in the Camp before Barcelona; even to Insinuations, that though the
Earl gave his Opinion for some Effort in public, yet used he not sufficient
Authority over the other General Officers to incline them to comply; throwing
out withal some Hints, that the General from the Beginning had declared himself
in favor of other Operations, and against coming to Catalonia; the latter Part
whereof was nothing but Fact. On the other Side, the Earl of Peterborow
complained, that the boasted Assistance was no way made good; and that in
failure thereof, his Troops were to be sacrificed to the Humors of a Stranger;
one who had no Command; and whose Conduct might bear a Question whether equal
to his Courage. These Reproaches of one another had bred so much ill Blood
between those two great Men, that for above a Fortnight they had no
Correspondence, nor ever exchanged one Word.

The Earl marches to Monjouick
THE Earl, however, having made his proper Dispositions, and delivered out his
Orders, began his March in the Evening with twelve Hundred Foot and two Hundred
Horse, which of necessity were to pass by the Quarters of the Prince of Hesse.
That Prince, on their Appearance, was told that the General was come to speak
with him; and being brought into his Apartment, the Earl acquainted him, that
he had at last resolved upon an Attempt against the Enemy; adding, that now, if
he pleased, he might be a Judge of their Behavior, and see whether his
Officers and Soldiers had deserved that Character which he had so liberally
given 'em. The Prince made answer, that he had always been ready to take his
Share; but could hardly believe, that Troops marching that way could make any
Attempt against the Enemy to satisfaction. However, without further Discourse
he called for his Horse.

BY this we may see what Share Fortune has in the greatest Events. In all
probability the Earl of Peterborow had never engaged in such a dangerous Affair
in cold Blood and unprovoked; and if such an Enterprise had been resolved on in
a regular Way, it is very likely he might have given the Command to some of the
General Officers; since it is not usual, nor hardly allowable, for one, that
commands in chief, to go in Person on such kind of Services. But here we see
the General and Prince, notwithstanding their late indifferent Harmony, engaged
together in this most desperate Undertaking.

BRIGADIER Stanhope and Mr. Methuen (now Sir Paul) were the General's
particular Friends, and those he most consulted, and most confided in; yet he
never imparted this Resolution of his to either of them; for he was not willing
to engage them in a Design so dangerous, and where there was so little Hope of
Success; rather choosing to reserve them as Persons most capable of giving
Advice and Assistance in the Confusion, great enough already, which yet must
have been greater, if any Accident had happened to himself. And I have very
good Reason to believe, that the Motive, which mainly engaged the Earl of
Peterborow in this Enterprise, was to satisfy the Prince of Hesse and the
World, that his Diffidence proceeded from his Concern for the Troops committed
to his Charge, and not for his own Person. On the other Hand, the great
Characters of the two Gentlemen just mentioned are so well known, that it will
easily gain Credit, that the only Way the General could take to prevent their
being of the Party, was to conceal it from them, as he did from all Mankind,
even from the Archduke himself. And certainly there never was a more universal
Surprise than when the firing was heard next Morning from Monjouick.

BUT I now proceed to give an exact Account of this great Action; of which no
Person, that I have heard of, ever yet took upon him to deliver to Posterity
the glorious Particulars; and yet the Consequences and Events, by what follows,
will appear so great, and so very extraordinary, that few^ if any, had they had
it in their Power^ would have denied themselves the Pleasure or the World the
Satisfaction of knowing it.

THE Troops, which marched all Nigh^ along the Foot of the Mountains, arriv'^
two Hours before Day under the Hill of Monjouick, not a Quarter of a Mile from
the outward Works: For this Reason it was taken for granted, whatever the
Design was which the General had proposed to himself, that it would be put in
Execution before Daylight; but the Earl of Peterborow was now pleased to
inform the Officers of the Reasons why he chose to stay till the Light
appeared. He was of opinion that any Success would be impossible, unless the
Enemy came into the outward Ditch under the Bastions of the second Enclosure;
but that if they had time allowed them to come thither, there being no
Palisadoes, our Men, by leaping in upon them, after receipt of their first
Fire, might drive 'em into the upper Works; and following them close, with some
Probability, might force them, under that Confusion, into the inward
Fortifications.

SUCH were the General's Reasons then and there given; after which, having
promised ample Rewards to such as discharged their Duty well, a Lieutenant,
with thirty Men, was ordered to advance toward the Bastion nearest the Town;
and a Captain, with fifty Men, to support him. After the Enemy's Fire they were
to leap into the Ditch, and their Orders were to follow 'em close, if they
retired into the upper Works: Nevertheless, not to pursue 'em farther, if they
made into the inner Fort; but to endeavor to cover themselves within the Gorge
of the Bastion.

A LIEUTENANT and a Captain, with the like Number of Men and the same Orders,
were commanded to a Demi-Bastion at the Extremity of the Fort toward the West,
which was above Musket Shot from the inward Fortification. Toward this Place
the Wall, which was cut into the Rock, was not faced for about twenty Yards;
and here our own Men got up; where they found three Pieces of Cannon upon a
Platform, without any Men to defend them.

THOSE appointed to the Bastion toward the Town were sustained by two hundred
Men; with which the General and Prince went in Person. The like Number, under
the Directions of Colonel Southwell, were to sustain the Attack toward the
West; and about five hundred Men were left under the Command of a Dutch
Colonel, whose Orders were to assist, where, in his own Judgment, he should
think most proper; and these were drawn up between the two Parties appointed to
begin the Assault. My Lot was on the Side where the Prince and Earl were in
Person; and where we sustained the only Loss from the first Fire of the Enemy.

OUR Men, though quite exposed, and though the Glacis was all escarp'd upon the
live Rock, went on with an undaunted Courage; Confederate Army attack Monjouick
and immediately after the first Fire of the Enemy, all, that were not killed or
wounded, leaped in, pel-mel, amongst the Enemy; who, being thus boldly
attacked, and seeing others pouring in upon 'em, retired in great Confusion;
and some one Way, some another, ran into the inward Works.

THERE was a large Port in the Flank of the principal Bastion, toward the
North-East, and a covered Way, through which the General and the Prince of
Hesse followed the flying Forces; and by that Means became possessed of it.
Luckily enough here lay a Number of great Stones in the Gorge of the Bastion,
for the Use of the Fortification; with which we made a Sort of Breast-Work,
before the Enemy recovered of their Amaze, or made any considerable Fire upon
us from their inward Fort, which commanded the upper Part of that Bastion.

WE were afterward informed, that the Commander of the Citadel, expecting but
one Attack, had called off the Men from the most distant and western Part of
the Fort, to that Side which was next the Town; upon which our Men got into a
Demi-Bastion in the most extreme Part of the Fortification. Here they got
Possession of three Pieces of Cannon, with hardly any Opposition; and had
Leisure to cast up a little Retrenchment, and to make use of the Guns they had
taken to defend it. Under this Situation, the Enemy, when drove into the inward
Fort, were exposed to our Fire from those Places we were possessed of, in case
they offered to make any Sally, or other Attempt against us. Thus we every
Moment became better and better prepared against any Effort of the Garrison.
And as they could not pretend to assail us without evident Hazard; so nothing
remained for us to do, till we could bring up our Artillery and Mortars. Now it
was that the General sent for the thousand Men under Brigadier Stanhope's
Command, which he had posted at a Convent, half way between the Town and
Monjouick.

THERE was almost a total Cessation of Fire, the Men on both Sides being under
Cover. The General was in the upper Part of the Bastion; the Prince of Hesse
below, behind a little Work at the Point of the Bastion, whence he could only
see the Heads of the Enemy over the Parapet of the inward Fort. Soon after an
Accident happened which cost that gallant Prince his Life.

THE Enemy had Lines of Communication between Barcelona and Monjouick. The
Governor of the former, upon hearing the firing from the latter, immediately
sent four hundred Dragoons on Horseback, under Orders, that two Hundred
dismounting should reinforce the Garrison, and the other two Hundred should
return with their Horses back to the Town.

WHEN those two Hundred Dragoons were accordingly got into the inward Fort,
unseen by any of our Men, the Spaniards, waving their Hats over their Heads,
repeated over and over, Viva el Rey, Viva. This the Prince of Hesse
unfortunately took for a Signal of their Desire to surrender. Upon which, with
too much Warmth and Precipitancy, calling to the Soldiers following, They
surrender, they surrender, he advanced with near three Hundred Men (who
followed him without any Orders from their General) along the Curtain which led
to the Ditch of the inward Fort. Two Hundred Men taken by the Spaniards.
The Enemy suffered them to come into the Ditch, and there surrounding 'em, took
two Hundred of them Prisoners, at the same time making a Discharge upon the
rest, who were running back the Way they came. This firing brought the Earl of
Peterborow down from the upper Part of the Bastion, to see what was doing
below. When he had just turned the Point of the Bastion, he saw the Prince of
Hesse retiring, with the Men that had so rashly advanced. The Prince of Hesse
killed.
The Earl had exchanged a very few Words with him, when, from a second Fire,
that Prince received a Shot in the great Artery of the Thigh, of which he died
immediately, falling down at the General's Feet, who instantly gave Orders to
carry off the Body to the next Convent.

ALMOST the same Moment an Officer came to acquaint the Earl of Peterborow,
that a great Body of Horse and Foot, at least three Thousand, were on their
March from Barcelona toward the Fort. The Distance is near a Mile, all uneven
Ground; so that the Enemy was either discoverable, or not to be seen, just as
they were marching on the Hills or in the Valleys. However, the General
directly got on Horseback, to take a View of those Forces from the rising
Ground without the Fort, having left all the Posts, which were already taken,
well secured with the allotted Numbers of Officers and Soldiers.

BUT the Event will demonstrate of what Consequence the Absence or Presence of
one Man may prove on great Occasions: No sooner was the Earl out of the Fort,
the Care of which he had left under the Command of the Lord Charlemont (a
Person of known Merit and undoubted Courage, but somewhat too flexible in his
Temper) when a panick Fear (though the Earl, as I have said, was only gone to
take a View of the Enemy) seized upon the Soldiery, which was a little too
easily complied with by the Lord Charlemont, then commanding Officer. True it
is; for I heard an Officer, ready enough to take such Advantages, urge to him,
that none of all those Posts we were become Masters of, were tenable; that to
offer at it would be no better than wilfully sacrificing human Lives to Caprice
and Humor; and just like a Man's knocking his Head against Stone Walls, to try
which was hardest. Having overheard this Piece of Lip-Oratory, and finding by
the Answer that it was too likely to prevail, and that all I was like to say
would avail nothing, I slipped away as fast as I could, to acquaint the General
with the Danger impending.

AS I passed along, I took notice that the Panick was upon the Increase, the
general Rumor affirming, that we should be all cut off by the Troops that were
come out of Barcelona, if we did not immediately gain the Hills, or the Houses
possessed by the Miquelets. Officers and Soldiers, under this prevailing
Terror, quitted their Posts; and in one united Body (the Lord Charlemont at the
Head of them) marched, or rather hurried out of the Fort; and were come half
way down the Hill before the Earl of Peterborow came up to them. Though on my
acquainting him with the shameful and surprising Accident he made no Stay; but
answering, with a good deal of Vehemence, Good God, is it possible? hastened
back as fast as he could.

I NEVER thought my self happier than in this Piece of Service to my Country. I
confess I could not but value it, as having been therein more than a little
instrumental in the glorious Successes which succeeded; since immediately upon
this Notice from me, the Earl galloped up the Hill, and lighting when he came
to Lord Charlemont, he took his Half-Pike out of his Hand; and turning to the
Officers and Soldiers, told them, if they would not face about and follow him,
they should have the Scandal and eternal Infamy upon them of having deserted
their Posts, and abandoned their General.

IT was surprising to see with what Alacrity and new Courage they faced about
and followed the Earl of Peterborow. In a Moment they had forgot their
Apprehensions; and, without doubt, had they met with any Opposition, they would
have behaved themselves with the greatest Bravery. But as these Motions were
unperceived by the Enemy, all the Posts were regained, and anew possessed in
less than half an Hour, without any Loss: Though, had our Forces marched half
Musket Shot farther, their Retreat would have been perceived, and all the
Success attendant on this glorious Attempt must have been entirely blasted.

ANOTHER Incident which attended this happy Enterprise was this: The two
hundred Men which fell into the Hands of the Enemy, by the unhappy Mistake of
the Prince of Hesse, were carried directly into the Town. The Marquess of
Risburg, a Lieutenant General, who commanded the three thousand Men which were
marching from the Town to the Relief of the Fort, examined the Prisoners, as
they passed by; and they all agreeing that the General and the Prince of Hesse
were in Person with the Troops that made the Attack on Monjouick, the Marquess
gave immediate Orders to retire to the Town; taking it for granted, that the
main Body of the Troops attended the Prince and General; and that some Design
therefore was on foot to intercept his Return, in case he should venture too
far. Thus the unfortunate Loss of our two hundred Men turned to our Advantage,
in preventing the Advance of the Enemy, which must have put the Earl of
Peterborow to inconceivable Difficulties.

THE Body of one Thousand, under Brigadier Stanhope, being come up to
Monjouick, and no Interruption given us by the Enemy, our Affairs were put into
very good Order on this Side; while the Camp on the other Side was so
fortified, that the Enemy, during the Siege, never made one Effort against it.
In the mean time, the Communication between the two Camps was secure enough;
although our Troops were obliged to a tedious March along the Foot of the
Hills, whenever the General thought fit to relieve those on Duty on the Side of
the Attack, from those Regiments encamped on the West Side of Barcelona.

THE next Day, after the Earl of Peterborow had taken Care to secure the first
Camp to the Eastward of the Town, he gave Orders to the Officers of the Fleet
to land the Artillery and Ammunition behind the Fortress to the Westward.
Immediately upon the Landing whereof, two Mortars were fixed; from both which
we plied the Fort of Monjouick furiously with our Bombs. But the third or
fourth Day, one of our Shells fortunately lighting on their Magazine of Powder,
blew it up; Magazine of Monjouick blown up, and the Fortress taken.
and with it the Governor, and many principal Officers who were at Dinner with
him. The Blast, at the same Instant, threw down a Face of one of the smaller
Bastions; which the vigilant Miquelets, ready enough to take all Advantages, no
sooner saw (for they were under the Hill, very near the Place) but they readily
entered, while the Enemy were under the utmost Confusion. If the Earl, no less
watchful than they, had not at the same Moment thrown himself in with some
regular Troops, and appeased the general Disorder, in all probability the
Garrison had been put to the Sword. However, the General's Presence not only
allayed the Fury of the Miquelets; but kept his own Troops under strictest
Discipline: So that in a happy Hour for the frighted Garrison, the General gave
Officers and Soldiers Quarters, making them Prisoners of War.

HOW critical was that Minute wherein the General met his retreating Commander?
a very few Steps farther had excluded us our own Conquests, to the utter Loss
of all those greater Glories which ensued. Nor would that have been the worst;
for besides the Shame attending such an ill concerted Retreat from our Acquests
on Monjouick, we must have felt the accumulative Disgrace of infamously
retiring aboard the Ships that brought us; but Heaven reserved for our General
amazing Scenes both of Glory and Mortification.

I CANNOT here omit one Singularity of Life, which will demonstrate Men's
different Way of Thinking, if not somewhat worse; when many Years after, to one
in Office, who seemed a little too deaf to my Complaints, and by that Means
irritating my human Passions, in Justice to my self, as well as Cause, I urged
this Piece of Service, by which I not only preserved the Place, but the Honor
of my Country; that Minister petite, to mortify my Expectations and baffle my
Plea, with a Grimace as odd as his Logic, returned, that, in his Opinion, the
Service pretended was a Disservice to the Nation; since Perseverance had cost
the Government more Money than all our Conquests were worth, could we have kept
'em. So irregular are the Conceptions of Man, when even great Actions thwart
the Bent of an interested Will!

THE Fort of Monjouick being thus surprizingly reduced, furnished a strange
Vivacity to Men's Expectations, and as extravagantly flattered their Hopes; for
as Success never fails to excite weaker Minds to pursue their good Fortune,
though many times to their own Loss; so is it often too apt to push on more
elevated Spirits to renew the Encounter for atchieving new Conquests, by
hazarding too rashly all their former Glory. Accordingly, every Body now began
to make his utmost Efforts; and looked upon himself as a Drone, if he was not
employed in doing something or other toward pushing forward the Siege of
Barcelona it self, and raising proper Batteries for that Purpose^ But, after
all, it must in Justice be acknowledged, that notwithstanding this prodigious
Success that attended this bold Enterprise, the Land Forces of themselves^
without the Assistance of the Sailors, could never have reduced the Town. The
Commanders and Officers of the Fleet had always evinced themselves Favorers of
the Project upon Barcelona. A new Undertaking so late in the Year, as I have
sai^ before, was their utter Aversion, and what they hated to hear of. Elated
therefore with a Beginning so auspicious, they gave a more willing Assistance
than could have been asked, or judiciously expected. The Admirals forgot their
Element, and acted as General Officers at Land: They came every Day from their
Ships, with a Body of Men formed into Companies, and regularly marshalled and
commanded by Captains and Lieutenants of their own. Captain Littleton in
particular, one of the most advanced Captains in the whole Fleet, offered of
himself to take care of the Landing and Conveyance of the Artillery to the
Camp. And answerable to that his first Zeal was his Vigor all along; for
finding it next to an Impossibility to draw the Cannon and Mortars up such vast
Precipices by Horses, if the Country had afforded them, he caused Harnesses to
be made for two hundred Men; and by that Means, after a prodigious Fatigue and
Labor, brought the Cannon and Mortars necessary for the Siege up to the very
Batteries.

Barcelona besieged.
IN this Manner was the Siege begun; nor was it carried on with any less
Application; the Approaches being made by an Army of Besiegers, that very
little, if at all, exceeded the Number of the Besieged; not altogether in a
regular Manner, our few Forces would not admit it; but yet with Regularity
enough to secure our two little Camps, and preserve a Communication between
both, not to be interrupted or incommoded by the Enemy. We had soon erected
three several Batteries against the Place, all on the West Side of the Town,
viz. one of nine Guns, another of Twelve, and the last of upwards of Thirty.
From all which we plied the Town incessantly, and with all imaginable Fury; and
very often in whole Vollies.

NEVERTHELESS it was thought not only advisable, but necessary, to erect
another Battery, upon a lower Piece of Ground under a small Hill; which lying
more within Reach, and opposite to those Places where the Walls were imagined
weakest, would annoy the Town the more; and being designed for six Guns only,
might soon be perfected. A French Engeneer had the Direction; and indeed very
quickly perfected it. But when it came to be considered which way to get the
Cannon to it, most were o^ opinion that it would be absolutely impracticable,
by reason of the vast Descent; tho^ I believe they might have added a stronge^
Reason, and perhaps more intrinsic, that i^ was extremely exposed to the Fire
of the Enemy.

HAVING gained some little Reputation in the Attack of Monjouick, this
Difficulty was at last to be put upon me; and as some not my Enemies, supposed,
more out of Envy than good Will. However, when I came to the Place, and had
carefully taken a View of it, though I was sensible enough of the Difficulty, I
made my main Objection as to the Time for accomplishing it; for it was then
between Nine and Ten, and the Guns were to be mounted by Daylight. Neither
could I at present see any other Way to answer their Expectations, than by
casting the Cannon down the Precipice, at all Hazards, to the Place below,
where that fourth Battery was erected.

THIS wanted not Objections to; and therefore to answer my Purpose, as to point
of Time, sixty Men more were ordered me, as much as possible to facilitate the
Work by Numbers; and accordingly I set about it. Just as I was setting all
Hands to work, and had given Orders to my Men to begin some Paces back, to make
the Descent more gradual, and thereby render the Task a little more feasible,
Major Collier, who commanded the Train, came to me; and perceiving the
Difficulties of the Undertaking, in a Fret told me, I was imposed upon; and
vowed he would go and find out Brigadier Petit, and let him know the
Impossibility, as well as the Unreasonableness of the Task I was put upon. He
had scarce uttered those Words, and turned himself round to perform his
Promise, when an unlucky Shot with a Musket-Ball wounded him through the
Shoulder; upon which he was carried off, and I saw him not till some
considerable time after.

BY the painful Diligence, and the additional Compliment of Men, however, I so
well succeeded (such was my great good Fortune) that the Way was made, and the
Guns, by the Help of Fascines, and other lesser Preparations below, safely let
down and mounted; so that that fourth Battery began to play upon the Town
before Break of Day; and with all the Success that was proposed.

IN short, the Breach in a very few Days after was found wholly practicable;
and all Things were got ready for a general Storm. Governor of Barcelona beats
a Parley, and agrees to surrender in three Days.
Which Don Valasco the Governor being sensible of, immediately beat a Parley;
upon which it was, among other Articles, concluded, that the Town should be
surrendered in three Days; and the better to ensure it, the Bastion, which
commanded the Port St. Angelo, was directly put into our Possession.

BUT before the Expiration of the limited three Days, a very unexpected
Accident fell out, which hastened the Surrender. Don Valasco, during his
Government, had behaved himself very arbitrarily, and thereby procured, as the
Consequence of it, a large Proportion of ill will, not only among the Townsmen,
but among the Miquelets, who had, in their Zeal to King Charles, flocked from
all Parts of Catalonia to the Siege of their Capital; and who, on the Signing
of the Articles of Surrender, had found various Ways, being well acquainted
with the most private Avenues, to get by Night into the Town: So that early in
the Morning they began to plunder all that they knew Enemies to King Charles,
or thought Friends to the Prince his Competitor.

THEIR main Design was upon Valasco the Governor, whom, if they could have got
into their Hands, it was not to be questioned, but as far as his Life and Limbs
would have served, they would have sufficiently satiated their Vengeance upon.
He expected no less; and therefore concealed himself, till the Earl of
Peterborow could give Orders for his more safe and private Conveyance by Sea to
Alicant.

NEVERTHELESS, in the Town all was in the utmost Confusion; which the Earl of
Peterborow, at the very first hearing, hastened to appease; with his usual
Alacrity he rid all alone to Port St. Angelo, where at that time my self
happened to be; and demanding to be admitted, the Officer of the Guard, under
Fear and Surprise, opened the Wicket, through which the Earl entered, and I
after him.

SCARCE had we gone a hundred Paces, when we saw a Lady of apparent Quality,
and indisputable Beauty, in a strange, but most affecting Agony, flying from
the apprehended Fury of the Miquelets; her lovely Hair was all flowing about
her Shoulders, which, and the Consternation she was in, rather added to, than
any thing diminished from the Charms of an Excess of Beauty. She, as is very
natural to People in Distress, made up directly to the Earl, her Eyes
satisfying her he was a Person likely to give her all the Protection she
wanted. And as soon as ever she came near enough, in a Manner that declared her
Quality before she spoke, she craved that Protection, telling him, the better
to secure it, who it was that asked it. But the generous Earl presently
convinced her, he wanted no Entreaties, having, before he knew her to be the
Duchess of Popoli, taken her by the Hand, in order to convey her through the
Wicket which he entered at, to a Place of Safety without the Town.

I STAYED behind, while the Earl conveyed the distressed Duchess to her
requested Asylum; and I believe it was much the longest Part of an Hour before
he returned. But as soon as ever he came back, he, and my self, at his Command,
repaired to the Place of most Confusion, which the extraordinary Noise full
readily directed us to; and which happened to be on the Parade before the
Palace. There it was that the Miquelets were making their utmost Efforts to get
into their Hands the almost sole Occasion of the Tumult, and the Object of
their raging Fury, the Person of Don Valasco, the late Governor.

IT was here that the Earl preserved that Governor from the violent, but
perhaps too just Resentments of the Miquelets; and, as I said before, conveyed
him by Sea to Alicant. And, indeed, I could little doubt the Effect, or be any
thing surpised at the Easiness of the Task, when I saw, that wherever he
appeared the popular Fury was in a Moment allayed, and that every Dictate of
that General was assented to with the utmost Cheerfulness and Deference.
Valasco, before his Embarkment, had given Orders, in Gratitude to his
Preserver, for all the Gates to be delivered up, though short of the stipulated
Term; and they were accordingly so delivered, and our Troops took Possession so
soon as ever that Governor was aboard the Ship that was to convey him to
Alicant.

DURING the Siege of Barcelona, Brigadier Stanhope ordered a Tent to be pitched
as near the Trenches as possibly could be with Safety; where he not only
entertained the chief Officers who were upon Duty, but likewise the Catalonian
Gentlemen who brought Miquelets to our Assistance. I remember I saw an old
Cavalier, having his only Son with him, who appeared a fine young Gentleman,
about twenty Years of Age, go into the Tent, in order to dine with the
Brigadier. But whilst they were at Dinner, an unfortunate Shot came from the
Bastion of St. Antonio, and entirely struck off the Head of the Son. The Father
immediately rose up, first looking down upon his headless Child, and then
lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, whilst the Tears ran down his Cheeks, he crossed
himself, and only said, Fiat voluntas tua, and bore it with a wonderful
Patience. 'Twas a sad Spectacle, and truly it affects me now whilst I am
writing.

THE Earl of Peterborow, though for some time after the Revolution he had been
employed in civil Affairs, returned to the military Life with great
Satisfaction, which was ever his Inclination. Brigadier Stanhope, who was
justly afterward created an Earl, did well deserve this Motto, Tam Mart quam
Mercurio; for truly he behaved, all the time he continued in Spain, as if he
had been inspired with Conduct; for the Victory at Almanar was entirely owing
to him; and likewise at the Battle of Saragosa he distinguished himself with
great Bravery. That he had not Success at Bruhega was not his Fault; for no Man
can resist Fate; for 'twas decreed by Heaven that Philip should remain King of
Spain, and Charles to be Emperor of Germany. Yet each of these Monarchs have
been ungrateful to the Instruments which the Almighty made use of to preserve
them upon their Thrones; for one had not been King of Spain but for France; and
the other had not been Emperor but for England.

Barcelona, the chief Place in Catalonia, being thus in our Hands, as soon as
the Garrison, little inferior to our Army, had marched out with Drums beating,
Colors flying, etc. according to the Articles, Charles the Third made his
public Entry, and was proclaimed King, and received with the general
Acclamations, and all other Demonstrations of Joy suitable to that great
Occasion.

Public Rejoycings.
SOME Days after which, the Citizens, far from being satiated with their former
Demonstrations of their Duty, sent a Petition to the King, by proper Deputies
for that Purpose appointed, desiring Leave to give more ample Instances of
their Affections in a public Cavalcade. The King granted their Request, and
the Citizens, pursuant thereto, made their Preparations.

ON the Day appointed, the King, placed in a Balcony belonging to the House of
the Earl of Peterborow, appeared ready to honor the Show. The Ceremonial, to
speak nothing figuratively, was very fine and grand: Those of the first Rank
made their Appearance in decent Order, and upon fine Horses; and others under
Arms, and in Companies, marched with native Gravity and Grandeur, all saluting
his Majesty as they passed by, after the Spanish Manner, which that Prince
returned with the Movement of his Hand to his Mouth; for the Kings of Spain are
not allowed to salute, or return a Salute, by any Motion to, or of, the Hat.

AFTER these followed several Pageants; the first of which was drawn by Mules,
set off to the Height with stateliest Feathers, and adorned with little Bells.
Upon the Top of this Pageant appeared a Man dressed all in Green; but in the
Likeness of a Dragon. The Pageant making a Stop just over against the Balcony
where the King sat, the Dragonical Representative diverted him with great
Variety of Dancings, the Earl of Peterborow all the time throwing out Dollars
by Handfuls among the Populace, which they as constantly received with the loud
Acclamation and repeated Cries of Viva, Viva, Carlos Terceros, Viva la Casa d'
Austria.

WHEN that had played its Part, another Pageant, drawn as before, made a like
full Stop before the same Balcony. On this was placed a very large Cage, or
Aviary, the Cover of which, by Springs contrived for that Purpose, immediately
flew open, and out of it a surprising Flight of Birds of various Colors.
These, all amazed at their sudden Liberty, which I took to be the Emblem
intended, hovered a considerable space of time over and about their Place of
Freedom, chirping, singing, and otherwise testifying their mighty Joy for their
so unexpected Enlargement.

THERE were many other Pageants; but having little in them very remarkable, I
have forgot the Particulars. Nevertheless, every one of them was dismissed with
the like Acclamations of Viva, Viva; the Whole concluding with Bonfires and
Illuminations common on all such Occasions.

I CANNOT here omit one very remarkable Instance of the Catholic Zeal of that
Prince, which I was soon after an Eyewitness of. I was at that time in the
Fruit-Market, when the King passing by in his Coach, the Host (whether by
Accident or Contrivance I cannot say) was brought, at that very Juncture, out
of the great Church, in order, as I after understood, to a poor sick Woman's
receiving the Sacrament. On Sight of the Host the King came out of his Coach,
kneeled down in the Street, which at that time proved to be very dirty, till
the Host passed by; then rose up, and taking the lighted Flambeau from him who
bore it, he followed the Priest up a straight nasty Alley, and there up a dark
ordinary Pair of Stairs, where the poor sick Woman lay. There he stayed till
the whole Ceremony was over, when, returning to the Door of the Church, he very
faithfully restored the lighted Flambeau to the Fellow he had taken it from,
the People all the while crying out Viva, Viva; an Acclamation, we may imagine,
intended to his Zeal, as well as his Person.

ANOTHER remarkable Accident, of a much more moral Nature, I must, in justice
to the Temperance of that, in this truly inimitable People, recite. I was one
Day walking in one of the most populous Streets of that City, where I found an
uncommon Concourse of People, of all Sorts, got together; and imagining so
great a Crowd could not be assembled on a small Occasion, I pressed in among the
rest; and after a good deal of Struggling and Difficulty, reached into the Ring
and Center of that mixed Multitude. But how did I blush? with what Confusion
did I appear? when I found one of my own Countrymen, a drunken Granadier, the
attractive Loadstone of all that high and low Mob, and the Butt of all their
Merriment? It will be easily imagined to be a Thing not a little surprising to
one of our Country, to find that a drunken Man should be such a wonderful
Sight: However, the witty Sarcasms that were then by high and low thrown upon
that senseless Creature, and as I interpreted Matters, me in him, were so
pungent, that if I did not curse my Curiosity, I thought it best to withdraw my
self as fast as Legs could carry me away.

BARCELONA being now under King Charles, the Towns of Gironne, Tarragona,
Tortosa, and Lerida, immediately declared for him. To every one of which
Engeneers being ordered, it was my Lot to be sent to Tortosa. This Town is
situated on the Side of the River Ebro, over which there is a fair and famous
Bridge of Boats. The Waters of this River are always of a dirty red Color,
somewhat fouler than our Moorish Waters; yet is it the only Water the
Inhabitants drink, or covet to drink; and every House providing for its own
Convenience Cisterns to preserve it in, by a few Hours standing it becomes as
clear as the clearest Rock-water, but as soft as Milk. In short, for Softness,
Brightness, and Pleasantness of Taste, the Natives prefer it to all the Waters
in the World. And I must declare in favor of their Opinion, that none ever
pleased me like it.

THIS Town was of the greater Moment to our Army, as opening a Passage into the
Kingdom of Valencia on one Side, and the Kingdom of Arragon on the other: And
being of it self tolerably defensible, in human Appearance might probably repay
a little Care and Charge in its Repair and Improvement. Upon this Employ was I
appointed, and thus was I busied, till the Arrival of the Earl of Peterborow
with his little Army, in order to march to Valencia, the Capital of that
Province. Here he left in Garrison Colonel Hans Hamilton's Regiment; the Place,
nevertheless, was under the Command of a Spanish Governor, appointed by King
Charles.

WHILE the Earl stayed a few Days at this Place, under Expectation of the
promised Succors from Barcelona, he received a Proprio (or Express) from the
King of Spain, full of Excuses, instead of Forces. And yet the very same
Letter, in a paradoxical Manner, commanded him, at all Events, to attempt the
Relief of Santo Mattheo, where Colonel Jones commanded, and which was then
under Siege by the Conde de los Torres (as was the Report) with upwards of
three thousand Men. The Earl of Peterborow could not muster above one thousand
Foot, and about two hundred Horse; a small Force to make an Attempt of that
Nature upon such a superior Power: Yet the Earl's Vivacity (as will be
occasionally further observed in the Course of these Memoirs) never much
regarded Numbers, so there was but room, by any Stratagem, to hope for Success.
True it is, for his greater Encouragement and Consolation, the same Letter
intimated, that a great Concourse of the Country People being up in Arms, to
the Number of many Thousands, in Favor of King Charles, and wanting only
Officers, the Enterprise would be easy, and unattended with much Danger. But
upon mature Enquiry, the Earl found that great Body of Men all in nubibus; and
that the Conde, in the plain Truth of the Matter, was much stronger than the
Letter at first represented.

SANTO Mattheo was a Place of known Importance; and that from its Situation,
which cut off all Communication between Catalonia and Valencia; and,
consequently, should it fall into the Hands of the Enemy, the Earl's Design
upon the latter must inevitably have been postpon'd. It must be granted, the
Commands for attempting the Relief of it were pressing and peremptory;
nevertheless, the Earl was very conscious to himself, that as the promised
Reinforcements were suspended, his Officers would not approve of the Attempt
upon the Foot of such vast Inequalities; and their own declared Sentiments soon
confirmed the Dictates of the Earl's Reason. He therefore addresses himself to
those Officers in a different Manner: He told 'em he only desired they would be
passive, and leave it to him to work his own Way. Accordingly, the Earl found
out and hired two Spanish Spies, for whose Fidelity (as his great Precaution
always led him to do) he took sufficient Security; and dispatched 'em with a
Letter to Colonel Jones, Governor of the Place, intimating his Readiness, as
well as Ability, to relieve him; and, above all, exhorting him to have the
Miquelets in the Town ready, on Sight of his Troops, to issue out, pursue, and
plunder; since that would be all they would have to do, and all he would expect
at their Hands. The Spies were dispatched accordingly; and, pursuant to
Instructions, one betrayed and discovered the other who had the Letter in
charge to deliver to Colonel Jones. The Earl, to carry on the Feint, having in
the mean time, by dividing his Troops, and marching secretly over the
Mountains, drawn his Men together, so as to make their Appearance on the Height
of a neighboring Mountain, little more than Cannon-shot from the Enemy's Camp.
Santo Mattheo relieved by the Earl of Peterborow.
The Tale of the Spies was fully confirmed, and the Conde (though an able
General) marched off with some Precipitation with his Army; and by that Means
the Earl's smaller Number of twelve Hundred had Liberty to march into the Town
without Interruption. I must not let slip an Action of Colonel Jones's just
before the Earl's Delivery of them: The Conde, for want of Artillery, had set
his Miners to work; and the Colonel, finding they had made some dangerous
Advances, turned the Course of a Rivulet, that ran through the Middle of the
Town, in upon them, and made them quit a Work they thought was brought to
Perfection.

SANTO Mattheo being relieved, as I have said, the Earl, though he had so far
gained his Ends, left not the flying Enemy without a Feint of Pursuit; with
such Caution, nevertheless, that in case they should happen to be better
informed of his Weakness, he might have a Resource either back again to Santo
Mattheo, or to Vinaros on the Seaside; or some other Place, as occasion might
require. But having just before received fresh Advice, that the Reinforcements
he expected were anew countermanded; and that the Duke of Anjou had increased
his Troops to twelve thousand Men; the Officers, not enough elated with the
last Success to adventure upon new Experiments, resolved, in a Council of War,
to advise the Earl, who had just before rereiv'd a discretionary Commission in
lieu of Troops, so to post the Forces under him, as not to be cut off from
being able to assist the King in Person; or to march to the Defense of
Catalonia, in case of Necessity.

PURSUANT to this Resolution of the Council of War, the Earl of Peterborow,
though still intent upon his Expedition into Valencia (which had been afresh
commanded, even while his Supplies were countermanded) orders his Foot, in a
truly bad Condition, by tedious Marches Day and Night over the Mountains, to
Vinaros; and with his two hundred Horse, set out to prosecute his pretended
Design of pursuing the flying Enemy; resolved, if possible, notwithstanding all
seemingly desperate Circumstances, to perfect the Security of that Capital.

TO that Purpose, the Earl, with his small Body of Patrolers, went on
frightning the Enemy, till they came under the Walls of Nules, a Town fortified
with the best Walls, regular Towers, and in the best Repair of any in that
Kingdom. But even here, upon the Appearance of the Earl's Forlorn (if they
might not properly at that time all have passed under that Character) under the
same Panick they left that fensible Town, with only one Thousand of the Town's
People, well armed, for the Defense of it. Yet was it scarce to be imagined,
that the Earl, with his small Body of two hundred Horse, should be able to gain
Admission; or, indeed, under such Circumstances, to attempt it. But bold as the
Undertaking was, his good Genius went along with him; and so good a Genius was
it, that it rarely left him without a good Effect. He had been told the Day
before, that the Enemy, on leaving Nules, had got Possession of Villa Real,
where they put all to the Sword. What would have furnished another with Terror,
inspired his Lordship with a Thought as fortunate as it was successful. The
Earl rides up to the very Gates of the Town, at the Head of his Party, and
peremptorily demands the chief Magistrate, or a Priest, immediately to be sent
out to him; and that under Penalty of being all put to the Sword, and used as
the Enemy had used those at Villa-Real the Day or two before. The Troops, that
had so lately left the Place, had left behind 'em more Terror than Men; which,
together with the peremptory Demand of the Earl, soon produced some Priests to
wait upon the General. By their Readiness to obey, the Earl very justly
imagined Fear to be the Motive; wherefore, to improve their Terror, he only
allowed them six Minutes time to resolve upon a Surrender, telling them, that
otherwise, so soon as his Artillery was come up, he would lay them under the
utmost Extremities. The Priests returned with this melancholy Message into the
Place; Nules surrendered to the Earl of Peterborow.
and in a very short time after the Gates were thrown open. Upon the Earl's
Entrance he found two hundred Horse, which were the Original of his Lordship's
forming that Body of Horse, which afterward proved the saving of Valencia.

THE News of the taking of Nules soon overtook the flying Enemy; and so
increased the Apprehensions of their Danger, that they renewed their March the
same Day; though what they had taken before would have satisfied them much
better without it. On the other hand, the Earl was so well pleased with his
Success, that leaving the Enemy to fly before their Fears, he made a short Turn
toward Castillon de la Plana, a considerable, but open Town, where his
Lordship furnished himself with four hundred Horses more; and all this under
the Assurance that his Troops were driving the Enemy before them out of the
Kingdom. Hence he sent Orders to Colonel Pierce's Regiment at Vinaros to meet
him at Oropesa, a Place at no great Distance; where, when they came, they were
very pleasingly surpised at their being well mounted, and furnished with all
Accoutrements necessary. After which, leaving 'em cantoned in walled Towns,
where they could not be disturbed without Artillery, that indefatigable
General, leaving them full Orders, went on his way toward Tortosa.

AT Vinaros the Earl met with Advice, that the Spanish Militia of the Kingdom
of Valencia were assembled, and had already advanced a Day's March at least
into that Country. Upon which, collecting, as fast as he could, the whole Corpse
together, the Earl resolved to penetrate into Valencia directly;
notwithstanding this whole collected Body would amount to no more than six
hundred Horse and two thousand Foot.

BUT there was a strong Pass over a River, just under the Walls of Molviedro,
which must be first disputed and taken. This Brigadier Mahoni, by the Orders of
the Duke of Arcos, who commanded the Troops of the Duke of Anjou in the Kingdom
of Valencia, had taken care to secure. Molviedro described.
Molviedro, though not very strong, is a walled Town, very populous of it self;
and had in it, besides a Garrison of eight hundred Men, most of Mahoni's
Dragoons. It lies at the very Bottom of a high Hill; on the upper Part whereof
they show the Ruins of the once famous SAGUNTUM; Saguntum.
famous sure to Eternity, if Letters shall last so long, for an inviolable
Fidelity to a negligent Confederate, against an implacable Enemy. Here yet
appear the visible Vestigia of awful Antiquity, in half standing Arches, and
the yet unlevell'd Walls and Towers of that once celebrated City. I could not
but look upon all these with the Eyes of Despite, in regard to their Enemy
Hannibal; with those of Disdain, in respect to the uncommon and unaccountable
Supineness of its Confederates, the Romans; but with those of Veneration, as to
the Memory of a glorious People, who rather than stand reproached with a Breach
of Faith, or the Brand of Cowardice, chose to sacrifice themselves, their
Wives, Children, and all that was dear to them, in the Flames of their expiring
City.

IN Molviedro, as I said before, Mahoni commanded, with eight hundred Men,
besides Inhabitants; which, together with our having but little Artillery,
induced the Officers under the Earl of Peterborow reasonably enough to imagine
and declare, that there could be no visible Appearance of surmounting such
Difficulties. The Earl, nevertheless, instead of indulging such Despondencies,
gave them Hope, that what Strength served not to accomplish, Art might possibly
obtain. To that Purpose he proposed an Interview between himself and Mahoni;
and accordingly sent an Officer with a Trumpet to intimate his Desire. The
Motion was agreed to; and the Earl having previously station'd his Troops to
advantage, and his little Artillery at a convenient Distance, with Orders they
should appear on a slow March on the Side of a rising Hill, during the time of
Conference, went to the Place appointed; only, as had been stipulated, attended
with a small Party of Horse. When they were met, the Earl first offered all he
could to engage Mahoni to the Interest of King Charles; proposing some Things
extravagant enough (as Mahoni himself some time after told me) to stagger the
Faith of a Catholic; but all to little Purpose: Mahoni was inflexible, which
obliged the Earl to new Measures.

WHEREUPON the Earl frankly told him, that he could not however but esteem the
Confidence he had put in him; and therefore, to make some Retaliation, he was
ready to put it in his Power to avoid the Barbarities lately executed at
Villa-Real. "My Relation to you, continued the General, inclines me to spare a
Town under your Command. You see how near my Forces are; and can hardly doubt
our soon being Masters of the Place: What I would therefore offer you, said the
Earl, is a Capitulation, that my Inclination may be held in Countenance by my
Honor. Barbarities, however justified by Example, are my utter Aversion, and
against my Nature; and to testify so much, together with my good Will to your
Person, was the main Intent of this Interview."

THIS Frankness so far prevailed on Mahoni, that he agreed to return an Answer
in half an Hour. Accordingly, an Answer was returned by a Spanish Officer, and
a Capitulation agreed upon; the Earl at the same time endeavoring to bring
over that Officer to King Charles, on much the same Topics he used with
Mahoni. But finding this equally fruitless, whether it was that he tacitly
reproached the Officer with a Want of Consideration in neglecting to follow the
Example of his Commander, or what else, he created in that Officer such a
Jealousy of Mahoni, that was afterward very serviceable to him in his further
Design.

TO forward which to a good Issue, the Earl immediately made choice of two
Dragoons, who, upon promise of Promotion, undertook to go as Spies to the Duke
of Arcos, whose Forces lay not far off, on the other Side a large Plain, which
the Earl must unavoidably pass, and which would inevitably be attended with
almost insuperable Dangers, if there attacked by a Force so much superior.
Those Spies, according to Instructions, were to discover to the Duke, that they
overheard the Conference between the Earl and Mahoni; and at the same time saw
a considerable Number of Pistoles delivered into Mahoni's Hands, large Promises
passing at that Instant reciprocally: But above all, that the Earl had
recommended to him the procuring the March of the Duke over the Plain between
them. The Spies went and delivered all according to Concert; concluding, before
the Duke, that they would ask no Reward, but undergo any Punishment, if Mahoni
did not very soon send to the Duke a Request to march over the Plain, in order
to put the concerted Plot in execution. It was not long after this pretended
Discovery before Mahoni did send indeed an Officer to the Duke, desiring the
March of his Forces over the Plain; but, in reality, to obstruct the Earl's
Passage, which he knew very well must be that and no other way. However, the
Duke being prepossessed by the Spies, and what those Spanish Officers that at
first escaped had before infused, took Things in their Sense; and as soon as
Mahoni, who was forced to make the best of his way over the Plain before the
Earl of Peterborow, arrived at his Camp, he was put under Arrest and sent to
Madrid. The Duke having thus imbibed the Venom, and taken the Alarm,
immediately decamped in Confusion, and took a different Rout than at first he
intended; leaving that once formidable Plain open to the Earl, without an Enemy
to obstruct him. In some little time after he arrived at Madrid, Mahoni made
his Innocence appear, and was created a General; while the Duke of Arcos was
recalled from his Post of Honor.

The Earl's Entry into the City of Valencia.
THE Day after we arrived at Valencia, the Gates of which fine City were set
open to us with the highest Demonstrations of Joy. I called it a fine City; but
sure it richly deserves a brighter Epithet, since it is a common Saying among
the Spaniards, that the Pleasures of Valencia would make a Jew forget
Jerusalem. It is most sweetly situated in a very beautiful Plain, and within
half a League of the Mediterranean Sea. It never wants any of the Fragrancies
of Nature, and always has something to delight the most curious Eye. It is
famous to a Proverb for fine Women; but as infamous, and only in that so, for
the Race of Bravoes, the common Companions of the Ladies of Pleasure in this
Country. These Wretches are so Case-hardened, they will commit a Murder for a
Dollar, though they run their Country for it when they have done. Not that other
Parts of this Nation are uninfested with this sort of Animals; but here their
Numbers are so great, that if a Catalogue was to be taken of those in other
Parts of that Country, perhaps nine in ten would be found by Birth to be of
this Province.

BUT to proceed, though the Citizens, and all Sorts of People, were redundant in
their various Expressions of Joy, for an Entry so surprising, and utterly lost
to their Expectation, whatever it was to their Wishes, the Earl had a secret
Concern for the Public, which lay gnawing at his Heart, and which yet he was
forced to conceal. He knew that he had not four thousand Soldiers in the Place,
and not Powder or Ammunition for those; nor any Provisions laid in for any
thing like a Siege. On the other Hand, the Enemy without were upwards of seven
Thousand, with a Body of four Thousand more, not fifteen Leagues off, on their
March to join them. Add to this, the Marshall de Thesse was no farther off
than Madrid, a very few Days March from Valencia; a short Way indeed for the
Earl (who, as was said before, was wholly unprovided for a Siege, which was
reported to be the sole End of the Mareschal's moving that Way.) But the Earl's
never-failing Genius resolved again to attempt that by Art, which the Strength
of his Forces utterly disallowed him. And in the first Place, his Intelligence
telling him that sixteen twenty-four Pounders, with Stores and Ammunition
answerable for a Siege, were shipped off for the Enemy's Service at Alicant, the
Earl forthwith lays a Design, and with his usual Success intercepts 'em all,
supplying that way his own Necessities at the Expense of the Enemy.

THE four thousand Men ready to reinforce the Troops nearer Valencia, were the
next Point to be undertaken; but hic labor, hoc opus; since the greater Body
under the Conde de las Torres (who, with Mahoni, was now reinstated in his
Post) lay between the Earl and those Troops intended to be dispersed. And what
inhaunc'd the Difficulty, the River Xucar must be passed in almost the Face of
the Enemy. Great Disadvantages as these were, they did not discourage the Earl.
He detached by Night four hundred Horse and eight hundred Foot who marched with
such hasty Silence, that they surpised that great Body, routed 'em, A small
Party of the Earl's routs a Body of four Thousand.
and brought into Valencia six hundred Prisoners very safely, notwithstanding
they were obliged, under the same Night-Covert, to pass very near a Body of
three Thousand of the Enemy's Horse. Such a prodigious Victory would hardly
have gained Credit in that City, if the Prisoners brought in had not been
living Witnesses of the Action as well as the Triumph. The Conde de las Torres,
upon these two military Rebuffs, drew off to a more convenient Distance, and
left the Earl a little more at ease in his new Quarters.

HERE the Earl of Peterborow made his Residence for some time. He was extremely
well beloved; his affable Behavior exacted as much from all; and he preserved
such a good Correspondence with the Priests and the Ladies, that he never
failed of the most early and best Intelligence, a thing by no means to be
slighted in the common Course of Life; but much more commendable and necessary
in a General, with so small an Army, at open War, and in the Heart of his
Enemy's Country.

THE Earl, by this Means; some small time after, receiving early Intelligence
that King Philip was actually on his March to Barcelona, with an Army of
upwards of twenty five thousand Men, under the Command of a Marshall of
France, began his March toward Catalonia, with all the Troops that he could
gather together, leaving in Valencia a small Body of Foot, such as in that
Exigence could best be spared. The whole Body thus collected made very little
more than two thousand Foot and six hundred Horse; yet resolutely with these he
sets out for Barcelona: In the Neighborhood of which, as soon as he arrived,
he took care to post himself and his diminutive Army in the Mountains which
inviron that City; where he not only secured 'em against the Enemy; but found
himself in a Capacity of putting him under perpetual Alarms. Nor was the
Marshall, with his great Army, capable of returning the Earl's Compliment of
Disturbance; since he himself, every six or eight Hours, put his Troops into
such a varying Situation, that always when most arduously sought, he was
farthest off from being found. In this Manner the General bitterly harrass'd
the Troops of the Enemy; and by these Means struck a perpetual Terror into the
Besiegers. Nor did he only this way annoy the Enemy; the Precautions he had
used, and the Measures he had taken in other Places, with a View to prevent
their Return to Madrid, though the Invidious endeavored to bury them in
Oblivion, having equally contributed to the driving of the Marshall of France,
and his Catholic King, out of the Spanish Dominions.

BUT to go on with the Siege: The Breaches in the Walls of that City, during
its Siege by the Earl, had been put into tolerable Repair; but those of
Monjouick, on the contrary, had been as much neglected. However, the Garrison
made shift to hold out a Battery of twenty-three Days, with no less than fifty
Pieces of Cannon; when, after a Loss of the Enemy of upwards of three thousand
Men (a Moiety of the Army employed against it when the Earl took it) they were
forced to surrender at Discretion. Monjouick taken by the Marshall of France.
And this cannot but merit our Observation, that a Place, which the English
General took in little more than an Hour, and with very inconsiderable Loss,
afforded the Marshall of France a Resistance of twenty-three Days.

Barcelona besieged.
UPON the taking of Fort Monjouick, the Marshall de These gave immediate Orders
for Batteries to be raised against the Town. Those Orders were put in Execution
with all Expedition; and at the same time his Army fortified themselves with
such Entrenchments, as would have ruined the Earl's former little Army to have
raised, or his present much lesser Army to have attempted the forcing them.
However, they sufficiently demonstrated their Apprehensions of that watchful
General, who lay hovering over their Heads upon the Mountains. Their main
Effort was to make a Breach between Port St. Antonio and that Breach which our
Forces had made the Year before; to effect which they took care to ply them
very diligently both from Cannon and Mortars; and in some few Days their
Application was answered with a practicable Breach for a Storm. Which however
was prudently deferred for some time, and that through fear of the Earl's falling
on the Back of them whenever they should attempt it; which, consequently, they
were sensible might put them into some dangerous Disorder.

AND now it was that the Earl of Peterborow resolved to put in practice the
Resolution he had some time before concerted within himself. About nine or ten
Days before the Raising of the Siege, he had received an Express from Brigadier
Stanhope (who was aboard Sir John Leake's Fleet appointed for the Relief of the
Place, with the Reinforcements from England) acquainting the Earl, that he had
used all possible Endeavors to prevail on the Admiral to make the best of his
way to Barcelona. But that the Admiral, however, persisted in a positive
Resolution not to attempt the French Fleet before that Place under the Count de
Toulouse, till the Ships were joined him which were expected from Ireland,
under the Command of Sir George Bing. True it was, the Fleet under Admiral
Leake was of equal Strength with that under the French Admiral; but jealous of
the Informations he had received, and too ready to conclude that People in
Distress were apt to make Representations too much in their own Favor; he held
himself, in point of Discretion, obliged not to hazard the Queen's Ships, when
a Reinforcement of both cleaner and larger were under daily Expectation.

THIS unhappy Circumstance (notwithstanding all former glorious Deliverances)
had almost brought the Earl to the Brink of Despair; and to increase it, the
Earl every Day received such Commands from the King within the Place, as must
have sacrificed his few Forces, without the least Probability of succeeding.
Those all tended to his forcing his Way into the Town; when, in all human
Appearance, not one Man of all that should make the Attempt could have done it,
with any Hope or Prospect of surviving. The French were strongly encamped at
the Foot of the Mountains, distant two Miles from Barcelona; toward the Bottom
of those Hills, the Avenues into the Plain were possessed and fortified by
great Detachments from the Enemy's Army. From all which it will be evident,
that no Attempt could be made without giving the Enemy time to draw together
what Body of Foot they pleased. Or supposing it feasible, under all these
difficult Circumstances, for some of them to have forced their Passage, the
Remainder, that should have been so lucky to have escaped their Foot, would
have found themselves exposed in open Field to a Pursuit of four thousand Horse
and Dragoons; and that for two Miles together; when in case of their enclosing
them, the bravest Troops in the World, under such a Situation, would have found
it their best way to have surrendered themselves Prisoners of War.

NEVERTHELESS, when Brigadier Stanhope sent that Express to the Earl, which I
just now mentioned, he assured him in the same, that he would use his utmost
Diligence, both by Sea and Land, to let him have timely Notice of the
Conjunction of the Fleets, which was now all they had to depend upon. Adding
withal, that if the Earl should at any time receive a Letter, or Paper, though
directed to no Body, and with nothing in it, but a half Sheet of Paper cut in
the Middle, he, the Earl, might certainly depend upon it, that the two Fleets
were joined, and making the best of their Way for Barcelona. It will easily be
imagined the Express was to be well paid; and being made sensible that he ran
little or no Hazard in carrying a Piece of blank Paper, he undertook it, and as
fortunately arrived with it to the Earl, at a Moment when Chagrin and Despair
might have hurried him to some Resolution that might have proved fatal. The
Messenger himself, however, knew nothing of the Joining of the Fleets, or the
Meaning of his Message.

AS soon as the Earl of Peterborow received this welcome Message from Brigadier
Stanhope, he marched the very same Night, with his whole little Body of Forces,
to a Town on the Seashore, called Sigeth. No Person guessed the Reason of his
March, or knew any thing of what the Intent of it was. The Officers, as
formerly, obeyed without Enquiry; for they were led to it by so many
unaccountable Varieties of Success, that Affiance became a second Nature, both
in Officer and Soldier.

THE Town of Sigeth was about seven Leagues to the Westward of Barcelona;
where, as soon as the Earl with his Forces arrived, he took care to secure all
the small Fishing-Boats, Feluccas, and Sattees; nay, in a Word, every Machine
in which he could transport any of his Men: So that in two Days time he had got
together a Number sufficient for the Conveyance of all his Foot.

BUT a Day or two before the Arrival o^ the English Fleet off Sigeth, the
Officers o^ his Troops were under a strange Consternation at a Resolution their
General had taken Impatient of Delay, and fearful of the Fleets passing by
without his Knowledge, the Earl summoned them together a little before Night,
at which time he discovered to the whole Assembly, that he himself was obliged
to endeavor to get aboard the English Fleet; and that, if possible, before the
French Scouts should be able to make any Discovery of their Strength: That
finding himself of no further Use on Shore, having already taken the necessary
Precautions for their Transportation and Security, they had nothing to do but
to pursue his Orders, and make the best of their Way to Barcelona, in the
Vessels which he had provided for them: That they might do this in perfect
Security when they saw the English Fleet pass by; or if they should pass by in
the Night, an Engagement with the French, which would be an inevitable
Consequence, would give them sufficient Notice what they had to do further.

THIS Declaration, instead of satisfying, made the Officers ten times more
curious: But when they saw their General going with a Resolution to lie out all
Night at Sea, in an open Boat, attended with only one Officer; and understood
that he intended to row out in his Felucca five or six Leagues distance from
the Shore; it is hardly to be expressed what Amazement and Concern surpised
them all. Mr. Crow, the Queen's Minister, and others, expressed a particular
Dislike and Uneasiness; but all to no purpose, the Earl had resolved upon it.
Accordingly, at Night he put out to Sea in his open Felucca, all which he spent
five Leagues from Shore, with no other Company than one Captain and his Rowers.

IN the Morning, to the great Satisfaction of all, Officers and others, the
Earl came again to Land; and immediately began to put his Men into the several
Vessels which lay ready in Port for that Purpose. But at Night their Amaze was
renewed, when they found their General ready to put in execution his old
Resolution, in the same Equipage, and with the same Attendance. Accordingly, he
again felucca'd himself; and they saw him no more till they were landed on the
Mole in Barcelona.

WHEN the Earl of Peterborow first engaged himself in the Expedition to Spain,
he proposed to the Queen and her Ministry; that Admiral Shovel might be joined
in Commission with him in the Command of the Fleet. But this Year, when the
Fleet came through the Straites, under Vice Admiral Leake, the Queen had sent a
Commission to the Earl of Peterborow for the full Command, whenever he thought
fit to come aboard in Person. This it was that made the General endeavor, at
all Hazards, to get aboard the Fleet by Night; for he was apprehensive, and the
Sequel proved his Apprehensions too well grounded, that Admiral Leake would
make his Appearance with the whole Body of the Fleet, which made near twice the
Number of the Ships of the Enemy; in which Case it was natural to suppose, that
the Count de Toulouse, as soon as ever the French Scouts should give Notice of
our Strength, would cut his Cables and put out to Sea, to avoid an Engagement.
On the other hand, the Earl was very sensible, that if a Part of his Ships had
kept a-stern, that the Superiority might have appeared on the French Side; or
rather if they had bore away in the Night toward the Coast of Africa, and
fallen to the Eastward of Barcelona the next Day, a Battle had been inevitable,
and a Victory equally certain; since the Enemy by this Means had been tempted
into an Engagement, and their Retreat being cut off, and their whole Fleet
surrounded with almost double their Number, there had hardly been left for any
of them a Probability of Escaping.

THEREFORE, when the Earl of Peterborow put to Sea again the second Evening,
fearful of loosing such a glorious Opportunity, and impatient to be aboard to
give the necessary Orders, he ordered his Rowers to obtain the same Station, in
order to discover the English Fleet. And according to his Wishes he did fall in
with it; but unfortunately the Night was so far advanced, that it was
impossible for him then to put his Project into practice. Earl of Peterborow
arrives on board the English Fleet.
Captain Price, a Gentleman of Wales, who commanded a Third Rate, was the
Person he first came aboard of; but how amazed was he to find, in an open Boat
at open Sea, the Person who had Commission to command the Fleet? So soon as he
was entered the Ship, the Earl sent the Ship's Pinnace with Letters to Admiral
Leake, to acquaint him with his Orders and Intentions; and to Brigadier
Stanhope with a Notification of his safe Arrival; but the Darkness of the Night
proved so great an Obstacle, that it was a long time before the Pinnace could
reach the Admiral. When Day appeared, it was astonishing to the whole Fleet to
see the Union Flag waving at the Main-top-mast Head. No Body could trust his
own Eyes, or guess at the Meaning, till better certify'd by the Account of an
Event so singular and extraordinary.

WHEN we were about six Leagues Distance from Barcelona, the Port we aimed at,
one of the French Scouts gave the Alarm, who making the Signal to another, he
communicated it to a Third, and so on, as we afterward sorrowfully found, and
as the Earl had before apprehended: The French Admiral being thus made
acquainted with the Force of our Fleet, hoisted sail, and made the best of his
Way from us, either pursuant to Orders, or under the plausible Excuse of a
Retreat.

THIS favorable Opportunity thus lost, there remained nothing to do but to
land the Troops with all Expedition; which was executed accordingly: The
Regiments, which the Earl of Peterborow embarked the Night before, being the
first that got into the Town. Let the Reader imagine how pleasing such a Sight
must be to those in Barcelona, reduced as they were to the last Extremity. In
this Condition, to see an Enemy's Fleet give way to another with Reinforcements
from England, the Sea at the same Instant covered with little Vessels crowded
with greater Succors; what was there wanting to complete the glorious Scene,
but what the General had projected, a Fight at Sea, under the very Walls of the
invested City, and the Ships of the Enemy sinking, or towed in by the
victorious English? But Night, and a few Hours, defeated the latter Part of
that well intended Landscape.

KING Philip, and the Marshall of France, had not failed to push on the Siege
with all imaginable Vigor; but this Retreat of the Count de Toulouse, and the
News of those Reinforcements, soon changed the Scene. Their Courage without was
abated proportionably, as theirs within was elated. The Siege of Barcelona
raised
In these Circumstances, a Council of War being called, it was unanimously
resolved to raise the Siege. Accordingly, next Morning, the first of May, 1706.
while the Sun was under a total Eclypse, in a suitable Hurry and Confusion,
they broke up, leaving behind them most of their Cannon and Mortars, together
with vast Quantities of all Sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, scarce stopping
to look back till they had left all but the very Verge of the disputed Dominion
behind them.

KING Charles looked with new Pleasure upon this lucky Effort of his old
Deliverers. Captivity is a State no way desirable to Persons however brave, of
the most private Station in Life; but for a King, within two Days of falling
into the Hands of his Rival, to receive so seasonable and unexpected a
Deliverance, must be supposed, as it really did, to open a Scene to universal
Rejoicing among us, too high for any Words to express, or any Thoughts to
imagine, to those that were not present and Partakers of it. He forth with gave
Orders for a Medal to be struck suitable to the Occasion; one of which, set
round with Diamonds, he presented to Sir John Leake, the English Admiral. The
next Orders were for re-casting all the damaged brass Cannon which the Enemy
had left; upon every one of which was, by order, a Sun eclyps'd, with this
Motto under it: Magna parvis obscurantur.

I HAVE often wondered that I never heard any Body curious enough to enquire
what could be the Motives to the King of Spain's quitting his Dominions upon
the raising of this Siege; very certain it is that he had a fine Army, under
the Command of a Marshall of France, not very considerably decreased, either
by Action or Desertion: But all this would rather increase the Curiosity than
abate it. In my Opinion then, though Men might have Curiosity enough, the
Question was purposely evaded, under an Apprehension that an honest Answer must
inevitably give a higher Idea of the General than their Inclinations led them
to. At first View this may carry the Face of a Paradox; yet if the Reader will
consider, that in every Age Virtue has had its Shaders or Maligners, he will
himself easily solve it, at the same time that he finds himself compelled to
allow, that those, who found themselves unable to prevent his great Services,
were willing, in a more subtle Manner, to endeavor at the annulling of them by
Silence and Concealment.

THIS will appear more than bare Supposition, if we compare the present
Situation, as to Strength, of the two contending Powers: The French, at the
Birth of the Siege, consisted of five thousand Horse and Dragoons, and
twenty-five thousand Foot, effective Men. Now grant, that their killed and
wounded, together with their Sick in the Hospitals, might amount to five
Thousand; yet as their Body of Horse was entire, and in the best Condition, the
Remaining will appear to be an Army of twenty-five Thousand at least. On the
other Side, all the Forces in Barcelona, even with their Reinforcements,
amounted to no more than seven thousand Foot and four hundred Horse. Why then,
when they raised their Siege, did not they march back into the Heart of Spain,
with their so much superior Army? or, at least, toward their Capital? The
Answer can be this, and this only; Because the Earl of Peterborow had taken
such provident Care to render all secure, that it was thereby rendered next to
an Impossibility for them so to do. That General was satisfied, that the
Capital of Catalonia must, in course, fall into the Hands of the Enemy, unless
a superior Fleet removed the Count de Toulouse, and threw in timely Succors
into the Town: And as that could not depend upon him, but others, he made it
his chief Care and assiduous Employment to provide against those Strokes of
Fortune to which he found himself again likely to be exposed, as he often had
been; and therefore had he Resource to that Vigilance and Precaution which had
often retrieved him, when to others his Circumstances seemed to be most
desperate.

THE Generality of Mankind, and the French in particular, were of opinion that
the taking Barcelona would prove a decisive Stroke, and put a Period to the War
in Spain; and yet at that very Instant I was inclined to believe, that the
General flattered himself it would be in his Power to give the Enemy sufficient
Mortification, even though the Town should be obliged to submit to King Philip.
The wise Measures taken induced me so to believe, and the Sequel approved it;
for the Earl had so well expended his Caution, that the Enemy, on the
Disappointment, found himself under a Necessity of quitting Spain; and the same
would have put him under equal Difficulties had he carried the Place. The
French could never have undertaken that Siege without depending on their Fleet,
for their Artillery, Ammunition, and Provisions; since they must be inevitably
forced to leave behind them the strong Towns of Tortosa, Lerida, and Taragona.
The Earl, therefore, whose perpetual Difficulties seemed rather to render him
more sprightly and vigorous, took care himself to examine the whole Country
between the Ebro and Barcelona; and, upon his doing so, was pleasingly, as well
as sensibly satisfied, that it was practicable to render their Return into the
Heart of Spain impossible, whether they did or did not succeed in the Siege
they were so intent to undertake.

THERE were but three Ways they could attempt it: The first of which was by the
Seaside, from Taragona toward Tortosa; the most barren, and consequently the
most improper Country in the Universe to sustain an Army; and yet to the
natural, the Earl had added such artificial Difficulties, as rendered it
absolutely impossible for an Army to subsist or march that Way.

THE middle Way lay through a better Country indeed, yet only practicable by
the Care which had been taken to make the Road so. And even here there was a
Necessity of marching along the Side of a Mountain, where, by vast Labor and
Industry, a high Way had been cut for two Miles at least out of the main Rock.
The Earl therefore, by somewhat of the same Labor, soon made it impassable. He
employed to that End many Thousands of the Country People, under a few of his
own Officers and Troops, who cutting up twenty several Places, made so many
Precipices, perpendicular almost as a Wall, which rendered it neither safe, or
even to be attempted by any single Man in his Wits, much less by an Army.
Besides, a very few Men, from the higher Cliffs of the Mountain, might have
destroyed an Army with the Arms of Nature only, by rolling down large Stones
and Pieces of the Rock upon the Enemy passing below.

THE last and uppermost Way, lay through the hilly Part of Catalonia, and led to
Lerida, toward the Head of the Ebro, the strongest Place we had in all Spain,
and which was as well furnished with a very good Garrison. Along this Road
there lay many old Castles and little Towns in the Mountains, naturally strong;
all which would not only have afforded Opposition, but at the same time have
entertained an Enemy with variety of Difficulties; and especially as the Earl
had given Orders and taken Care that all Cattle, and every Thing necessary to
sustain an Army, should be conveyed into Places of Security, either in the
Mountains or thereabouts. These three Ways thus precautiously secured, what had
the Earl to apprehend but the Safety of the Archduke; which yet was through no
Default of his, if in any Danger from the Siege?

FOR I well remember, on Receipt of an Express from the Duke of Savoy (as he
frequenly sent such to enquire after the Proceedings in Spain) I was showed a
Letter, wrote about this time by the Earl of Peterborow to that Prince, which
raised my Spirits, though then at a very low Ebb. It was too remarkable to be
forgot; and the Substance of it was, That his Highness might depend upon it,
that he (the Earl) was in much better Circumstances than he was thought to be:
That the French Officers, knowing nothing of the Situation of the Country,
would find themselves extremely disappointed, since in case the Siege was
raised, their Army should be obliged to abandon Spain: Or in case the Town was
taken, they should find themselves shut up in that Corner of Catalonia, and
under an Impossibility of forcing their Way back, either through Aragon or
Valencia: That by this Means all Spain, to the Ebro, would be open to the Lord
Galoway, who might march to Madrid, or any where else, without Opposition. That
he had no other Uneasiness or Concern upon him, but for the Person of the
Archduke, whom he had nevertheless earnestly solicited not to remain in the
Town on the very first Appearance of the intended Siege.

BARCELONA being thus relieved, and King Philip forced out of Spain, by these
cautious Steps taken by the Earl of Peterborow, before we bring him to
Valencia, it will be necessary to intimate, that as it always was the Custom of
that General to settle, by a Council of War, all the Measures to be taken,
whenever he was obliged for the Service to leave the Archduke; a Council of
War was now accordingly held, where all the General Officers, and those in
greatest Employments at Court assisted. Here every thing was in the most solemn
Manner concerted and resolved upon; here Garrisons were settled for all the
strong Places, and Governors appointed: But the main Article then agreed upon
was, that King Charles should immediately begin his Journey to Madrid, and that
by the Way of Valencia. The Reason assigned for it was, because that Kingdom
being in his Possession, no Difficulties could arise which might occasion
Delay, if his Majesty took that Rout. It was likewise agreed in the same
Council, that the Earl of Peterborow should embark all the Foot, not in
Garrisons, for their more speedy, as well as more easy Conveyance to Valencia.
The same Council of War agreed, that all the Horse in that Kingdom should be
drawn together, the better to insure the Measures to be taken for the opening
and facilitating his Majesty's Progress to Madrid.

ACCORDINGLY, after these Resolutions were taken, the Earl of Peterborow
embarks his Forces and sails for Valencia, where he was doubly welcomed by all
Sorts of People upon Account of his safe Arrival, and the News he brought along
with it. By the Joy they expressed, one would have imagined that the General
had escaped the same Danger with the King; and, in truth, had their King
arrived with him in Person, the most loyal and zealous would have found
themselves at a loss how to have expressed their Satisfaction in a more
sensible Manner.

SOON after his Landing, with his customary Vivacity, he applied himself to put
in execution the Resolutions taken in the Councils of War at Barcelona; and a
little to improve upon them, he raised an entire Regiment of Dragoons, bought
them Horses, provided them Clothes, Arms, and Acoutrements; and in six Weeks
time had them ready to take the Field; a thing though hardly to be paralleled,
is yet scarce worthy to be mentioned among so many nobler Actions of his; yet
in regard to another General it may merit Notice, since while he had Madrid in
Possession near four Months, he neither augmented his Troops, nor laid up any
Magazines; neither sent he all that time any one Express to concert any
Measures with the Earl of Peterborow; but lay under a perfect Inactivity, or
which was worse, negotiating that unfortunate Project of carrying King Charles
to Madrid by the round-about and ill-concerted Way of Aragon; a Project not
only contrary to the solemn Resolutions of the Council of War; but which in
reality was the Root of all our succeeding Misfortunes; and that only for the
wretched Vanity of appearing to have had some Share in bringing the King to his
Capital; but how minute a Share it was will be manifest, if it be considered
that another General had first made the Way easy, by driving the Enemy out of
Spain; and that the French General only stayed at Madrid till the Return of
those Troops which were in a manner driven out of Spain.

AND yet that Transaction, doughty as it was, took up four most precious
Months, which most certainly might have been much better employed in rendering
it impossible for the Enemy to re-enter Spain; nor had there been any great
Difficulty in so doing, but the contrary, if the General at Madrid had thought
convenient to have joined the Troops under the Earl of Peterborow, and then to
have marched directly toward Pampelona, or the Frontiers of France. To this
the Earl of Peterborow solicited the King, and those about him; he advised,
desired, and entreated him to lose no time, but to put in Execution those
Measures resolved on at Barcelona. A Council of War in Valencia renewed the
same Application: but all to no Purpose, his Rout was ordered him, and that to
meet his Majesty on the Frontiers of Arragon. There, indeed, the Earl did meet
the King; and the French General an Army, which, by Virtue of a decrepid
Intelligence, he never saw or heard of till he fled from it to his Camp at
Guadalira. Inexpressible was the Confusion in this fatal Camp: The King from
Arragon, the Earl of Peterborow from Valencia arriving in it the same Day,
almost the same Hour that the Earl of Galoway entered under a hasty Retreat
before the French Army.

BUT to return to Order, which a Zeal of Justice has made me somewhat
anticipate; the Earl had not been long at Valencia before he gave Orders to
Major General Windham to march with all the Forces he had, which were not above
two thousand Men, and lay Siege to Requina, Requina besieged.
a Town ten Leagues distant from Valencia, and in the Way to Madrid. The Town
was not very strong, nor very large; but sure the odliest fortified that ever
was. The Houses in a Circle connectively composed the Wall; and the People, who
defended the Town, instead of firing from Hornworks, Counter-scarps, and
Bastions, fired out of the Windows of their Houses.

NOTWITHSTANDING all which, General Windam found much greater Opposition than
he at first imagined; and therefore finding he should want Ammunition, he sent
to the Earl of Peterborow for a Supply; at the same time assigning, as a Reason
for it, the unexpected Obstinacy of the Town. So soon as the Earl received the
Letter he sent for me; and told me I must repair to Requina, where they would
want an Engineer; and that I must be ready next Morning, when he should order a
Lieutenant, with thirty Soldiers and two Matrosses, to guard some Powder for
that Service. Accordingly, the next Morning we set out, the Lieutenant, who was
a Dutchman, and Commander of the Convoy, being of my Acquaintance.

WE had reached Saint Jago, a small Village about midway between Valencia and
Requina, when the Officer, just as he was got without the Town, resolving to
take up his Quarters on the Spot, ordered the Mules to be unloaded. The Powder,
which consisted of forty-five Barrels, was pil'd up in a Circle, and covered
with Oil-cloth, to preserve it from the Weather; and though we had agreed to
sup together at my Quarters within the Village, yet being weary and fatigued,
he ordered his Field-Bed to be put up near the Powder, and so lay down to take
a short Nap. Forty-five Barrels of Powder blewn up by an Accident.
I had scarce been at my Quarters an Hour, when a sudden Shock attacked the
House so violently, that it threw down Tiles, Windows, Chimneys and all. It
presently came into my Head what was the Occasion; and as my Fears suggested so
it proved: For running to the Door I saw a Cloud ascending from the Spot I left
the Powder pitched upon. In haste making up to which, nothing was to be seen
but the bare Circle upon which it had stood. The Bed was blown quite away, and
the poor Lieutenant all to pieces, several of his Limbs being found separate,
and at a vast Distance each from the other; and particularly an Arm, with a
Ring on one of the Fingers. The Matrosses were, if possible, in a yet worse
Condition, that is, as to Manglement and Laceration. All the Soldiers who were
standing, and any thing near, were struck dead. Only such as lay sleeping on
the Ground escaped; and of those one assured me, that the Blast removed him
several Foot from his Place of Repose. In short, enquiring into this deplorable
Disaster, I had this Account: That a Pig running out of the Town, the Soldiers
endeavored to intercept its Return; but driving it upon the Matrosses, one of
them, who was jealous of its getting back into the Hands of the Soldiers, drew
his Pistol to shoot it, which was the Source of this miserable Catastrophe. The
Lieutenant carried along with him a Bag of Dollars to pay the Soldiers
Quarters, of which the People, and the Soldiers that were saved, found many;
but blown to an inconceivable Distance.

WITH those few Soldiers that remained alive, I proceeded, according to my
Orders, to Requina; where, when I arrived, I gave General Windham an Account of
the Disaster at St. Jago. As such it troubled him, and not a little on account
of the Disappointment. However, to make the best of a bad Market, he gave
Orders for the forming of a Mine under an old Castle, which was part of the
Wall. As it was ordered, so it was begun, more in Terrorem, than with any
Expectation of Success from it as a Mine. Nevertheless, I had scarce began to
frame the Oven of the Mine, when those within the Town desired to capitulate.
Requina surrenders.
This being all we could aim at, under the Miscarriage of our Powder at St.
Jago (none being yet arrived to supply that Defect) Articles were readily
granted them; pursuant to which, that Part of the Garrison, which was composed
of Castilian Gentry, had Liberty to go wherever they thought best, and the rest
were made Prisoners of War. Requina being thus reduced to the Obedience of
Charles III. a new raised Regiment of Spaniards was left in Garrison, the
Colonel of which was appointed Governor; and our Supply of Powder having at
last got safe to us, General Windham marched his little Army to Cuenca.

Cuenca besieged.
CUENCA is a considerable City and a Bishopric; therefore to pretend to sit
down before it with such a Company of Forragers, rather than an Army, must be
placed among the hardy Influences of the Earl of Peterborow's auspicious
Administration. On the out Part of Cuenca there stood an old Castle, from
which, upon our Approach, they played upon us furiously: But as soon as we
could bring two Pieces of our Cannon to bear, we answered their Fire with so
good Success, that we soon obliged them to retire into the Town. We had raised
a Battery of twelve Guns against the City, on their Rejection of the Summons
sent them to come under the Obedience of King Charles; going to which from the
old Castle last reduced, I received a Shot on the Toe of one of my Shoes, which
carried that Part of the Shoe entirely away, without any further Damage.

WHEN I came to that Battery we plied them warmly (as well as from three
Mortars) for the Space of three Days, their Nights included; but observing,
that in one particular House, they were remarkably busy; People thronging in
and out below; and those above firing perpetually out of the Windows, I was
resolved to have one Shot at that Window, and made those Officers about me take
Notice of it. True it was, the Distance would hardly allow me to hope for
Success; yet as the Experiment could only be attended with the Expense of a
single Ball, I made it. So soon as the Smoke of my own Cannon would permit it,
we could see Clouds of Dust issuing from out of the Window, which, together
with the People's crouding out of Doors, convinced the Officers, whom I had
desired to take Notice of it, that I had been no bad Marksman.

UPON this, two Priests were sent out of the Place with Proposals; but they
were so triflingly extravagant, that as soon as ever the General heard them, he
ordered their Answer in a fresh Renewal of the Fire of both Cannon and Mortars.
And it happened to be with so much Havoc and Execution, that they were soon
taught Reason; and sent back their Divines, with much more moderate Demands.
After the General had a little modeled these last, they were accepted; and
according to the Articles of Capitulation, the City was that very Day
surrendered into our Possession. Cuenca surrenders.
The Earl of Duncannon's Regiment took Guard of all the Gates; and King Charles
was proclaimed in due Form.

THE Earl of Peterborow, during this Expedition, had left Valencia, and was
arrived at my Lord Galway's Camp at Guadalaxara; who for the Confederates, and
King Charles in particular, unfortunately was ordered from Portugal, to take
the Command from a General, who had all along been almost miraculously
successful, and by his own great Actions paved the Way for a safe Passage to
that his Supplanter.

YET even in this fatal Place the Earl of Peterborow made some Proposals,
which, had they beem embraced, might, in all Probability, have secured Madrid
from falling into the Hands of the Enemy: But, in opposition thereto, the Lord
Galway, and all his Portugueze Officers, were for forcing the next Day the
Enemy to Battle. The almost only Person against it was the Earl of Peterborow;
who then and there took the Liberty to evince the Impossibility of coming to an
Engagement. This the next Morning too evidently made apparent, when upon the
first Motion of our Troops toward the River, which they pretended to pass, and
must pass, before they could engage, they were so warmly saluted from the
Batteries of the Enemy, and their small Shot, that our Regiments were forced to
retire in Confusion to their Camp. By which Rebuff all heroical Imaginations
were at present laid aside, to consider how they might make their Retreat to
Valencia.

THE Retreat being at last resolved on, and a Multiplicity of Generals
rendering our bad Circumstances much worse, the Earl of Peterborow met with a
fortunate Reprieve, by Solicitations from the Queen, and Desires tantamount to
Orders, that he would go with the Troops left in Catalonia to the Relief of the
Duke of Savoy. It is hardly to be doubted that that General was glad to
withdraw from those Scenes of Confusion, which were but too visible to Eyes
even less discerning than his. However, he forbore to prepare himself to put
her Majesty's Desires in execution, as they were not peremptory, till it had
been resolved by the unanimous Consent of a Council of War, where the King, all
the Generals and Ministers were present, That it was expedient for the Service
that the Earl of Peterborow, during the Winter Season, should comply with her
Majesty's Desires, and go for Italy; since he might return before the opening
of the Campaign, if it should be necessary. And return indeed he did, before
the Campaign opened, and brought along with him one hundred thousand Pounds
from Genoa, to the great Comfort and Support of our Troops, which had neither
Money nor Credit. But on his Return, that noble Earl found the Lord Galway had
been near as successful against him, as he had been unsuccessful against the
Enemy. Thence was the Earl of Peterborow recalled to make room for an
unfortunate General, who the next Year suffered himself to be decoyed into that
fatal Battle of Almanza.

THE Earl of Peterborow, on his leaving Valencia, had ordered his Baggage to
follow him to the Camp at Guadalaxara; and it arrived in our little Camp, so
far safe in its way to the greater at Guadalaxara. I think it consisted of
seven loaded Wagons; and General Windham gave Orders for a small Guard to
escorte it; under which they proceeded on their Journey: But about eight
Leagues from Cuenca, at a pretty Town called Huette, a Party from the Duke of
Berwick's Army, with Boughs in their Hats, the better to appear what they were
not (for the Bough in the Hat is the Badge of the English, as white Paper is
the Badge of the French) came into the Town, crying all the way, Viva Carlos
Tercero, Viva. With these Acclamations in their Mouths, they advanced up to the
very Wagons; when attacking the Guards, who had too much deluded themselves
with Appearances, they routed 'em, and immediately plundered the Wagons of all
that was valuable, and then marched off.

THE Noise of this soon reached the Ears of the Earl of Peterborow at
Guadalaxara. When leaving my Lord Galway's Camp, pursuant to the Resolutions of
the Council of War, with a Party only of fourscore of Killegrew's Dragoons, he
met General Windham's little Army within a League of Huette, the Place where
his Baggage had been plundered. The Earl had strong Motives of Suspicion, that
the Inhabitants had given Intelligence to the Enemy; and, as is very natural,
giving way to the first Dictates of Resentment, he resolved to have laid the
Town in Ashes: But when he came near it, the Clergy and Magistrates upon their
Knees, disavowing the Charge, and asserting their Innocence, prevailed on the
good Nature of that generous Earl, without any great Difficulty, to spare the
Town, at least not to burn it.

WE marched however into the Town, and that Night took up our Quarters there;
and the Magistrates, under the Dread of our avenging our selves, on their part
took Care that we were well supplied. But when they were made sensible of the
Value of the Loss, which the Earl had sustained; and that on a moderate
Computation it amounted to at least eight thousand Pistoles; they voluntarily
presented themselves next Morning, and of their own accord offered to make his
Lordship full Satisfaction, and that, in their own Phrase, de Contado, in ready
Money. The Earl was not displeased at their Offer; but generously made Answer,
That he was just come from my Lord Galway's Camp at Chincon, where he found
they were in a likelihood of wanting Bread; and as he imagined it might be
easier to them to raise the Value in Corn, than in ready Money; if they would
send to that Value in Corn to the Lord Galway's Camp, he would be satisfied.
This they with Joy embraced, and immediately complied with.

I AM apt to think the last Century (and I very much fear the Current will be
as deficient) can hardly produce a parallel Instance of Generosity and true
public Spiritedness: And the World will be of my Opinion, when I have
corroborated this with another Passage some Years after. The Commissioners for
Stating the Debts due to the Army, meeting daily for that Purpose at their
House in Darby Court in Channel Row, I there mentioned to Mr. Read, Gentleman
to his Lordship, this very just and honorable Claim upon the Government, as
Moneys advanced for the Use of the Army. Who told me in a little Time after,
that he had mentioned it to his Lordship; but with no other Effect than to have
it rejected with a generous Disdain.

WHILE we stayed at Huette there was a little Incident in Life, which gave me
great Diversion. The Earl, who had always maintained a good Correspondence with
the fair Sex, hearing from one of the Priests of the Place, That on the Alarm
of burning the Town, one of the finest Ladies in all Spain had taken Refuge in
the Nunnery, was desirous to speak with her.

THE Nunnery stood upon a small rising Hill within the Town; and to obtain the
View, the Earl had presently in his Head this Stratagem; he sends for me, as
Engineer, to have my Advice, how to raise a proper Fortification upon that Hill
out of the Nunnery. I waited upon his Lordship to the Place, where declaring
the Intent of our coming, and giving plausible Reasons for it, the Train took,
and immediately the Lady Abbess, and the fair Lady, came out to make
Intercession, That his Lordship would be pleased to lay aside that Design. The
divine Oratory of one, and the beautiful Charms of the other, prevailed; so his
Lordship left the Fortification to be the Work of some future Generation.

FROM Huette the Earl of Peterborow marched forwards for Valencia, with only
those fourscore Dragoons, which came with him from Chincon, leaving General
Windham pursuing his own Orders to join his Forces to the Army then under the
Command of the Lord Galway. But stopping at Campilio, a little Town in our Way,
his Lordship had Information of a most barbarous Fact committed that very
Morning by the Spaniards, at a small Villa, about a League distant, upon some
English Soldiers.

A CAPTAIN of the English Guards (whose Name has slipped my Memory, though I well
knew the Man) marching in order to join the Battalion of the Guards, then under
the Command of General Windham, with some of his Soldiers, that had been in the
Hospital, took up his Quarters in tha^ little Villa. But on his marching out of
i^ next Morning, a Shot in the Back lai^ that Officer dead upon the Spot: And
as it had been before concerted, the Spaniards of the Place at the same Time
fell upon the poor, weak Soldiers, killing several; not even sparing their
Wives. This was but a Prelude to their Barbarity; their savage Cruelty was only
whetted, not glutted. They took the surviving few; hurried and dragged them up
a Hill, a little without the Villa. On the Top of this Hill there was a Hole,
or Opening, somewhat like the Mouth of one of our Coal-Pits, down this they
cast several, who, with hideous Shrieks and Cries, made more hideous by the
Echoes of the Chasm, there lost their Lives.

THIS Relation was thus made to the Earl of Peterborow, at his Quarters at
Campilio; who immediately gave Orders for to found to Horse. At first we were
all surpised; but were soon satisfied, that it was to revenge, or rather, do
Justice, on this barbarous Action.

AS soon as we entered the Villa we found that most of the Inhabitants, but
especially the most Guilty, had withdrawn themselves on our Approach. We found,
however, many of the dead Soldiers Clothes, which had been conveyed into the
Church, and there hid. And a strong Accusation being laid against a Person
belonging to the Church, and full Proof made, that he had been singularly
Industrious in the Execution of that horrid Piece of Barbarity on the Hill, his
Lordship commanded him to be hanged up at the Knocker of the Door.

AFTER this piece of military Justice, we were led up to the fatal Pit or Hole,
down which many had been cast headlong. There we found one poor Soldier alive,
who, upon his throwing in, had caught fast hold of some impending Bushes, and
saved himself on a little Jutty within the Concavity. On hearing us talk
English he cried out; and Ropes being let down, in a little Time he was drawn
up; when he gave us an ample Detail of the whole Villainy. Among other
Particulars, I remember he told me of a very narrow Escape he had in that
obscure Recess. A poor Woman, one of the Wives of the Soldiers, who were thrown
down after him, struggled, and roared so much, that they could not, with all
their Force, throw her cleaverly in the Middle; by which means falling near the
Side, in her Fall she almost beat him from his Place of Security.

UPON the Conclusion of this tragical. Relation of the Soldier thus saved, his
Lordship gave immediate Orders for the Firing of the Villa, which was executed
with due Severity: After which his Lordship marched back to his Quarters at
Campilio; from whence, two Days after, we arrived at Valencia. Where, the first
Thing presented to that noble Lord, was all the Papers taken in the Plunder of
his Baggage, which the Duke of Berwick had generously ordered to be returned
him, without waste or opening.

IT was too manifest, after the Earl's arrival at this City, that the
Alteration in the Command of the English Forces, which before was only received
as a Rumor, had deeper Grounds for Belief, than many of his Friends in that
City could have wished. His Lordship had gained the Love of all by a Thousand
engaging Condescensions; even his Gallantries being no way prejudicial, were
not offensive; and though his Lordship did his utmost to conceal his Chagrin,
the Sympathy of those around him made such Discoveries upon him, as would have
disappointed a double Portion of his Caution. They had seen him un-elated under
Successes, that were so near being unaccountable, that in a Country of less
Superstition than Spain, they might almost have passed for miraculous; they
knew full well, that nothing, but that Series of Successes had paved a Passage
for the General that was to supersede him; those only having removed all the
Difficulties of his March from Portugal to Madrid; they knew him the older
General; and therefore, not knowing, that in the Court he came from, Intrigue
was too often the Soul of Merit, they could not but be amazed at a Change,
which his Lordship was unwilling any body should perceive by himself.

IT was upon this Account, that, as formerly, he treated the Ladies with Balls,
and to pursue the Dons in their own Humor, ordered a Tawridore or Bull-Feast.
In Spain no sort of public Diversions are esteemed equal with this. But the
Bulls provided at Valencia, not being of the right Breed, nor ever initiated in
the Mysteries, did not acquit themselves at all masterly; and consequently, did
not give the Diversion, or Satisfaction expected. For which Reason I shall omit
giving a Description of this Bull-Feast; and desire my Reader to suspend his
Curiosity till I come to some, which, in the Spanish Sense, were much more
entertaining; that is, attended with much greater Hazards and Danger.

BUT though I have said, the Gallantries of the General were mostly political,
at least very inoffensive; yet there happened about this Time, and in this
Place, a piece of Gallantry, that gave the Earl a vast deal of Offense and
Vexation; as a Matter, that in its Consequences might have been fatal to the
Interest of King Charles, if not to the English Nation in general; and which I
the rather relate, in that it may be of use to young Officers, and others;
pointing out to them the Danger, not to say Folly, of inadvertent and
precipitate Engagements, under unruly Passions.

I HAVE said before, that Valencia is famous for fine Women. It indeed abounds
in them; and among those, are great Numbers of Courtezans not inferior in
Beauty to any. Nevertheless, two of our English Officers, not caring for the
common Road, however safe, resolved to launch into the deeper Seas, though
attended with much greater Danger. Amors, the common Failing of that fair
City, was the Occasion of this Accident, and two Nuns the Objects. It is
customary in that Country for young People in an Evening to resort to the
Grates of the Nunneries, there to divert themselves, and the Nuns, with a
little pleasant and inoffensive Chitchat. For though I have heard some relate a
World of nauseous Passages at such Conversations, I must declare, that I never
saw, or heard any Thing unseemly; and therefore whenever I have heard any such
from such Fabulists, I never so much wronged my Judgment as to afford them
Credit.

OUR two Officers were very assiduous at the Grates of a Nunnery in this Place;
and having there pitched upon two Nuns, prosecuted their Amors with such
Vigor, that, in a little time, they had made a very great Progress in their
Affections, without in the least considering the Dangers that must attend
themselves and the Fair; they had exchanged Vows, and prevailed upon the weaker
Vessels to endeavor to get out to their Lovers. To effect which, soon after, a
Plot was laid; the Means, the Hour, and every thing agreed upon.

IT is the Custom of that Nunnery, as of many others, for the Nuns to take
their weekly Courses in keeping the Keys of all the Doors. The two Lovesick
Ladies giving Notice to their Lovers at the Grate, that one of their Turns was
come, the Night and Hour was appointed, which the Officers punctually
observing, carried off their Prey without either Difficulty or Interruption.

BUT next Morning, when the Nuns were missing, what an Uproar was there over
all the City? The Ladies were both of Quality; and therefore the Tidings were
first carried to their Relations. They received the News with Vows of utmost
Vengeance; and, as is usual in that Country, put themselves in Arms for that
Purpose. There needed no great canvassing for discovering who were the
Aggressors: The Officers had been too frequent, and too public, in their
Addresses, to leave any room for question. Accordingly, they were complained of
and sought for; but sensible at last of their past Temerity, they endeavored,
and with a great deal of Difficulty perfected their Escape.

LESS fortunate were the two fair Nuns; their Lovers, in their utmost Exigence,
had forsaken them; and they, poor Creatures, knew not where to fly. Under this
sad Dilemma they were taken; and, as in like Offenses, condemned directly to
the Punishment of immuring. And what greater Punishment is there on Earth than
to be confined between four narrow Walls, only open at the Top; and thence to
be half supported with Bread and Water, till the Offenders gradually starve to
Death?

THE Earl of Peterborow, though highly exasperated at the Proceedings of his
Officers, in compassion to the unhappy Fair, resolved to interpose by all the
moderate Means possible. He knew very well, that no one Thing could so much
prejudice the Spaniard against him, as the countenancing such an Action;
wherefore he inveighed against the Officers, at the same time that he
endeavored to mitigate in favor of the Ladies: But all was in vain; it was
urged against those charitable Intercessions, that they had broke their Vows;
and in that had broke in upon the Laws of the Nunnery and Religion; the
Consequence of all which could be nothing less than the Punishment appointed to
be inflicted. And which was the hardest of all, the nearest of their Relations
most opposed all his generous Mediations; and those, who according to the
common Course of Nature should have thanked him for his Endeavors to be
instrumental in rescuing them from the impending Danger, grew more and more
enraged, because he opposed them in their Design of a cruel Revenge.

NOTWITHSTANDING all which the Earl persever'd; and after a deal of Labor,
first got the Penalty suspended; and, soon after, by the Dint of a very
considerable Sum of Money (a most powerful Argument, which prevails in every
Country) saved the poor Nuns from immuring; and at last, though with great
Reluctance, he got them received again into the Nunnery. As to the Warlike
Lovers, one of them was the Year after slain at the Battle of Almanza; the
other is yet living, being a Brigadier in the Army.

WHILE the Earl of Peterborow was here with his little Army of great Heretics,
neither Priests nor People were so open in their superstitious Fopperies, as I
at other times found them. For which Reason I will make bold, and by an
Antichronism in this Place, a little anticipate some Observations that I made
some time after the Earl left it. And as I have not often committed such a
Transgression, I hope it may be the more excusable now, and no way blemish my
Memoirs, that I break in upon the Series of my Journal.

VALENCIA is a handsome City, and a Bishopric; and is considerable not only
for the Pleasantness of its Situation and beautiful Ladies; but (which at some
certain Times, and on some Occasions, to them is more valuable than both those
put together) for being the Birthplace of Saint Vincent, the Patron of the
Place; and next for its being the Place where Santo Domingo, the first
Institutor of the Dominican Order had his Education. Here, in honor of the
last, is a spacious and very splendid Convent of the Dominicans. Walking by
which, I one Day observed over the Gate, a Figure of a Man in Stone; and near
it a Dog with a lighted Torch in his Mouth. The Image I rightly enough took to
intend that of the Saint; but inquiring of one of the Order, at the Gate, the
Meaning of the Figures near it, he very courteously asked me to walk in, and
then entertained me with the following Relation:

WHEN the Mother of Santo Domingo, said that Religious, was with Child of that
future Saint, she had a Dream which very much afflicted her. She dreamt that
she heard a Dog bark in her Belly; and inquiring (at what Oracle is not said)
the Meaning of her Dream, she was told, That that Child should bark out the
Gospel (excuse the Bareness of the Expression, it may run better in Spanish;
though, if I remember right, Erasmus gives it in Latin much the same Turn) which
should thence shine out like that lighted Torch. And this is the Reason, that
wherever you see the Image of that Saint, a Dog and a lighted Torch is in the
Group.

HE told me at the same time, that there had been more Popes and Cardinals of
that Order than of any, if not all the other. To confirm which, he led me into
a large Gallery, on each Side whereof he showed me the Pictures of all the
Popes and Cardinals that had been of that Order; among which, I particularly
took Notice of that of Cardinal Howard, great Uncle to the present Duke of
Norfolk. But after many Encomiums of their Society, with which he interspersed
his Discourse, he added one that I least valued it for; That the sole Care and
Conduct of the Inquisition was entrusted with them.

FINDING me attentive, or not so contradictory as the English Humor generally
is, he next brought me into a fair and large Cloister, round which I took
several Turns with him; and, indeed, the Place was too delicious to tire, under
a Conversation less pertinent or courteous than that he entertained me with. In
the Middle of the Cloister was a small but pretty and sweet Grove of Orange and
Lemon-trees; these bore Fruit ripe and green, and Flowers, all together on one
Tree; and their Fruit was so very large and beautiful, and their Flowers so
transcendently odoriferous, that all I had ever seen of the like Kind in
England could comparatively pass only for Beauty in Epitome, or Nature imitated
in Wax-work. Many Flocks also of pretty little Birds, with their cheerful
Notes, added not a little to my Delight. In short, in Life I never knew or
found three of my Senses at once so exquisitely gratified.

NOT far from this, Saint Vincent, the Patron, as I said before, of this City,
has a Chapel dedicated to him. Once a Year they do him Honor in a sumptuous
Procession. Then are their Streets all strow'd with Flowers, and their Houses
set off with their richest Tapestries; every one strives to excel his Neighbor
in distinguishing himself by the Honor he pays to that Saint; and he is the
best Catholic, as well as the best Citizen, in the Eye of the religious, who
most exerts himself on this Occasion.

THE Procession begins with a Cavalcade of all the Friars of all the Convents
in and about the City. These walk two and two with folded Arms, and Eyes cast
down to the very Ground, and with the greatest outward Appearance of Humility
imaginable; nor, though the Temptation from the fine Women that filled their
Windows, or the rich Tapestries that adorned the Balconies might be allowed
sufficient to attract, could I observe that any one of them all ever moved them
upwards.

AFTER the Friars is borne, upon the Shoulders of twenty Men at least, an Image
of that Saint of solid Silver, large as the Life: It is placed in a great Chair
of Silver likewise; the Staves that bear him up, and upon which they bear him,
being of the same Metal. The whole is a most costly and curious Piece of
Workmanship, such as my Eyes never before or since beheld.

THE Magistrates follow the Image and its Supporters, dressed in their richest
Apparel, which is always on this Day, and on this Occasion, particularly
sumptuous and distinguishing. Thus is the Image, in the greatest Splendour,
borne and accompanied round that fine City; and at last conveyed to the Place
from whence it came: And so concludes that annual Ceremony.

THE Valencians, as to the Exteriors of Religion, are the most devout of any in
Spain, though in common Life you find them amorous, gallant, and gay, like
other People; yet on solemn Occasions there shines outright such a Spirit as
proves them the very Bigots of Bigotry: As a Proof of which Assertion, I will
now give some Account of such Observations, as I had time to make upon them,
during two Lent Seasons, while I resided there.

THE Week before the Lent commences, commonly known by the Name of Carnaval
Time, the whole City appears a perfect Bartholomew Fair; the Streets are
crowded, and the Houses empty; nor is it possible to pass along without some
Gambol or Jack-pudding Trick offered to you; Ink, Water, and sometimes Ordure,
are sure to be hurled at your Face or Clothes; and if you appear concerned or
angry, they rejoice at it, pleased the more, the more they displease; for all
other Resentment is at that time out of Season, though at other times few in
the World are fuller of Resentment or more captious.

THE younger Gentry, or Dons, to express their Gallantry, carry about them
Egg-shells, filled with Orange or other sweet Water, which they cast at Ladies
in their Coaches, or such other of the fair Sex as they happen to meet in the
Streets.

BUT after all, if you would think them extravagant to Day, as much
transgressing the Rules of common Civility, and neither regarding Decency to
one another, nor the Duty they owe to Almighty God; yet when Ash Wednesday
comes you will imagine them more unaccountable in their Conduct, being then as
much too excessive in all outward Indications of Humility and Repentance. Here
you shall meet one, barefooted, with a Cross on his Shoulder, a Burden rather
fit for somewhat with four Feet, and which his poor Two are ready to sink
under, yet the vain Wretch bears and sweats, and sweats and bears, in hope of
finding Merit in an Ass's Labor.

OTHERS you shall see naked to their Wastes, whipping themselves with Scourges
made for the Purpose, till the Blood follows every Stroke; and no Man need be
at a Loss to follow them by the very Tracks of Gore they shed in this frentick
Perambulation. Some, who from the Thickness of their Hides, or other
Impediments, have not Power by their Scourgings to fetch Blood of themselves,
are followed by Surgeons with their Lancets, who, at every Turn, make use of
them, to evince the Extent of their Patience and Zeal by the Smart of their
Folly. While others, mingling Amor with Devotion, take particular Care to
present themselves all macerated before the Windows of their Mistresses; and
even in that Condition, not satisfied with what they have barbarously done to
themselves, they have their Operators at hand, to evince their Love by the
Number of their Gashes and Wounds; imagining the more Blood they lose, the more
Love they show, and the more they shall gain. These are generally Devoto's of
Quality; though the Tenet is universal, that he that is most bloody is most
devout.

AFTER these Street-Exercises, these ostentatious Castigations are over, these
Self-sacrificers repair to the great Church, the bloodier the better; there
they throw themselves, in a Condition too vile for the Eye of a Female, before
the Image of the Virgin Mary; though I defy all their Race of Fathers, and
their infallible holy Father into the Bargain, to produce any Authority to fit
it for Belief, that she ever delighted in such sanguinary Holocausts.

DURING the whole Time of Lent, you will see in every Street some Priest or
Friar, upon some Stall or Stool, preaching up Repentance to the People; and
with violent Blows on his Breast crying aloud, Mia Culpa, mia maxima Culpa,
till he extract reciprocal Returns from the Hands of his Auditors on their own
Breasts.

WHEN Good Friday is come they entertain it with the most profound Show of
Reverence and Religion, both in their Streets and in their Churches. In the
last, particularly, they have contrived about twelve a-Clock suddenly to darken
them, so as to render them quite gloomy. This they do to intimate the Eclipse
of the Sun, which at that time happened. And to signify the Rending of the Vail
of the Temple, you are struck with a strange artificial Noise at the very same
Instant.

BUT when Easter Day appears, you find it in all Respects with them a Day of
Rejoicing; for though Abstinence from Flesh with them, who at no time eat much,
is not so great a Mortification as with those of the same Persuasion in other
Countries, who eat much more, yet there is a visible Satisfaction darts out at
their Eyes, which demonstrates their inward Pleasure in being set free from the
Confinement of Mind to the Dissatisfaction of the Body. Every Person you now
meet greets you with a Resurrexit Jesus; a good Imitation of the primitive
Christians, were it the real Effect of Devotion. And all Sorts of the best
Music (which here indeed is the best in all Spain) proclaim an auspicious
Valediction to the departed Season of superficial Sorrow and stupid
Superstition. But enough of this: I proceed to weightier Matters.

WHILE we lay at Valencia, under the Vigilance and Care of the indefatigable
Earl, News was brought that Alicant was besieged by General Gorge by Land,
while a Squadron of Men of War battered it from the Sea; from both which the
Besiegers played their Parts so well, and so warmly plied them with their
Cannon, that an indifferent practicable Breach was made in a little time.

MAHONI commanded in the Place, being again received into Favor; and cleared
as he was of those political Insinuations before intimated, he now seemed
resolved to confirm his Innocence by a resolute Defense. However, perceiving
that all Preparations tended toward a Storm, and knowing full well the
Weakness of the Town, he withdrew his Garrison into the Castle, leaving the
Town to the Defense of its own Inhabitants.

JUST as that was doing, the Sailors, not much skilled in Sieges, nor at all
times capable of the coolest Consideration, with a Resolution natural to them,
stormed the Walls to the Side of the Sea; where not meeting with much
Opposition (for the People of the Town apprehended the least Danger there) they
soon got into the Place; and, as soon as got in, began to Plunder. This obliged
the People, for the better Security of themselves, to open their Gates, and
seek a Refuge under one Enemy, in opposition to the Rage of another.

GENERAL Gorge, as soon as he entered the Town, with a good deal of seeming
Lenity, put a stop to the Ravages of the Sailors; and ordered Proclamation to
be made throughout the Place, that all the Inhabitants should immediately bring
in their best Effects into the great Church for their better Security. This was
by the mistaken Populace, as readily complied with; and neither Friend nor Foe
at all disputing the Command, or questioning the Integrity of the Intention;
the Church was presently crowded with Riches of all sorts and sizes. Yet after
some time remaining there, they were all taken out, and disposed of by those,
that had as little Property in 'em, as the Sailors, they were pretended to be
preserved from.

THE Earl of Peterborow upon the very first News of the Siege had left
Valencia, and taken Shipping for Alicant; where he arrived soon after the
Surrender of the Town, and that Outcry of the Goods of the Townsmen. Upon his
Arrival, Mahoni, who was blocked up in the Castle, and had experienced his
indefatigable Diligence, being in want of Provisions, and without much hope of
Relief, desired to capitulate. The Earl granted him honorable Conditions, upon
which he delivered up the Castle, and Gorge was made Governor.

UPON his Lordship's taking Ship at Valencia, I had an Opportunity of marching
with those Dragoons, which escorted him from Castile, who had received Orders
to march into Murcia. We quartered the first Night at Alcira, a Town that the
River Segra almost surrounds, which renders it capable of being made a Place of
vast Strength, though now of small Importance.

THE next Night we lay at Xativa, a Place famous for its Steadiness to King
Charles. General Basset, a Spaniard, being Governor; it was besieged by the
Forces of King Philip; but after a noble Resistance, the Enemy were beat off,
and the Siege raised; for which Effort, it is supposed, that on the Retirement
of King Charles out of this Country, it was deprived of its old Name Xativa,
and is now called San Felippo; though to this day the People thereabouts much
dissallow by their Practice, that novel Denomination.

WE marched next Morning by Monteza; which gives Name to the famous Title of
Knights of Monteza. It was at the Time that Colonel O Guaza, an Irishman, was
Governor, besieged by the People of the Country, in favor of King Charles; but
very ineffectually, so it never changed its Sovereign. That Night we quartered
at Font dalas Figuras, within one League of Almanza; where that fatal and
unfortunate Battle, which I shall give an Account of in its Place, was fought
the Year after, under the Lord Galway.

ON our fourth days March we were obliged to pass Villena, where the Enemy had
a Garrison. A Party of Mahoni's Dragoons made a part of that Garrison, and they
were commanded by Major Oroirk an Irish Officer, who always carried the
Reputation of a good Soldier, and a brave Gentleman.

I had all along made it my Observation, that Captain Matthews, who commanded
those Dragoons, that I marched with, was a Person of much more Courage than
Conduct; and he used as little Precaution here, though just marching under the
Eye of the Enemy, as he had done at other Times. As I was become intimately
acquainted with him, I rode up to him, and told him the Danger, which, in my
Opinion, attended our present March. I pointed out to him just before Villena a
jutting Hill, under which we must unavoidably pass; at the turning whereof, I
was apprehensive the Enemy might lie, and either by Ambuscade or otherwise,
surprise us; I therefore entreated we might either wait the coming of our Rear
Guard; or at least march with a little more leisure and caution. But he taking
little notice of all I said, kept on his round March; seeing which, I pressed
forward my Mule, which was a very good one, and rid as fast as her Legs could
carry her, till I had got on the top of the Hill. When I came there, I found
both my Expectation, and my Apprehensions answered: For I could very plainly
discern three Squadrons of the Enemy ready drawn up, and waiting for Us at the
very winding of the Hill.

HEREUPON I hastened back to the Captain with the like Speed, and told him the
Discovery I had made; who nevertheless kept on his March, and it was with a
good deal of Difficulty, that I at last prevailed on him to halt, till our Rear
Guard of twenty Men had got up to us. But those joining us, and a new Troop of
Spanish Dragoons, who had marched toward us that Morning, appearing in Sight;
our Captain, as if he was afraid of their rivalling him in his Glory, at the
very turn of the Hill, rode in a full Gallop, with Sword in Hand, up to the
Enemy. They stood their Ground, till we were advanced within two hundred Yards
of them; and then in Confusion endeavored to retire into the Town.

THEY were obliged to pass over a small Bridge, too small to admit of such a
Company in so much haste; their crouding upon which obstructed their Retreat,
and left all that could not get over, to the Mercy of our Swords, which spared
none. However narrow as the Bridge was, Captain Matthews was resolved to
venture over after the Enemy; on doing which, the Enemy made a halt, till the
People of the Town, and the very Priests came out to their Relief with fire
Arms. On so large an Appearance, Captain Matthews thought it not advisable to
make any further Advances; so driving a very great flock of Sheep from under
the Walls, he continued his March toward Elda. In this Action we lost Captain
Topham, and three Dragoons.

I remember we were not marched very far from the Place, where this Rencounter
happened; when an Irish Dragoon overtook the Captain, with a civil Message from
Major O Rairk, desiring that he would not entertain a mean Opinion of him for
the Defense that was made; since could he have got the Spaniards to have stood
their Ground, he should have given him good Reason for a better. The Captain
returned a complimental Answer, and so marched on. This Major O Rairk, or O
Roork, was the next Year killed at Alkay, being much lamented, for he was
esteemed both for his Courage and Conduct, one of the best of the Irish
Officers in the Spanish Service. I was likewise informed that he was descended
from one of the ancient Kings of Ireland; the Mother of the honorable Colonel
Paget, one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber to his present Majesty, was nearly
related to this Gallant Gentleman.

ONE remarkable Thing I saw in that Action, which affected and surprised me: A
Scotch Dragoon, of but a moderate Size, with his large basket-hilted Sword,
struck off a Spaniard's Head at one stroke, with the same ease, in appearance,
as a Man would do that of a Poppy.

WHEN we came to Elda (a Town much in the Interest of King Charles, and famous
for its fine Situation, and the largest Grapes in Spain) the Inhabitants
received us in a manner as handsome as it was peculiar; all standing at their
Doors with lighted Torches; which considering the Time we entered was far from
an unwelcome or disagreeable Sight.

THE next Day several requested to be the Messengers of the Action at Villena
to the Earl of Peterborow at Alicant; but the Captain returned this Answer to
all, that in consideration of the Share that I might justly claim in that Day's
Transactions, he could not think of letting any other Person be the Bearer. So
giving me his Letters to the Earl, I the next Day delivered them to him at
Alicant. At the Delivery, Colonel Killegrew (whose Dragoons they were) being
present, he expressed a deal of Satisfaction at the Account, and his Lordship
was pleased at the same time to appoint me sole Engineer of the Castle of
Alicant.

SOON after which, that successful General embarked for Genoa, according to the
Resolutions of the Council of War at Guadalaxara, on a particular Commission
from the Queen of England, another from Charles King of Spain, and charged at
the same time with a Request of the Marquess das Minas, General of the
Portugueze Forces, to negotiate Bills for one hundred thousand Pounds for the
use of his Troops. In all which, though he was (as ever) successful; yet may it
be said without a figure, that his Departure, in a good measure, determined the
Success of the confederate Forces in that Kingdom. True it is, the General
returned again with the fortunate Fruits of those Negotiations; but never to
act in his old auspicious Sphere: And therefore, as I am now to take leave of
this fortunate General, let me do it with Justice, in an Appeal to the World,
of the not to be paralleled Usage (in these latter Ages, at least) that he met
with for all his Services; such a vast variety of Enterprises, all successful,
and which had set all Europe in amaze; Services that had given occasion to such
solemn and public Thanksgivings in our Churches, and which had received such
very remarkable Approbations, both of Sovereign and Parliament; and which had
been represented in so lively a Manner, in a Letter wrote by the King of Spain,
under his own Hand, to the Queen of England, and communicated to both Houses in
the Terms following:

MADAM, my Sister,
I Should not have been so long ever I did my self the Honor to repeat the
Assurances of my sincere Respe^s to you, had I not waited for the good Occasion
which I now acquaint you with, that the City of Barcelona is surrendered to me
by Capitulation. I doubt not but you will receive this great News with entire
Satisfaction, as well, because this happy Success is the Effect of your Arms,
always glorious, as from the pure Motives of that Bounty and maternal Affection
you have for me, and for every Thing which may contribute to the Advancement of
my Interest.

I must do this Justice to all the Officers and common Soldiers, and
particularly to my Lord Peterborow, that he has shew^ in this whole Expedition,
a Constancy^ Bravery, and Conduct, worthy of the Choic^ that your Majesty has
made of him, an^ that he could no ways give me bette^ Satisfaction than he has,
by the great Zea^ and Application, which he has equally testified for my
Interest, and for the Service of my Person. I owe the same Justice to Brigadier
Stanhope, for his great Zeal, Vigilance, and very wise Conduct, which he has
given Proofs of upon all Occasions: As also to all your Officers of the Fleet,
particularly to your worthy Admiral Shovel, assuring your Majesty, that he has
assisted me in this Expedition, with an inconceivable Readiness and
Application, and that no Admiral will be ever better able to render me greater
Satisfaction, than he has done. During the Siege of Barcelona, some of your
Majesty's Ships, with the Assistance of the Troops of the Country, have reduced
the Town of Tarragona, and the Officers are made Prisoners of War. The Town of
Girone has been taken at the same Time by Surprise, by the Troops of the
Country. The Town of Lerida has submitted, as also that of Tortosa upon the
Ebro; so that we have taken all the Places of Catalonia, except Roses. Some
Places in Aragon near Sarragosa have declared for me, and the Garrison of the
Castle of Denia in Valencia have maintained their Post, and repulsed the Enemy;
400 of the Enemies Cavalry have entered into our Service, and a great number of
their Infantry have deserted.

THIS, Madam, is the ^te that your Arms, and the Inclination of the People have
put my Affairs in. It is unnecessary to tell you what stops the Course of these
Conquests; it is not the Season of the Year, nor the Enemy; these are no
Obstacles to your Troops, who desire nothing more than to act under the Conduct
that your Majesty has appointed them. The taking of Barcelona, with so small a
Number of Troops, is very remarkable; and what has been done in this Siege is
almost without Example; that with seven or eight thousand Men of your Troops,
and two hundred Miquelets, we should surround and invest a Place, that thirty
thousand French could not block up.

AFTER a March of thirteen Hours, the Troops climbed up the Rocks and
Precipices, to attack a Fortification stronger than the Place, which the Earl
of Peterborow has sent you a Plan of; two Generals, with the Grenadiers,
attacked it Sword in Hand. In which Action the Prince of Hesse died gloriously,
after so many brave Actions: I hope his Brother and his Family will always have
your Majesty's Protection. With eight hundred Men they forced the covered Way,
and all the Intrenchments and Works, one after another, till they came to the
last Work which surrounded it, against five hundred Men of regular Troops which
defended the Place, and a Reinforcement they had received; and three Days
afterward we became Masters of the Place. We afterward attacked the Town on
the Side of the Castle. We landed again our Cannon, and the other Artillery,
with inconceivable Trouble, and formed two Camps, distant from each other three
Leagues, against a Garrison almost as numerous as our Army, whose Cavalry was
double the Strength of ours. The first Camp was so well entrenched, that 'twas
defended by two thousand Men and the Dragoons; whilst we attacked the Town with
the rest of our Troops. The Breach being made, we prepared to make a general
Assault with all the Army. These are Circumstances, Madam, which distinguish
this Action, perhaps, from all others.

HERE has happened an unforeseen Accident. The Cruelty of the pretended
Viceroy, and the Report spread abroad, that he would take away the Prisoners,
contrary to the Capitulation, provoked the Burghers, and some of the Country
People, to take up Arms against the Garrison, whilst they were busy in packing
up their Baggage, which was to be sent away the next Day; so that every thing
tended to Slaughter: But your Majesty's Troops, entering into Town with the
Earl of Peterborow, instead of seeking Pillage, a Practice common upon such
Occasions, appeased the Tumult, and have saved the Town, and even the Lives of
their Enemies, with a Discipline and Generosity without Example.

WHAT remains is, that I return you my most hearty Thanks for sending so great
a Fleet, and such good and valiant Troops to my Assistance. After so happy a
Beginning, I have thought it proper, according to the Sentiments of your
Generals and Admirals, to support, by my Presence, the Conquests that we have
made; and to show my Subjects, so affectionate to my Person, that I cannot
abandon them. I receive such Succors from your Majesty, and from your generous
Nation, that I am loaded with your Bounties; and am not a little concerned to
think that the Support of my Interest should cause so great an Expense. But,
Madam, I sacrifice my Person, and my Subjects in Catalonia expose also their
Lives and Fortunes, upon the Assurances they have of your Majesty's generous
Protection. Your Majesty and your Council knows better than we do, what is
necessary for our Conservation. We shall then expect your Majesty's Succors,
with an entire Confidence in your Bounty and Wisdom. A further Force is
necessary: We give no small Diversion to France, and without doubt they will
make their utmost Efforts against me as soon as possible; but I am satisfied,
that the same Efforts will be made by my Allies to defend me. Your Goodness,
Madam, inclines you, and your Power enables you, to support those that the
Tyranny of France would oppress. All that I can insinuate to your Wisdom, and
that of your Allies, is, that the Forces employed in this Country will not be
unprofitable to the public Good, but will be under an Obligation and Necessity
to act with the utmost Vigor against the Enemy. I am,

With an inviolable Affection, Respect, and most Sincere Acknowledgment, Madam,
my Sister, Your most affectionate Brother, CHARLES.
From the Camp at Senia, before Barcelona, the 22d of October, 1705.

AND yet, after all, was this noble General not only recalled, the Command of
the Fleet taken from him, and that of the Army given to my Lord Galway, without
Assignment of Cause; but all Manner of Falsities were industriously spread
abroad, not only to diminish, if they could, his Reputation, but to bring him
under Accusations of a malevolent Nature. I can hardl^ imagine it necessary
here to take Notic^ that afterward he disproved all those idl^ Calumnies and
ill-invented Rumors; or t^ mention what Compliments he received, i^ the most
solemn Manner, from his Country, upon a full Examination and thorough
canvassing of his Actions in the House of Lords. But this is too notorious to
be omitted, That all Officers coming from Spain were purposely intercepted in
their Way to London, and craftily examined upon all the idle Stories which had
passed tending to lessen his Character: And when any Officers had asserted the
Falsity of those Inventions (as they all did, except a military Sweetner or
two) and that there was no Possibility of laying any thing amiss to the Charge
of that General-they were told, that they ought to be care, full however, not to
speak advantagiously of that Lord's Conduct, unless they were willing to fall
Martyrs in his Cause -- A Thing scarce to be credited even in a popish Country.
But Scipio was accused -- though (as my Author finely observes) by Wretches only
known to Posterity by that stupid Accusation.

AS a mournful Valediction, before I enter upon any new Scene, the Reader will
pardon this melancholy Expostulation. How mortifying must it be to an
Englishman, after he has found himself solac'd with a Relation of so many
surprising Successes of her Majesty's Arms, under the Earl of Peterborow;
Successes that have laid before our Eyes Provinces and Kingdoms reduced, and
Towns and Fortresses taken and relieved; where we have seen a continued Series
of happy Events, the Fruits of Conduct and Vigilance; and Caution and Foresight
preventing Dangers that were held, at first View, certain and unsurmountable:
To change this glorious Landscape, I say, for Scenes every way different, even
while our Troops were as numerous as the Enemy, and better provided, yet always
baffled and beaten, and flying before the Enemy, till fatally ruined in the
Battle of Almanza: How mortifying must this be to any Lover of his Country! But
I proceed to my Memoirs.

ALICANT is a Town of the greatest Trade of any in the Kingdom of Valencia,
having a strong Castle, being situated on a high Hill, which commands both Town
and Harbor. In this Place I resided a whole Year; but it was soon after my
first Arrival, that Major Collier (who was shot in the Back at Barcelona, as I
have related in the Siege of that Place) hearing of me, sought me out at my
Quarters; and, after a particular Enquiry into the Success of that difficult
Task that he left me upon, and my answering all his Questions to satisfaction
(all which he received with evident Pleasure) he threw down a Purse of Pistoles
upon the Table; which I refusing, he told me, in a mos handsome Manner, his
Friendship was not to be preserved but by my accepting it.

AFTER I had made some very necessary Repairs, I pursued the Orders I had
received from the Earl of Peterborow, to go upon the erecting a new Battery
between the Castle and the Town. This was a Task attended with Difficulties,
neither few in Number, nor small in Consequence; for it was to be raised upon a
great Declivity, which must render the Work both laborious and precarious.
However, I had the good Fortune to effect it much sooner than was expected; and
it was called Gorge's Battery, from the Name of the Governor then commanding;
who, out of an uncommon Profusion of Generosity, wetted that Piece of Gossiping
with a distinguishing Bowl of Punch. Brigadier Bougard, when he saw this Work
some time after, was pleased to honor it with a singular Admiration and
Approbation, for its Compleatness, notwithstanding its Difficulties.

THIS Work, and the Siege of Cartagena, then in our Possession, by the Duke of
Berwick, brought the Lord Galway down to this Place. Cartagena is of so little
Distance from Alicant, that we could easily hear the Cannon playing against,
and from it, in our Castle, where I then was. And I remember my Lord Galway, on
the fourth Day of the Siege, sending to know if I could make any useful
Observations, as to the Success of it; I returned, that I was of Opinion the
Town was surrendered, from the sudden Cessation of the Cannon, which, by our
News next Day from the Place, proved to be fact. Cartagena is a small Seaport
Town in Murcia; but has so good an Harbor, that when the famous Admiral Doria
was asked, which were the three best Havens in the Mediterranean, he readily
returned, June, July, and Cartagena.

UPON the Surrender of this Place, a Detachment of Foot was sent by the
Governor, with some Dragoons, to Elsha; but it being a Place of very little
Strength they were soon made Prisoners of War.

THE Siege of Cartagena being over, the Lord Galway returned to his Camp; and
the Lord Duncannon dying in Alicant, the first Guns that were fired from
Gorge's Battery, were the Minute-Guns for his Funeral. His Regiment had been
given to the Lord Montandre, who lost it before he had Possession, by an Action
as odd as it was scandalous.

THAT Regiment had received Orders to march to the Lord Galway's Camp, under
the Command of their Lieutenant Colonel Bateman, a Person before reputedly a
good Officer, though his Conduct here gave People, not invidious, too much Reason
to call it in Question. On his March, he was so very careless and negligent
(though he knew himself in a Country surrounded with Enemies, and that he was
to march through a Wood, where they every Day made their Appearance in great
Numbers) that his Soldiers marched with their Muskets slung at their Backs, and
went one after another (as necessity had forced us to do in Scotland) himself
at the Head of 'em, in his Chaise, riding a considerable way before.

IT happened there was a Captain, with threescore Dragoons, detatch'd from the
Duke of Berwick's Army, with a Design to intercept some Cash, that was ordered
to be sent to Lord Galway's Army from Alicant. This Detachment, missing of that
intended Prize, was returning very disconsolately, Re infecta; when their
Captain, observing that careless and disorderly March of the English, resolved,
boldly enough, to attack them in the Wood. To that Purpose he secreted his
little Party behind a great Barn; and so soon as they were half passed by, he
falls upon 'em in the Center with his Dragoons, cutting and slashing at such a
violent Rate, that he soon dispersed the whole Regiment, leaving many dead and
wounded upon the Spot. The three Colors were taken; and the gallant
Lieutenant Colonel taken out of his Chaise, and carried away Prisoner with many
others; only one Officer who was an Ensign, and so bold as to do his Duty, was
killed.

THE Lieutenant who commanded the Granadiers, received the Alarm time enough to
draw his Men into a House in their way; where he bravely defended himself for a
long Time; but being killed, the rest immediately surrendered. The Account of
this Action I had from the Commander of the Enemy's Party himself, some Time
after, while I was a Prisoner. And Captain Mahoni, who was present when the
News was brought, that a few Spanish Dragoons had defeated an English Regiment,
which was this under Bateman, protested to me, that the Duke of Berwick turned
pale at the Relation; and when they offered to bring the Colors before him, he
would not so much as see them. A little before the Duke went to Supper, Bateman
himself was brought to him, but the Duke turned away from him without any
further Notice than coldly saying, that he thought he was very strangely taken.
The Wags of the Army made a thorough jest of him, and said his military Conduct
was of a piece with his Economy, having two Days before this March, sent his
young handsome Wife into England, under the Guardianship of the young Chaplain
of the Regiment.

April 15. IN the Year 1707, being Easter Monday, we had in the Morning a
flying Report in Alicant, that there had been the Day before a Battle at
Almanza, between the Army under the Command of the Duke of Berwick, and that of
the English, under Lord Galway, in which the latter had suffered an entire
Defeat. We at first gave no great Credit to it: But, alas, we were too soon
woefully convinced of the Truth of it, by Numbers that came flying to us from
the conquering Enemy. Then indeed we were satisfied of Truths, too difficult
before to be credited. But as I was not present in that calamitous Battle, I
shall relate it, as I received it from an Officer then in the Duke's Army.

TO bring the Lord Galway to a Battle, in a Place most commodious for his
purpose, the Duke made use of this Stratagem: He ordered two Irishmen, both
Officers, to make their way over to the Enemy as Deserters; putting this Story
in their Mouths, that the Duke of Orleans was in a full March to join the Duke
of Berwick with twelve thousand Men; that this would be done in two Days, and
that then they would find out the Lord Galway, and force him to Fight,
wherever they found him.

Battle of Almanza.
LORD Galway, who at this Time lay before Villena, receiving this Intelligence
from those well instructed Deserters, immediately raised the Siege; with a
Resolution, by a hasty March, to force the Enemy to Battle, before the Duke of
Orleans should be able to join the Duke of Berwick. To effect this, after a
hard March of three long Spanish Leagues in the heat of the Day; he appears a
little after Noon in the face of the Enemy with his fatiegu'd Forces. Glad and
rejoiced at the Sight, for he found his Plot had taken; Berwick, the better to
receive him, draws up his Army in a half Moon, placing at a pretty good Advance
three Regiments to make up the Center, with express Order, nevertheless, to
retreat at the very first Charge. All which was punctually observed, and had
its desired Effect: For the three Regiments, at the first Attack gave way, and
seemingly fled toward their Camp; the English, after their customary Manner,
pursuing them with Shouts and Hollowings. As soon as the Duke of Berwick
perceived his Trap had taken, he ordered his right and left Wings to close; by
which Means, he at once cut off from the rest of their Army all those who had
so eagerly pursued the imaginary Runaways. In short, the Rout was total, and
the most fatal Blow that ever the English received during the whole War with
Spain. Nor, as it is thought, with a great probability of Reason, had those
Troops that made their Retreat to the Top of the Hills, under Major General
Shrimpton, met with any better Fate than those on the Plain, had the Spaniards
had any other General in the Command than the Duke of Berwick; whose native
Sympathy gave a check to the Ardour of a victorious Enemy. And this was the
sense of the Spaniards themselves after the Battle. Verifying herein that noble
Maxim, That Victory to generous Minds is only an Inducement to Moderation.

THE Day after this fatal Battle (which gave occasion to a Spanish piece of
Wit, that the English General had routed the French) the Duke of Orleans did
arrive indeed in the Camp, but with an Army of only fourteen Attendants.

THE fatal Effects of this Battle were soon made visible, and to none more than
those in Alicant. The Enemy grew every Day more and more troublesome; visiting
us in Parties more boldly than before; and often hovering about us so very
near, that with our Cannon we could hardly teach 'em to keep a proper Distance.
Gorge the Governor of Alicant being recalled into England, Major General
Richards was by King Charles appointed Governor in his Place. He was a Roman
Catholic, and very much beloved by the Natives on that Account; though to give
him his due, he behaved himself extremely well in all other Respects. It was in
his Time, that a Design was laid of surprising Guardamere, a small Seaport
Town in Murcia: But the military Bishop (for he was in a literal Sense
excellent tam Mart, quam Mercurio, among his many others Exploits, by a timely
Expedition, prevented that.

GOVERNOR Richards, my Post being always in the Castle, had sent to desire me
to give notice whenever I saw any Parties of the Enemy moving. Pursuant to this
Order, discovering one Morning a considerable body of Horse toward Elsha, I
went down into the Town, and told the Governor what I had seen; and without any
delay he gave his Orders, that a Captain with threescore Men should attend me
to an old House about a Mile distance. As soon as we had got into it, I set
about barricading all the open Places, and Avenues, and put my Men in a Posture
ready to receive an Enemy, as soon as he should appear; upon which the Captain,
as a feint, ordered a few of his Men to show themselves on a rising Ground just
before the House. But we had like to have caught a Tartar: For though the Enemy
took the Train I had laid, and on sight of our small Body on the Hill, sent a
Party from their greater Body to intercept them, before they could reach the
Town; yet the Sequel proved, we had mistaken their Number, and it soon appeared
to be much greater than we at first imagined. However our Out-scouts, as I may
call 'em, got safe into the House; and on the Appearance of the Party, we let
fly a full Volly, which laid dead on the Spot three Men and one Horse. Hereupon
the whole Body made up to the House, but stood a-loof upon the Hill without
reach of our Shot. We soon saw our Danger from the number of the Enemy: And
well for us it was, that the watchful Governor had taken notice of it, as well
as we in the House. For observing us surrounded with the Enemy, and by a Power
so much superior, he marched himself with a good part of the Garrison to our
Relief. The Enemy stood a little time as if they would receive 'em; but upon
second thoughts they retired; and to our no little Joy left us at Liberty to
come out of the House and join the Garrison.

SCARCE a Day passed but we had some visits of the like kind attended sometimes
with Rencounters of this Nature; in so much that there was hardly any stirring
out in Safety for small Parties, though never so little away. There was within a
little Mile of the Town, an old Vineyard, environed with a lose stone Wall: An
Officer and I made an Agreement to ride thither for an Airing. We did so, and
after a little riding, it came into my Head to put a Fright upon the Officer.
And very lucky for us both was that unlucky Thought of mine; pretending to see
a Party of the Enemy make up to us, I gave him the Alarm, set Spurs to my
Horse, and rid as fast as Legs could carry me. The Officer no way bated of his
Speed; and we had scarce got out of the Vineyard but my Jest proved Earnest,
twelve of the Enemy's Horse pursuing us to the very Gates of the Town. Nor
could I ever after prevail upon my Fellow-Traveller to believe that he owed his
Escape to Merriment more than Speed.

SOON after my Charge, as to the Fortifications, was pretty well over, I
obtained Leave of the Governor to be absent for a Fortnight, upon some Affairs
of my own at Valencia. On my Return from whence, at a Town called Venissa, I
met two Officers of an English Regiment, going to the Place from whence I last
came. They told me, after common Congratulations, that they had left Major
Boyd, at a little Place called Capel, hiring another Mule, that he rode on
thither having tired and failed him; desiring withal, that if I met him, I
would let him know that they would stay for him at that Place. I had another
Gentleman in my Company, and we had traveled on not above a League further,
whence, at a little Distance, we were both surpised with a Sight that seemed
to have set all Art at defiance, and was too odd for any thing in Nature. It
appeared all in red, and to move; but so very slowly, that if we had not made
more way to that than it did to us, we should have made it a Day's Journey
before we met it. My Companion could as little tell what to make of it as I;
and, indeed, the nearer it came the more monstrous it seemed, having nothing of
the Tokens of Man, either Walking, Riding, or in any Posture whatever. At last,
coming up with this strange Figure of a Creature (for now we found it was
certainly such) what, or rather who, should it prove to be, but Major Boyd? He
was a Person of himself far from one of the least Proportion, and mounted on a
poor little Ass, with all his warlike Accoutrements upon it, you will allow
must make a Figure almost as odd as one of the old Centaurs. The Morocco Saddle
that covered the Ass was of Burden enough for the Beast without its Master; and
the additional Holsters and Pistols made it much more weighty. Nevertheless, a
Curb-Bridle of the largest Size covered his little Head, and a long red Cloak,
hanging down to the Ground, covered Jackboots, Ass, Master and all. In short,
my Companion and I, after we could specifically declare it to be a Man, agreed
we never saw a Figure so comical in all our Lives. When we had merrily greeted
our Major (for a Cynick could not have forborne Laughter) He excused all as well
as he could, by saying he could get no other Beast. After which, delivering our
Message, and condoling with him for his present Mounting, and wishing him
better at his next Quarters, he settled into his old Pace, and we into ours,
and parted.

WE lay that Night at Altea, famous for its Bay for Ships to water at. It
stands on a high Hill; and is adorned, not defended, with an old Fort.

THENCE we came to Alicant, where having now been a whole Year, and having
effected what was held necessary, I once more prevailed upon the Governor to
permit me to take another Journey. The Lord Galway lay at Tarraga, while Lerida
lay under the Siege of the Duke of Orleans; and having some Grounds of
Expectation given me, while he was at Alicant, I resolved at least to
demonstrate I was still living. The Governor favored me with Letters, not at
all to my Disadvantage; so taking Ship for Barcelona, just at our putting into
the Harbor, we met with the English Fleet, on its Return from the Expedition
to Toulon under Sir Cloudsly Shovel.

I STAYED but very few Days at Barcelona, and then proceeded on my intended
Journey to Tarraga; arriving at which Place I delivered my Packet to the Lord
Galway, who received me with very great Civility; and to double it, acquainted
me at the same time, that the Governor of Alicant had wrote very much in my
Favor: But though it was a known Part of that noble Lord's Character, that the
first Impression was generally strongest, I had Reason soon after to close with
another Saying, equally true, That general Rules always admit of some
Exception. While I was here we had News of the taking of the Town of Lerida;
the Prince of Hesse (Brother to that brave Prince who lost his Life before
Monjouick) retiring into the Castle with the Garrison, which he bravely
defended a long time after.

WHEN I was thus attending my Lord Galway at Tarraga, he received Intelligence
that the Enemy had a Design to lay Siege to Denia; whereupon he gave me Orders
to repair there as Engineer. After I had received my Orders, and taken Leave of
his Lordship, I set out, resolving, since it was left to my Choice, to go by
way of Barcelona, and there take Shipping for the Place of my Station; by which
I proposed to save more time than would allow me a full Opportunity of visiting
Montserat, a Place I had heard much Talk of, which had filled me with a longing
Desire to see it. To say Truth, I had been told such extravagant Things of the
Place, that I could hardly impute more than one half of it to any thing but
Spanish Rhodomontado's, the Vice of extravagant Exaggeration being too natural
to that Nation.

Description of Montserat.
MONTSERAT is a rising lofty Hill, in the very Middle of a spacious Plain, in
the Principality of Catalonia, about seven Leagues distant from Barcelona to
the Westward, somewhat inclining to the North. At the very first Sight, its
Oddness of Figure promises something extraordinary; and even at that Distance
the Prospect makes somewhat of a grand Appearance: Hundreds of aspiring
Pyramids presenting themselves all at once to the Eye, look, if I may be
allowed so to speak, like a little petrified Forest; or, rather, like the
awful Ruins of some capacious Structure, the Labor of venerable Antiquity. The
nearer you approach the more it affects; but till you are very near you can
hardly form in your Mind any thing like what you find it when you come close to
it. Till just upon it you would imagine it a perfect Hill of Steeples; but so
intermingled with Trees of Magnitude, as well as Beauty, that your Admiration
can never be tired, or your Curiosity surfeited. Such I sound it on my
Approach; yet much less than what I found it, was so soon as I entered upon the
very Premises.

NOW that stupendous Cluster of Pyramids affected me in a Manner different to
all before; and I found it so finely group'd with verdant Groves, and here and
there interspersed with aspiring, but solitary Trees, that it no way lessened
my Admiration, while it increased my Delight. Those Trees, which I call
solitary, as standing single, in opposition to the numerous Groves, which are
close and thick (as I observed when I ascended to take a View of the several
Cells) rise generally out of the very Clefts of the main Rock, with nothing, to
Appearance, but a Soil or Bed of Stone for their Nurture. But though some few
Naturalists may assert, that the Nitre in the Stone may afford a due Proportion
of Nourishment to Trees and Vegetables; these, in my Opinion, were all too
beautiful, their Bark, Leaf, and Flowers, carried too fair a Face of Health, to
allow them even to be the Foster-children of Rock and Stone only.

UPON this Hill, or if you please, Grove of Rocks, are thirteen Hermits Cells,
the last of which lies near the very Summit. You gradually advance to every
one, from Bottom to Top, by a winding Ascent; which to do would otherwise be
impossible, by reason of the Steepness; but though there is a winding Ascent to
every Cell, as I have said, I would yet set at defiance the most observant, if
a Stranger, to find it feasible to visit them in order, if not precaution'd to
follow the poor Borigo, or old Ass, that with Paniers hanging on each Side of
him, mounts regularly, and daily, up to every particular Cell. The Manner is as
follows:

IN the Paniers there are thirteen Partitions; one for every Cell. At the Hour
appointed, the Servant having placed the Paniers on his Back, the Ass, of
himself, goes to the Door of the Convent at the very Foot of the Hill, where
every Partition is supplied with their several Allowances of Victuals and Wine.
Which, as soon as he has received, without any further Attendance, or any
Guide, he mounts and takes the Cells gradually, in their due Course, till he
reaches the very uppermost. Where having discharged his Duty, he descends the
same Way, lighter by the Load he carried up. This the poor stupid Drudge fails
not to do, Day and Night, at the stated Hours.

TWO Gentlemen, who had joined me on the Road, alike led by Curiosity, seemed
alike delighted, that the End of it was so well answered. I could easily
discover in their Countenances a Satisfaction, which, if it did not give a
Sanction to my own, much confirmed it, while they seemed to allow with me that
these reverend Solitaries were truly happy Men: I then thought them such; and a
thousand times since, reflecting within my self, have wished, bating their
Errors, and lesser Superstitions, my self as happily station'd: For what can
there be wanting to a happy Life, where all things necessary are provided
without Care? Where the Days, without Anxiety or Troubles, may be gratefully
passed away, with an innocent Variety of diverting and pleasing Objects, and
where their Sleeps and Slumbers are never interrupted with any thing more
offensive, than murmuring Springs, natural Cascades, or the various Songs of
the pretty feathered Quiristers.

BUT their Courtesy to Strangers is no less engaging than their Solitude. A
recluse Life, for the Fruits of it, generally speaking, produces Moroseness;
Pharisaical Pride too often sours the Temper; and a mistaken Opinion of their
own Merit too naturally leads such Men into a Contempt of others: But on the
contrary, these good Men (for I must call them as I thought them) seemed to me
the very Emblems of Innocence; so ready to oblige others, that at the same
Instant they seemed laying Obligations upon themselves. This is self-evident,
in that Affability and Complaisance they use in showing the Rarities of their
several Cells; where, for fear you should slip any thing worthy Observation,
they endeavor to instill in you as quick a Propensity of asking, as you find in
them a prompt Alacrity in answering such Questions of Curiosity as their own
have inspired.

IN particular, I remember one of those reverend old Men, when we were taking
Leave at the Door of his Cell, to which out of his great Civility he
accompanied us, finding by the Air of our Faces, as well as our Expressions,
that we thought our selves pleasingly entertained; to divert us afresh,
advanced a few Paces from the Door, when giving a Whistle with his Mouth, a
surprising Flock of pretty little Birds, variegated, and of different Colors,
immediately flocked around him. Here you should see some alighting upon his
Shoulders, some on his awful Beard; others took Refuge on his snow-like Head,
and many feeding, and more endeavoring to feed out of his Mouth; each
appearing emulous and under an innocent Contention, how best to express their
Love and Respect to their no less pleased Master.

NOR did the other Cells labor under any Deficiency of Variety: Every one
boasting in some particular, that might distinguish it in something equally
agreeable and entertaining. Nevertheless, crystal Springs spouting from the
solid Rocks were, from the highest to the lowest, common to the^ all; and, in
most of them, they had little brass Cocks, out of which, when turned, issued
the most cool and crystalline Flows o^ excellent pure Water. And yet what more
affected me, and which I found near more Cells than one, was the natural
Cascades of the same transparent Element; these falling from one Rock to
another, in that warm, or rather hot Climate, gave not more delightful
Astonishment to the Eye, than they afforded grateful Refreshment to the whole
Man. The Streams falling from these, soften, from a rougher tumultuous Noise,
into such affecting Murmurs, by Distance, the Intervention of Groves, or
neighboring Rocks, that it were impossible to see or hear them and not be
charmed.

NEITHER are those Groves grateful only in a beautiful Verdure; Nature renders
them otherwise delightful, in loading them with Clusters of Berries of a
perfect scarlet Color, which, by a beautiful Intermixture, strike the Eye with
additional Delight. In short, it might nonplus a Person of the nicest Taste, to
distinguish or determine, whether the Neatness of their Cells within, or the
beauteous Varieties without, most exhaust his Admiration. Nor is the Whole, in
my Opinion, a little advantaged by the frequent View of some of those
pyramidical Pillars, which seem, as weary of their own Weight, to recline and
seek Support from others in the Neighborhood.

WHEN I mentioned the outside Beauties of their Cells, I must be thought to
have forgot to particularize the glorious Prospects presented to your Eye from
every one of them; but especially from that nearest the Summit. A Prospect, by
reason of the Purity of the Air, so extensive, and so very entertaining, that
to dilate upon it properly to one that never saw it, would baffle Credit; and
naturally to depaint it, would confound Invention. I therefore shall only say,
that on the Mediterranean Side, after an agreeable Interval of some fair
Leagues, it will set at defiance the strongest Optics; and although Barcelona
bounds it on the Land, the Eyes are feasted with the Delights of such an
intervening Champion (where beauteous Nature does not only smile, but riot)
that the Sense must be very temperate, or very weak, that can be soon or easily
satisfied.

HAVING thus taken a View of all their refreshing Springs, their grateful
Groves, and solitary Shades under single Trees, whose Clusters proved that even
Rocks were grown fruitful; and having ran over all the Variety of Pleasures in
their several pretty Cells, decently set off with Gardens round them, equally
fragrant and beautiful, we were brought down again to the Convent, which,
though on a small Ascent, lies very near the Foot of this terrestrial Paradise,
there to take a Survey of their sumptuous Hall, much more sumptuous Chapel, and
its adjoining Repository; and feast our Eyes with Wonders of a different
Nature; and yet as entertaining as any, or all, we had seen before.

IMMEDIATELY on our Descent, a Priest presented himself at the Door of the
Convent, ready to show us the hidden Rarities. And though, as I understood,
hardly a Day passes without the Resort of some Strangers to gratify their
Curiosity with the Wonders of the Place; yet is there, on every such Occasion,
a superior Concourse of Natives ready to see over again, out of mere Bigotry
and Superstition, what they have seen, perhaps, a hundred times before. I could
not avoid taking notice, however, that the Priest treated those constant
Visitants with much less Ceremony, or more Freedom, if you please, than any of
the Strangers of what Nation soever; or, indeed, he seemed to take as much
Pains to disoblige those, as he did Pleasure in obliging us.

THE Hall was neat, large and stately; but being plain and unadorned with more
than decent Decorations, suitable to such a Society, I hasten to the other.

WHEN we entered the Chapel, our Eyes were immediately attracted by the Image
of our Lady of Montserat (as they call it) which stands over the Altar-Piece.
It is about the natural Stature; but as black and shining as Ebony it self.
Most would imagine it made of that Material; though her Retinue and Adorers
will allow nothing of the Matter. On the contrary, Tradition, which with them
is, on some Occasions, more than tantamount to Religion, has assured them, and
they relate it as undoubted Matter of Fact, that her present Color, if I may
so call it, proceeded from her Concealment, in the Time of the Moors, between
those two Rocks on which the Chapel is founded; and that her long lying in that
dismal Place changed her once lovely White into its present opposite. Would not
a Heretic here be apt to say, That it was great pity that an Image which still
boasts the Power of acting so many Miracles, could no better conserve her own
Complexion? At least it must be allowed, even by a good Catholic, to carry
along with it Matter of Reproach to the fair Ladies, Natives of the Country,
for their unnatural and excessive Affection of adulterating, if not defacing,
their beautiful Faces, with the ruinating Dauberies of Carmine?

AS the Custom of the Place is (which is likewise allowed to be a
distinguishing Piece of Civility to Strangers) when we approach the black Lady
(who, I should have told you, bears a Child in her Arms; but whether maternally
Black, or of the Mulatto Kind, I protest I did not mind) the Priest, in great
Civility, offers you her Arm to salute; at which Juncture, I, like a true blue
Protestant, mistaking my Word of Command, fell foul on the fair Lady's Face.
The Displeasure in his Countenance (for he took more Notice of the Rudeness
than the good Lady her self) soon convinced me of my Error: However, as a
greater Token of his Civility, having admitted no Spaniards along with my
Companions and me, it passed off the better; and his after Civilities
manifested, that he was willing to reform my Ignorance by his Complaisance.

TO demonstrate which, upon my telling him that I had a Set of Beads, which I
must entreat him to consecrate for me, he readily, nay eagerly complied; and
having hung them on her Arm for the Space of about half, or somewhat short of a
whole Minute, he returned me the holy Baubles with a great deal of Address and
most evident Satisfaction. The Reader will be apt to admire at this curious
Piece of Superstition of mine, till I have told him, that even rigid
Protestants have, in this Country^ thought it but prudent to do the like; and
likewise having so done, to carry them about their Persons, or in their
Pockets: For Experience has convinced us of the Necessity of this most
Catholic Precaution; since those who have here, traveling or otherwise, come
to their Ends, whether by Accident, Sickness, or the Course of Nature, not
having these sanctifying Seals found upon them, have ever been refused
Christian Burial, under a superstitious Imagination, that the Corpse of a
Heretic will infect every thing near it.

TWO Instances of this kind fell within my Knowledge; one before I came to
Montserat, the other after. The first was of one Slunt, who had been Bombardier
at Monjouick; but being killed while we lay at Campilio, a Priest, whom I
advised with upon the Matter, told me, that if he should be buried where any
Corn grew, his Body would not only be taken up again, but ill treated, in
revenge of the Destruction of so much Corn, which the People would on no
account be persuaded to touch; for which Reason we took care to have him laid
in a very deep Grave, on a very barren Spot of Ground. The other was of one
Captain Bush, who was a Prisoner with me on the Surrender of Denia; who being
sent, as I was afterward, to Saint Clemente la Mancha, there died; and, as I
was informed, though he was privately, and by Night, buried in a Corn-Field, he
was taken out of his Grave by those superstitious People, as soon as ever they
could discover the Place where his Body was deposited. But I return to the
Convent at Montserat.

OUT of the Chapel, behind the High-Altar, we descended into a spacious Room,
the Repository of the great Offerings made to the Lady. Here, though I thought
in the Chapel it self I had seen the Riches of the Universe, I found a
prodigious Quantity of more costly Presents, the superstitious Tribute of most
of the Roman Catholic Princes in Europe. Among a Multitude of others, they
showed me a Sword set with Diamonds, the Offering of Charles the Third, then
King of Spain, but now Emperor of Germany. Though I must confess, being a
Heretic, I could much easier find a Reason for a fair Lady's presenting such a
Sword to a King of Spain, than for a King of Spain's presenting such a Sword to
a fair Lady: And by the Motto upon it, Pulchra tamen nigra, it was plain such
was his Opinion. That Prince was so delighted with the Pleasures of this sweet
Place, that he, as well as I, stayed as long as ever he could; though neither
of us so long as either could have wished.

BUT there was another Offering from a King of Portugal, equally glorious and
costly; but much better adapted; and therefore in its Propriety easier to be
accounted for. That was a Glory for the Head of her Ladyship, every Ray of
which was set with Diamonds, large at the Bottom, and gradually lessening to
the very Extremity of every Ray. Each Ray might be about half a Yard long; and
I imagined in the Whole there might be about one Hundred of them. In short, if
ever her Ladyship did the Offerer the Honor to put it on, I will, though a
Heretic, venture to aver, she did not at that present time look like a humane
Creature.

TO enumerate the rest, if my Memory would suffice, would exceed Belief. As the
upper Part was a plain Miracle of Nature, the lower was a complete Treasury of
miraculous Art.

IF you ascend from the lowest Cell to the very Summit, the last of all the
thirteen, you will perceive a continual Contention between Pleasure and
Devotion; and at last, perhaps, find your self at a Loss to decide which
deserves the Pre-eminence: For you are not here to take Cells in the vulgar
Acceptance, as the little Dormitories of solitary Monks: No! Neatness, Use,
and Contrivance appear in every one of them; and though in an almost perfect
Equality, yet in such Perfection, that you will find it difficult to discover
in any one of them any thing wanting to the Pleasure of Life.

IF you descend to the Convent near the Foot of that venerable Hill; you may
see more, much more of the Riches of the World; but less, far less Appearance
of a celestial Treasure. Perhaps, it might be only the Sentiment of a Heretic;
but that Awe and Devotion, which I found in my Attendant from Cell to Cell grew
languid, and lost in mere empty Bigotry and foggy Superstition, when I came
below. In short, there was not a greater Difference in their Heights, than in
the Sentiments they inspired me with.

BEFORE I leave this Emblem of the beatifick Vision, I must correct some thing
like a Mistake, as to the poor Borigo. I said at the Beginning that his Labor
was daily; but the Sunday is to him a Day of rest, as it is to the Hermits, his
Masters, a Day of Refection. For to save the poor faithful Brute the hard
Drudgery of that Day, the thirteen Hermits, if Health permit, descend to their
Coenobium, as they call it; that is, to the Hall of the Convent; where they
dine in common with the Monks of the Order, who are Benedictines.

AFTER seven Days Variety of such innocent Delight (the Space allowed for the
Entertainment of Strangers) I took my Leave of this pacifick Hermitage, to
pursue the more boisterous Duties of my Calling. The Life of a Soldier is in
every Respect the full Antithesis to that of a Hermit; and I know not, whether
it might not be a Sense of that, which inspired me with very great Reluctance
at parting. I confess, while on the Spot, I over and over bandy'd in my Mind
the Reasons which might prevail upon Charles the Fifth to relinquish his Crown;
and the Arguments on his Side never failed of Energy, when I could persuade my
self that this, or some like happy Retreat, was the Reward of abdicated Empire.

FULL of these Contemplations (for they lasted there) I arrived at Barcelona;
where I found a Vessel ready to sail, on which I embarked for Denia, in
pursuance of my Orders. Sailing to the Mouth of the Mediterranean, no Place
along the Christian Shore affords a Prospect equally delightful with the Castle
of Denia. It was never designed for a Place of great Strength, being built, and
first designed, as a Seat of Pleasure to the Great Duke of Lerma. In that
Family it many Years remained; though, within less than a Century, that with two
other Dukedoms, have devolved upon the Family of the Duke de Medina Celi, the
richest Subject at this time in all Spain.

DENIA was the first Town, that, in our Way to Barcelona, declared for King
Charles; and was then by his Order made a Garrison. The Town is but small, and
surrounded with a thin Wall; so thin, that I have known a Cannon-Ball pierce
through it at once.

WHEN I arrived at Denia, I found a Spaniard Governor of the Town, whose Name
has slipped my Memory; though his Behavior merited everlasting Annals. Major
Percival, an Englishman, commanded in the Castle, and on my coming there, I
understood, it had been agreed between 'em, that in case of a Siege, which they
apprehended, the Town should be defended wholly by Spaniards, and the Castle by
the English.

I had scarce been there three Weeks before those Expectations were answered.
The Place was invested by Count D' Alfelt, and Major General Mahoni; two Days
after which, they opened Trenches on the East Side of the Town. I was
necessitated upon their so doing, to order the Demolishment of some Houses on
that Side, that I might erect a Battery to point upon their Trenches, the
better to annoy them. I did so; and it did the intended Service; for with that,
and two others, which I raised upon the Castle (from all which we fired
incessantly, and with great Success) the Besiegers were sufficiently incommoded.

THE Governor of the Town (a Spaniard as I said before, and with a Spanish
Garrison) behaved very gallantly; insomuch, that what was said of the Prince of
Hesse, when he so bravely defended Gibraltar against the joint Forces of France
and Spain, might be said of him, that he was Governor, Engineer, Gunner, and
Bombardier all in one: For no Man could exceed him, either in Conduct or
Courage; nor were the Spaniards under him less valiant or vigilant: For in case
the Place was taken, expecting but indifferent Quarter, they fought with
Bravery, and defended the Place to Admiration.

THE Enemy had answered our Fire with all the Ardour imaginable; and having
made a Breach, that, as we thought was practicable, a Storm was expected every
Hour. Preparing against which, to the great Joy of all the Inhabitants, and the
Surprise of the whole Garrison, and without our being able to assign the least
Cause, the Enemy suddenly raised the Siege, and withdrew from a Place, which
those within imagined in great Danger.

THE Siege thus abdicated (if I may use a modern Phrase) I was resolved to
improve my Time, and make the best Provision I could against any future Attack.
To that purpose I made several new Fortifications, together with proper
Casemets for our Powder, all which rendered the Place much stronger, though Time
too soon showed me that Strength it self must yield to Fortune.

SURVEYING those Works, and my Workmen, I was one Day standing on the great
Battery, when casting my Eye toward the Barbary Coast, I observed an odd sort
of greenish Cloud making to the Spanish Shore. Not like other Clouds with
Rapidity or Swiftness; but with a Motion so slow, that Sight itself was a long
time before it would allow it such. At last, it came just over my Head, and
interposing between the Sun and me, so thickened the Air, that I had lost the
very Sight of Day. At this moment it had reached the Land; and though very near
me in my Imagination, it began to dissolve, and lose of its first Tenebrity,
when all on a sudden there fell such a vast multitude of Locusts, as exceeded
the thickest storm of Hail or Snow that I ever saw. All around me was
immediately covered with those crauling Creatures; and they yet continued to
fall so thick, that with the swing of my Cane I knocked down thousands. It is
scarce imaginable the Havoc I made in a very little space of time; much less
conceivable is the horrid Desolation which attended the Visitation of those
Animalcula. There was not in a Day or two's time, the least Leaf to be seen
upon a Tree, nor any green Thing in a Garden. Nature seemed buried in her own
Ruins; and the vegetable World to be Supporters only to her Monument. I never
saw the hardest Winter, in those Parts, attended with any equal Desolation.
When, glutton like, they had devoured all that should have sustained them, and
the more valuable Part of God's Creation (whether weary with gorging, or over
thirsty with devouring, I leave to Philosophers) they made to Ponds, Brooks,
and standing Pools, there revenging their own Rape upon Nature, upon their own
vile Carcasses. In every of these you might see them lie in Heaps like little
Hills; drowned indeed, but attended with Stenches so noisome, that it gave the
distracted Neighborhood too great Reason to apprehend yet more fatal
Consequences. A Pestilential Infection is the Dread of every Place, but
especially of all Parts upon the Mediterranean. The Priests therefore repaired
to a little Chapel, built in the open Fields, to be made use of on such like
Occasions, there to deprecate the miserable Cause of this dreadful Visitation.
In a Week's time, or there abouts, the Stench was over, and every Thing but
verdant Nature in its pristin Order.

Denia besieged again and taken.
SOME few Months after this, and about eight Months from the former Siege, Count
D' Alfelt caused Denia to be again invested; and being then sensible of all the
Mistakes he had before committed, he now went about his Business with more
Regularity and Discretion. The first Thing he set upon, and it was the wisest
Thing he could do, was to cut off our Communication with the Sea. This he did,
and thereby obtained what he much desired. Next, he caused his Batteries to be
erected on the West side of the Town, from which he plied it so furiously, that
in five Days time a practicable Breach was made; upon which they stormed and
took it. The Governor, who had so bravely defended it in the former Seige,
fortunately for him, had been removed; and Francis Valero, now in his Place,
was made Prisoner of War with all his Garrison.

AFTER the taking the Town, they erected Batteries against the Castle, which
they kept plied with incessant Fire, both from Cannon and Mortars. But what
most of all plagued us, and did us most Mischief, was the vast showers of
Stones sent among the Garrison from their Mortars. These, terrible in Bulk and
Size, did more Execution than all the rest put together. The Garrison could not
avoid being somewhat disheartened at this uncommon way of Rencounter; yet, to a
Man, declared against hearkening to any Proposals of Surrender, the Governor
excepted; who having selected more Treasure than he could properly, or justly
call his own, was the only Person that seemed forward for such a Motion. He had
more than once thrown out Expressions of such a Nature, but without any Effect.
Nevertheless, having at last secretly obtained a peculiar Capitulation for
himself, Bag, and Baggage; the Garrison was sacrificed to his private Interest,
and basely given up Prisoners of War. By these Means indeed he saved his Money,
but lost his Reputation; and soon after, Life it self. And sure every Body will
allow the latter loss to be least, who will take Pains to consider, that it
screen'd him from the consequential Scrutinies of a Council of War, which must
have issued as the just Reward of his Demerits.

THE Garrison being thus unaccountably delivered up and made Prisoners, were
dispersed different Ways: Some into Castile, others as far as Oviedo, in the
Kingdom of Leon. For my own part, having received a Contusion in my Breast; I
was under a necessity of being left behind with the Enemy, till I should be in
a Condition to be removed, and when that time came, I found my self agreeably
ordered to Valencia.

AS a Prisoner of War I must now bid adieu to the active Part of the military
Life; and hereafter concern my self with Descriptions of Countries, Towns,
Palaces, and Men, instead of Battles. However, if I take in my way Actions of
War, founded on the best Authorities, I hope my Interspersing such will be no
disadvantage to my now more pacifick MEMOIRS.

SO soon as I arrived at Valencia, I wrote to our Play Master Mr. Mead, at
Barcelona, letting him know, that I was become a Prisoner, wounded, and in want
of Money. Nor could even all those Circumstances prevail on me to think it long
before he returned a favorable Answer, in an Order to Monsieur Zoulicafre, a
Banker, to pay me on Sight fifty Pistoles. But in the same Letter he gave me to
understand, that those fifty Pistoles were a Present to me from General
(afterward Earl) Stanhope; and so indeed I found it, when I returned into
England, my Account not being charged with any part of it: But this was not the
only Test I received of that generous Earl's Generosity. And where is the
Wonder, as the World is compelled to own, that Heroic Actions and Largeness of
Soul ever did discover and amply distinguish the genuine Branches of that
illustrious Family.

THIS Recruit to me however was the more generous for being seasonable.
Benefits are always doubled in their being easily conferred and well timed; and
with such an Allowance as I constantly had by the order of King Philip, as
Prisoner of War, viz. eighteen Ounces of Mutton per diem for my self, and nine
for my Man, with Bread and Wine in proportion, and especially in such a
Situation; all this I say was sufficient to invite a Man to be easy, and almost
forget his want of Liberty, and much more so to me, if it be considered, that,
that want of Liberty consisted only in being debarred from leaving the
pleasantest City in all Spain.

HERE I met with the French Engineer, who made the Mine under the Rock of the
Castle at Alicant. That fatal Mine, which blew up General Richards, Colonel
Syburg, Colonel Thornicroft, and at least twenty more Officers. And yet by the
Account, that Engineer gave me, their Fate was their own choosing: The General,
who commanded at that Siege being more industrious to save them, than they were
to be saved: He endeavored it many ways: He sent them word of the Mine, and
their readiness to spring it; he over and over sent them Offers of Leave to
come, and take a view of it, and inspect it: Notwithstanding all which, though
Colonel Thornicroft, and Captain Page, a French Engineer, in the Service of Kng
Charles, pursued the Invitation, and were permitted to view it, yet would they
not believe; but reported on their Return, that it was a sham Mine, a feint
only to intimidate 'em to a Surrender, all the Bags being filled with Sand
instead of Gunpowder.

THE very Day on which the Besiegers designed to spring the Mine, they gave
Notice of it; and the People of the Neighborhood ran up in Crowds to an
opposite Hill in order to see it: Nevertheless, although those in the Castle saw
all this, they still remained so infatuated, as to imagine it all done only to
affright 'em. At length the fatal Mine was sprung, and all who were upon that
Battery lost their Lives; and among them those I first mentioned. The very
Recital hereof made me think within my self, who can resist his Fate?

THAT Engineer added further, that it was with an incredible Difficulty, that
he prepared that Mine; that there were in the Concavity thirteen hundred
Barrels of Powder; notwithstanding which, it made no great Noise without,
whatever it might do inwardly; that only taking away what might be not
improperly termed an Excrescence in the Rock, the Heave on the Blast had
rendered the Castle rather stronger on that Side than it was before, a Crevice
or Crack which had often occasioned Apprehensions being thereby wholly closed
and firm.

SOME further Particulars I soon after had from Colonel Syburg's Gentleman; who
seeing me at the Playhouse, challenged me, though at that Time unknown to me. He
told me, that the Night preceding the unfortunate Catastrophe of his Master,
he was waiting on him in the Casemet, where he observed, sometime before the
rest of the Company took notice of it, that General Richards appeared very
pensive and thoughtful, that the whole Night long he was pestered with, and
could not get rid of a great Fly, which was perpetually buzzing about his Ears
and Head, to the vexation and disturbance of the rest of the Company, as well
as the General himself; that in the Morning, when they went upon the Battery,
under which the Mine was, the General made many offers of going off; but
Colonel Syburg, who was got a little merry, and the rest out of a Bravado,
would stay, and would not let the General stir; that at last it was proposed by
Colonel Syburg to have the other two Bottles to the Queen's Health, after which
he promised they would all go off together.

UPON this my Relator, Syburg's Gentleman, said, he was sent to fetch the
stipulated two Bottles; returning with which, Captain Daniel Weaver, within
thirty or forty Yards of the Battery, ran by him, vowing, he was resolved to
drink the Queen's Health with them; but his Feet were scarce on the Battery,
when the Mine was sprung, which took him away with the rest of the Company;
while Major Harding now a Justice in Westminster coming that very Moment off
Duty, exchanged Fates.

IF Predestination, in the Eyes of many, is an unaccountable Doctrine, what
better Account can the wisest give of this Fatality? Or to what else shall we
impute the Issue of this whole Transaction? That Men shall be solicited to
their Safety; suffered to survey the Danger they were threatened with; among
many other Tokens of its approaching Certainty, see such a Concourse of People
crowding to be Spectators of their impending Catastrophe; and after all this,
so infatuated to stay on the fatal Spot the fetching up of the other two
Bottles; whatever it may to such as never think, to such as plead an use of
Reason, it must administer Matter worthy of the sedatest Consideration.

BEING now pretty well recovered of my Wounds, I was by Order of the Governor
of Valencia, removed to Saint Clemente de la Mancha, a Town somewhat more
Inland, and consequently esteemed more secure than a Semi-Seaport. Here I
remained under a sort of Pilgrimage upwards of three Years. To me as a Stranger
divested of Acquaintance or Friend (for at that instant I was sole Prisoner
there) at first it appeared such, though in a very small compass of Time, I
luckily found it made quite otherwise by an agreeable Conversation.

SAINT Clemente de la Mancha, is rendered famous by the renowned Don Michael
Cerviantes, who in his facetious but satirical Romance, has fixed it the Seat
and Birth Place of his Hero Don Quixot.

THE Gentlemen of this Place are the least Priest-ridden or Sons of Bigotry, of
any that I met with in all Spain; of which in my Conversation with them I had
daily Instances. Among many others, an Expression that fell from Don Felix
Pacheco, a Gentleman of the best Figure thereabout, and of a very plentiful
Fortune, shall now suffice. I was become very intimate with him; and we used
often to converse together with a Freedom too dangerous to be common in a
Country so enslaved by the Inquisition. Asking me one Day in a sort of a jocose
manner, who, in my Opinion, had done the greatest Miracles that ever were heard
of? I answered, Jesus Christ. "It is very true, says he, Jesus Christ did great
Miracles, and a great one it was to feed five Thousand People with two or three
small Fishes, and a like number of Loaves: But Saint Francis, the Founder of
the Franciscan Order, has found out a way to feed daily one hundred Thousand
Lubbards with nothing at all;" meaning the Franciscans, the Followers of Saint
Francis, who have no visible Revenues; yet in their way of Living come up to,
if they do not exceed any other Order.

ANOTHER Day talking of the Place, it naturally led us into a Discourse of the
Knight of la Mancha, Don Quixot. At which time he told me, that in his Opinion,
that Work was a perfect Paradox, being the best and the worst Romance, that
ever was wrote. "For, says he, though it must infallibly please every Man, that
has any taste of Wit; yet has it had such a fatal Effect upon the Spirits of my
Countrymen, that every Man of Wit must ever resent; for, continued he, before
the Appearance in the World of that Labor of Cerviantes, it was next to an
Impossibility for a Man to walk the Streets with any Delight, or without
Danger. There were seen so many Cavaliero's prancing and curvetting before the
Windows of their Mistresses, that a Stranger would have imagined the whole
Nation to have been nothing less than a Race of Knight Errants. But after the
World became a little acquainted with that notable History; the Man that was
seen in that once celebrated Drapery, was pointed at as a Don Quixot, and found
himself the Jest of High and Low. And I verily believe, added he, that to this,
and this only we owe that dampness and poverty of Spirit, which has run through
all our Councils for a Century past, so little agreeable to those nobler
Actions of our famous Ancestors."

AFTER many of these lesser sorts of Confidences, Don Felix recommended me to a
Lodging next Door to his own. It was at a Widow's, who had one only Daughter,
her House just opposite to a Franciscan Nunnery. Here I remained somewhat
upwards of two Years; all which time, lying in my Bed, I could hear the Nuns
early in the Morning at their Matins, and late in the Evening at their Vespers,
with Delight enough to my self, and without the least Indecency in the World in
my Thoughts of them. Their own Divine Employ too much employed every Faculty of
mine to entertain any Thing inconsentaneous or offensive.

THIS my Neighborhood to the Nunnery gave me an opportunity of seeing two Nuns
invested; and in this I must do a Justice to the whole Country, to acknowledge,
that a Stranger who is curious (I would impute it rather to their hopes of
Conversion, than to their Vanity) shall be admitted to much greater Freedoms in
their religious Pageantries, than any Native.

The manner of Investing Nuns.
ONE of these Nuns was of the first Quality, which rendered the Ceremony more
remarkably fine. The manner of investing them was thus: In the Morning her
Relations and Friends all met at her Father's House; whence, she being attired
in her most sumptuous Apparel, and a Coronet placed on her Head, they attended
her, in Cavalcade, to the Nunnery, the Streets and Windows being crowded, and
filled with Spectators of all sorts.

SO soon as she entered the Chapel belonging to the Nunnery, she kneeled down,
and with an appearance of much Devotion, saluted the Ground; then rising up,
she advanced a Step or two farther; when on her Knees she repeated the Salutes:
This done she approached to the Altar, where she remained till Mass was over:
After which, a Sermon was preached by one of the Priests in Praise, or rather
in an exalted Preference of a single Life. The Sermon being over, the Nun elect
fell down on her Knees before the Altar; and after some short mental Oraisons,
rising again, she withdrew into an inner Room, where stripping off all her rich
Attire, she put on her Nun's Weeds: In which making her Appearance, she, again
kneeling, offered up some private Devotions; which being over, she was led to
the Door of the Nunnery, where the Lady and the rest of the Nuns stood ready to
receive her with open Arms. Thus entered, the Nuns conducted her into the
Quire, where after they had entertained her with Singing, and playing upon the
Organ, the Ceremony concluded, and every one departed to their proper
Habitations.

THE very same Day of the Year ensuing, the Relations and Friends of the fair
Novitiate meet again in the Chapel of the Nunnery, where the Lady Abbess brings
her out, and delivers her to them. Then again is there a Sermon preached on the
same Subject as at first; which being over, she is brought up to the Altar in a
decent, but plain Dress, the fine Apparel, which she put off on her Initiation,
being deposited on one side of the Altar, and her Nun's Weeds on the other.
Here the Priest in Latin cries, Utrum horum mavis, accipe: to which she
answers, as her Inclination, or as her Instruction directs her. If she, after
this her Year of Probation, show any Dislike, she is at Liberty to come again
into the World: But if awed by Fear (as too often is the Case) or won by
Expectation, or present real Inclination, she makes choice of the Nun's Weeds,
she is immediately invested, and must never expect to appear again in the World
out of the Walls of the Nunnery. The young Lady I thus saw invested was very
beautiful, and sang the best of any in the Nunnery.

THERE are in the Town three Nunneries, and a Convent to every one of them;
viz. one of Jesuits, one of Carmelites, and the other of Franciscans. Let me
not be so far mistaken to have this taken by way of Reflection. No! Whatever
some of our Rakes of the Town may assert, I freely declare, that I never saw in
any of the Nunneries (of which I have seen many both in Spain and other Parts
of the World) any thing like indecent Behavior, that might give occasion for
Satyr or Disesteem. It is true, there may be Accidents, that may lead to a
Misinterpretation; of which I remember a very untoward Instance in Alicant.

WHEN the English Forces first laid Siege to that Town, the Priests, who were
apprehensive of it, having been long since made sensible of the profound Regard
to Chastity and Modesty of us Heretics, by the ignominious Behavior of
certain Officers at Rota and Porta St. Maria, the Priests, I say, had taken
care to send away privately all the Nuns to Majorca. But that the Heretic
Invaders might have no Jealousy of it, the fair Curtezans of the Town were
admitted to supply their Room. The Officers, both of Land and Sea, as was by
the Friars pre-imagin'd, on taking the Town and Castle, immediately repaired to
the Grates of the Nunnery, tossed over their Handkercheifs, Nosegays, and other
pretty Things; all which were, doubtless, very graciously received by those
imaginary Recluses. Thence came it to pass, that in the space of a Month or
less, you could hardly fall into Company of any one of our younger Officers, of
either sort, but the Discourse, if it might deserve the Name, was concerning
these beautiful Nuns; and you would have imagined the Price of these Ladies as
well known as that of Flesh in their common Markets. Others, as well as my
self, have often endeavored to disabuse those Glorioso's, but all to little
purpose, till more sensible Tokens convinced them, that the Nuns, of whose
Favors they so much boasted, could hardly be perfect Virgins, though in a
Cloister. And I am apt to think, those who would palm upon the World like
vicious Relations of Nuns and Nunneries, do it on much like Grounds. Not that
there are wanting Instances of Nunneries disfranchis'd, and even demolished,
upon very flagrant Accounts; but I confine my self to Spain.

IN this Town of la Mancha the Corrigidore always has his Presidence, having
sixteen others under his Jurisdiction, of which Almanza is one. They are
changed every three Years, and their Offices are the Purchase of an excessive
Price; which occasions the poor People's being extravagantly fleeced, nothing
being to be sold but at the Rates they impose; and every Thing that is sold
paying the Corrigidore an Acknowledgment in specie, or an Equivalent to his
liking.

WHILE I was here, News came of the Battle of Almanar and Saragosa; and giving
the Victory to that Side, which they espoused (that of King Philip) they made
very great Rejoycings. But soon, alas, for them, was all that Joy converted
into Sorrow: The next Courier evincing, that the Forces of King Charles had
been victorious in both Engagements. This did not turn to my present
Disadvantage: For Convents and Nunneries, as well as some of those Dons, whom
before I had not stood so well with, strove now how most to oblige me; not
doubting, but if the victorious Army should march that way, it might be in my
Power to double the most signal of their Services in my Friendship.

SOON after an Accident fell out, which had like to have been of an unhappy
Consequence to me. I was standing in Company, upon the Parade, when a most
surprising flock of Eagles flew over our Heads, where they hovered for a
considerable time. The Novelty struck them all with Admiration, as well as my
self. But I, less accustomed to like Spectacles, innocently saying, that in my
Opinion, it could not bode any good to King Philip, because the Eagle composed
the Arms of Austria; some busy Body, in hearing, went and informed the
Corrigidore of it. Those most magisterial Wretches embrace all Occasions of
squeezing Money; and more especially from Strangers. However finding his
Expectations disappointed in me, and that I too well knew the length of his
Foot, to let my Money run freely; he sent me next Day to Alercon; but the
Governor of that Place having had before Intelligence, that the English Army
was advancing that way, refused to receive me, so I returned as I went; only
the Gentlemen of the Place, as they had condol'd the first, congratulated the
last; for that Corrigidore stood but very indifferently in their Affections.
However, it was a warning to me ever after, how I made use of English Freedom
in a Spanish Territory.

AS I had attained the Acquaintance of most of the Clergy, and Religious of the
Place; so particularly I had my aim in obtaining that of the Provincial of the
Carmelites. His Convent, though small, was exceeding neat; but what to me was
much more agreeable, there were very large Gardens belonging to it, which often
furnished me with Sallading and Fruit, and much oftener with Walks of
Refreshment, the most satisfactory Amusement in this warm Climate. This
Acquaintance with the Provincial was by a little Incident soon advanced into a
Friendship; which was thus: I was one Day walking, as I used to do, in the long
Gallery of the Convent, when observing the Images of the Virgin Mary, of which
there was one at each end; I took notice that one had an Inscription under it,
which was this, Ecce, Virgo pepe^it filium: but the other had no Inscription at
all; upon which, I took out my Pencil, and wrote underneath, this Line: Sponsa
Dei, patrisque parens, and filia filii.

THE Friars, who at a little distance had observed me, as soon as I was gone,
came up and read what I had writ; reporting which to the Provincial, he ordered
them to be writ over in Letters of Gold, and placed just as I had put 'em;
saying, doubtless, such a fine Line could proceed from nothing less than
Inspiration. This secured me ever after his and their Esteem; the least
advantage of which, was a full Liberty of their Garden for all manner of Fruit,
Sallading, or whatever I pleased: And as I said before, the Gardens were too
fine not to render such a Freedom acceptable.

THEY often want Rain in this Country: To supply the Defect of which, I
observed in this Garden, as well as others, an Invention not unuseful. There is
a Well in the middle of the Garden, and over that a Wheel with many Pitchers,
or Buckets, one under another, which Wheel being turned round by an Ass, the
Pitchers scoop up the Water on one Side, and throw it out on the other into a
Trough, that by little Channels conveys it, as the Gardener directs, into every
part of the Garden. By this Means their Flowers and their Sallading are
continually refreshed, and preserved from the otherwise over-parching Beams of
the Sun.

The Danger of the Inquisition.
THE Inquisition, in almost every Town in Spain (and more especially, if of any
great Account) has its Spies, or Informers, for treacherous Intelligence. These
make it their Business to ensnare the simple and unguarded; and are more to be
avoided by the Stranger, than the Rattle Snake. Nature having appointed no such
happy Tokens in the former to foreshew the Danger. I had Reason to believe,
that one of those Vermin once made his Attack upon me in this place: And as
they are very rarely, if ever known to the Natives themselves, I being a
Stranger, may be allowed to make a guess by Circumstances.

I was walking by my self, when a Person, wholly unknown to me, giving me the
civil Salute of the Day, endeavored to draw me into Conversation. After
Questions had passed on general Heads, the Fellow ensnaringly asked me, how it
came to pass, that I showed so little Respect to the Image of the crucified
Jesus, as I passed by it in such a Street, naming it? I made Answer, that I
had, or ought to have him always in my Heart crucified. To that he made no
Reply: But proceeding in his Interrogatories, questioned me next, whether I
believed a Purgatory? I evaded the Question, as I took it to be ensnaring; and
only told him that I should be willing to hear him offer any Thing that might
convince me of the Truth, or Probability of it. Truth? He replied in a Heat:
There never yet was Man so Holy as to enter Heaven without first passing
through Purgatory. In my Opinion, said I, there will be no Difficulty in
convincing a reasonable Man to the contrary. What mean you by that, cried the
Spy? I mean, said I, that I can name one, and a great Sinner too, who went into
Bliss without any Visit to Purgatory. Name him, if you can, replied my Querist.
What think you of the Thief upon the Cross, said I? to whom our dying Savior
said, Hodie eris mecum in Paradiso. At which being silenced though not convicted,
he turned from me in a violent Rage, and left me to my self.

WHAT increased my first Suspicion of him was, that a very short time after, my
Friend the Provincial sent to speak with me; and repeating all Passages between
the holy Spy and me, assured me that he had been forced to argue in my Favor,
and tell him that I had said nothing but well: For, says he, all ought to have
the Holy Jesus crucified in their Hearts. "Nevertheless, continued he, it is a
commendable and good Thing to have him represented in the high Ways: For,
suppose, said he, a Man was going upon some base or profligate Design, the very
Sight of a crucified Savior may happen to subvert his Resolution, and deter
him from committing Theft, Murder, or any other of the deadly Sins." And thus
ended that Conference.

I remember upon some other occasional Conversation after, the Provincial told
me, that in the Carmelite Nunnery next to his Convent, and under his Care,
there was a Nun, that was Daughter to Don Juan of Austria; if so, her Age must
render her venerable, as her Quality.

TAKING notice one Day, that all the People of the Place fetched their Water
from a Well without the Town, although they had many seemingly as good within; I
spoke to Don Felix of it, who gave me, under the Seal of Secrecy, this Reason
for it: "When the Seat of the War, said he, lay in these Parts, the French
Train of Artillery was commonly quartered in this Place; the Officers and
Soldiers of which were so very rampant and rude, in attempting to debauch our
Women, that there is not a Well within the Town, which has not some French Men's
Bones at the bottom of it; therefore the Natives, who are sensible of it,
choose rather to go farther a field."

BY this Well there runs a little Rivulet, which gives head to that famous
River called the Guadiana; which running for some Leagues under Ground, affords
a pretense for the Natives to boast of a Bridge on which they feed many
Thousands of Sheep. When it rises again, it is a fine large River, and after a
Currency of many Leagues, empties it self into the Atlantic Ocean.

AS to military Affairs, Almanar and Saragosa were Victories so complete, that
no Body made the least doubt of their settling the Crown of Spain upon the Head
of Charles the Third, without a Rival. This was not barely the Opinion of his
Friends, but his very Enemies resigned all Hope or Expectation in favor of
King Philip. The Castilians, his most faithful Friends, entertained no other
Imagination; for after they had advised, and prevailed that the Queen with the
Prince of Asturias should be sent to Victoria; under the same Despondency, and
a full Dispiritedness, they gave him so little Encouragement to stay in Madrid,
that he immediately quitted the Place, with a Resolution to retire into his
Grandfather's Dominions, the Place of his Nativity.

IN his way to which, even on the last Day's Journey, it was his great good
Fortune to meet the Duke of Vendome, with some few Troops, which his
Grandfather Lewis XIV. of France had ordered to his Succor, under that Duke's
Command. The Duke was grievously affected at such an unexpected Catastrophe;
nevertheless, he left nothing unsaid or undone, that might induce that Prince
to turn back; and at length prevailing, after a little Rest, and a great deal
of Patience, by the Coming in of his scattered Troops, and some few he could
raise, together with those the Duke brought with him, he once more saw himself
at the Head of twenty thousand Men.

While Things were in this Manner, under Motion in King Philip's Favor,
Charles the third, with his victorious Army, advances forward, and enters into
Madrid, of which he made General Stanhope Governor. And even here the
Castilians gave full Proof of their Fidelity to their Prince; even at the Time
when, in their Opinion, his Affairs were past all Hopes of Retrieve, they
themselves having, by their Advice, contributed to his Retreat. Instead of
prudential Acclamations therefore, such as might have answered the Expectations
of a victorious Prince, now entering into their Capital, their Streets were all
in a profound Silence, their Balconies un-adorn'd with costly Carpets, as was
customary on like Occasions; and scarce an Inhabitant to be seen in either Shop
or Window.

This doubtless was no little Mortification to a conquering Prince; however his
Generals were wise enough to keep him from showing any other Tokens of
Resentment, than marching through the City with Unconcern, and taking up his
Quarters at Villa-verda, about a League from it.

NEVERTHELESS King Charles visited, in his March, the Chapel of the Lady de
Atocha, where finding several English Colors and Standards, taken in the
Battle of Almanza, there hung up; he ordered 'em to be taken down, and restored
'em to the English General.

IT was the current Opinion then, and almost universal Consent has since
confirmed it, that the falsest Step in that whole War was this Advancement of
King Charles to Madrid. After those two remarkable Victories at Almanar and
Saragosa, had he directed his March to Pampeluna, and obtained Possession of
that Place, or some other near it, he had not only stopped all Succors from
coming out of France, but he would, in a great Measure, have prevented the
gathering together of any of the routed and dispersed Forces of King Philip:
And it was the general Notion of the Spaniards, I conversed with while at
Madrid, that had King Philip once again set his Foot upon French Land, Spain
would never have been brought to have re-acknowledged him.

KING Charles with his Army having stayed some Time about Madrid, and seeing
his Expectations of the Castilians joining him not at all answered, at last
resolved to decamp, and return to Saragosa: Accordingly with a very few Troops
that Prince advanced thither; while the main Body, under the Command of the
Generals Stanhope and Staremberg, passing under the very Walls of Madrid, held
on their March toward Aragon.

AFTER about three Days March, General Stanhope took up his Quarters at
Breuhiga, a small Town half walled; General Staremberg marching three Leagues
farther, to Cifuentes. This Choice of Situation of the two several Armies not a
little puzzled the Politicians of those Times; who could very indifferently
account for the English General's lying exposed in an open Town, with his few
English Forces, of which General Harvey's Regiment of fine Horse might be
deemed the Main; and General Staremberg encamping three Leagues farther off the
Enemy. But to see the Vicissitudes of Fortune, to which the Actions of the
bravest, by an untoward Sort of Fatality, are often forced to contribute! None,
who had been Eyewitnesses of the Bravery of either of those Generals at the
Battles of Almanar and Saragosa, could find Room to call in question either
their Conduct or their Courage; and yet in this March, and this Encampment will
appear a visible ill Consequence to the Affairs of the Interest they fought for.

THE Duke of Vendosme having increased the Forces which he brought from France,
to upwards of twenty thousand Men, marches by Madrid directly for Breuhiga,
where his Intelligence informed him General Stanhope lay, and that so secretly
as well as swiftly, that that General knew nothing of it, nor could be
persuaded to believe it, till the very Moment their Bullets from the Enemy's
Cannon convinced him of the Truth. Breuhiga, I have said, was walled only on
one Side, and yet on that very Side the Enemy made their Attack. But what could
a Handful do against a Force so much superior, though they had not been in want
of both Powder and Ball; and in want of these were forced to make use of Stones
against all Sorts of Ammunition, which the Enemy plied them with? The
Consequence answered the Deficiency; they were all made Prisoners of War, and
Harvey's Regiment of Horse among the rest; which, to augment their Calamity,
was immediately remounted by the Enemy, and marched along with their Army to
attack General Staremberg.

THAT General had heard somewhat of the March of Vendosme; and waited with some
Impatience to have the Confirmation of it from General Stanhope, who lay
between, and whom he lay under an Expectation of being joined with: However he
thought it not improper to make some little Advance toward him; and
accordingly breaking up from his Camp at Cifuentes, he came back to Villa
viciosa, a little Town between Cifuentes and Breuhiga; there he found Vendosme
ready to attack him, before he could well be prepared for him, but no English
to join him, as he had expected; nevertheless, the Battle was hot, and
obstinately fought; although Staremberg had visibly the Advantage, having beat
the Enemy at least a League from their Cannon; at which Time hearing of the
Misfortune of Breuhiga, and finding himself thereby frustrated of those
expected Succors to support him, he made a handsome Retreat to Barcelona,
which in common Calculation is about one hundred Leagues, without any
Disturbance of an Enemy that seemed glad to be rid of him. Nevertheless his
Baggage having fallen into the Hands of the Enemy, at the Beginning of the
Fight, King Philip and the Duke of Vendosme generously returned it unopen'd,
and untouched, in acknowledgment of his brave Behavior.

I HAD like to have omitted one material Passage, which I was very credibly
informed of; That General Carpenter offered to have gone, and have joined
General Staremberg with the Horse, which was refused him. This was certainly an
Oversight of the highest Nature; since his going would have strengthened
Staremberg almost to the Assurance of an entire Victory; whereas his Stay was
of no manner of Service, but quite the contrary: For, as I said before, the
Enemy, by re-mounting the English Horse (which perhaps were the compleatest of
any Regiment in the World) turned, if I may be allowed the Expression, the
Strength of our Artillery upon our Allies.

UPON this Retreat of Staremberg, and the Surprise at Breuhiga, there were
great Rejoicings at Madrid, and every where else, where King Philip's Interest
prevailed. And indeed it might be said, from that Day the Interest of King
Charles looked with a very lowering Aspect. I was still a Prisoner at la
Mancha, when this News arrived; and very sensibly affected at that strange Turn
of Fortune. I was in Bed, when the Express passed through the Town, in order to
convey it farther; and in the Middle of the Night I heard a certain Spanish
Don, with whom, a little before, I had had some little Variance, thundering at
my Door, endeavoring to burst it open, with, as I had Reason to suppose, no
very favorable Design upon me. But my Landlady, who hitherto had always been
kind and careful, calling Don Felix, and some others of my Friends together,
saved me from the Fury of his Designs, whatever they were.

AMONG other Expressions of the general Joy upon this Occasion, there was a
Bull-Feast at la Mancha; which being much beyond what I saw at Valencia, I
shall here give a Description of. These Bull-Feasts are not so common now in
Spain as formerly, King Philip not taking much Delight in them. Nevertheless,
as soon as it was published here, that there was to be one, no other Discourse
was heard; and in the Talk of the Bulls, and the great Preparations for the
Feast, Men seemed to have lost, or to have laid aside, all Thoughts of the
very Occasion. A Week's time was allowed for the Building of Stalls for the
Beasts, and Scaffolds for the Spectators, and other necessary Preparations for
the setting off their Joy with the most suitable Splendor.

ON the Day appointed for the bringing the Bulls into Town, the Cavalieroes
mounted their Horses, and, with Spears in their Hands, rode out of Town about a
League, or somewhat more to meet them: If any of the Bulls break from the
Drove, and make an Excursion (as they frequently do) the Cavaliero that can
make him return again to his Station among his Companions, is held in Honor,
suitable to the Dexterity and Address he performs it with. On their Entrance
into the Town, all the Windows are filled with Spectators; a Pope passing in
grand Procession could not have more; for what can be more than all? And he or
she who should neglect so rare a Show, would give Occasion to have his or her
Legitimacy called in Question.

WHEN they come to the Plaza, where the Stalls and Scaffolds are built, and
upon which the Feats of Chivalry are to be performed, it is often with a great
deal of Difficulty that the Brutes are got in; for there are twelve Stalls, one
for every Bull, and as their Number grows less by the enstalling of some, the
Remainder often prove more untractable and unruly: In these Stalls they are
kept very dark, to render them fiercer for the Day of Battle.

ON the first of the Days appointed (for a Bull-Feast commonly lasts three) all
the Gentry of the Place, or near adjacent, resort to the Plaza in their most
gaudy Apparel, every one vieing in making the most glorious Appearance. Those
in the lower Ranks provide themselves with Spears, or a great many small Darts
in their Hands, which they fail not to cast or dart, whenever the Bull by his
Nearness gives them an Opportunity. So that the poor Creature may be said to
fight, not only with the Tauriro (or Bull-hunter, a Person always hired for
that Purpose) but with the whole Multitude in the lower Class at least.

ALL being seated, the uppermost Door is opened first; and as soon as ever the
Bull perceives the Light, out he comes, snuffing up the Air, and stareing about
him, as if in admiration of his Attendants; and with his Tail cocked up, he
spurns the Ground with his Forefeet, as if he intended a Challenge to his yet
unappearing Antagonist. Then at a Door appointed for that purpose, enters the
Tauriro all in white, holding a Cloak in one Hand, and a sharp two edged Sword
in the other. The Bull no sooner sets Eyes upon him, but wildly staring, he
moves gently toward him; then gradually mends his pace, till he is come within
about the space of twenty Yards of the Tauriro; when, with a sort of Spring, he
makes at him with all his might. The Tauriro knowing by frequent Experience,
that it behooves him to be watchful, slips aside just when the Bull is at him;
when casting his Cloak over his Horns, at the same Moment he gives him a slash
or two, always aiming at the Neck, where there is one particular Place, which
if he hit, he knows he shall easily bring him to the Ground. I my Self observed
the truth of this Experiment made upon one of the Bulls, who received no more
than one Cut, which happening upon the fatal Spot, so stunned him, that he
remained perfectly stupid, the Blood flowing out from the Wound, till after a
violent Trembling he dropped down stone dead.

BUT this rarely happens, and the poor Creature oftener receives many Wounds,
and numberless Darts, before he dies. Yet whenever he feels a fresh Wound
either from Dart, Spear, or Sword, his Rage receives addition from the Wound,
and he pursues his Tauriro with an Increase of Fury and Violence. And as often
as he makes at his Adversary, the Tauriro takes care with the utmost of his
Agility to avoid him, and reward his kind Intention with a new Wound.

SOME of their Bulls will play their Parts much better than others: But the
best must die. For when they have behaved themselves with all the commendable
Fury possible; if the Tauriro is spent, and fail of doing Execution upon him,
they set Dogs upon him: Hough him and stick him all over with Darts, till with
very loss of Blood he puts an end to their present Cruelty.

WHEN dead, a Man brings in two Mules dressed out with Bells and Feathers. and
fastening a Rope about his Horns, draws off the Bull with the Shouts and
Acclamations of the Spectators; as if the Infidels had been drove from before
Ceuta.

I had almost forgot another very common piece of barbarous Pleasure at these
Diversions. The Tauriro will sometimes stick one of their Bull Spears fast in
the Ground, aslant, but levelled as near as he can at his Chest; then
presenting himself to the Bull, just before the point of the Spear, on his
taking his run at the Tauriro, which, as they assured me, he always does with
his Eyes closed, the Tauriro slips on one side, and the poor Creature runs with
a violence often to stick himself, and sometimes to break the Spear in his
Chest, running away with part of it till he drop.

THIS Tauriro was accounted one of the best in Spain; and indeed I saw him
mount the back of one of the Bulls, and ride on him, slashing and cutting, till
he had quite wearied him; at which time dismounting, he killed him with much
Ease, and to the acclamatory Satisfaction of the whole Concourse: For variety
of Cruelty, as well as Dexterity, administers to their Delight.

THE Tauriroes are very well paid; and in Truth so they ought to be; for they
often lose their Lives in the Diversion, as this did the Year after in the way
of his Calling. Yet is it a Service of very great Profit when they perform
dexterously: For when ever they do any Thing remarkable, deserving the Notice of
the Spectators, they never fail of a generous Gratification, Money being thrown
down to 'em in plenty.

THIS Feast (as they generally do) lasted three Days; the last of which was, in
my Opinion, much before either of the other. On this, a young Gentleman, whose
Name was Don Pedro Ortega, a Person of great Quality, performed the Exercise on
Horseback. The Seats, if not more crowded, were filled with People of better
Fashion, who came from Places at a distance to grace the noble Tauriro.

HE was finely mounted, and made a very graceful Figure; but as when the Foot
Tauriro engages, the Bull first enters; so in the Contest the Cavaliero always
makes his Appearance on the Plaza before the Bull. His Steed was a managed
Horse; mounted on which he made his Entry, attended by four Footmen in rich
Liveries; who, as soon as their Master had rid round, and paid his Devoirs to
all the Spectators, withdrew from the Dangers they left him exposed to. The
Cavaliero having thus made his Bows, and received the repeated Vivas of that
vast Concourse, marched with a very stately Air to the very middle of the
Plaza, there standing ready to receive his Enemy at coming out.

THE Door being opened, the Bull appeared; and as I thought with a fiercer and
more threatening Aspect than any of the former. He star'd around him for a
considerable time, snuffing up the Air, and spurning the Ground, without in the
least taking notice of his Antagonist. But at last fixing his Eyes upon him, he
made a full run at the Cavaliero, which he most dexterously avoided, and at the
same moment of time, passing by, he cast a Dart that stuck in his Shoulders. At
this the Shouts and Vivas were repeated; and I observed a Handkerchief waved
twice or thrice, which, as I afterward understood, was a Signal from the Lady
of his Affections, that she had beheld him with Satisfaction. I took notice
that the Cavaliero endeavored all he could to keep aside the Bull, for the
Advantage of the Stroke, when putting his Horse on a full Career, he threw
another Dart, which fixed in his Side, and so enraged the Beast, that he seemed
to renew his Attacks with greater Fury. The Cavaliero had behaved himself to
Admiration, and escaped many Dangers; with the often repeated Acclamations of
Viva, Viva; when at last the enraged Creature getting his Horns between the
Horse's hinder Legs, Man and Horse came both together to the Ground.

I expected at that Moment nothing less than Death could be the Issue; when to
the general Surprise, as well as mine, the very civil Brute, Author of all the
Mischief, only withdrew to the other Side of the Plaza, where he stood still,
staring about him as if he knew nothing of the Matter.

THE Cavaliero was carried off not much hurt, but his delicate Beast suffered
much more. However I could not but think afterward, that the good natured Bull
came short of fair Play. If I may be pardoned the Expression, he had used his
Adversary with more Humanity than he met with; at least, since, after he had
the Cavaliero under, he generously forsook him; I think he might have pleaded,
or others for him, for better Treatment than he after met with.

FOR as the Cavaliero was disabled and carried off, the Foot Tauriro entered in
white Accoutrements, as before; but he flattered himself with an easier
Conquest than he found: there is always on these Occasions, when he apprehends
any imminent Danger, a Place of Retreat ready for the Foot Tauriro; and well
for him there was so; this Bull obliged him over and over to make Use of it.
Nor was he able at last to dispatch him, without a general Assistance; for I
believe I speak within Compass, when I say, he had more than an hundred Darts
stuck in him. And so barbarously was he mangled, and slashed besides, that, in
my Mind, I could not but think King Philip in the Right, when he said, That it
was a Custom deserved little Encouragement.

SOON after this Tauridore, or Bull-Feast was over, I had a Mind to take a
pleasant Walk to a little Town, called Minai, about three Leagues off; but I
was scarce got out of la Mancha, when an Acquaintance meeting me, asked where I
was going? I told him to Minai; when taking me by the Hand, Friend Gorgio, says
he in Spanish, Come back with me; you shall not go a Stride further; there are
Picarons that Way; you shall not go. Inquiring, as we went back, into his
Meaning, he told me, that the Day before, a Man, who had received a Sum of
Money in Pistoles at la Mancha, was, on the Road, set upon by some, who had got
notice of it, and murdered him; that not finding the Money expected about him
(for he had cautiously enough left it in a Friend's Hands at la Mancha) they
concluded he had swallowed it; and therefore they ripped up his Belly, and opened
every Gut; but all to as little Purpose. This diverted my Walk for that Time.

BUT some little Time after, the same Person inviting me over to the same
Place, to see his Melon-Grounds, which in that Country are wonderful fine and
pleasant; I accepted his Invitation, and under the Advantage of his Company,
went thither. On the Road I took notice of a Cross newly erected, and a
Multitude of small Stones around the Foot of it: Asking the Meaning whereof, my
Friend told me, that it was raised for a Person there murdered (as is the
Custom throughout Spain) and that every good Catholic passing by, held it his
Duty to cast a Stone upon the Place, in Detestation of the Murder. I had often
before taken Notice of many such Crosses: but never till then knew the Meaning
of their Erection, or the Reason of the Heaps of Stones around them.

THERE is no Place in all Spain more famous for good Wine than Saint Clemente
de la Mancha; nor is it any where sold cheaper: For as it is only an inland
Town, near no navigable River, and the People temperate to a Proverb, great
Plenty, and a small Vend must consequently make it cheap. The Wine here is so
famous, that, when I came to Madrid, I saw wrote over the Doors of most Houses
that sold Wine, Vino Saint Clemente. As to the Temperance of the People, I
must say, that notwithstanding those two excellent Qualities of good and cheap,
I never saw, all the three Years I was Prisoner there, any one Person overcome
with Drinking.

IT is true, there may be a Reason, and a political one, assigned for that
Abstemiousness of theirs, which is this, That if any Man, upon any Occasion,
should be brought in as an Evidence against you, if you can prove that he was
ever drunk, it will invalidate his whole Evidence. I could not but think this a
grand Improvement upon the Spartans. They made their Slaves purposely drunk, to
show their Youth the Folly of the Vice by the sottish Behavior of their
Servants under it: But they never reached to that noble height of laying a
Penalty upon the Aggressor, or of discouraging a voluntary Impotence of Reason
by a disreputable Impotence of Interest. The Spaniard therefore, in my Opinion,
in this exceeds the Spartan, as much as a natural Beauty exceeds one procured
by Art; for though Shame may somewhat influence some few, Terror is of force to
deter all. A Man, we have seen it, may shake Hands with Shame; but Interest,
says another Proverb, will never lie. A wise Institution therefore doubtless is
this of the Spaniard; but such as I fear will never take Place in Germany,
Holland, France, or Great Britain.

BUT though I commend their Temperance, I would not be thought by any Means to
approve of their Bigotry. If there may be such a Thing as Intemperance in
Religion, I much fear their Ebriety in that will be found to be over-measure.
Under the notion of Devotion, I have seen Men among 'em, and of Sense too,
guilty of the grossest Intemperancies. It is too common to be a rarity to see
their Dons of the prime Quality as well as those of the lower Ranks, upon
meeting a Priest in the open Streets, condescend to take up the lower part of
his Vestment, and salute it with Eyes erected as if they looked upon it as the
Seal of Salvation.

WHEN the Ave-Bell is heard, the Hearer must down on his Knees upon the very
Spot; nor is he allowed the small Indulgence of deferring a little, till he can
recover a clean Place; Dirtiness excuses not, nor will dirty Actions by any
means exempt. This is so notorious, that even at the Playhouse, in the middle
of a Scene, on the first sound of the Bell, the Actors drop their Discourse,
the Auditors supersede the indulging of their unsanctified Ears, and all on
their Knees, bend their Tongues, if not their Hearts, quite a different way, to
what they just before had been employed in. In short, though they pretend in all
this to an extraordinary Measure of Zeal and real Devotion; no Man, that lives
among them any time, can be a Proselyte to them without immolating his Senses
and his Reason: Yet I must confess, while I have seen them thus deludeing
themselves with Ave Marias, I could not refrain throwing up my Eyes to the only
proper Object of Adoration, in commiseration of such Delusions.

THE Hours of the Ave Bell, are eight and twelve in the Morning, and six in the
Evening. They pretend at the first to fall down to beg that God would be
pleased to prosper them in all things they go about that Day. At twelve they
return Thanks for their Preservation to that time; and at six for that of the
whole Day. After which, one would think that they imagine themselves at perfect
Liberty; and their open Gallantries perfectly countenance the Imagination: For
though Adultery is looked upon as a grievous Crime, and punished accordingly; yet
Fornication is softened with the title of a Venial Sin, and they seem to
practice it under that Persuasion.

I found here, what Erasmus ridicules with so much Wit and Delicacy, the Custom
of burying in a Franciscan's Habit, in mighty request. If they can for that
purpose procure an old one at the price of a new one; the Purchaser will look
upon himself a provident Chap, that has secured to his deceased Friend or
Relation, no less than Heaven by that wise Bargain.

THE Evening being almost the only time of Enjoyment of Company, or
Conversation, every body in Spain then greedily seeks it; and the Streets are
at that time crowded like our finest Gardens or most private Walks. On one of
those Occasions, I met a Don of my Acquaintance walking out with his Sisters;
and as I thought it became an English Cavalier, I saluted him: But to my
Surprise he never returned the Civility. When I met him the Day after, instead
of an Apology, as I had flattered my self, I received a Reprimand, though a very
civil one; telling me it was not the Custom in Spain, nor well taken of any
one, that took Notice of any who were walking in the Company of Ladies at Night.

BUT a Night or two after, I found by Experience, that if the Men were by
Custom prohibited taking Notice, Women were not. I was standing at the Door, in
the cool of the Evening, when a Woman seemingly genteel, passing by, called me
by my Name, telling me she wanted to speak with me: She had her Mantilio on; so
that had I had Daylight, I could have only seen one Eye of her. However I
walked with her a good while, without being able to discover any thing of her
Business, nor passed there between us any thing more than a Conversation upon
indifferent Matters. Nevertheless, at parting she told me she should pass by
again the next Evening; and if I would be at the Door, she would give me the
same Advantage of a Conversation, that seemed not to displease me. Accordingly
the next Night she came, and as before we walked together in the privatest
parts of the Town: For though I knew her not, her Discourse was always
entertaining and full of Wit, and her Enquiries not often improper. We had
continued this Intercourse many Nights together, when my Landlady's Daughter
having taken Notice of it, stopped me one Evening, and would not allow me to
stand at the usual Post of Intelligence, saying, with a good deal of heat, Don
Gorgio, take my Advice; go no more along with that Woman: You may soon be
brought home deprived of your Life if you do. I cannot say, whether she knew
her; but this I must say, she was very agreeable in Wit as well as Person.
However my Landlady and her Daughter took that Opportunity of giving me so many
Instances of the fatal Issues of such innocent Conversations, (for I could not
call it an Intrigue) that apprehensive enough of the Danger, on laying
Circumstances together, I took their Advice, and never went into her Company
after.

Saint Clemente de la Mancha, where I so long remained a Prisoner of War, lies
in the Road from Madrid to Valencia; and the Duke of Vendosme being ordered to
the latter, great Preparations were made for his Entertainment, as he passed
through. He stayed here only one Night, where he was very handsomely treated by
the Corrigidore. He was a tall fair Person, and very fat, and at the time I saw
him wore a long black Patch over his left Eye; but on what Occasion I could not
learn. The afterward famous Alberoni (since made a Cardinal) was in his
Attendance; as indeed the Duke was very rarely without him. I remember that
very Day three Weeks, they returned through the same Place; the Duke in his
Hearse, and Alberoni in a Coach, paying his last Duties. That Duke was a
prodigious Lover of Fish, of which having eat over heartily at Veneros, in the
Province of Valencia, he took a Surfeit, and died in three Days time. His Corpse
was carrying to the Escurial, there to be buried in the Panthaeon among their
Kings.

THE Castilians have a Privilege by License from the Pope, which, if it could
have been converted into a Prohibition, might have saved that Duke's Life: In
regard their Country is wholly inland, and the River Tagus famous for its
Poverty, or rather Barrenness; their Holy Father indulges the Natives with the
Liberty, in lieu of that dangerous Eatable, of eating all Lent time the Inwards
of Cattle. When I first heard this related, I imagined, that the Garbidge had
been intended, but I was soon after thus rectified, by Inwards (for so expressly
says the License it self) is meant the Heart, the Liver, and the Feet.

THEY have here as well as in most other Parts of Spain, Valencia excepted, the
most wretched Music in the Universe. Their Guitars, if not their Sole, are
their darling Instruments, and what they most delight in: Though in my Opinion
our English Sailors are not much amiss in giving them the Title of Strum
Strums. They are little better than our Jews-harps, though hardly half so
Musical. Yet are they perpetually at Nights disturbing their Women with the
Noise of them, under the notion and name of Serenadoes. From the Barber to the
Grandee the Infection spreads, and very often with the same Attendant, Danger:
Night Quarrels and Rencounters being the frequent Result. The true born
Spaniards reckon it a part of their Glory, to be jealous of their Mistresses,
which is too often the Forerunner of Murders; or at best attended with many
other very dangerous Inconveniences. And yet bad as their Music is, their
Dancing is the reverse. I have seen a Country Girl manage her Castanets with
the graceful Air of a Duchess, and that not to common Music; but to Peoples
beating or druming a Tune with their Hands on a Table. I have seen half a Dozen
couple at a time dance to the like in excellent order.

I just now distinguished, by an Exception, the Music of Valencia, where alone
I experienced the use of the Violin; which though I cannot, in respect to other
Countries, call good; yet in respect to the other parts of Spain, I must
acknowledge it much the best. In my Account of that City, I omitted to speak of
it; therefore now to supply that Defect, I will speak of the best I heard,
which was on this unfortunate Occasion: Several Natives of that Country having
received Sentence of Death for their Adherence to King Charles, were
accordingly ordered to the Place of Execution. It is the Custom there, on all
such Occasions, for all the Music of the City to meet near the Gallows, and
play the most affecting and melancholy Airs, to the very approach of the
Condemned; and really the Music was so moving, it heightened the Scene of
Sorrow, and brought Compassion into the Eyes of even Enemies.

AS to the Condemned, they came stripped of their own Clothes, and covered with
black Frocks, in which they were led along the Streets to the Place of
Execution, the Friars praying all the way. When they came through any Street,
where any public Images were fixed, they stayed before 'em some reasonable
time in Prayer with the Friars. When they are arrived at the fatal Place, those
Fathers leave 'em not, but continue praying and giving them ghostly
Encouragement, standing upon the rounds of the Ladder till they are turned off.
The Hangman always wears a silver Badge of a Ladder to distinguish his
Profession: But his manner of executing his Office had somewhat in it too
singular to allow of Silence. When he had tied fast the Hands of the Criminal,
he rested his Knee upon them, and with one Hand on the Criminal's Nostrils, to
stop his Breath the sooner, threw himself off the Ladder along with the dying
Party. This he does to expedite his Fate; though considering the Force, I wonder
it does not tear Head and Body asunder; which yet I never heard that it did.

BUT to return to la Mancha; I had been there now upwards of two Years, much
diverted with the good Humor and Kindness of the Gentlemen, and daily pleased
with the Conversation of the Nuns of the Nunnery opposite to my Lodgings; when
walking one Day alone upon the Plaza, I found my self accosted by a Clerico. At
the first Attack, he told me his Country: But added, that he now came from
Madrid with a Potent, that was his Word, from Pedro de Dios, Dean of the
Inquisition, to endeavor the Conversion of any of the English Prisoners; that
being an Irishman, as a sort of a Brother, he had conceived a Love for the
English, and therefore more eagerly embraced the Opportunity, which the Holy
Inquisition had put into his Hands for the bringing over to Mother Church as
many Heretics as he could; that having heard a very good Character of me, he
should think himself very happy, if he could be instrumental in my Salvation;
"It is very true, continued he, I have lately had the good Fortune to convert
many; and besides the Candor of my own Disposition, I must tell you, that I
have a peculiar knack at Conversion, which very few, if any, ever could resist.
I am going upon the same work into Murcia; but your good Character has fixed me
in my Resolution of preferring your Salvation to that of others."

TO this very long, and no less surprising Address, I only returned, that it
being an Affair of moment, it would require some Consideration; and that by the
time he returned from Murcia, I might be able to return him a proper Answer.
But not at all satisfied with this Reply; "Sir, says he, God Almighty is
all-sufficient: This moment is too precious to be lost; he can turn the Heart
in the twinkling of an Eye, as well as in twenty Years. Hear me then; mind what
I say to you: I will convince you immediately. You Heretics do not believe in
Transubstantiation, and yet did not our Savior say in so many Words, Hoc est
corpus meum? And if you don't believe him, don't you give him the Lie? Besides,
does not one of the Fathers say, Deus, qui est omnis Veritas, non potest dicere
falsum?" He went on at the same ridiculous rate; which soon convinced me, he
was a thorough Rattle. However, as a Clerico, and consequently in this Country,
a Man dangerous to disoblige, I invited him home to Dinner; where when I had
brought him, I found I had no way done an unacceptable thing; for my Landlady
and her Daughter, seeing him to be a Clergyman, received him with a vast deal
of Respect and Pleasure.

DINNER being over, he began to entertain me with a Detail of the many
wonderful Conversions he had made upon obstinate Heretics; that he had
convinced the most Stubborn, and had such a Nostrum, that he would undertake to
convert any one. Here he began his old round, intermixing his Harangue with
such scraps and raw sentences of fustian Latin, that I grew weary of his
Conversation; so pretending some Business of consequence, I took leave, and
left him and my Landlady together.

I did not return till pretty late in the Evening, with Intent to give him Time
enough to think his own Visit tedious; but to my great Surprise, I found my
Irish Missionary still on the Spot, ready to dare me to the Encounter, and
resolved, like a true Son of the Church militant, to keep last in the Field of
Battle. As soon as I had seated my self, he began again to tell me, how good a
Character my Landlady had given me, which had prodigiously increased his Ardour
of saving my Soul; that he could not answer it to his own Character, as well as
mine, to be negligent; and therefore he had entered into a Resolution to stay
my Coming, though it had been later. To all which, I returned him Abundance of
Thanks for his good Will, but pleading Indisposition and want of Rest, after a
good deal of civil Impertinence, I once more got rid of him; at least, I took
my Leave, and went to Bed, leaving him again Master of the Field; for I
understood next Morning, that he stayed some Time after I was gone, with my
good Landlady.

Next Morning the Nuns of the Nunnery opposite, having taken Notice of the
Clerico's Ingress, long Visit, and late Egress, sent to know whether he was my
Countryman; with many other Questions, which I was not then let into the
Secret of. To all which I returned, that he was no Countryman of mine, but an
Irishman, and so perfectly a Stranger to me, that I knew no more of him than
what I had from his own Mouth, that he was going into Murcia. What the Meaning
of this Enquiry was, I could never learn; but I could not doubt, but it
proceeded from their great Care of their Vicino, as they called me; a Mark of
their Esteem, and of which I was not a little proud.

AS was my usual Custom, I had been taking my Morning Walk, and had not been
long come home in order to Dinner, when in again drops my Irish Clerico: I was
confounded, and vexed, and he could not avoid taking Notice of it;
nevertheless, without the least Alteration of Countenance, he took his Seat;
and on my saying, in a cold and indifferent Tone, that I imagined he had been
got to Murcia before this; he replied, with a natural Fleer, that truly he was
going to Murcia, but his Conscience pricked him, and he did find that he could
not go away with any Satisfaction, or Peace of Mind, without making me a
perfect Convert; that he had plainly discovered in me a good Disposition, and
had, for that very Reason, put himself to the Charge of Man and Mule, to the
Bishop of Cuenca for a License, under his Hand, for my Conversion: For in
Spain, all private Missionaries are obliged to ask Leave of the next Bishop,
before they dare enter upon any Enterprise of this Nature.

I was more confounded at this last Assurance of the Man than at all before;
and it put me directly upon reflecting, whether any, and what Inconveniences
might ensue, from a Rencounter that I, at first, conceived ridiculous, but
might now reasonably begin to have more dangerous Apprehensions of. I knew, by
the Articles of War, all Persons are exempted from any Power of the
Inquisition; but whether carrying on a Part in such a Farce, might not admit,
or at least be liable to some dangerous Construction, was not imprudently now
to be considered. Though I was not fearful, yet I resolved to be cautious.
Wherefore not making any Answer to his Declaration about the Bishop, he took
Notice of it; and to raise a Confidence, he found expiring, began to tell me,
that his Name was Murtough Brennan, that he was born near Kilkenny, of a very
considerable Family. This last part indeed, when I came to Madrid, I found
pretty well confirmed in a considerable Manner. However, taking Notice that he
had altered his Tone of leaving the Town, and that instead of it, he was
advancing somewhat like an Invitation of himself to Dinner the next Day, I
resolved to show my self shy of him; and thereupon abruptly, and without taking
any Leave, I left the Room, and my Landlady and him together.

THREE or four Days had passed, every one of which, he never failed my
Lodgings; not at Dinner Time only, but Night and Morning too; from all which I
began to suspect, that instead of my Conversion, he had fixed upon a
Re-conversion of my Landlady. She was not young, yet, for a black Woman,
handsome enough; and her Daughter very pretty: I entered into a Resolution to
make my Observations, and watch them all at a Distance; nevertheless carefully
concealing my Jealousy. However, I must confess, I was not a little pleased,
that any Thing could divert my own Persecution. He was now no longer my Guest,
but my Landlady's, with whom I found him so much taken up, that a little Care
might frustrate all his former impertinent Importunities on the old Topic.

BUT all my Suspicions were very soon after turned into Certainties, in this
Manner: I had been abroad, and returning somewhat weary, I went to my Chamber,
to take, what in that Country they call, a Cesto, upon my Bed: I got in unseen,
or without seeing any Body, but had scarce laid my self down, before my young
Landlady, as I jestingly used to call the Daughter, rushing into my Room, threw
her self down on the Floor, bitterly exclaiming. I started off my Bed, and
immediately running to the Door, who should I meet there but my Irish Clerico,
without his Habit, and in his Shirt? I could not doubt, by the Dishabille of
the Clerico, but the young Creature had Reason enough for her Passion, which
rendered me quite unable to master mine; wherefore as he stood with his Back
next the Door, I thrust him in that ghostly Plight into the open Street.

I might, with leisure enough, have repented that precipitate Piece of
Indiscretion; if it had not been for his bad Character, and the favorable
Opinion the Town had conceived of me; for he inordinately exclaimed against me,
calling me Heretic, and telling the People, who were soon gathered round him,
that coming to my Lodgings on the charitable work of Conversion, I had thus
abused him, stripped him of his Habit, and then turned him out of Doors. The
Nuns, on their hearing the Outcries he made, came running to their Grates, to
enquire into the Matter, and when they understood it, as he was pleased to
relate it; though they condemned my Zeal, they pitied my Condition. Very well
was it for me, that I stood more than a little well in the good Opinion of the
Town; among the Gentry, by my frequent Conversation, and the inferior Sort by
my charitable Distributions; for nothing can be more dangerous, or a nearer Way
to violent Fate, than to insult one of the Clergy in Spain, and especially, for
such an one as they entitle a Heretic.

MY old Landlady (I speak in respect to her Daughter) however formerly my
seeming Friend, came in a violent Passion, and wrenching the Door out of my
Hands, opened it, and pulled her Clerico in; and so soon as she had done this,
she took his Part, and railed so bitterly at me, that I had no Reason longer to
doubt her thorough Conversion, under the full Power of his Mission. However the
young one stood her Ground, and by all her Expressions, gave her many Inquirers
Reason enough to believe, all was not Matter of Faith that the Clerico had
advanced. Nevertheless, holding it advisable to change my Lodgings, and a
Friend confirming my Resolutions, I removed that Night.

The Clerico having put on his upper Garments, was run away to the Corrigidor,
in a violent Fury, resolving to be early, as well knowing, that he who tells
his Story first, has the Prospect of telling it to double Advantage. When he
came there, he told that Officer a thousand idle Stories, and in the worst
Manner; repeating how I had abused him, and not him only, but my poor Landlady,
for taking his Part. The Corrigidor was glad to hear it all, and with an
officious Ear fished for a great deal more; expecting, according to Usage, at
last to squeeze a Sum of Money out of me. However he told the Clerico, that, as
I was a Prisoner of War, he had no direct Power over me; but if he would
immediately write to the President Ronquillo, at Madrid, he would not fail to
give his immediate Orders, according to which he would as readily act against
me.

THE Clerico resolved to pursue his old Maxim, and cry out first; and so taking
the Corrigidor's Advice, he wrote away to Madrid directly. In the mean Time the
People in the Town, both high and low, some out of Curiosity, some out of
Friendship, pursued their Enquiries into the Reality of the Facts. The old
Landlady they could make little of to my Advantage; but whenever the young one
came to the Question, she always left them with these Words in her Mouth, El
Diabolo en forma del Clerico, which rendering Things more than a little cloudy
on the Clerico's Side, he was advised and pressed by his few Friends, as fast
as he could to get out of Town; Nuns, Clergy, and every Body taking Part
against him, excepting his new Convert, my old Landlady.

The Day after, as I was sitting with a Friend at my new Quarters, Maria (for
that was the Name of my Landlady's Daughter) came running in with these Words
in her Mouth, El Clerico, el Clerico, passa la Call. We hastened to the
Window; out of which we beheld the Clerico, Murtough Brennan, pitifully mounted
on the Back of a very poor Ass (for they would neither let, nor lend him a Mule
through all the Town) his Legs almost rested on the Ground, for he was lusty,
as his Ass was little; and a Fellow with a large Cudgel marched a-foot, driving
his Ass along. Never did Sancha Pancha, on his Embassage to Dulcinea, make such
a despicable, out of the way Figure, as our Clerico did at this Time. And what
increased our Mirth was, their telling me, that our Clerico, like that Squire
(though upon his own Priest-Errantry) was actually on his March to Toboso, a
Place five Leagues off, famous for the Nativity of Dulcinea, the Object of the
Passion of that celebrated Hero Don Quixot. So I will leave our Clerico on his
Journey to Murcia, to relate the unhappy Sequel of this ridiculous Affair.

I have before said, that, by the Advice of the Corrigidor, our Clerico had
wrote to Don Ronquillo at Madrid. About a Fortnight after his Departure from la
Mancha, I was sitting alone in my new Lodgings, when two Alguizils (Officers
under the Corrigidor, and in the Nature of our Bailiffs) came into my Room, but
very civilly, to tell me, that they had Orders to carry me away to Prison; but
at the same Moment they advised me, not to be afraid; for they had observed,
that the whole Town was concerned at what the Corrigidor and Clerico had done;
adding, that it was their Opinion, that I should find so general a Friendship,
that I need not be apprehensive of any Danger. With these plausible Speeches,
though I afterward experienced the Truth of them, I resigned my self, and went
with them to a much closer Confinement.

I had not been there above a Day or two, before many Gentlemen of the Place
sent to me, to assure me, they were heartily afflicted at my Confinement, and
resolved to write in my Favor to Madrid; but as it was not safe, nor the
Custom in Spain, to visit those in my present Circumstances, they hoped I would
not take it amiss, since they were bent to act all in their Power toward my
Deliverance; concluding however with their Advice, that I would not give one
Real of Plata to the Corrigidor, whom they hated, but confide in their
assiduous Interposal. Don Pedro de Ortega in particular, the Person that
performed the Part of the Tauriro on Horseback, sometime before, sent me Word,
he would not fail to write to a Relation of his, of the first Account in
Madrid, and so represent the Affair, that I should not long be debarred my old
Acquaintance.

IT may administer, perhaps, Matter of Wonder, that Spaniards, Gentlemen of the
stanchest Punctilio, should make a Scruple, and excuse themselves from visiting
Persons under Confinement, when, according to all Christian Acceptance, such a
Circumstance would render such a Visit, not charitable only, but generous. But
though Men of vulgar Spirits might, from the Narrowness of their Views, form
such insipid Excuses, those of these Gentlemen, I very well knew, proceeded
from much more excusable Topics. I was committed under the Accusation of
having abused a sacred Person, one of the Clergy; and though, as a Prisoner of
War, I might deem my self exempt from the Power of the Inquisition; yet how far
one of that Country, visiting a Person, so accused, might be esteemed culpable,
was a consideration in that dangerous Climate, far from deserving to be
slighted. To me therefore, who well knew the Customs of the Country, and the
Temper of its Countrymen, their Excuses were not only allowable, but acceptable
also; for, without calling in Question their Charity, I verily believed I might
safely confide in their Honor.

ACCORDINGLY, after I had been a close Prisoner one Month to a Day, I found the
Benefit of these Gentlemen's Promises and Solicitations. Pursuant to which, an
Order was brought for my immediate Discharge; notwithstanding, the new Convert,
my old Landlady, did all she could to make her appearing against me effectual,
to the Height of her Prejudice and Malice, even while the Daughter, as sensible
of my Innocence, and acting with a much better Conscience, endeavored as much
to justify me, against both the Threats and Persuasions of the Corrigidor, and
his few Accomplices, though her own Mother made one.

After Receipt of this Order for my Enlargement, I was mightily pressed by Don
Felix, and others of my Friends, to go to Madrid, and enter my Complaint
against the Corrigidor and the Clerico, as a Thing highly essential to my own
future Security. Without asking Leave therefore of the Corrigidor, or in the
least acquainting him with it, I set out from la Mancha, and, as I afterward
understood, to the terrible Alarm of that griping Officer; who was under the
greatest Consternation, when he heard I was gone; for as he knew very well,
that he had done more than he could justify, he was very apprehensive of any
Complaint; well knowing, that as he was hated as much as I was beloved, he
might assure himself of the Want of that Assistance from the Gentlemen, which I
had experienced.

SO soon as I arrived at Madrid, I made it my Business to enquire out, and wait
upon Father Fahy, Chief of the Irish College. He received me very courteously;
but when I acquainted him with the Treatment I had met with from Brennan, and
had given him an Account of his other scandalous Behavior, I found he was no
Stranger to the Man, or his Character; for he soon confirmed to me the Honor
Brennan first boasted of, his considerable Family, by saying, that scarce an
Assize passed in his own Country, without two or three of that Name receiving
at the Gallows the just Reward of their Demerits. In short, not only Father
Fahy, but all the Clergy of that Nation at Madrid, readily subscribed to this
Character of him, That he was a Scandal to their Country.

AFTER this, I had nothing more to do, but to get that Father to go with me to
Pedro de Dios, who was the Head of the Dominican Cloister, and Dean of the
Inquisition. He readily granted my Request, and when we came there, in a Manner
unexpected, represented to the Dean, that having some good Dispositions toward
Mother Church, I had been diverted from them, he feared, by the evil Practices
of one Murtough Brennan, a Countryman of his, though a Scandal to his Country;
that under a Pretense of seeking my Conversion, he had laid himself open in a
most beastly Manner, such as would have set a Catholic into a vile Opinion of
their Religion, and much more one that was yet a Heretic. The Dean had hardly
Patience to hear Particulars; but as soon as my Friend had ended his Narration,
he immediately gave his Orders, prohibiting Murtough's saying any more Masses,
either in Madrid, or any other Place in Spain. This indeed was taking away the
poor Wretches sole Subsistence, and putting him just upon an Equality with his
Demerits.

I took the same Opportunity to make my Complaints of the Corrigidor; but his
Term expiring very soon, and a Process being likely to be chargeable, I was
advised to let it drop. So having effected what I came for, I returned to my
old Station at la Mancha.

WHEN I came back, I found a new Corrigidor, as I had been told there would, by
the Dean of the Inquisition, who, at the same Time, advised me to wait on him.
I did so, soon after my Arrival, and then experienced the Advice to be well
intended; the Dean having wrote a Letter to him, to order him to treat me with
all Manner of Civility. He showed me the very Letter, and it was in such
particular and obliging Terms, that I could not but perceive he had taken a
Resolution, if possible, to eradicate all the evil Impressions, that Murtough's
Behavior might have given too great Occasion for. This served to confirm me in
an Observation that I had long before made, That a Protestant, who will
prudently keep his Sentiments in his own Breast, may command any Thing in
Spain; where their stiff Bigotry leads 'em naturally into that other Mistake,
That not to oppose, is to assent. Besides, it is generally among them, almost a
work of Supererogation to be even instrumental in the Conversion of one they
call a Heretic. To bring any such back to what they call Mother Church,
nothing shall be spared, nothing thought too much: And if you have Insincerity
enough to give them Hopes, you shall not only live in Ease, but in Pleasure and
Plenty.

I had entertained some thoughts on my Journey back, of taking up my old
Quarters at the Widow's; but found her so entirely converted by her Clerico,
that there would be no room to expect Peace: For which Reason, with the help of
my fair Vicinos, and Don Felix, I took another, where I had not been long,
before I received an unhappy Account of Murtough's Conduct in Murcia. It seems
he had kept his Resolution in going thither; where meeting with some of his own
Countrymen, though he found 'em stanch good Catholics, he so far inveigled
himself into 'em, that he brought them all into a foul chance for their Lives.
There were three of 'em, all Soldiers, in a Spanish Regiment, but in a fit of
ambitious, though frantic, Zeal: Murtough had wheedled them to go along with
him to Pedro de Dios, Dean of the Inquisition, to declare and acknowledge
before him, that they were converted and brought over to Mother Church, and by
him only. The poor Ignorants, thus enticed, had left their Regiment, of which
the Colonel, having notice, sent after them, and they were overtaken on the
Road, their Missionair with them. But notwithstanding all his Oratory, nay,
even the Discovery of the whole Farce, one of them was hanged for an Example to
the other two.

IT was not long after my Return before News arrived of the Peace; which though
they received with Joy, they could hardly entertain with Belief. Upon which,
the new Corrigidor, with whom I held a better Correspondence than I had done
with the old one, desired me to produce my Letters from England, that it was
true. Never did People give greater Demonstrations of Joy, than they upon this
Occasion. It was the common cry in the Streets, Paz con Angleterra, con todo
Mundo Guerra; And my Confirmation did them as much Pleasure as it did Service
to me; for if possible, they treated me with more Civility than before.

BUT the Peace soon after being proclaimed, I received Orders to repair to
Madrid, where the rest of the Prisoners taken at Denia had been carried; when
I, by reason of my Wounds, and want of Health, had been left behind. Others I
understood lay ready, and some were on their March to Bayone in France; where
Ships were ordered for their Transportation into England. So after a Residence
of three Years and three Months; having taken leave of all my Acquaintance, I
left a Place, that was almost become natural to me, the delicious Saint
Clemente de la Mancha.

NOTHING of Moment, or worth observing, met I with, till I came near Ocanna;
and there occurred a Sight ridiculous enough. The Knight of the Town, I last
came from, the ever renowned Don Quixot, never made such a Figure as a
Spaniard, I there met on the Road. He was mounted on a Mule of the largest
size, and yet no way unsizeable to his Person: He had two Pistols in his
Holsters, and one on each side stuck in his Belt; a sort of large Blunderbuss
in one of his Hands, and the fellow to it slung over his Shoulders hung at his
Back. All these were accompanied with a right Spanish Spado, and an Attendant
Stiletto, in their customary Position. The Muletier that was my Guide, calling
out to him in Spanish, told him he was very well armed; to which, with a great
deal of Gravity, the Don returned Answer, by Saint Jago a Man cannot be too
well armed in such dangerous Times.

I took up my Quarters that Night at Ocanna, a large, neat, and well built
Town. Houses of good Reception, and Entertainment, are very scarce all over
Spain; but that, where I then lay, might have passed for good in any other
Country. Yet it gave me a Notion quite different to what I found: for I
imagined it to proceed from my near Approach to the Capital. But instead of
that, contrary to all other Countries, the nearer I came to Madrid, the Houses
of Entertainment grew worse and worse; not in their Rates do I mean (for that
with Reason enough might have been expected) but even in their Provision, and
Places and way of Reception. I could not however forbear smiling at the Reason
given by my Muletier, that it proceeded from a piece of Court Policy, in Order
to oblige all Travelers to hasten to Madrid.

TWO small Leagues from Ocanna we arrived at Aranjuez, a Seat of Pleasure,
which the Kings of Spain commonly select for their place of Residence during
the Months of April and May. It is distant from Madrid about seven Leagues; and
the Country round is the pleasantest in all Spain, Valencia excepted. The House
it self makes but a very indifferent Appearance; I have seen many a better in
England, with an Owner to it of no more than five hundred Pounds per Annum; yet
the Gardens are large and fine; or as the Spaniards say, the finest in all
Spain, which with them is all the World. They tell you at the same Time, that
those of Versailles, in their most beautiful Parts, took their Model from
these. I never saw those at Versailles: But in my Opinion, the Walks at
Aranjuez, though noble in their length, lose much of their Beauty by their
Narrowness.

THE Waterworks here are a great Curiosity; to which the River Tagus running
along close by, does mightily contribute. That River is let into the Gardens by
a vast number of little Canals, which with their pleasing Maeanders divert the
Eye with inexpressible Delight. These pretty Wanderers by Pipes properly placed
in them, afford Varieties scarce to be believed or imagined; and which would be
grateful in any Climate; but much more, where the Air, as it does here, wants
in the Summer Months perpetual cooling.

TO see a spreading Tree, as growing in its natural Soil, distinguished from
its pineing Neighborhood by a gentle refreshing Shower, which appears softly
distilling from every Branch and Leaf thereof, while Nature all around is
smiling, without one liquid sign of Sorrow, to me appeared surprizingly
pleasing. And the more when I observed that its Neighbors received not any the
least Benefit of that plentiful Effusion: And yet a very few Trees distant, you
should find a dozen together under the same healthful Sudor. Where Art imitates
Nature well, Philosophers hold it a Perfection: Then what must she exact of us,
where we find her transcendent in the Perfections of Nature?

THE watery Arch is nothing less surprising; where Art contending with Nature,
acts against the Laws of Nature, and yet is beautiful. To see a Liquid Stream
vaulting it self for the space of threescore Yards into a perfect Semi-Orb,
will be granted by the Curious to be rare and strange: But sure to walk beneath
that Arch, and see the Waters flowing over your Head, without your receiving
the minutest Drop, is stranger, if not strange enough to stagger all Belief.

THE Story of Actaeon, pictured in Water Colors, if I may so express my self,
though pretty, seemed to me, but trifling to the other. Those seemed to be like
Nature miraculously displayed; this only Fable in Grotesque. The Figures indeed
were not only fine, but extraordinary; yet their various Shapes were not at all
so entertaining to the Mind, however refreshing they might be found to the Body.

I took notice before of the straitness of their Walks: But though to me it might
seem a Diminution of their Beauty: I am apt to believe to the Spaniard, for and
by whom they were laid out, it may seem otherwise. They, of both Sexes, give
themselves so intolerably up to Amouring, that on that Account the Closeness of
the Walks may be looked upon as an Advantage rather than a Defect. The grand
Avenue to the House is much more stately, and composed as they are, of Rows of
Trees, somewhat larger than our largest Limes, whose Leaves are all of a
perfect Pea bloom Color, together with their Grandeur, they strike the Eye
with a pleasing Beauty. At the Entrance of the Grand Court we see the Statue of
Philip the Second; to intimate to the Spectators, I suppose, that he was the
Founder.

AMONG other Parks about Aranjuez there is one entirely preserved for
Dromedaries; an useful Creature for Fatigue, Burden, and Dispatch; but the
nearest of kin to Deformity of any I ever saw. There are several other
enclosures for several sorts of strange and wild Beasts, which are sometimes
baited in a very large Pond, that was shown me about half a League from hence.
This is no ordinary Diversion: But when the Court is disposed that way, the
Beast, or Beasts, whether Bear, Lion, or Tiger, are conveyed into a House
prepared for that purpose; whence he can no other way issue than by a Door over
the Water, through, or over, which forcing or flinging himself, he gradually
finds himself descend into the very depth of the Pond by a wooden Declivity.
The Dogs stand ready on the Banks, and so soon as ever they spy their Enemy,
rush all at once into the Water, and engage him. A Diversion less to be
complained of than their Tauridores; because attended with less Cruelty to the
Beast, as well as Danger to the Spectators.

WHEN we arrived at Madrid, a Town much spoken of by Natives, as well as
Strangers, though I had seen it before, I could hardly restrain my self from
being surprised to find it only environed with Mud Walls. It may very easily be
imagined, they were never intended for Defense, and yet it was a long time
before I could find any other use, or rather any use at all in 'em. And yet I
was at last convinced of my Error by a sensible Increase of Expense. Without
the Gates, to half a League without the Town, you have Wine for two Pence the
Quart; but within the Place, you drink it little cheaper than you may in
London. The Mud Walls therefore well enough answer their Intent of forcing
People to reside there, under pretense of Security; but in reality to be taxed,
for other Things are taxable, as well as Wine, though not in like Proportion.

All Ambassadors have a Claim or Privilege, of bringing in what Wine they
please Tax-free; and the King, to wave it, will at any Time purchase that
Exemption of Duty at the price of five hundred Pistoles per Annum. The Convents
and Nunneries are allowed a like License of free Importation; and it is one of
the first Advantages they can boast of; for, under that License having a
liberty of setting up a Tavern near them, they make a prodigious Advantage of
it. The Wine drank and sold in this Place, is for the most part a sort of white
Wine.

BUT if the Mud Walls gave me at first but a faint Idea of the Place; I was
pleasingly disappointed, as soon as I entered the Gates. The Town then showed
itself well built, and of Brick, and the Streets wide, long, and spacious.
Those of Atocha, and Alcala, are as fine as any I ever saw; yet is it situated
but very indifferently: For though they have what they call a River, to which
they give the very fair Name of la Mansuera, and over which they have built a
curious, long, and large Stone Bridge; yet is the Course of it, in Summer time
especially, mostly dry. This gave occasion to that piece of Railery of a
Foreign Ambassador, That the King would have done wisely to have bought a
River, before he built the Bridge. Nevertheless, that little Stream of a River
which they boast of, they improve as much as possible, since down the Sides, as
far as you can see, there are Coops, or little Places hooped in, for People to
wash their Linen (for they very rarely wash in their own Houses) nor is it
really any unpleasing Sight, to view the regular Rows of them at that cleanly
Operation.

THE King has here two Palaces; one within the Town, the other near adjoining,
That in the Town is built of Stone, the other which is called Bueno Retiro, is
all of Brick. From the Town to this last, in Summer time, there is a large
covering of Canvas, propt up with tall Poles; under which People walk to avoid
the scorching heats of the Sun.

AS I was passing by the Chapel of the Carmelites, I saw several blind Men,
some led, some groping the Way with their Sticks, going into the Chapel. I had
the curiosity to know the Reason: I no sooner entered the Door, but was
surprised to see such a number of those unfortunate People, all kneeling before
the Altar, some kissing the Ground, others holding up their Heads, crying out
Misericordia. I was informed 'twas Saint Lucy's Day, the Patroness of the
Blind; therefore all who were able, came upon that Day to pay their Devotion:
So I left them, and directed my Course toward the King's Palace.

WHEN I came to the outward Court, I met with a Spanish Gentleman of my
Acquaintance, and we went into the Piazza's; whilst we were talking there, I
saw several Gentlemen passing by having Badges on their Breasts, some white,
some red, and others green: The Orders of Knighthood in Spain.
My Friend informed me that there were five Orders of Knighthood in Spain. That
of the Golden Fleece was only given to great Princes, but the other four to
private Gentlemen, viz. That of Saint Jago, Alacantara, Saint Salvador de
Montreal, and Monteza.

HE likewise told me, that there were above ninety Places of Grandees, but
never filled up; who have the Privilege of being covered in the Presence of the
King, and are distinguished into three Ranks. The first is of those who cover
themselves before they speak to the King. The second are those who put on their
Hats after they have begun to speak. The third are those who only put on their
Hats, having spoke to him. The Ladies of the Grandees have also great Respect
showed them. The Queen rises up when they enter the Chamber, and offers them
Cushions.

NO married Man except the King lies in the Palace, for all the Women who live
there are Widows, or Maids of Honor to the Queen. I saw the Prince of
Asturia's Dinner carried through the Court up to him, being guarded by four
Gentlemen of the Guards, one before, another behind, and one on each Side, with
their Carbines shouldered; the Queen's came next, and the King's the last,
guarded as before, for they always dine separately. I observed that the
Gentlemen of the Guards, though not on Duty, yet they are obliged to wear their
Carbine Belts.

SAINT Isodore, who from a poor laboring Man, by his Sanctity of Life arrived
to the Title of Saint, is the Patron of Madrid, and has a Church dedicated to
him, which is richly adorned within. The Sovereign Court of the Inquisition is
held at Madrid, the President whereof is called the Inquisitor General. They
judge without allowing any Appeal for four Sorts of Crimes, viz. Heresy,
Polygamy, Sodomy and Witchcraft, and when any are convicted, it is called the
Act of Faith.

MOST People believe that the King's greatest Revenue consists in the Gold and
Silver brought from the West Indies (which is a mistake) for most Part of that
Wealth belongs to Merchants and others, that pay the Workmen at the Golden
Mines of Potosi, and the Silver Mines at Mexico; yet the King, as I have been
informed, receives about a Million and a half of Gold.

THE Spaniards have a Saying, that the finest Garden of Fruit in Spain is in
the middle of Madrid, which is the Plaza or Market Place, and truly the Stalls
there are set forth with such variety of delicious Fruit, that I must confess I
never saw any Place comparable to it; and which adds to my Admiration, there
are no Gardens or Orchards of Fruit within some Leagues.

THEY seldom eat Hares in Spain but whilst the Grapes are growing, and then
they are so exceeding fat, they are knocked down with Sticks. Their Rabits are
not so good as ours in England; they have great plenty of Patridges, which are
larger and finer feathered than ours. They have but little Beef in Spain,
because there is no Grass, but they have plenty of Mutton, and exceeding good,
because their Sheep feed only upon wild Potherbs; their Pork is delicious,
their Hogs seeding only upon Chestnuts and Acorns.

MADRID and Valladolid, though Great, yet are only accounted Villages: In the
latter Philip the Second, by the persuasion of Parsons an English Jesuit,
erected an English Seminary; and Philip the Fourth built a most noble Palace,
with extraordinary fine Gardens. They say that Christopher Columbus, who first
discovered the West Indies, dyed there, though I have heard he lies buried, and
has a Monument at Sevil.

The King's Palace.
THE Palace in the Town stands upon eleven Arches, under every one of which
there are Shops, which degrade it to a mere Exchange. Nevertheless, the Stairs
by which you ascend up to the Guard Room (which is very spacious too) are
stately, large, and curious. So soon as you have passed the Guard Room, you
enter into a long and noble Gallery, the right Hand whereof leads to the King's
Apartment, the left to the Queen's. Entering into the King's Apartment you soon
arrive at a large Room, where he keeps his Levee; on one side whereof (for it
takes up the whole Side) is painted the fatal Battle of Almanza. I confess the
View somewhat affected me, though so long after; and brought to Mind many old
Passages. However, the Reflection concluded thus in favor of the Spaniard,
that we ought to excuse their Vanity in so exposing under a French General, a
Victory, which was the only material one the Spaniards could ever boast of over
an English Army.

IN this State Room, when the King first appears, every Person present,
receives him with a profound Homage: After which turning from the Company to a
large Velvet Chair, by which stands the Father Confessor, he kneels down, and
remains some Time at his Devotion; which being over, he rising crosies himself,
and his Father Confessor having with the motion of his Hand intimated his
Benediction, he then gives Audience to all that attend for that purpose. He
receives every Body with a seeming Complaisance; and with an Air more
resembling the French than the Spanish Ceremony. Petitions to the King, as with
us, are delivered into the Hands of the Secretary of State: Yet in one
Particular they are, in my Opinion, worthy the Imitation of other Courts; the
Petitioner is directly told, what Day he must come for an Answer to the Office:
at which Time he is sure, without any further fruitless Attendance, not to fail
of it. The Audience being over, the King returns through the Gallery to his own
Apartment.

I cannot here omit an accidental Conversation, that passed between General
Mahoni and my self in this Place. After some talk of the Bravery of the English
Nation, he made mention of General Stanhope, with a very peculiar Emphasis.
"But, says he, I never was so put to the Nonplus in all my Days, as that
General once put me in. I was on the Road from Paris to Madrid, and having
notice, that that General was going just the Reverse, and that in all
likelihood we should meet the next Day: Before my setting out in the Morning, I
took care to order my gayest Regimental Apparel, resolving to make the best
Appearance I could to receive so great a Man. I had not tr^d above four Hours
before I saw t^ ^tlemen, who appearing to be English, it induced me to imagine
they were Forerunners, and some of his Retinue. But how abashed and confounded
was I? when putting the Question to one of 'em, he made answer, Sir, I am the
Person. Never did Moderation put Vanity more out of Countenance: Though, to say
Truth, I could not but think his Dress as much too plain for General Stanhope,
as I at that juncture thought my own too gay for Mahoni. But, added he, that
great Man had too many inward great Endowments to stand in need of any outside
Decoration."

OF all Diversions the King takes most delight in that of Shooting, which he
performs with great Exactness and Dexterity. I have seen him divert himself at
Swallow shooting (by all, I think allowed to be the most difficult) and
exceeding all I ever saw. The last time I had the Honor to see him, was on his
Return from that Exercise. He had been abroad with the Duke of Medina Sidenia,
and alighted out of his Coach at a back Door of the Palace, with three or four
Birds in his Hand, which according to his usual Custom, he carried up to the
Queen with his own Hands.

(...)
There are two Play Houses in Madrid, at both which they act every Day; but
their Actors, and their Music, are almost too indifferent to be mentioned. The
Theater at the Bueno Retiro is much the best; but as much inferior to ours at
London, as those at Madrid are to that. I was at one Play, when both King and
Queen were present. There was a splendid Audience, and a great Concourse of
Ladies; but the latter, as is the Custom there, having Lattices before them,
the Appearance lost most of its Luster. One very remarkable Thing happened,
while I was there; the Ave-Bell rung in the Middle of an Act, when down on
their Knees fell every Body, even the Players on the Stage, in the Middle of
their Harangue. They remained for some Time at their Devotion; then up they
rose, and returned to the Business they were before engaged in, beginning where
they left off.

THE Ladies of Quality make their Visits in grand State and Decorum. The Lady
Visitant is carried in a Chair by four Men; the two first, in all Weathers,
always bare. Two others walk as a Guard, one on each Side; another carrying a
large Lanthorn for fear of being benighted; then follows a Coach drawn by six
Mules, with her Women, and after that another with her Gentlemen; several
Servants walking after, more or less, according to the Quality of the Person.
They never suffer their Servants to overload a Coach, as is frequently seen
with us, neither do Coachmen or Chairmen go or drive as if they carried
Midwives in lieu of Ladies. On the contrary, they affect a Motion so slow and
so stately, that you would rather imagine the Ladies were every one of them
near their Time, and very apprehensive of a Miscarriage.

I remember not to have seen here any Horses in any Coach, but in the King's,
or an Embassador's; which can only proceed from Custom; for certainly finer
Horses are not to be found in the World.

AT the Time of my being here, Cardinal Giudici was at Madrid; he was a tall,
proper, comely Man, and one that made the best Appearance. Alberoni was there
at the same Time, who, upon the Death of the Duke of Vendosme, had the good
Fortune to find the Princess Ursini his Patroness. An Instance of whose
Ingratitude will plead Pardon for this little Digression. That Princess first
brought Alberoni into Favor at Court. They were both of Italy, and that might
be one Reason of that Lady's espousing his Interest: though some there are, that
assign it to the Recommendation of the Duke of Vendosme; with whom Alberoni had
the Honor to be very intimate, as the other was always distinguished by that
Princess. Be which it will, certain it is, she was Alberoni's first, and sole
Patroness; which gave many People afterward a very smart Occasion of
reflecting upon him, both as to his Integrity and Gratitude. For, when
Alberoni, upon the Death of King Philip's first Queen, had recommended this
present Lady, who was his Countrywoman, (she of Parma, and he of Placentia,
both in the same Dukedom) and had forwarded her Match with the King, with all
possible Assiduity; and when that Princess, pursuant to the Orders she had
received from the King, passed over into Italy to accompany the Queen Elect
into her own Dominions; Alberoni, forgetful of the Hand that first advanced
him, sent a Letter to the present Queen, just before her Landing, that if she
resolved to be Queen of Spain, she must banish the Princess Ursini, her
Companion, and never let her come to Court. Accordingly that Lady, to evince
the Extent of her Power, and the Strength of her Resolution, dispatched that
Princess away, on her very Landing, and before she had seen the King, under a
Detachment of her own Guards, into France; and all this without either allowing
her an Opportunity of justifying her self, or assigning the least Reason for so
uncommon an Action. But the same Alberoni (though afterward created Cardinal,
and for some Time King Philip's Prime Minion) soon saw that Ingratit^de of his
rewarded in his own Dis^race, at the very same Court.

I remember, when at la Mancha, Do^ Felix Pachero, in a Conversation there^
maintained, that three Women, at tha^ Time, ruled the World, viz. Queen Anne^
Madam Mantenon, and this Princess Ursini^

FATHER Fahy's Civilities, when last a^ Madrid, exacting of me some suitable
Acknowledgment, I went to pay him a Visit^ as to render him due Thanks for the
past, s^ to give him a further Account of his Countryman Brennan: but I soon
found he di^ not much incline to hear any Thing more o^ Murtough, not expecting
to hear any Goo^ of him; for which Reason, as soon as I wel^ could, I changed
the Conversation to another Topic. In which some Word dropping of the Count de
Montery, I told him that I heard he had taken Orders, and officiated at Mass:
He made answer, it was al^ very true. And upon my intimating, tha^ I had the
Honor to serve under him in Flanders, on my first entering into Service, an^
when he commanded the Spanish Forces a^ the famous Battle of Seneff; and
adding^ that I could not but be surprised, that he^ who was then one of the
brightest Cavalieroes of the Age, should now be in Orders; and that I should
look upon it as a mighty Favor barely to have, if it might be, a View of him;
he very obligingly told me, that he was very well acquainted with him, and that
^f I would come the next Day, he would not fail to accompany me to the Count's
House.

PUNCTUALLY at the Time appointed, I waited on Father Fahy, who, as he
promised, carried me to the Count's House: He was stepping into his Coach just
as we got there; but seeing Father Fahy, he advanced toward us. The Father
delivered my Desire in as handsome a Manner as could be, and concluding with the
Reason of it, from my having been in that Service under him; he seemed very
well pleased, but added, that there were not many beside my self living, who
had been in that Service with him. After some other Conversation, he called his
Gentleman to him, and gave him particular Orders to give us a Frescari, or, in
English, an Entertainment; so taking leave, he went into his Coach, and we to
our Frescari.

COMING from which, Father Fahi made me observe, in the open Street, a Stone,
on which was a visible great Stain of somewhat reddish and like Blood. "This,
said he, was occasioned by the Death of a Countryman of mine, who had the
Misfortune to overset a Child, coming out of that House (pointing to one
opposite to us) the Child frighted, though not hurt, as is natural, made a
terrible Outcry; upon which its Father coming out in a violent Rage
(notwithstanding my Countryman begged Pardon, and pleaded Sorrow as being only
an Accident) stabbed him to the Heart, and down he fell upon that Stone, which
to this Day retains the Mark of innocent Blood, so rashly shed." He went on,
and told me, the Spaniard immediately took Sanctuary in the Church, whence some
Time after he made his Escape. But Escapes of that Nature are so common in
Spain, that they are not worth wondering at. For even though it were for wilful
and premeditated Murder, if the Murderer have taken Sanctuary, it was never
known, that he was delivered up to Justice, though demanded; but in some
Disguise he makes his Escape, or some Way is secured against all the Clamours
of Power or Equity. I have observed, that some of the greatest Quality stop
their Coaches over a stinking nasty Puddle, which they often find in the
Streets, and holding their Heads over the Door, snuff up the nasty Scent which
ascends, believing that it is extreme healthful; when I was forced to hold my
Nose, passing by. It Is not convenient to walk out early in the Morning, they
having no necessary Houses, throw out their Nastiness in the Middle of the
Street.

AFTER I had taken Leave of Father Fahy, and returned my Thanks for all
Civilities, I went to pay a Visit to Mr. Salter, who was Secretary to General
Stanhope, when the English Forces were made Prisoners of War at Breuhiga; going
up Stairs, I found the Door of his Lodgings a-jar; and knocking, a Person came
to the Door, who appeared under some Surprise at Sight of me. I did not know
him, but enquiring if Mr. Salter was within; He answered, as I fancied, with
some Hesitation, that he was, but was busy in an inner Room. However, though
unasked, I went in, resolving, since I had found him at home, to wait his
Leisure. In a little Time Mr. Salter entered the Room; and after customary
Ceremonies, asking my Patience a little longer, he desired I would sit down and
bear Ensign Fanshaw Company (for so he called him) adding at going out, he had
a little Business that required Dispatch; which being over, he would return,
and join Company.

THE Ensign, as he called him, appeared to me under a Dishabilee; and the first
Question he asked me, was, if I would drink a Glass of English Beer? Misled by
his Appearance, though I assented, it was with a Design to treat; which he
would by no Means permit; but calling to a Servant, ordered some in. We sat
drinking that Liquor, which to me was a greater Rarity than all the Wine in
Spain; when in dropped an old Acquaintance of mine, Mr. Le N^y, Secretary to
Colonel Nevil. He sat down with us, and before the Glass could go twice round,
told Ensign Fanshaw, That his Colonel gave his humble Service to him, and
ordered him to let him know, that he had but threescore Pistoles by him, which
he had sent, and which were at his Service, as what he pleased more should be,
as soon as it came to his Hands.

AT this I began to look upon my Ensign as another guess Person than I had
taken him for; and Le Noy imagining, by our setting cheek by joul together,
that I must be in the Secret, soon after gave him the Title of Captain. This
soon convinced me, that there was more in the Matter than I was yet Master of;
for laying Things together, I could not but argue within my self, that as it
seemed at first, a most incredible Thing, that a Person of his Appearance
should have so large Credit, with such a Complement at the End of it, without
some Disguise, and as from an Ensign he was risen to be a Captain, in the
taking of one Bottle of English Beer; a little Patience would let me into a
Farce, in which, at present, I had not the Honor to bear any Part but that of
a Mute.

AT last Le Noy took his leave, and as soon as he had left us, and the other
Bottle was brought in, Ensign Fanshaw began to open his Heart, and tell me, who
he was. I am necessitated, said he, to be under this Disguise, to conceal my
self, especially in this Place. "For you must know, continued he, that when our
Forces were Lords of this Town, as we were for a little while, I fell under an
Intrigue with another Man's Wife: Her Husband was a Person of considerable
Account; nevertheless the Wife showed me all the Favors that a Soldier, under
a long and hard Campaigne, could be imagined to ask. In short, her Relations
got acquainted with our Amor, and knowing that I was among the Prisoners taken
at Breuhiga, are now upon the Scout and Enquiry, to make a Discovery that may
be of fatal Consequence. This is the Reason of my Disguise; this the
unfortunate Occasion of my taking upon me a Name that does not belong to me."

HE spoke all this with such an Openness of Heart, that in return of so much
Confidence, I confessed to him, that I had heard of the Affair, for that it had
made no little Noise all over the Country; that it highly behoved him to take
great Care of himself, since, as the Relations on both Sides were considerable,
he must consequently be in great Danger: That in Cases of that Nature, no
People in the World carry Things to greater Extremities, than the Spaniards. He
returned me Thanks for my good Advice, which I understood, in a few Days after,
he, with the Assistance of his Friends, had taken Care to put in Practice; for
he was conveyed away secretly, and afterward had the Honor to be made a Peer
of Ireland.

MY Passport being at last signed by the Count de las Torres, I prepared for a
Journey, I had long and ardently wished for, and set out from Madrid, in the
Beginning of September, 1712. in Order to return to my native Country.

ACCORDINGLY I set forward upon my Journey, but having heard, both before and
since my being in Spain, very famous Things spoken of the Escurial; though it
was a League out of my Road, I resolved to make it a Visit. And I must confess,
when I came there, I was so far from condemning my Curiosity, that I chose to
congratulate my good Fortune, that had, at half a Day's Expense, feasted my
Eyes with Extraordinaries, which would have justified a Twelve-months Journey
on purpose.

Description of the Escurial.
THE Structure is entirely magnificent, beyond any Thing I ever saw, or any
Thing my Imagination could frame It is composed of eleven several Quadrangles,
with noble Cloisters round every one of them. The Front to the West is adorned
with three stately Gates; every one of a different Model, yet every one the
Model of nicest Architecture. The Middlemost of the three leads into a fine
Chapel of the Hieronomites, as they call them; in which are entertained one
hundred and fifty Monks. At every of the four Corners of this august Fabric,
there is a Turret of excellent Workmanship, which yields to the Whole an
extraordinary Air of Grandeur. The King's Palace is on the North, nearest that
Mountain, whence the Stone it is built of was hew'n; and all the South Part is
set off with many Galleries, both beautiful and sumptuous.

THIS prodigious Pile, which, as I have said, exceeds all that I ever saw; and
which would ask, of it self, a Volume to particularize, was built by Philip the
Second. He laid the first Stone, yet lived to see it finished; and lies buried
in the Panthaeon, a Part of it, set apart for the Burial-place of succeeding
Princes, as well as himself. It was dedicated to Saint Laurence, in the very
Foundation; and therefore built in the Shape of a Gridiron, the Instrument of
that Martyr's Execution; and in Memory of a great Victory obtained on that
Saint's Day. The Stone of which it is built, contrary to the common Course,
grows whiter by Age; and the Quarry, whence it was dug, lies near enough, if it
had Sense or Ambition, to grow enamored of its own wonderful Production. Some
there are, who stick not to assign this Convenience, as the main Cause of its
Situation; and for my Part, I must agree, that I have seen many other Parts of
Spain, where that glorious Building would have shone with yet far greater
Splendor.

THERE was no Town of any Consequence presented it self in my Way to Burgos.
Here I took up my Quarters that Night; where I met with an Irish Priest, whose
Name was White. As is natural on such Rencounters, having answered his Enquiry,
whither I was going; he very kindly told me, he should be very glad of my
Company as far as Victoria, which lay in my Road; and I with equal Frankness
embraced the Offer.

NEXT Morning, when we had mounted our Mules, and were got a little Distance
from Burgos; he began to relate to me a great many impious Pranks of an English
Officer, who had been a Prisoner there a little before I came; concluding all,
with some Vehemence, that he had given greater Occasion of Scandal and Infamy
to his native Country, than would easily be wiped off, or in a little Time. The
Truth of it is, many Particulars, which he related to me, were too monstrously
vile to admit of any Repetition here; and highly meriting that unfortunate End,
which that Officer met with some Time after. Nevertheless the just Reflections
made by that Father, plainly manifested to me the Folly of those Gentlemen,
who, by such Inadvertencies, to say no worse, cause the Honor of the Land of
their Nativity to be called in question. For though, no doubt, it is a very false
Conclusion, from a singular, to conceive a general Character; yet in a strange
Country, nothing is more common. A Man therefore, of common Sense, would
carefully avoid all Occasions of Censure, if not in respect to himself, yet out
of a human Regard to such of his Countrymen as may have the Fortune to come
after him; and, it is more than probable, may desire to hear a better and juster
Character of their Country, and Countrymen, than he perhaps might incline to
leave behind him.

AS we traveled along, Father White told me, that near the Place of our
Quartering that Night, there was a Convent of the Carthusian Order, which would
be well worth my seeing. I was doubly glad to hear it, as it was an Order most
a Stranger to me; and as I had often heard from many others, most unaccountable
Relations of the Severity of their Way of Life, and the very odd Original of
their Institution.

THE next Morning therefore, being Sunday, we took a Walk to the Convent. It
was situated at the Foot of a great Hill, having a pretty little River running
before it. The Hill was naturally covered with Evergreens of various Sorts; but
the very Summit of the Rock was so impending, that one would at first Sight be
led to apprehend the Destruction of the Convent, from the Fall of it.
Notwithstanding all which, they have very curious and well ordered Gardens;
which led me to observe, that, what ever Men may pretend, Pleasure was not
incompatible with the most austere Life. And indeed, if I may guess of others
by this, no Order in that Church can boast of finer Convents. Their Chapel was
completely neat, the Altar of it set out with the utmost Magnificence, both as
to fine Paintings, and other rich Adornments. The Building was answerable to
the rest; and, in short, nothing seemed omitted, that might render it beautiful
or pleasant.

WHEN we had taken a full Survey of all, we, not without some Regret, returned
to our very indifferent Inn: Where the better to pass away the Time, Father
White gave me an ample Detail of the Original of that Order. I had beforehand
heard somewhat of it; nevertheless, I did not care to interrupt him, because I
had a Mind to hear how his Account would agree with what I had already heard.

" Bruno, said the Father, the Author or Founder of this Order, was not
originally of this, but of another. He had a holy Brother of the same Order,
that was his Cell-mate, or Chamber-fellow, who was reputed by all that ever saw
or knew him, for a Person of exalted Piety, and of a most exact holy Life. This
Man, Bruno had intimately known for many Years; and agreed in his Character,
that general Consent did him no more than Justice, having never observed any
Thing in any of his Actions, that, in his Opinion, could be offensive to God or
Man. He was perpetually at his Devotions; and distinguishably remarkable, for
never permiting any Thing but pious Ejaculations to proceed out of his Mouth.
In short, he was reputed a Saint upon Earth."

"THIS Man at last dies, and, according to Custom, is removed into the Chapel
of the Convent, and there placed with a Cross fixed in his Hands: Soon after
which, saying the proper Masses for his Soul, in the Middle of their Devotion,
the dead Man lifts up his Head, and with an audible Voice, cried out, Vocatus
sum. The pious Brethren, as any one will easily imagine, were most prodigiously
surprised at such an Accident, and therefore they earnestly redoubled their
Prayers; when lifting up his Head a second Time, the dead Man cried aloud,
Judicatus sum. Knowing his former Piety, the pious Fraternity could not then
entertain the least doubt of his Felicity; when, to their great Consternation
and Confusion he lifted up his Head a third Time, crying out in a terrible
Tone, Damnatus sum; upon which they incontinently removed the Corpse out of the
Chapel, and threw it upon the Dunghill."

"Good Bruno, pondering upon these Passages, could not fail of drawing this
Conclusion; That if a Person to all Appearance so holy and devout, should miss
of Salvation, it behooved a wise Man to contrive some Way more certain to make
his Calling and Election sure. To that Purpose he instituted this strict and
severe Order, with an Injunction to them, sacred as any Part, that every
Professor should always wear Hair Cloth next his Skin; never eat any Flesh; nor
speak to one another, only as passing by, to say, Memento mori."

THIS Account I found to agree pretty well with what I had before heard; but at
the same Time, I found the Redouble of it made but just the same Impression, it
had at first made upon my Heart. However having made it my Observation, that a
Spirit the least contradictory, best carries a Man through Spain; I kept Father
White Company, and in Humor, 'till we arrived at Victoria. Where he added one
Thing, by Way of Appendix, in Relation to the Carthusians, That every Person of
the Society, is obliged every Day to go into their Place of Burial, and take up
as much Earth, as he can hold at a Grasp with one Hand, in order to prepare his
Grave.

NEXT Day we set out for Victoria. It is a sweet, delicious, and pleasant Town.
It received that Name in Memory of a considerable Victory there obtained over
the Moors. Leaving this Place, I parted with Father White; he going where his
Affairs led him; and I to make the best of my Way to Bilboa.

Entering into Biscay, soon after I left Victoria, I was at a Loss almost to
imagine, what Country I was got into. By my long Stay in Spain, I thought my
self a tolerable Master of the Tongue; yet here I found my self at the utmost
Loss to understand Landlord, Landlady, or any of the Family. I was told by my
Muletier, that they pretend their Language, as they call it, has continued
uncorrupted from the very Confusion of Babel; though if I might freely give my
Opinion in the Matter, I should rather take it to be the very Corruption of all
that Confusion. Another Rhodomontado they have, (for in this they are perfect
Spaniards) that neither Romans, Carthaginians, Vandals, Goths, or Moors, ever
totally subdued them. And yet any Man that has ever seen their Country, might
cut this Knot without a Hatchet, by saying truly, that neither Roman,
Carthaginian, nor any victorious People, thought it worth while to make a
Conquest of a Country, so mountainous and so barren.

Bilboa described.
HOWEVER, Bilboa must be allowed, though not very large, to be a pretty, clean and
neat Town. Here, as in Amsterdam, they allow neither Cart, nor Coach, to enter;
but every Thing of Merchandise is drawn, and carried upon Sledges: And yet it
is a Place of no small Account, as to Trade; and especially for Iron and Wool.
Here I hoped to have met with an opportunity of Embarking for England; but to
my Sorrow I found my self disappointed, and under that Disappointment, obliged
to make the best of my Way to Bayonne.

SETTING out for which Place, the first Town of Note that I came to, was Saint
Sebastian. A very clean Town, and neatly paved; which is no little Rarity in
Spain. It has a very good Wall about it, and a pretty Citadel. At this Place I
met with two English Officers, who were under the same state with my self; one
of them being a Prisoner of War with me at Denia. They were going to Bayonne to
embark for England as well as my self; so we agreed to set out together for
Port Passage. The Road from St. Sebastian is all over a well paved Stone
Causeway; almost at the end whereof, there accosted us a great number of young
Lasses. They were all prettily dressed, their long Hair flowing in a decent
manner over their Shoulders, and here and there decorated with Ribbons of
various Colors, which wantonly played on their Backs with the Wind. The Sight
surpised my Fellow Travelers no less than me; and the more, as they advanced
directly up to us, and seized our Hands. But a little time undeceived us, and
we found what they came for; and that their Contest, though not so robust as our
Oars on the Thames, was much of the same Nature; each contending who should
have us for their Fare. For it is here a Custom of Time out of mind, that none
but young Women should have the management and profit of that Ferry. And though
the Ferry is over an Arm of the Sea, very broad, and sometimes very rough,
those fair Ferriers manage themselves with that Dexterity, that the Passage is
very little dangerous, and in calm Weather, very pleasant. In short, we made
choice of those that best pleased us; who in a grateful Return, led us down to
their Boat under a sort of Music, which they, walking along, made with their
Oars, and which we all thought far from being disagreeable. Thus were we
transported over to Port Passage; not undeservedly accounted the best Harbor
in all the Bay of Biscay.

WE stayed not long here after Landing, resolving, if possible, to reach
Fonterabia before Night; but all the Expedition we could use, little availed;
for before we could reach thither the Gates were shut, and good Nature and
Humanity were so locked up with them, that all the Rhetoric we were Masters of
could not prevail upon the Governor to order their being opened; for which
Reason we were obliged to take up our Quarters at the Ferry House.

When we got up the next Morning, we found the Waters so broad, as well as
rough, that we began to enquire after another Passage; and were answered, that
at the Isle of Conference, but a short League upwards, the Passage was much
shorter, and exposed to less Danger. Such good Reasons soon determined us: So,
setting out we got there in a very little Time; and very soon after were landed
in France. Here we found a House of very good Entertainment, a Thing we had
long wanted, and much lamented the want of.

WE were hardly well seated in the House before we were made sensible, that it
was the Custom, which had made it the business of our Host, to entertain all
his Guests at first coming in, with a prolix Account of that remarkable
Interview between the two Kings of France and Spain. I speak safely now, as
being got on French Ground: For the Spaniard in his own Country would have made
me to know, that putting Spain after France had there been looked upon as a
mere Solecism in Speech. However, having refreshed our selves, to show our
deference to our Host's Relation, we agreed to pay our Respects to that famous
little Isle he mentioned; which indeed, was the whole burden of the Design of
our crafty Landlord's Relation.

WHEN we came there, we found it a little oval Island, overrun with Weeds, and
surrounded with Reeds and Rushes. "Here, said our Landlord (for he went with
us) upon this little Spot, were at that juncture seen the two greatest Monarchs
in the Universe. A noble Pavilion was erected in the very middle of it, and in
the middle of that was placed a very large oval Table; at which was the
Conference, from which the Place received its Title. There were two Bridges
raised; one on the Spanish side, the Passage to which was a little upon a
Descent by reason of the Hills adjacent; and the other upon the French side,
which as you see, was all upon a Level. The Music playing, and Trumpets
sounding, the two Kings, upon a Signal agreed upon, set forward at the same
time; the Spanish Monarch handing the Infanta his Daughter to the Place of
Interview. As soon as they were entered the Pavilion, on each Side, all the
Artillery fired, and both Armies after that made their several Vollies. Then
the King of Spain advancing on his side the Table with the Infanta, the King of
France advanced at the same Moment on the other; till meeting, he received the
Infanta at the Hands of her Father, as his Queen; upon which, both the
Artillery and small Arms fired as before. After this, was a most splendid and
sumptuous Entertainment; which being over, both Kings retired into their
several Dominions; the King of France conducting his new Queen to Saint Jean de
Luz, where the Marriage was consummated; and the King of Spain returning to
Port Passage."

AFTER a Relation so very inconsistent with the present State of the Place; we
took Horse (for Mule-mounting was now out of Fashion) and rode to Saint Jean de
Luz, where we found as great a difference in our Eating and Drinking, as we had
before done in our Riding. Here they might be properly called Houses of
Entertainment; though generally speaking, till we came to this Place, we met with
very mean Fare, and were poorly accommodated in the Houses where we lodged.

A Person that travels this way, would be esteemed a Man of a narrow Curiosity,
who should not desire to see the Chamber where Louis le grand took his first
Nights Lodging with his Queen. Accordingly, when it was put into my Head, out
of an Ambition to evince my self a Person of Taste, I asked the Question, and
the Favor was granted me, with a great deal of French Civility. Not that I
found any Thing here, more than in the Isle of Conference, but what Tradition
only had rendered remarkable.

S Jean de Luz.
Saint Jean de Luz is esteemed one of the greatest Village Towns in all France.
It was in the great Church of this Place, that Lewis XIV. according to Marriage
Articles, took before the high Altar the Oath of Renunciation to the Crown of
Spain, by which all the Issue of that Marriage were debarred Inheritance, if
Oaths had been obligatory with Princes. The Natives here are reckoned expert
Seamen; especially in Whale fishing. Here is a fine Bridge of Wood; in the
middle of which is a Descent, by Steps, into a pretty little Island; where is a
Chapel, and a Palace belonging to the Bishop of Bayonne. Here the Queen Dowager
of Spain often walks to divert herself; and on this Bridge, and in the Walks on
the Island, I had the Honor to see that Princess more than once.

THIS Villa not being above four Leagues from Bayonne, we got there by Dinner
time, where at an Ordinary of twenty Sons, we eat and drank in Plenty, and with
a gusto, much better than in any part of Spain; where for eating much worse, we
paid very much more.

Bayonne.
BAYONNE is a Town strong by Nature; yet the Fortifications have been very much
neglected, since the building of the Citadel, on the other Side the River;
which not only commands the Town, but the Harbor too. It is a noble Fabric;
fair and strong, and raised on the side of a Hill, wanting nothing that Art
could furnish, to render it impregnable. The Marshal Bouflers had the Care of
it in its erection; and there is a fine Walk near it, from which he used to
survey the Workmen, which still carries his Name. There are two noble Bridges
here, though both of Wood, one over that River which runs on one side the Town;
the other over that, which divides it in the middle, the Tide runs through both
with vast Rapidity; notwithstanding which, Ships of Burden come up, and paying
for it, are often fastened to the Bridge, while loading or unloading. While I
was here, there came in four or five English Ships laden with Corn; the first,
as they told me, that had come in to unlade there, since the beginning of the
War.

Pont d' Esprit.
ON that Side of the River where the new Citadel is built, at a very little
distance lies Pont d' Esprit, a Place mostly inhabited by Jews, who drive a
great Trade there, and are esteemed very rich, though as in all other Countries
mostly very rogueish. Here the Queen Dowager of Spain has kept her Court ever
since the Jealousy of the present King reclus'd her from Madrid. As Aunt to his
Competitor Charles (now Emperor) he apprehended her Intrigueing; for which
Reason giving her an Option of Retreat, that Princess made choice of this City,
much to the Advantage of the Place, and in all Appearance much to her own
Satisfaction. She is a Lady not of the lesser Size; and lives here in suitable
Splendor, and not without the Respect due to a Person of her high Quality:
Every time she goes to take the Air, the Cannon of the Citadel saluting her, as
she passes over the Bridge; and to say Truth, the Country round is extremely
pleasant, and abounds in plenty of all Provisions; especially in wild Fowl.
Bayonne Hams are, to a Proverb, celebrated all over France.

WE waited here near five Months before the expected Transports arrived from
England, without any other Amusements, than such as are common to People under
Suspense. Short Tours will not admit of great Varieties; and much Acquaintance
could not be any way suitable to People, that had long been in a strange
Country, and earnestly desired to return to our own. Yet one Accident befell me
here, that was nearer costing me my Life, than all I had before encountered,
either in Battle or Siege.

GOING to my Lodgings one Evening, I unfortunately met with an Officer, who
would needs have me along with him, aboard one of the English Ships, to drink a
Bottle of English beer. He had been often invited, he said; and I am afraid our
Countryman, continued he, will hold himself slighted, if I delay it longer.
English Beer was a great rarity, and the Vessel lay not at any great distance
from my Lodgings; so without any f^rther Persuasion I consented. When we came
upon the Bridge, to which the Ship we were to go aboard was fastened, we found,
as was customary, as well as necessary, a Plank laid over from the Ship, and a
Rope to hold by, for safe Passage. The Night was very dark; and I had
cautiously enough taken care to provide a Man with a Lanthorn to prevent
Casualties. The Man with the Light went first, and out of his abundant
Complaisance, my Friend, the Officer, would have me follow the Light: But I was
no sooner stepped upon the Plank after my Guide, but Rope and Plank gave way, and
Guide and I tumbled both together into the Water.

THE Tide was then running in pretty strong: However, my Feet in the Fall
touching Ground, gave me an opportunity to recover my self a little; at which
Time I caught fast hold of a Buoy, which was placed over an Anchor on one of
the Ships there riding: I held fast, till the Tide rising stronger and stronger
threw me off my Feet; which gave an Opportunity to the poor Fellow, our
Lanthorn-bearer, to lay hold of one of my Legs, by which he held as fast as I
by the Buoy. We had lain thus lovingly at Hull together, struggling with the
increasing Tide, which, well for us, did not break my hold (for if it had, the
Ships which lay breast a breast had certainly sucked us under) when several on
the Bridge, who saw us fall, brought others with Ropes and Lights to our
Assistance; and especially my Brother Officer, who had been Accessory as well
as Spectator of our Calamity; though at last a very small Portion of our
Deliverance fell to his share.

AS soon as I could feel a Rope, I quitted my hold of the Buoy; but my poor
Drag at my Heels would not on any account quit his hold of my Leg. And as it
was next to an Impossibility, in that Posture to draw us up the Bridge to save
both, if either of us, we must s^ll have perished, had not the Alarm brought
off a Boat or two to our Succor, who took us in.

I was carried as fast as possible, to a neighboring House hard by, where they
took immediate care to make a good Fire; and where I had not been long before
our intended Host, the Master of the Ship, came in very much concerned, and
blaming us for not hailing the Vessel, before we made an Attempt to enter. For,
says he, the very Night before, my Vessel was robbed; and that Plank and Rope
were a Trap designed for the Thieves, if they came again; not imagining that
Men in an honest way would have come on board without asking Questions. Like
the wise Men of this World, I hereupon began to form Resolutions against a
Thing, which was never again likely to happen; and to draw Inferences of
Instruction from an Accident, that had not so much as a Moral for its
Foundation.

ONE Day after this, partly out of Business, and partly out of Curiosity, I
went to see the Mint here, and having taken notice to one of the Officers, that
there was a difference in the Impress of their Crown Pieces, one having at the
bottom the Impress of a Cow, and the other none: "Sir, replied that Officer,
you are much in the right in your Observation. Those that have the Cow, were
not coined here, but at Paw, the chief City of Navarr; where they enjoy the
Privilege of a Mint, as well as we. And Tradition tells, says he, that the
Reason of that Addition to the Impress was this: A certain King of Navarr (when
it was a Kingdom distinct from that of France) looking out of a Window of the
Palace, spied a Cow, with her Calf standing aside her, attacked by a Lion,
which had got loose out of his Menagery. The Lion strove to get the young Calf
into his Paw; the Cow bravely defended her Charge; and so well, that the Lion
at last, tired and weary, withdrew, and left her Mistress of the Field of
Battle; and her young one. Ever since which, concluded that Officer, by Order
of that King, the Cow is placed at the bottom of the Impress of all the Money
there coined."

WHETHER or no my Relator guessed at the Moral, or whether it was Fact, I dare
not determine: But to me it seemed apparent, that it was no otherways intended,
than as an emblematical Fable to cover, and preserve the Memory of the
Deliverance of Henry the Fourth, then the young King of Navarr, at that
eternally ignominious Slaughter, the Massacre of Paris. Many Historians, their
own as well as others, agree, that the House of Guise had levelled the Malice
of their Design at that great Prince. They knew him to be the lawful Heir; but
as they knew him bred, what they called a Hugonot, Barbarity and Injustice was
easily concealed under the Cloak of Religion, and the Good of Mother Church,
under the veil of Ambition, was held sufficient to post-pone the Laws of God
and Man. Some of those Historians have delivered it as Matter of Fact, that the
Conspirators, in searching after that young King, pressed into the very
Apartments of the Queen his Mother; who having, at the Toll of the Bell, and
Cries of the Murdered, taken the Alarm, on hearing 'em coming, placed her self
in her Chair, and covered the young King her Son with her Farthingale, till
they were gone. By which means she found an opportunity to convey him to a
Place of more Safety; and so preserved him from those bloody Murderers, and in
them from the Paw of the Lion. This was only a private Reflection of my own at
that Time; but I think carries so great a Face of Probability, that I can see
no present Reason to reject it. And to have sought after better Information
from the Officer of the Mint, had been to sacrifice my Discretion to my
Curiosity.

WHILE I stayed at Bay^nne, the Princess Ursini came thither, attended by some
of the King of Spain's Guards. She had been to drink the Waters of some famous
Spaw in the Neighborhood, the Name of which has now ^pt my Memory. She was
most splendidly entertained by the Queen Dowager of Spain; and the Marshall de
Montrevel no less signalized himself in his Reception of that great Lady, who
was at that Instant the greatest Favorite in the Spanish Court; though as I have
before related, she was some Time after basely undermined by a Creature of her
own advancing.

BAYONNE is esteemed the third Emporium of Trade in all France. It was once,
and remained long so, in the Possession of the English; of which had History
been silent, the Cathedral Church had afforded evident Demonstration; being in
every respect of the English Model, and quite different to any of their own way
of Building in France.

Pampelona.
PAMPELONA is the Capital City of the Spanish Navarr, supposed to have been
built by Pompey. It Is situated in a pleasant Valley, surrounded by lofty Hills.
This Town, whether famous or infamous, was the Cause of the first Institution
of the Order of the Jesuits. For at the Siege of this Place Ignatius Loyola
being only a private Soldier, received a shot on his Thigh, which made him
incapable of following that Profession any longer; upon which he set his Brains
to work, being a subtle Man, and invented the Order of the Jesuits, which has
been so troublesome to the World ever since.

AT Saint Stephen near Lerida, an Action happened between the English and
Spaniards, in which Major General Cunningham bravely fighting at the Head of
his Men, lost his Life, being extremely much lamented. He was a Gentleman of a
great Estate, yet left it, to serve his Country; Dulce est pro Patria Mori.

ABOUT two Leagues from Victoria, there is a very pleasant Hermitage placed
upon a small rising Ground, a murmuring Rivulet running at the bottom, and a
pretty neat Chapel standing near it, in which I saw Saint Christopher in a
Gigantick Shape, having a Christo on his Shoulders. The Hermit was there at his
Devotion, I asked him (though I knew it before) the reason why he was represented
in so large a Shape: The Hermit answered with great Civility, and told me, he
had his Name from Christo Ferendo, for when our Savior was young, he had an
inclination to pass a River, so Saint Christopher took him on his Shoulders in
order to carry him over, and as the Water grew deeper and deeper, so he grew
higher and higher.

AT last we received News, that the Gloucester Man of War, with two Transports,
was arrived at Port Passage, in order for the Transporting of all the remaining
Prisoners of War into England. Accordingly they marched next Day, and there
embarked. But I having before agreed with a Master of a Vessel, which was
loaded with Wine for Amsterdam, to set me ashore at Dover, stayed behind,
waiting for that Ship, as did that for a fair Wind.

IN three or four Days Time, a fine and fair Gale presented; of which the
Master taking due Advantage, we sailed over the Bar into the Bay of Biscay.
This is with Sailors, to a Proverb, reckoned the roughest of Seas; and yet on
our Entrance into it, nothing appeared like it. 'Twas smooth as Glass; a Lady's
Face might pass for young, and in its Bloom, that discovered no more Wrinckles:
Yet scarce had we sailed three Leagues, before a prodigious Fish presented it
self to our View. As near as we could guess, it might be twenty Yards in
Length; and it lay sporting it self on the Surface of the Sea, a great Part
appearing out of the Water. The Sailors, one and all, as soon as they saw it,
declared it the certain Forerunner of a Storm. However, our Ship kept on its
Course, before a fine Gale, till we had near passed over half the Bay; when,
all on a sudden, there was such a hideous Alteration, as makes Nature recoil on
the very Reflection. Those Seas that seemed before to smile upon us, with the
Aspect of a Friend, now in a Moment changed their flattering Countenance into
that of an open Enemy; and Frowns, the certain Indexes of Wrath, presented us
with apparent Danger, of which little on this Side Death could be the Sequel.
The angry Waves cast themselves up into Mountains, and scourged the Ship on
every Side from Poop to Prow: Such Shocks from the contending Wind and Surges!
Such Falls from Precipices of Water, to dismal Caverns of the same uncertain
Element! Although the latter seemed to receive us in Order to skreen us from
the Riot of the former, Imagination could offer no other Advantage than that of
a Winding Sheet, presented and prepared for our approaching Fate. But why
mention I Imagination? In me 'twas wholly dormant. And yet those Sons of stormy
Weather, the Sailors, had theirs about them in full Stretch; for seeing the
Wind and Seas so very boisterous, they lashed the Rudder of the Ship, resolved
to let her drive, and steer herself; since it was past their Skill to steer
her. This was our Way of sojourning most Part of that tedious Night; driven
where the Winds and Waves thought fit to drive us, with all our Sails quite
lowered and flat upon the Deck. If Ovid, in the little Archipelagian Sea, could
whine out his jam jam jacturus, etc. in this more dismal Scene, and much more
dangerous Sea (the Pitch-like Darkness of the Night adding to all our sad
Variety of Woes) what Words in Verse or Prose could serve to paint our
Passions, or our Expectations? Alas! our only Expectation was in the Return of
Morning: It came at last; yet even slowly as it came, when come, we thought it
come too soon, a new Scene of sudden Death being all the Advantage of its first
Appearance. Our Ship was driving full Speed, toward the Breakers on the
Cabritton Shore, between Bordeaux and Bayonne; which filled us with Ideas more
terrible than all before, since those were past, and these seemingly as
certain. Beside, to add to our Distress, the Tide was driving in, and
consequently must drive us fast to visible Destruction. A State so evident,
that one of our Sailors, whom great Experience had rendered more sensible of
our present Danger, was preparing to save one, by lashing himself to the main
Mast, against the expected Minute of Desolation. He was about that melancholy
Work, in utter Despair of any better Fortune, when, as loud as ever he could
bawl, he cried out, a Point, a Point of Wind. To me, who had had too much of
it, it appeared like the Sound of the last Trump; but to the more intelligent
Crew, it had a different Sound. With Vigor and Alacrity they started from
their Prayers, or their Despair, and with all imaginable Speed, unlash'd the
Rudder, and hoisted all their Sails. Never sure in Nature did one Minute
produce a greater Scene of Contraries. The more skilful Sailors took Courage at
this happy Presage of Deliverance. And according to their Expectation did it
happen; that heavenly Point of Wind delivered us from the Jaws of those
Breakers, ready open to devour us; and carrying us out to the much more
welcome wide Sea, furnished every one in the Ship with Thoughts, as distant as
we thought our Danger.

WE endeavored to make Port Passage; but our Ship became unruly, and would not
answer her Helm; for which Reason we were glad to go before the Wind, and make
for the Harbor of Saint Jean de Luz. This we attained without any great
Difficulty, and to the Satisfaction of all, Sailors as well as Passengers, we
there cast Anchor, after the most terrible Storm (as all the oldest Sailors
agreed) and as much Danger as ever People escaped.

HERE I took notice, that the Sailors buoyed up their Cables with Hogsheads;
enquiring into the Reason of which, they told me, that the Rocks at the Bottom
of the Harbor were by Experience found to be so very sharp, that they would
otherwise cut their Cables asunder. Our Ship was obliged to be drawn up into
the Dock to be refitted; during which, I lay in the Town, where nothing of
Moment, or worth reciting, happened.

I beg Pardon for my Errors; the very Movements of Princes must always be
considerable, and consequently worth Recital. While the Ship lay in the Dock, I
was one Evening walking upon the Bridge, with the little Island near it, (which
I have before spoke of) and had a little Spanish Dog along with me, when at the
further End I spied a Lady, and three or four Gentlemen in Company; I kept on
my Pace of Leisure, and so did they; but when I came nearer, I found they as
much out numbered me in the Dog, as they did in the human Kind. And I soon
experienced to my Sorrow, that their Dogs, by their Fierceness and Ill-humour,
were Dogs of Quality; having, without Warning, or the least Declaration of War,
fallen upon my little Dog, according to pristine Custom, without any honorable
Regard to Size, Interest or Number. However the good Lady, who, by the
Privilege of her Sex, must be allowed the most competent Judge of Inequalities,
out of an Excess of Condescension and Goodness, came running to the Relief of
oppressed poor Tony; and, in courtly Language, rated her own oppressive Dogs
for their great Incivility to Strangers. The Dogs, in the Middle of their
insulting Wrath, obeyed the Lady with a vast deal of profound Submission; which
I could not much wonder at, when I understood, that it was a Queen Dowager of
Spain, who had chid them.

Our Ship being now repaired, and made fit to go out again to Sea, we left the
Harbor of Saint Jean de Luz, and with a much better Passage, as the last
Tempest was still dancing in my Imagination, in ten Days Sail we reached Dover.
Here I landed on the last Day of March, 1713. having not, till then, seen or
touched English Shore from the Beginning of May, 1705.

I took Coach directly for London, where, when I arrived, I thought my self
transported into a Country more foreign, than any I had either fought or
pilgrimag'd in. Not foreign, do I mean, in respect to others, so much as to it
self. I left it, seemingly, under a perfect Unanimity: The fatal Distinctions
of Whig and Tory were then esteemed merely nominal; and of no more ill
Consequence or Danger, than a Be robbed of its Sting. The national Concern
went on with Vigor, and the prodigious Success of the Queen's Arms, left every
Soul without the least Pretense to a Murmur. But now on my Return, I found them
on their old Establishment, perfect Contraries, and as unlikely to be brought
to meet as direct Angles. Some arraigning, some extolling of a Peace; in which
Time has shown both were wrong, and consequently neither could be right in
their Notions of it, however an over prejudiced Way of thinking might draw them
into one or the other. But Whig and Tory are, in my Mind, the compleatest
Paradox in Nature; and yet like other Paradoxes, old as I am, I live in Hope to
see, before I die, those seeming Contraries perfectly reconciled, and reduced
into one happy Certainty, the Public Good.

Whilst I stayed at Madrid, I made several Visits to my old Acquaintance
General Mahoni. I remember that he told me, when the Earl of Peterborow and he
held a Conference at Morvidro, his Lordship used many Arguments to induce him
to leave the Spanish Service. Mahoni made several Excuses, especially that none
of his Religion was suffered to serve in the English Army. My Lord replied,
That he would undertake to get him excepted by an Act of Parliament. I have
often heard him speak with great Respect of his Lordship, and was strangely
surprised, that after so many glorious Successes he should be sent away.

He was likewise pleased to inform me, that at the Battle of Saragoza, 'twas
his Fortune to make some of our Horse to give way, and he pursued them for a
considerable time; but at his Return, he saw the Spanish Army in great
Confusion: But it gave him the Opportunity of attacking our Battery of Guns;
which he performed with great Slaughter, both of Gunners and Matrosses. He at
the same time inquired, who 'twas that commanded there in chief. I informed him
'twas Col. Bourguard, one that understood the Economy of the Train exceeding
well. As for that, he knew nothing of; but that he would vouch, he behaved
himself with extraordinary Courage, and defended the Battery to the utmost
Extremity, receiving several Wounds, and deserved the Post in which he acted. A
Gentleman who was a Prisoner at Gualaxara, informed me, that he saw King Philip
riding through that Town, being only attended with one of his Guards.

Saragoza.
Saragoza, or Caesar Augusta, lies upon the River Ebro, being the Capital of
Arragon; it is a very ancient City, and contains fourteen great Churches, and
twelve Convents. The Church of the Lady of the Pillar is frequented by
Pilgrims, almost from all Countries; 'twas anciently a Roman Colony.

Tibi laus, tibi honor, tibi sit gloria, O gloriosa Trinitas, quia tu dedisti
mihi hanc opportunitatem, omnes has res gestas rec^rdandi. Nomen tuum sit
benedictum, per saecula saeculorum. Amen.
FINIS.

