CASE OF A FRACTURE OF THE STERNUM,

BY JOHN HALE, SURGEON TO THE NEW FINSBURY DISPENSARY.

LONDON: PRINTED IN THE YEAR MDCCLXXXVII.

ALTHOUGH Fractures of the Sternum are described by every writer on the accidents
to which the bones are subject, yet they appear to have seldom occurred, even
to the oldest practitioner. All those authors whom I have had an opportunity of
consulting, very fully describe in what manner this accident may happen, and as
fully prescribe the rules to be observed in the treatment of it. They seem,
however, to have copied from each other, without adducing any proofs to
corroborate their assertions. DU VERNEY, in his excellent Treatise on the
Diseases of the Bones, is the only writer (that I have met with) who enters
fully and circumstantially into Fractures of this part, he mentions three cases
which had occurred to him, two of which proved instantly fatal; and the third
recovered, but the patient remained an invalid during the rest of his life. He
likewise asserts, that all Fractures of the Sternum are to be regarded as
mortal; "though there have been patients whose constitutions have held out, and
have been cured." I can only regret that he gives no information where those
cases are recorded.

The singularity of the following case, the unexpected favorable termination
of it, together with the solicitations of my friends, are the motives which
induce me to have a few copies printed for their perusal.

My particular thanks are due to my worthy Friend and Colleague DR. SKEETE, and
to MR. HAIGHTON, for their kind advice and assistance during the progress of
the cure. They who are acquainted with the professional abilities of those
Gentlemen, will rather approve my silence, than commend me for any further
eulogium on their merits.

October, 1787.
CASE OF A FRACTURED STERNUM.
JOHN OATS, aged 38, by trade a cabinet-maker, being in company with some
friends at a Tavern, and drinking freely, a dispute arose, which terminated in
blows, and he was unfortunately thrown down with such violence on the edge of a
chair, as to cause a fracture of the Sternum, about four inches above the
ensiform cartilage.

Being carried home, a neighboring Apothecary was sent for, who ordered some
draughts to be taken, and a volatile liniment to embrocate the part. Symptoms,
however, soon became alarming, great pain and difficulty in respiration, cough,
and oppression on the lungs. These complaints were suffered to increase,
without any means being used to alleviate them, for the space of one week. He
often spoke with certainty of his breast being broken, and said he could "feel
the bones jar against each other."

Obtaining no relief, and being positively told that his complaint was only a
bruise, he dismissed his Apothecary, and applied to the NEW FINSBURY
DISPENSARY, on Tuesday, the 23d January, 1787. He was immediately visited by
DR. SKEETE and myself, with MR. HAIGHTON, who happened to call on me that
morning. On examination, we perceived that a fracture had taken place as
described above, but how much of the bone was depressed, or how deep the
depression might be, we could not readily ascertain, owing to an inflammation
which occupied the inferior and middle part of the Sternum, and which seemed
hastily advancing to suppuration. His pulse was hard and full, the cough
frequent, and attended with such distress and anxiety to the patient, that he
said he should be perfectly well if the cough could be stopped; for at that
time he could plainly feel the broken edges of the bone grate on each other,
the irritation of which was almost insupportable, and prevented his taking any
rest.

He was immediately blooded to the quantity of sixteen ounces, which was much
inflamed, a laxative mixture ordered to be taken occasionally, an emulsion of
Sperm. Ceti, cum Sal. Nitri, and Tinct. Thebaic. every three hours; and every
other means used to obviate the effects which we imagined would be the
consequences of such an accident. On the day following, the pulse was rather
softer, and the respiration not quite so laborious; ten ounces more of blood
were taken from him, which had the same inflammatory appearance; the
inflammation on the Sternum was more circumscribed, and evidently showed that
some pus was already formed. The laxative medicine was ordered to be repeated,
and thirty drops of Tinct. Thebaic to be taken at night.

Symptoms continued much the same till Saturday, the 27th of January, when Mr.
COOPER, Surgeon to Guy's Hospital, favored me with his company, and was of
opinion that the abscess on the Sternum should be immediately opened. About six
ounces of pus were discharged. On passing my finger to the bottom of the wound,
I expected to have discovered the broken portion of bone, but did not, probably
owing to the parts having become thickened in consequence of the preceding
inflammation. The fracture, however, was evident to one sense, though not to
the other; for on the patient desiring us to place our ear on the wound, we
could hear the edges of the bone grate on each other at every inspiration. The
pulse being still full, it was thought necessary to draw six ounces more of
blood. He had no rest this night, the cough being incessant. On Sunday, the
28th, the countenance appeared much dejected, the skin hot, but the pulse calm;
I ordered the opiate to be increased to seventy drops of Tinct. Thebaic, and
applied a bandage, or rather a girt, (such as I use in fractures of the ribs,
and which is made to buckle to what degree of tightness may be requisite) in
hopes of being able to confine the motion of the Sternum, and thereby prevent
the irritation which the fracture produced. I intended to have applied this
bandage when I first visited him, but it was thought that if much pressure was
thrown on the ribs, it might probably cause the inferior broken part of the
bone to protrude through the inflamed integuments, and be productive of much
danger; the bandage was therefore deferred till the abscess was opened, and the
bone not being evident to the touch, we had less to fear from the application
of a moderate pressure.

He experienced much relief in consequence of the bandage being applied, the
cough was greatly abated, the opiate procured a sound sleep, and the bone was
not troublesome in inspiration; the pulse was perfectly calm, and the wound
discharged a healthy pus. He was now ordered some mutton broth, having hitherto
been confined to water gruel.

From this time to Monday the sixth of February, the symptoms indicated much
danger; he sweated profusely, coughed incessantly, and what he expectorated was
often tinged with blood. He took liberally of a decoction of Bark with Elixir
of Vitriol, drank warm milk every morning, and used such nourishing articles of
diet as were directed by DR. SKEETE. This plan seemed to succeed, for from the
6th to 12th of February, the sweats were much diminished, and the cough less
frequent; but the wound discharged a foetid ichor in great abundance, which
proceeded from a sinus extending above, and for some space round the superior
part of the wound. We were now of opinion that this ichorous discharge might
proceed from the edges of the broken bone, if so, it became advisable to make
a further opening, to endeavor to reach the foundation of the mischief, and
then pursue such a course as might be indicated from examining the condition of
the parts.

This, however, was delayed till Saturday, the 17th of February, as for some
days we pleased ourselves with the idea that the parts would unite independent
of our interference, especially as the discharge from the wound became thicker;
(DR. SKEETE having added Gum Myrrh to the decoction of Bark) but we were
unhappily disappointed in our expectations; and as no time was to be lost, I
informed him of the plan which (on consultation) we intended to follow, viz. to
make an incision down to the bone, to examine its condition, and, if necessary,
to remove whatever part of it might, in our opinion, be an obstacle to a
perfect union. He readily assented to whatever might be judged expedient for
his relief; not on his own account, having suffered so much that life was
become a burden, but for the sake of his wife and five infant children, whose
subsistence depended solely on his labor. I made an incision from about an
inch above the edge of the old wound, and continued it to the bottom, the knife
grated on the bone, and the inferior part became evident to the touch, though
covered externally with a smooth granulation. It now appeared that the fracture
was not immediately on the center of the Sternum, but more inclined to the
right side of it; that portion to which the ribs are united was firmly attached
to them, and in consequence of the incision, the fractured part had separated
from its situation, and exposed the cavity of the mediastinum. I passed my
finger into the cavity, and felt the parts apparently carious on each side. We
now could only conjecture that a large exfoliation would ensue; but, in all
probability, the consequence of this operation might prove fatal, either by the
pus lodging in the cavity of the mediastinum, or by causing that irritation
often consequent to the exposure of cavities. Theory certainly justified us in
these conclusions, but practice has happily convinced us that notwithstanding
these discouragements, there was still a method left to prevent what we had so
much reason to fear. The bone, though broken, was not denuded, both the superior
and inferior portions were covered with granulations; it then became an object
to endeavor to promote a union of those parts by incarnation, similar to what
occurs in compound fractures, in which light it might now certainly be
considered.

I must here observe, that on the day following, I found him much better, he
became easier after the operation, coughed but little, and slept the greatest
part of the night without taking the opiate; this was the first natural sleep
he had enjoyed since the accident happened, for the opiates only served to
palliate the cough, without procuring any refreshing sleep, although he generally
took one hundred drops of Tinct. Thebaic; the expectoration also appeared more
frothy, and he had no difficulty in discharging it from the lungs. This
amendment was but temporary, for from the 17th to the 24th of February, the
opiates were again obliged to be given. Our attempts to procure a union of the
parts proved abortive, and the inferior edge of the bone protruded through the
wound at every inspiration, and consequently exposed the cavity of the
mediastinum. There seemed no prospect of any exfoliation, I therefore omitted
the former bandage, as it appeared to have no power to answer the intention we
had in view, and passed a common roller round the inferior part of the Sternum;
the pressure of this brought the lower portion in contact with the upper, and
we had the pleasure of seeing a union effected in a few days. The sweats from
this time totally ceased, and the cough was not troublesome. I removed him to
Islington, for the benefit of the air, there the cough entirely left him, and
he slept without taking the opiate.

When he attempted a deep inspiration, he felt a small pressure on the
fractured part, and also on the right side of the wound; which side was
evidently enlarged, and felt as if the cartilages of the ribs had received some
injury from the fall. He complained that the air was too sharp for him, and (to
use his own expression) "felt like vinegar in his nostrils;" indeed this was so
much the case, that if he stood at the window when open, or attempted to walk
out, the air instantly caused him to sneeze violently, which gave great pain to
the fractured part. I was therefore obliged to remove him from Islington, where
he only continued four days; and for two or three nights after he returned
home, the cough again became violent, so that I was under the necessity of
repeating the opiates. As the wound healed, the cough abated, and his only
complaint was that of great weakness, and a total inability to use his arms
with any freedom of motion. He could stoop to buckle his shoe, could take up
any weight, but was utterly unable to perform any lateral motion.

March. During this month, he was perfectly free from complaint; had taken
Pulv. Cort. Peruv. 3. ter die. The enlargement related to have been on the
right side of the wound was much lessened, but an abscess formed on that side
immediately on the breast, which broke on Friday, the 30th of March. It
appeared quite superficial, and to have had no connection with the original
injury.

April. The wound on the Sternum was now healed to about the size of a
sixpence, and from this a vast discharge was daily evacuated; suspecting some
sinus, I passed the probe, and found one, which extended about two inches on
the right side between the two inferior cartilages, directly above that
enlargement already mentioned. This sinus was laid open, and continued
discharging till the beginning of August, when it was proposed to apply a
caustic on the part; the action of which laid bare the fractured portions of
the bone, the superior edge greatly depressed, and the intermediate space
filled with a kind of membranous substance, which had prevented an ossific
union of the parts. It was now curious to observe the process which nature was
daily executing, in order to fill up the vacuity; at every dressing some new
excitement was perceived; increased vascularity In order more fully to
comprehend what I mean by an "increased vascularity," it is necessary to
observe, that when the slough (which the action of the caustic had produced)
was separated from the Sternum, a very large portion of the inferior part of
the bone appeared to be entirely deprived of the living principle; but
fortunately this was not the case; every day's inspection fully proved it, by
that portion becoming more and more florid, and by the assistance of a glass,
we could plainly discover new vessels shooting in a transverse direction
through the osseous fibers. I therefore trust that the term of "increased
vascularity," is not misapplied, and I am at a loss for any other to express my
meaning more intelligibly.
in the living portions of bone, by which the carious part became more
separated, and granulations arising from the surrounding soft parts. On the
10th of October, the exfoliation from the inferior part took place, the portion
of bone was but small, healthy granulations being substituted in its place.

We now assisted him with an elastic truss, which proved of so much service as
to enable him again to follow his business of a cabinet-maker. This truss makes
an equal pressure on each side of the breast, and supports the sternum in such
a manner, that if he takes it off, he says, he feels "as if his inside was
falling in pieces." Without it, he is incapable of performing any lateral
motion.

The wound now healed, without any interruption, and was perfectly cicatrized
on the 23d of October.

The following observations are such as will naturally suggest themselves on an
attentive consideration of the above facts.

First, That the case was attended with considerable danger, throughout the
greater part of its progress; but from very different, and even opposite
circumstances, at different periods. In the beginning, the symptoms of
inflammation in the Thorax seemed to be so general and violent, that without
the free use of the lancet, assisted by dilution and the antiphlogistic
regimen, it is probable that a fatal termination would speedily have ensued;
but the only method by which this could be prevented, doubtless assisted in
inducing that state of debility and hectic under which the patient was
afterward in danger of sinking, and which required the liberal exhibition of
Bark, Elixir of Vitriol, Myrrh, and such nourishing articles of diet as were
judiciously prescribed by Dr. Skeete. The same thing happens in many cases of
disease which fall under the care of the Surgeon; and the present instance is a
strong illustration of the necessity of a particular attention being required
to the state of the constitution, as well as to the condition of the diseased
part.

Secondly, It may appear extraordinary, that notwithstanding the frequent
exposure of the cavity of the Mediastinum, which seemed to take place when the
broken edges of the bone were separated, during the alternate motions of
inspiration and expiration, that this exposure was not followed by any repeated
attack of inflammation, or by any effusion of pus into the cavities of the
Thorax, though we had more than once sufficient reasons to apprehend such
effects, especially when the expectoration assumed a purulent and bloody
appearance, with symptoms of hectic. The event therefore seems to prove that
such adhesions must have taken place between the Lungs and Pleura in the
neighborhood of the injured part, as completely to have prevented any such
effect.

Thirdly, After some months, the treatment was almost entirely confined to the
part; the healing of the wound being prevented by the state of the bone
underneath, as has been already mentioned.

Fourthly, That the loss of substance which the Sternum has sustained, is at
present supplied by granulation only; and whether nature will in this case, as
in many others, restore the part to its original state, by a bony deposition,
time alone will be able to discover.

POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the foregoing sheets came from the press, I have read an account of a
Fractured Sternum, in the EDINBURGH MEDICAL COMMENTARIES, Vol. IV. p. 185, by
Mr. George Borthwick, Surgeon to the 14th regiment of Dragoons. In many
instances the symptoms agreed with those mentioned in my case, particularly the
grating noise in the time of respiration. Mr. Borthwick being immediately
called in, prevented that train of dangerous symptoms which unfortunately befell
my patient. The account being drawn up with great precision, I refer my reader
to the book itself for further information.

The addition of this Postscript affords me an opportunity of saying, that my
patient called on me at the Dispensary, on the 30th ult. and informed me that
he had gained so much strength within a few days, as to be enabled to perform
the most laborious part of his work, without the assistance of the truss.

November, 1787.

