AN ESSAY ON THE NATURE AND METHOD Of TREATING the GOUT.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, M.DCC.XLVI.

AN ESSAY ON THE NATURE and METHOD Of TREATING the GOUT.
IT is certain, that many Treatises have been published on this important
Subject, and considerable Discoveries and Improvements made to the Science of
Physic; yet, it is manifest, the Assiduity of the Learned, and the most
Inquisitive, have hitherto failed, to find out a Specific in this Distemper,
which is too conspicuous in the Practice: Therefore, I hope this short Tract
will be acceptable, and not deemed a superficial Performance.

THE Basis of the Design is, Reason and Experience, adapted to every
Constitution and Age; and, I do not apprehend, but will answer the grand
Intention, not only alleviating the Symptoms, but effectually the Cause.

BEFORE the Virtues of the Cortex where known, many Distempers were removed
with great Difficulty; and if the Public will but give me Leave, I shall
endeavor to render this Method apparently as efficacious in the Cure of the
GOUT, as the Cortex is in Fevers.

THIS Disease is called in Greek rthrti, in Latin Arthritis, the GOUT; and by
affecting various Parts, has received as many Terms, viz. ngra, the GOUT in the
Shoulder; eirgra, the GOUT in the Hand; schi, in or about that Bone that is
connected to the Os Ilium; Gongra, in the Knee; and Podgra, in the Foot.

I SHALL confine myself to treat of these two, that implies all the other, viz.
Hereditary, and Adventitious. The first descending from the Parents, the
Adventitious from Causes arising through Intemperance in the Non-Naturals, but
both, from an Effervescence of the nervous Juice with the saline Particles of
the Blood, received with our Food, or too great Freedom of spirituous Fluids:
Whence the Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments, the Membranes about the Bones are
tormented; and from whence proceed Swellings, Redness, hard sandy Concretions
on the Joints.

WHAT Time of the Year this Distemper invades, is no material Circumstance; but
it is certain, that in hereditary GOUTS, be the Regimen ever so strict, the
Patient shall have one or more Fits.

THE Acquired, or Adventitious, comes unexpectedly, and no certain Time of
Continuance.

THE Signs are, a vehement Pain in the Joints, viz. the Heel, the Ancle, Leg,
or the Knee, but not to all alike. Presently after a Chillness with a shaking
Fit, and a slight Fever succeeds, which increases with Pain, so exquisite, as
is hardly to be endured; the Pressure of the Bed-Cloaths, or the least Motion
in the Room, giving Uneasiness, and continues some little Time before it
remits; then a gentle Sweat coming on, the Pain abates, and the Sick falls into
Sleep, and the Part affected is immediately found to swell. The following, and
perhaps for many Days after, it may return with equal Violence in the Evening,
and gradually go off in the Morning. In like Manner other Parts at that Time
may be affected, and with the Severity of Pain, until the principal Paroxysm is
complete, which is longer or shorter, according to the Quantity of Salts, as
well, as the Age of the Sick.

IN such who are young and strong, and have seldom the GOUT, the Fit may
continue fourteen or sixteen Days; but in elderly People, and such as are
frequently afflicted, it generally holds for two Months: Such as are broken, or
much weakened, either by their Years, or a long Continuance of the Disease, it
is most commonly six Months, more or less, or till the Heat of the Summer.

IN the Increase of the Fit, the Urine is commonly of a high Color, with a red
Sediment, abounding with Sand, and the Belly usually costive; a depraved
Appetite, a Coldness seizes the whole Body about Evening, which continues the
whole Fit.

IN the decline, the Part or Parts are subject to a violent itching, from
whence falls a Leprous kind of Scurff.

WHEN the GOUT is enraged by Medicines unskilfully applied, and the Length and
Obstinacy of the Disease perverted, other Parts are then infected, as Head,
Shoulders, Stomach, Hands, Wrists, Elbows, and sometimes one or more of the
Fingers are distorted, or made crooked, and at length generating Tophs, and
chalky Concretions like Crab's-eyes, which in Time break the Skin, and fall out,
and fresh Chalk comes in their Place.

IT frequently afflicts the Thigh and Hip, that the Patient complains of an
heavy Weight, but without exquisite Pain; and the Sick have their Joints almost
every Way contracted and weakened, especially the Knees, whereby the Use for a
long while is taken away; and by frequent Tits to those Pares most oppressed,
partly by Age and Weakness, a total Loss ensues.

THE Urine, in the Decline of a Fit, is generally loaded with Sand; and too
frequently, if the Disease happens to be of a long Duration, so as to confine
the Patient from Motion, is the Beginning of a Fit of the Stone.

IT is to be observed, that as the Fever is, that ushers in the GOUT, so will
be the Fit; if the Fever be short and sharp, the Fit will be so.

It is the general Opinion, that a tartarous urinous Salt, is the principal
Cause of this Distemper.
PARACELSUS terms it Morbus Tartareus, as proceeding from, and caused of
Tartar; a Mixture of an acid Liquor or Salt, with the Synovia, which is a
transparent Mucilage, like the White of Eggs; and this being hardened, is the
chalky Matter so common to gouty Persons.

Helmont says, its Original is in the Stomach, which breeds an Acid, which
insinuating itself into the Synovia, coagulates it, and by a preternatural
Heat, it is hardened into Chalk; and that the Intenseness, or Remissness of the
Pain, is to be attributed, according to the Difference of the Salts. But the
intemperate Use of Wines, especially those of the French, I believe to be a
very good Reason, we have so frequent Complaints of the Obstinacy of this
Distemper; for the smaller the Body of the Wine is, so much the more is it
loaded with tartarous Salt: Likewise an immoderate Freedom of Port-Wines has a
vrey bad Effect, but more so, if ever so little pricked, as Experience has
demonstrated.

SOME hereditary gouty Subjects, that have severely suffered, and had a narrow
Escape for their Lives, I have known entirely forsake their darling Liquor, and
take to Madeira Wine, or Brandy mixed with a little Water, and with the
Assistance of a few proper Medicines, continued free for a long Time, that
before the Regimen have been subject to tedious and long Fits.

THE adventitious GOUT, is known to proceed immediately from the immoderate Use
of Wine, or fermented Liquors; whereby, the acid Faeculencies remaining in the
Stomach, become an acid and vicious Tartar, corrupting the Lympha and Juices,
create the antecedent Cause, which Nature, in her Defense, to preserve the
principal Parts, forces to the Extremes, as the Joints of the Hands, Arms,
Legs, and Feet, which irritates and hurts the Fibers of the Nerves and Tendons,
and thereby causes Pain, Tumor, Redness, and Inflammation. This Matter
remaining long in the Parts affected, for want of proper Remedies to carry it
off, by Degrees coagulates, and becomes Chalk or Stone.

A LATE learned Gentleman, who wrote a Treatise on this Distemper, says, that
an hereditary GOUT is ingraned and transubstantiated into the Solids, and
impossible to be rooted out by Art and Industry; but speaks more favorable of
an acquired, as being more confined to the Fluids, a proper Diet, due Exercise,
and a few well chosen Remedies may go a great Way, if not to a perfect Cure,
yet to make Life tolerably easy; but I hope my Endeavors will convince the
World of this Error, by showing, that there are Medicines, that will in most
Cases totally remove this Complaint, and at the same Time, strengthen the Tone
of the Stomach.

THIS is the essential Reason of the writing this Treatise, viz. to remove this
ingraned and transubstantiated Conception, and to make it appear, that it may
be done, with as much Safety and Certainty, as any other Distemper; and that
either hereditary or adventitious GOUTS, in Proportion to the offending Salts,
may be effectually removed: And if the Patient be but freed from chalky
Concretions, and of a Constitution not too much broken with frequent Paroxysms,
to prevent a Relapse; but if so worn out with Age, and frequent returns of the
Fit, I can assure him of a better State of Health, though not absolutely of a
Cure.

The general and direct Method in Curing the GOUT in the Fits, is a gentle
Perspiration and breathing Sweat by Medicines, repeated twice a Day, as long as
the Fit continues; that causes no Sickness at the Stomach, and that are easily
digested, giving a gradual Heat and Warmth through the Body.
DILUTION frequently by proper Liquors, such as old small Beer, with a little
Madeira Wine; Water boiled with a few Spices, mixed with a little Brandy, that
may lie warm on the Stomach: Thin Water Gruel with Madeira Wine, during all the
Time of the Fever, is not to be omitted, Liquors may be more freely indulged
than solid Food, and are always to be regulated by their Lightness on, and
Agreeableness to the Stomach, and by their not rendering the Patient more hot
and restless than the GOUT itself would do; for whatever causes Sickness, must
of Course draw in the gouty Matter; but if it produce an agreeable Sensation,
and not inflame, will procure Coolness and Rest.

THE Diet ought to be easy of Digestion, such as Sagoe, or Panado, with a
little Madeira Wine, or Brandy, or Jellies, little or no flesh Meat during the
Fever, is best, and that the Patient should eat sparingly; for overmuch feeding
nourishes the Disease: All Salt and pickled Meats, and Food of large
Nourishment is to be avoided. The Body is to be kept soluble, which is commonly
the reverse, but may easily be so, by a simple Glyster of Broth, now and then,
with a few carminative Seeds boiled in it.

THE Urine is to pass freely and plentifully, because sometimes a good Part of
the morbific Matter may be carried off that Way. Immoderate Sleeping and
Watching is to be avoided, likewise Venery.

IF the Patient can suffer Motion, it is better to use it, by which the
Calculus is prevented.

LASTLY, The Mind is to be kept serene and pleasant, a cheerful Friend, and a
Glass of good Madeira Wine will keep up the Spirits, and in some Measure lessen
the Fatigue of a tedious Confinement.

BY this Method, I am certain, this stubborn Distemper is to be removed, and
have known some to have been freed from it for several Years, who by
Intemperance and Irregularities of Life, have taken as great Pains for a
Relapse; but this is to be attributed chiefly to the Goodness of their
Constitution.

To speak something of the Medicines that have this salutiferous Effect. The
Professors in Physic do generally concur, that if a Medicine could be
discovered, that would sweat the Part affected, it would be the only and
infallible Means of Success, and the properest Way to remove the Load of
tartarous Salts and viscous Matter, which is the principal Motive of this
chronical Disease.

Now, the Nature of these Medicines are of such Effect, supposing the Complaint
in the Foot (which is a considerable Distance from the Stomach) that soon after
the first Dose is received, they have this Consequence, viz. give the Patient
very sensible Reason of its reaching that Part, by an additional Warmth and
Moisture; Indications sufficient to a gouty Person. And if one Dose have so
great Effect, what must result from repeated Doses every Day, but removeing the
Obstruction, enlarging the Pores braced tight with Pain and Anguish, and by a
full and free Perspiration setting at Liberty the Cause of the Distemper.

IN answer to some invidious People, who attribute the Operation of the
Medicines to a Preparation of Mercury; others again to Antimony; and from the
quick and unexpected Relief the Patient so suddenly receives, to some
Assistance from the opiate Tribe.

THE publishing this Secret would immediately convince them of their gross
Errors, besides, a ponderous Medicine as Mercury or Antimony must of Course
detect itself; but I shall at this Time wave the Argument, and when proper make
it public; but to satisfy the timorous, shall so far declare, that there is
not one Grain of an Opiate, or those Minerals in the Composition.

IT is certain, Minerals, such as Mercury and Antimony, have been used, but
prudently condemned as dangerous Medicines, breaking and tearing the smallest
and finest Vessels and Fibers, by their Particles, so that the Body, when the
Blood is replenished again with gouty Salts, becomes in a worse State in
respect of the future Fits, which will become more painful and obstinate, than
they would have been in several Years Time under the common Symptoms.

AND as to Opiates, they are never to be given but in Extremities, when the
Patient has been many Days without Rest, and not then, but by joining spicy
nervous and stomach Medicines to them: So that it is plain, nothing of that
kind can be in the Composition, which is to be administered Morning and
Evening, and has no other Effect, but a gentle Perspiration and breathing
Sweat, and so repeated for a few Days, the Symptoms of a regular Fit are
completely carried off.

THE irregular GOUTS, where the Constitution is broken and impaired, and the
gouty Humor fixes on the Head, the Intention to be had in View is to expel the
said Humor outwardly upon the Muscles and Joints, and to fix it there; and is
to be treated as any other violent Headache, or as an Inflammation on the Brain,
by bleeding in the Foot, blistering on the Ancles to give the gouty Matter a
vent downwards. Some Authors are bold enough to prescribe mercurial and
antimonial Vomits, but they are seldom to be ventured on in any Constitution,
for the active Part of the GOUT is too dangerous to be attempted by such an
Operation; even Bleeding, without an absolute Necessity, is not to be admitted
of, but when other mild Methods has been ineffectually used. Gentle stomach
Purges may be frequently and safely repeated (but Care must be taken that the
Medicines be not too hot, especially in young sanguine Constitutions) and at
the same Time Endeavors must be made toward a powerful Evacuation by the
Pores, which will not fail spending the gouty Humor.

THE GOUT in the Stomach is a common and less dangerous Case, for it rarely
comes on or goes off without touching there, and is as easily removed; but
toward the Decline of Life, especially in those that have been long afflicted,
the Paroxysm generally of great Length, is more obstinate, especially when it
settles in a constant Pain, and in nauseating and kecking in the Stomach.

THOUGH Vomits are reckoned dangerous in the GOUT, lest they should derive the
Humor on the Stomach; yet I have known some, contrary to Advice, bold enough
to make Experiment, and that have done it without any visible Alteration on
either Side. Upon the first Seizure of the Stomach, a gentle Vomit is by some
prescribed, as a Dose of the Indian root and repeated as they found Occasion;
but, I never had a Patient that pursued my Method of Evacuation by Sweat, to
have any Call for such an Operation, therefore cannot easily admit of the
Remedy. Stomach Purges, such as Hiera Picra, with Tincture of Diambra, or
Snake-root, blisters on the Ancles, highest Cordials, and most generous Wines,
may be now freely indulged, and without any Fear of Inflammation; but if the
GOUT should continue still in the Stomach, and become habitual, then the Bath
Waters with Steel, the aforesaid Stomach Purges frequently repeated, a regular
Diet and Exercise, perpetual Blisters between the Thighs, powerful Evacuation
by the Pores, cupping between the Shoulders, or Bleeding in the Foot, are the
only Means effectually to remove it.

THE GOUT in the Intestines, must be treated altogether as in the Stomach, and
no Opiates to be used, but in the last Extremity.

BUT if there should be a Translation of the offending Matter from the Stomach,
or elsewhere, to the Lobes of the Lungs, you must behave in the same Manner, as
if it was an absolute Peripneumonia, or Inflammation on the Lungs.

THESE are Cases that are generally attended with great Fatigue and Danger, yet
I shall exhibit an Instance of a Gentleman in a hereditary Fit of the GOUT, and
near Seventy Years of Age, who had been a Cripple by the chalky Concretions in
his Knees full twenty Years, and had entirely lost the Use of his Legs; and,
during the Paroxysm, the Stomach was affected with a continual Pain and Heat;
no Liquids but the most spirituous, such as Brandy, or Aqua Mirabilis, would
rest on his Stomach.

AFTER some Weeks, and various Methods had ineffectually been made use of, I
was admitted, and gave him the Medicines, and along with them, warm spice
stomach Medicines, which continued for twelve or fourteen Days, removed it from
his Stomach into his Hand and Elbow, whereby the Tone of the Stomach was
restored, and the Fit gradually carried off.

I MIGHT instance many Cases that would have proved dangerous, if it had not
been for these Remedies, but for Brevity sake must omit them.

SINCE hereditary and adventitious GOUTS proceed from one and the same
Principal, a tartarous Salt, having seen no remarkable Difference worthy
Observation, but that an Adventitious in some Constitutions has been equally as
violent as the other, I shall treat them alike.

THEREFORE, a GOUT in a Person of a firm stiff state of Nerves, of a middle
Age, and free from chalky Concretions, I may venture to assure him of a Cure,
in the Time of fourteen or twenty-one Days, by taking the Medicines.

A nervous GOUT in a loose, flabby, and relaxed State, and of the same Age, a
few Days longer; but when ascending toward the grand Climacteric, then the
Time cannot so easily be limited: However, I may affirm, that it will be barely
half the Time of the customary Length of the Paroxysm.

IN young Subjects, I have known the Cure performed in ten or twelve Days, to
an entire Extirpation; and this great Benefit obtained by no other Method, than
Medicines that promote Evacuation by Sweat, that cause no Sickness, Thirst, or
any Inconveniency whatever, but sit easy on the Stomach.

IN the Practice of ten Years in this Distemper, I do not remember an Instance
of the GOUT either hereditary or adventitious, that withstood the Efficacy of
these Medicines so long a Time as a Month, though the Patient has had both Legs
and Arms at the same Time affected, neither an Instance of a Relapse. And, I am
certain, if this Practice was but generally known, it would meet with a proper
Encouragement, in spite of the Obstacles that attend an Undertaking of this
Nature, that has not the Sanction of the Superiors in Physic; but I hope in
Time, every one will be convinced, that the sole End and Design is immediately
calculated for a public Benefit; and that it may appear more so, and take off
all Thoughts of an Imposition, I am willing to wait upon any one that shall
desire it, and satisfy them, by Word of Mouth, of the Efficacy of the Method.
And, as no Reward is expected till the CURE is effectually performed, so I hope
no QUACKERY can be ascribed to this Manner of PURLICATION.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 7, Pares read Parts. Page 9, vrey read very, Page 11, freed read free.


