A CONTINUATION OF FACTS AND OBSERVATIONS RELATIVE TO THE VARIOLAE VACCINAE.

A CONTINUATION OF FACTS AND OBSERVATIONS RELATIVE TO THE VARIOLAE VACCINAE, OR
COW POX.

BY EDWARD JENNER, M.D. F.R.S. F.L.S. etc.

London: PRINTED, FOR THE AUTHOR, BY SAMPSON LOW, NO. 7, BERWICK STREET, SOHO:
AND SOLD BY LAW, AVE-MARIA LANE; AND MURRAY AND HIGHLEY, FLEET STREET.

1800.

A CONTINUATION OF FACTS AND OBSERVATIONS, etc. etc.
SINCE my former publications on the Vaccine Inoculation, I have had the
satisfaction of seeing it extend very widely. Not only in this country is the
subject pursued with ardour, but from my correspondence with many respectable
medical gentlemen on the Continent, (among whom are Dr. De Carro of Vienna, and
Dr. Ballhorn of Hanover) I find it is as warmly adopted abroad, where it has
afforded the greatest satisfaction. I have the pleasure too of seeing that the
feeble efforts of a few individuals to depreciate the new practice, are sinking
fast into contempt beneath the immense mass of evidence which has risen up in
support of it.

Upwards of six thousand persons have now been inoculated with the virus of Cow
Pox, and the far greater part of them have since been inoculated with that of
Small Pox, and exposed to its infection in every rational way that could be
devised, without effect.

It was very improbable that the investigation of a disease so analagous to the
Small Pox, should go forward without engaging the attention of the Physician of
the Small Pox Hospital in London.

Accordingly, Dr. Woodville, who fills that department with so much
respectability, took an early opportunity of instituting an Inquiry into the
nature of the Cow Pox. This Inquiry was began in the early part of the present
year, and in May, Dr. Woodville published the result, which differs essentially
from mine in a point of much importance. It appears that three-fifths of the
patients inoculated were affected with eruptions, for the most part so
perfectly resembling the Small Pox, as not to be distinguished from them. On
this subject it is necessary that I should make some comments.

When I consider that out of the great number of Cases of casual inoculation
immediately from cows; which have from time to time presented themselves to my
observation, and the many similar instances which have been communicated to me
by medical gentlemen in this neighborhood; when I consider too that the matter
with which my inoculations were conducted in the years 1797, 98, and 99, was
taken from different cows, and that in no instance any thing like a variolous
pustule appeared, I cannot feel disposed to imagine that eruptions, similar to
those described by Dr. Woodville, have ever been produced by the pure
uncontaminated Cow Pock virus: on the contrary, I do suppose that those which
the Doctor speaks of, originated in the action of variolous matter, which crept
into the constitution with the vaccine. And this I presume happened from the
inoculation of a great number of the patients with variolous matter (some on
the third, others on the fifth day) after the vaccine had been applied; and it
should be observed, that the matter thus propagated became the source of future
inoculations in the hands of many medical gentlemen who appeared to have been
previously unacquainted with the nature of the Cow Pox.

Another circumstance strongly, in my opinion, supporting this supposition, is
the following: The Cow Pox has been known among our dairies time immemorial. If
pustules then, like the variolous, were to follow the communication of it from
the cow to the milker, would not such a fact have been known, and recorded at
our farms? Yet, neither our farmers nor the medical people of the neighborhood
have noticed such an occurrence.

A few scattered pimples I have sometimes, though very rarely seen, the greater
part of which have generally disappeared quickly, but some have remained long
enough to suppurate at their appex. That local cuticular inflammation, whether
springing up spontaneously, or arising from the application of acrid
substances, such, for instance, as Cantharides, Pix Burgundica, Antimonium
Tartarizatum, etc. will often produce cutaneous affections, not only near the
seat of the inflammation, but on some parts of the skin far beyond its
boundary, is a well-known fact. It is, doubtless, on this principle that the
inoculated Cow-pock pustule and its concomitant efflorescence may in very
irritable constitutions produce this affection. The eruption I allude to, has
commonly appeared some time in the third week after inoculation. But this
appearance is too trivial to excite the least regard.

The change which took place in the general appearance during the progress of
the vaccine inoculation at the Small Pox Hospital should likewise be considered.

Although at first it took on so much of the variolous character as to produce
pustules in three Cases out of five, yet in Dr. Woodville's last report,
published in June, he says, "since the publication of my reports of
inoculations for the Cow Pox, upwards of three hundred Cases have been under my
care; and out of this number, only thirty-nine had pustules that suppurated:
viz. out of the first hundred, nineteen had pustules; out of the second,
thirteen; and out of the last hundred and ten, only seven had pustules. Thus it
appears that the disease has become considerably milder; which I am inclined to
attribute to a greater caution used in the choice of the matter, with which the
infection was communicated; for lately, that which has been employed for this
purpose has been taken only from those patients in whom the Cow Pox proved very
mild and well characterised In a few weeks after the Cow Pox inoculation was
introduced at the Small Pox Hospital, I was favored with some virus from this
stock. In the first instance it produced a few pustules, which did not
maturate; but in the subsequent cases none appeared. E. J.
."

The inference I am induced to draw from these premises is very different. The
decline, and finally, the total extinction nearly of these pustules, in my
opinion, are more fairly attributable to the Cow Pox virus, assimilating the
variolous In my first publication on this subject, I expressed an opinion that
the Small Pox and the Cow Pox were the same diseases under different
modifications. In this opinion Dr. Woodville has concurred. The axiom of the
immortal Hauter, that two diseased actions cannot take place at the same time
in one and the same part, will not be injured by the admission of this theory.
, the former probably being the original, the latter the same disease under a
peculiar, and at present an inexplicable modification.

One experiment tending to elucidate the point under discussion, I had myself
an opportunity of instituting. On the supposition of its being possible that
the Cow which ranges over the fertile meadows in the vale of Gloucester, might
generate a virus differing in some respects in its qualities from that produced
by the animal artificially pampered for the production of milk for the
metropolis, I procured, during my residence there in the spring, some Cow Pock
virus from a cow at one of the London milk-farms It was taken by Mr. Tanner,
then a student at the Veterinary College, from a cow at Mr. Clark's farm at
Kentish Town.
. It was immediately conveyed into Gloucestershire to Dr. Marshall, who was
then extensively engaged in the inoculation of the Cow Pox, the general result
of which, and of the inoculation in particular with this matter, I shall lay
before my Readers in the following communication from the Doctor.

"DEAR SIR,
My neighbor Mr. Hicks having mentioned your wish to be informed of the
progress of the inoculation here for the Cow Pox, and he also having taken the
trouble to transmit to you my minutes of the Cases which have fallen under my
care, I hope you will pardon the further trouble I now give you in stating the
observations I have made upon the subject. When first informed of it, having
two children who had not had the Small Pox, I determined to inoculate them for
the Cow Pox whenever I should be so fortunate as to procure matter proper for
the purpose. I was therefore particularly happy when I was informed that I
could procure matter from some of those whom you had inoculated. In the first
instance, I had no intention of extending the disease further than my own
family, but the very extensive influence which the conviction of its efficacy
in resisting the Small Pox has had upon the minds of the people in general, has
rendered that intention nugatory, as you will perceive by the continuation of
my Cases enclosed in this letter Doctor Marshall has detailed these Cases with
great accuracy, but their publication would now be deemed superfluous. E. J.
, by which it will appear, that since the 22d of March, I have inoculated an
hundred and seven persons; which, considering the retired situation I reside
in, is a very great number. There are also other considerations which, besides
that of its influence in resisting the Small Pox, appear to have had their
weight; namely, the peculiar mildness of the disease, the known safety of it,
and its not having in any instance prevented the patient from following his
ordinary business. In all the Cases under my care, there have only occurred two
or three which required any application owing to erysipelatous inflammation on
the arm, and they immediately yielded to it. In the remainder the
constitutional illness has been slight but sufficiently marked, and
considerably less than I ever observed in the same number inoculated with the
Small Pox. In only one or two of the Cases have any other eruptions appeared
than those around the spot where the matter was inserted, and those near the
infected part. Neither does there appear in the Cow Pox to be the least
exciting cause to any other disease, which in the Small Pox has been frequently
observed, the constitution remaining in as full health and vigor after the
termination of the disease as before the infection. Another important
consideration appears to be the impossibility of the disease being communicated
except by the actual contact of the matter of the pustule, and consequently the
perfect safety of the remaining part of the family, supposing only one or two
should wish to be inoculated at the same time.

Upon the whole it appears evident to me, that the Cow Pox is a pleasanter,
shorter, and infinitely more safe disease than the inoculated Small Pox when
conducted in the most careful and approved manner; neither is the local
affection of the inoculated part, or the constitutional illness near so
violent. I speak with confidence on the subject, having had an opportunity of
observing its effects upon a variety of constitutions, from three months old to
sixty years; and to which I have paid particular attention. In the Cases
alluded to here, you will observe that the removal from the original source of
the matter has made no alteration or change in the nature or appearance of the
disease, and that it may be continued, ad infinitum, (I imagine) from one
person to another (if care be observed in taking the matter at a proper period)
without any necessity of recurring to the original matter of the cow.

I should be happy if any endeavors of mine could tend further to elucidate
the subject, and shall be much gratified in sending you any further
observations I may be enabled to make.

I have the pleasure to subscribe myself, Dear Sir, etc. JOSEPH H. MARSHALL."
Eastington, Gloucestershire, April 26th, 1799.

The gentleman who favored me with the above account, has continued to
prosecute his inquiries with unremitting industry, and has communicated the
result in another letter, which at his request I lay before the public without
abbreviation.

DR. MARSHALL'S SECOND LETTER.
"DEAR SIR,
"Since the date of my former letter, I have continued to inoculate with the
Cow Pox virus. Including the cases before enumerated, the number now amounts to
four hundred and twenty-three. It would be tedious and useless to detail the
progress of the disease in each individual -- it is sufficient to observe, that
I noticed no deviation in any respect from the Cases I formerly adduced. The
general appearances of the arm exactly corresponded with the account given in
your first publication. When they were disposed to become troublesome by
erysipelatous inflammation, an application of equal parts of vinegar and water
always answered the desired intention. I must not omit to inform you that when
the disease had duly acted upon the constitution, I have frequently used the
vitriolic acid. A portion of a drop applied with the head of a probe or any
convenient utensil upon the pustule, suffered to remain about forty seconds,
and afterward washed off with sponge and water, never failed to stop its
progress, and expedite the formation of a scab.

"I have already subjected two hundred and eleven of my patients to the action
of variolous matter, but every one resisted it.

"The result of my experiments (which were made with every requisite caution)
has fully convinced me that the true Cow Pox is a safe and infallible
preventive from the Small Pox; that in no case which has fallen under my
observation has it been in any considerable degree troublesome, much less have
I seen any thing like danger; for in no instance were the patients prevented
from following their ordinary employments.

"In Dr. Woodville's publication on the Cow Pox, I notice an extraordinary
fact. He says that the generality of his patients had pustules. It certainly
appears extremely extraordinary that in all my Cases there never was but one
pustule, which appeared on a patient's elbow on the inoculated arm, and
maturated. It appeared exactly like that on the incised part.

"The whole of my observations, founded as it appears on an extensive
experience, leads me to these obvious conclusions; that those Cases which have
been or may be adduced against the preventive powers of the Cow Pox, could not
have been those of the true kind, since it must appear to be absolutely
impossible that I should have succeeded in such a number of Cases without a
single exception, if such a preventive power did not exist. I cannot entertain
a doubt that the inoculated Cow Pox must quickly supercede that of Small Pox.
If the many important advantages which must result from the new practice are
duly considered, we may reasonably infer that public benefit, the sure test of
the real merit of discoveries, will render it generally extensive.

"To you, Sir, as the discoverer of this highly beneficial practice, mankind
are under the highest obligations. As a private individual I participate in the
general feeling; more particularly as you have afforded me an opportunity of
noticing the effects of a singular disease, and of viewing the progress of the
most curious experiment that ever was recorded in the History of Physiology.

"I remain, Dear Sir, etc. "JOSEPH H. MARSHALL.
"P. S. I should have observed, that of the patients I inoculated and
enumerated in my letter, one hundred and twenty-seven were infected with the
matter you sent me from the London cow. I discovered no dissimilarity of
symptoms in these cases, from those which I inoculated from matter procured in
this country. No pustules have occurred, except in one or two cases, where a
single one appeared on the inoculated arm. No difference was apparent in the
local inflammation. There was no suspension of ordinary employment among the
laboring people, nor was any medicine required.

I have frequently inoculated one or two in a family, and the remaining part of
it some weeks afterward. The uninfected have slept with the infected during
the whole course of the disease without being affected; so that I am fully
convinced that the disease cannot be taken but by actual contact with the
matter.

A curious fact has lately fallen under my observation, on which I leave you to
comment.

I visited a patient with the confluent Small Pox, and charged a lancet with
some of the matter. Two days afterward I was desired to inoculate a woman and
four children with the Cow Pox, and I inadvertently took the vaccine matter on
the same lancet which was before charged with that of Small Pox. In three days
I discovered the mistake, and fully expected that my five patients would be
infected with Small Pox; but I was agreeably surprised to find the disease to
be the genuine Cow Pox, which proceeded without deviating in any particular
from my former cases. I afterward inoculated these patients with variolous
matter, but all of them resisted its action.

I omitted mentioning another great advantage that now occurs to me in the
inoculated Cow Pox; I mean the safety with which pregnant women may have the
disease communicated to them. I have inoculated a great number of females in
that situation, and never observed their cases to differ in any respect from
those of my other patients. Indeed the disease is so mild, that it seems as if
it might at all times be communicated with the most perfect safety."




I shall here take the opportunity of thanking Dr. Marshall and those other
gentlemen who have obligingly presented me with the result of their
inoculations; but, as they all agree in the same point as that given in the
above communication, namely, the security of the patient from the effects of
the Small Pox after the Cow Pox, their perusal, I presume, would afford us
satisfaction that has not been amply given already. Particular occurrences I
shall of course detail. Some of my correspondents have mentioned the appearance
of Small Pox-like eruptions at the commencement of their inoculations; but in
these cases the matter was derived from the original stock at the Small Pox
Hospital.

I have myself inoculated a very considerable number from the matter produced
by Dr. Marshall's patients, originating in the London cow, without observing
pustules of any kind, and have dispersed it among others who have used it with
a similar effect. From this source Mr. H. Jenner informs me, he has inoculated
above an hundred patients without observing eruptions. Whether the nature of
the virus will undergo any change from being farther removed from its original
source in passing successively from one person to another, time alone can
determine. That which I am now employing has been in use near eight months, and
not the least change is perceptible in its mode of action either locally or
constitutionally. There is therefore every reason to expect that its effects
will remain unaltered, and that we shall not be under the necessity of seeking
fresh supplies from the cow.

The following observations were obligingly sent me by Mr. Tierny, Assistant
Surgeon to the South Gloucester Regiment of Militia, to whom I am indebted for
a former report on this subject.

"I inoculated with the Cow Pox matter from the 11th to the latter part of
April, twenty-five persons, including women and children. Some on the 11th were
inoculated with the matter Mr. Shrapnell (Surgeon to the Regiment) had from
you, the others with matter taken from these. The progress of the puncture was
accurately observed, and its appearance seemed to differ from the Small Pox in
having less inflammation around its basis on the first days, that is, from the
third to the seventh; but after this the inflammation increased, extending on
the tenth or eleventh day to a circle of an inch and a half from its center,
and threatening very sore arms; but this I am happy to say was not the case;
for, by applying mercurial ointment to the inflamed part, which was repeated
daily until the inflammation went off, the arm got well without any further
application or trouble. The constitutional symptoms which appeared on the
eighth or ninth day after inoculation, scarcely deserved the name of disease,
as they were so slight as to be scarcely perceptible, except that I could
connect a slight headache and langour, with a stiffness and rather painful
sensation in the axilla. This latter symptom was the most striking, it remained
from twelve to forty-eight hours. In no case did I observe the smallest
pustule, or even discolouration of the skin like an incipient pustule, except
about the part where the virus had been applied.

After all these symptoms had subsided, and the arms were well, I inoculated
four of this number with variolous matter, taken from a patient in another
regiment. In each of these it was inserted several times under the cuticle,
producing slight inflammation on the second or third day, and always
disappearing before the fifth or sixth; except in one who had the Cow Pox in
Gloucestershire before he joined us, and who also received it at this time by
inoculation. In this man the puncture inflamed, and his arm was much sorer than
from the insertion of the Cow Pox virus; but there was no pain in the axilla,
nor could any constitutional affection be observed.

I have only to add, that I am now fully satisfied of the efficacy of the Cow
Pox in preventing the appearance of the Small Pox, and that it is a most happy
and salutary substitute for it.

I remain, etc. M. J. TIERNY."


Although the susceptibility of the virus of the Cow Pox is for the most part
lost in those who have had the Small Pox, yet in some constitutions it is only
partially destroyed, and in others it does not appear to be in the least
diminished.

By far the greater number, on whom trials were made, resisted it entirely; yet
I found some on whose arms the pustule from inoculation was formed completely,
but without producing the common efflorescent blush around it, or any
constitutional illness, while others have had the disease in the most perfect
manner. A case of the latter kind having been presented to me by Mr. Fewster,
Surgeon, of Thornbury, I shall infert it.

"Three children were inoculated with the vaccine matter you obligingly sent
me. On calling to look at their arms three days after, I was told that John
Hodges, one of the three, had been inoculated with the Small Pox when a year
old, and that he had a full burden, of which his face produced plentiful
marks, a circumstance I was not before made acquainted with. On the sixth day
the arm of this boy appeared as if inoculated with variolous matter, but the
pustule was rather more elevated. On the ninth day he complained of violent
pain in his head and back, accompanied with vomiting and much fever. The next
day he was very well, and went to work as usual. The punctured part began to
spread, and there was the areola around the inoculated part to a considerable
extent.

As this is contrary to an assertion made in the Medical and Physical Journal,
No. 8, I thought it right to give you this information, and remain,

Dear Sir, etc. J. FEWSTER."


It appears then that the animal economy with regard to the action of this
virus is under the same laws as it is with respect to the variolous virus,
after previously feeling its influence, as far as comparisons can be made
between the two diseases.

Some striking instances of the power of the Cow Pox in suspending the progress
of the Small Pox after the patients had been several days casually exposed to
the infection have been laid before me, by Mr. Lyford, Surgeon, of Winchester,
and my nephew the Rev. G. C. Jenner. Mr. Lyford, after giving an account of his
extensive and successful practice in the vaccine inoculation in Hampshire,
writes as follows:

"The following Case occurred to me a short time since, and may probably be
worth your notice. I was sent for to a patient with the Small Pox, and on
inquiry found that five days previous to my seeing him the eruption began to
appear. During the whole of this time two children, who had not had the Small
Pox, were constantly in the room with their father, and frequently on the bed
with him. The mother consulted me on the propriety of inoculating them, but
objected to my taking the matter from their father, as he was subject to
erysipelas. I advised her by all means to have them inoculated at that time, as
I could not procure any variolous matter elsewhere. However, they were
inoculated with vaccine matter, but I cannot say I flattered myself with its
proving successful, as they had previously been so long and still continued to
be exposed to the variolous infection. Notwithstanding this I was agreeably
surprised to find the vaccine disease advance and go through its regular
course; and, if I may be allowed the expression, to the total extinction of the
Small Pox." Mr. Jenner's Cases were not less satisfactory. He writes as follows:

"A son of Thomas Stinchcomb of Woodford, near Berkeley, was infected with the
natural Small Pox at Bristol, and came home to his father's cottage. Four days
after the eruptions had appeared upon the boy, the family (none of which had
ever had the Small Pox) consisting of the father, mother, and five children,
was inoculated with vaccine virus. On the arm of the mother it failed to
produce the least effect, and she of course had the Small Pox Under similar
circumstances I think it would be advisable to insert the matter into each
arm, which would be more likely to insure the success of the operation.
, but the rest of the family had the Cow Pox in the usual mild way, and were
not affected with the Small Pox, although they were in the same room, and the
children slept in the same bed with their brother who was confined to it with
the natural Small Pox; and subsequently with their mother.

I attended this family with my brother Mr. H. Jenner."

The following Cases are of too singular a nature to remain unnoticed.

Miss R --, a young lady about five years old, was seized on the evening of the
eighth day after inoculation with vaccine virus, with such symptoms as commonly
denote the accession of violent fever. Her throat was also a little sore, and
there were some uneasy sensations about the muscles of the neck. The day
following a rash was perceptible on her face and neck, so much resembling the
efflorescence of the Scarlatina Anginosa, that I was induced to ask whether
Miss R -- had been exposed to the contagion of that disease. An answer in the
affirmative, and the rapid spreading of the redness over the skin, at once
relieved me from much anxiety respecting the nature of the malady, which went
through its course in the ordinary way, but not without symptoms which were
alarming, both to myself and Mr. Lyford, who attended with me. There was no
apparent deviation in the ordinary progress of the pustule to a state of
maturity, from what we see in general; yet there was a total suspension of the
Arcola or florid discolouration around it, until the Scarlatina had retired
from the constitution. As soon as the patient was freed from this disease, this
appearance advanced in the usual way I witnessed a similar fact in a case of
Measles See page 55.
. The pustule from the Cow Pock virus advanced to maturity, while the Measles
existed in the constitution, but no efflorescence appeared around it until the
Measles had ceased to exert its influence.
.

The Case of Miss H -- R -- is not less interesting than that of her sister
above related. She was exposed to the contagion of the Scarlatina at the same
time, and sickened almost at the same hour. The symptoms continued severe about
twelve hours when the Scarlatine-rash showed itself faintly upon her face, and
partly upon her neck. After remaining two or three hours it suddenly
disappeared, and she became perfectly free from every complaint. My surprise at
this sudden transition from extreme sickness to health, in great measure ceased
when I observed that the inoculated pustule had occasioned, in this case, the
common efflorescent appearance around it, and that as it approached the center
it was nearly in an erysipelatous state. But the most remarkable part of this
history is, that on the fourth day afterward, as soon as the efflorescence
began to die away upon the arm, and the pustule to dry up, the Scarlatina again
appeared, her throat became sore, the rash spread all over her. She went fairly
through the disease, with its common symptoms.

That these were actually Cases of Scarlatina, was rendered certain by two
servants in the family falling ill at the same time with the distemper, who had
been exposed to the infection with the young ladies.

Some there are who suppose the security from the Small Pox obtained through
the Cow Pox will be of a temporary nature only. This supposition is refuted not
only by analogy with respect to the habits of diseases of a similar nature, but
by incontrovertible facts, which appear in great numbers against it. To those
already adduced in the former part of my first Treatise See pages 9, 11, 12,
13, 14, 20, etc.
many more might be added were it deemed necessary; but among the Cases I refer
to, one will be found of a person who had the Cow Pox fifty-three years before
the effect of the Small Pox was tried upon him. As he completely resisted it,
the intervening period I conceive must necessarily satisfy any reasonable mind.
Should further evidence be thought necessary, I shall observe that among the
Cases presented to me by Mr. Fry, Mr. Dark, Mr. Tierny, Mr. H. Jenner, and
others, there were many whom they inoculated ineffectually with variolous
matter, who had gone through the Cow Pox many years before this trial was made.

It has been imagined that the Cow Pox is capable of being communicated from
one person to another by effluvia without the intervention of inoculation. My
experiments, made with the design of ascertaining this important point, all
tend to establish my original position, that it is not insectious, except by
contact. I have never hesitated to suffer those on whose arms there were
pustules exhaling the effluvia, from associating or even sleeping with others
who never had experienced either the Cow Pox or the Small Pox. And further, I
have repeatedly among children caused the uninfected to breathe over the
inoculated vaccine pustules during their whole progress, yet these experiments
were tried without the least effect. However, to submit a matter so important
to a still further scrutiny, I desired Mr. H. Jenner to make any further
experiments which might strike him as most likely to establish or refute what
had been advanced on this subject. He has since informed me, "that he
inoculated children at the breast, whose mothers had not gone through either
the Small Pox or the Cow Pox; that he had inoculated mothers whose sucking
infants had never undergone either of these diseases; that the effluvia from
the inoculated pustules, in either case, had been inhaled from day to day
during the whole progress of their maturation, and that there was not the least
perceptible effect from these exposures. One woman he inoculated about a week
previous to her Accouchment, that her infant might be the more fully and
conveniently exposed to the pustule; but, as in the former instances, no
infection was given, although the child frequently slept on the arm of its
mother with its nostrils and mouth exposed to the pustule in the fullest state
of maturity. In a word, is it not impossible for the Cow Pox, whose only
manifestation appears to consist in the pustules created by contact, to produce
itself by effluvia?

In the course of a late inoculation, I observed an appearance which it may be
proper here to relate. The punctured part on a boy's arm (who was inoculated
with fresh limpid virus) on the sixth day, instead of showing a beginning
vesicle, which is usual in the Cow Pox at that period, was encrusted over with
a rugged amber-coloured scab. The scab continued to spread and increase in
thickness for some days, when at its edges a vesicated ring appeared, and the
disease went through its ordinary course, the boy having had soreness in the
axilla, and some slight indisposition. With the fluid matter taken from his
arm, five persons were inoculated. In one it took no effect. In another it
produced a perfect pustule without any deviation from the common appearance;
but in the other three the progress of the inflammation was exactly similar to
the instance which afforded the virus for their inoculation; there was a
creeping scab of a loose texture, and subsequently the formation of limpid
fluid at its edges. As these people were all employed in laborious exercises,
it is possible that these anomalous appearances might owe their origin to the
friction of the clothes on the newly-inflamed part of the arm. I have not yet
had an opportunity of exposing them to the Small Pox.

In the early part of this Inquiry I felt far more anxious respecting the
inflammation of the inoculated arm than at present; yet that this affection
will go on to a greater extent than could be wished is a circumstance sometimes
to be expected. As this can be checked, or even entirely subdued by very simple
means, I see no reason why the patient should feel an uneasy hour because an
application may not be absolutely necessary. About the tenth or eleventh day,
if the pustule has proceeded regularly, the appearance of the arm will almost
to a certainty indicate whether this is to be expected or not. Should it
happen, nothing more need be done than to apply a single drop of the Aqua
Lythargyr. Acctati Extract of Saturn.
upon the pustule, and having suffered it to remain two or three minutes, to
cover the efflorescence surrounding the pustule with a piece of linen dipped in
the Aqua Lythargyr. Compos. Goulard Water. For further information on this
subject see the first Treatise on the Var. Vac. Dr. Marshall's Letters, etc.
The former may be repeated twice or thrice during the day, the latter as often
as it may feel agreeable to the patient.

When the scab is prematurely rubbed off, (a circumstance not unfrequent among
children and working people) the application of a little Aqua Lythargyri Acct.
to the part, immediately coagulates the surface, which supplies its place, and
prevents a sore.

In my former Treatises on this subject I have remarked that the human
constitution frequently retains its susceptibility of the Small Pox contagion
(both from effluvia and contact) after previously feeling its influence. In
further corroboration of this declaration, many facts have been communicated to
me by various correspondents. I shall select one of them.

"DEAR SIR,
Society at large must I think feel much indebted to you for your Inquiries and
Observations on the Nature and Effects of the Variolae Vaccinae, etc. etc. As I
conceive what I am now about to communicate to be of some importance, I imagine
it cannot be uninteresting to you, especially as it will serve to corroborate
your assertion of the susceptibility of the human system of the variolous
contagion, although it has previously been made sensible of its action. In
November 1793, I was desired to inoculate a person with the Small Pox. I took
the variolous matter from a child under the disease in the natural way, who had
a large burden of distinct pustules. The mother of the child being desirous of
seeing my method of communicating the disease by inoculation, after having
opened a pustule, I introduced the point of my lancet in the usual way on the
back part of my own hand, and thought no more of it until I felt a sensation in
the part, which reminded me of the transaction. This happened upon the third
day; on the fourth there were all the appearances common to inoculation, at
which I was not at all surprised, nor did I feel myself uneasy upon perceiving
the inflammation continue to increase to the sixth and seventh day, accompanied
with a very small quantity of fluid, repeated experiments having taught me it
might happen so with persons who had undergone the disease, and yet would
escape any constitutional affection: but I was not so fortunate; for on the
eighth day I was seized with all the symptoms of the eruptive fever, but in a
much more violent degree than when I was before inoculated, which was about
eighteen years previous to this, when I had a considerable number of pustules.
I must confess I was now greatly alarmed, although I had been much engaged in
the Small Pox, having at different times inoculated not less than two thousand
persons. I was convinced my present indisposition proceeded from the insertion
of the variolous matter, and therefore anxiously looked for an eruption. On the
tenth day I felt a very unpleasant sensation of stiffness, and heat on each
side of my face near my ear, and the fever began to decline. The affection in
my face soon terminated in three or four pustules attended with inflammation,
but which did not maturate, and I was presently well.

I remain, Dear Sir, etc. THOMAS MILES."


This Inquiry is not now so much in its infancy as to restrain me from speaking
more positively than formerly on the important point of Scrophula as connected
with the Small Pox.

Every practitioner in medicine, who has extensively inoculated with the Small
Pox, or has attended many of those who have had the distemper in the natural
way, must acknowledge that he has frequently seen scrophulous affections, in
some form or another, sometimes rather quickly showing themselves after the
recovery of the patients. Conceiving this fact to be admitted, as I presume it
must be by all who have carefully attended to the subject, may I not ask
whether it does not appear probable that the general introduction of the Small
Pox into Europe has not been among the most conducive means in exciting that
formidable foe to health? Having attentively watched the effects of the Cow Pox
in this respect, I am happy in being able to declare, that the disease does not
appear to have the least tendency to produce this destructive malady.

The skepticism that appeared even among the most enlightened of medical men
when my sentiments on the important subject of the Cow Pox were first
promulgated, was highly laudable. To have admitted the truth of a doctrine, at
once so novel and so unlike any thing that ever had appeared in the Annals of
Medicine, without the test of the most rigid scrutiny, would have bordered upon
temerity; but now, when that scrutiny has taken place, not only among ourselves
but in the first professional circles in Europe, and when it has been uniformly
found in such abundant instances that the human frame, when once it has felt
the influence of the genuine Cow Pox in the way that has been described, is
never afterward at any period of its existence assailable by the Small Pox,
may I not with perfect confidence congratulate my country and society at large
on their beholding, in the mild form of the Cow Pox, an antidote that is
capable of extirpating from the earth a disease which is every hour devouring
its victims; a disease that has ever been considered as the severest scourge of
the human race!

FINIS.
PRINTED BY SAMPSON LOW, BERWICK STREET, SOHO.


