OBSERVATIONS ON THE SUPERIOR EFFICACY OF THE RED PERUVIAN BARK, IN THE CURE of
AGUES and other FEVERS.

Interspersed with OCCASIONAL REMARKS on the TREATMENT of other DISEASES, by
the same REMEDY.

By WILLIAM SAUNDERS, M. D.

Member of the Royal College of Physicians in LONDON, and Physician to GUY'S
Hospital.

AEQUE PAUPERIBUS PRODEST, LOCUPLETIBUS AEQUE.

HORATIUS. LONDON: Printed for J. JOHNSON, St. Paul's Church Yard, and J.
MURRAY, Fleet Street.

MDCCLXXXII.

TO ROBERT THOMLINSON, M. D. JAMES HERVEY, M. D. FELLOWS of the ROYAL COLLEGE,
and PHYSICIANS of GUY'S HOSPITAL.

MR. JOSEPH WARNER, F.R.S. MR. JAMES FRANK, MR. WILLIAM LUCAS, SURGEONS of
GUY'S HOSPITAL.

GENTLEMEN,
PERMIT me to dedicate these Observations to you, as a Mark of my sincere
Esteem, and high Opinion of your PROFESSIONAL CHARACTERS.

I have the Honor to be, GENTLEMEN, Your most obedient, Humble Servant, W.
SAUNDERS.
Jeffries Square, July 20, 1782.

PREFACE.
I HAD long suspected that the Peruvian Bark in common use, was very inferior
in power and efficacy to that recommended by the early writers on the subject;
but, more especially by our countrymen, MORTON and SYDENHAM, in whose works the
medical virtues of this Drug, in Intermittent and other Fevers are extolled as
little short of infallibility. In their time the Quill Bark was not mentioned;
their cotemporary writers on the Materia Medica, evidently describe the
Peruvian Bark of that period, as of a larger kind, of more compact pieces, and
of the color of the rust of Iron, which marks are very expressive of the Red
Bark,; the innermost coat of which has an ochry appearance, and its resinous or
middle layer resembles very much the Lapis Haematitis. Cortex crassitie
mediocri, for as scaber, paululum canescens, aliquando musco obductus, intus
laevis, coloris ferruginei, saporis acris at intense amari. Autumno colligitur
et cortex circum, circa delibratur, tam Trunci quam ramorum. Dalei
Pharmacologia. p. 201. Anno 1692.

Mr. SPRINGALL of Thames Street, (whose Uncle was, in the the year 1702, with
SIR GEORGE ROOKE, at the taking of the French and Spanish Galleons, in the
harbor of Vigo in Gallicia) had a quantity of Peruvian Bark, which was part of
the plunder brought home at that time. It was bought, about four years ago, by
Mr. PEARSON, an Apothecary in Spital Square, who assured me that it was the Red
Bark: its Decoction was much stronger than that of the Common Bark, and he
found it very efficacious in the cure of Fevers and other Diseases. This seems
a collateral proof of the Red Bark being early in use.


M. LA CONDAMINE expressed his surprise, when he was told by Mr. THOMAS
BLACHYNDEN, Director of the English South Sea Company, at Panama, that the
writers on Pharmacy and Materia Medica in England had preferred the Small and
Quill Bark, while the inhabitants of New Spain, held the larger Bark in higher
estimation. They commonly reckon three species of the Quinquina, tho some make
four; the white, the yellow, and the red: I was told at Loxa, that these three
kinds differ in their virtue only; the white having scarce any virtue, and the
red excelling the yellow. The trees from whence the first Bark was taken, which
were very large, are all dead, having been entirely stripped, which infallibly
ki^ls them when they come to be old. Experience has shown that stripping kills
some of the young ones also, but the greatest part escape. For this operation
they use a common knife, which they hold in both hands; the barker sticks it
into the Bark as high as he can reach, and so draws it downwards as low as he
can. It does not appear that the trees which grow where the old ones stood,
have less virtue than they, the situation and soil being the same; the
difference, if there be any, may arise, perhaps, from the different ages of the
trees. Few but young ones are now to be met with: I do not remember to have
seen any much thicker than my arm, or above 12 or 15 feet high; those which are
cut young, shoot forth new branches from the stumps.

I was informed at Loxa, that heretofore, they preferred the coarsest Bark, and
laid it by as a rarity, but now the finest is most esteemed: the merchants may
possibly find their account in it, as it takes up less room in packing. But a
director of the English South Sea Company at Panama. through which all the
Quinquina that comes to Europe must pass, assured me, that the preference given
at present to the fine Bark, is in consequence of several chemical analyzes and
experiments which have been made on both sorts in England. It seems probable,
that the difficulty of thoroughly drying the large coarse bark, and the
humidity it is naturally apt to contract and retain, has hel^ed to bring it
into disrepute. Vulgar prejudice will have it, that to lose nothing of its
virtue, the tree should be barked in the moon's decrease, and on the east side.
These circumstances, as also its being gathered on the mountain of Cajanuma,
were certified by a notary in 1735. where the marquis de Castelfuerte procured
a quantity of Quinquina from Loxa, to carry to Spain on his return. Memoir de
l'Acad. d. Sc. 1738.


I can only explain such a preference from this circumstance, that the larger
pieces of Bark which were imported into this country along with the smaller
Bark, were either of a fibrous, spongy, or ligneous texture; or, probably
damaged by moisture, and taken from decayed trees.

Druggists have sometimes suggested this as an argument against the use of the
present Bark, and many probably endeavor to oppose its introduction, until the
quantity in the markets be greater, and more equally divided among them* or
until they have been able to dispose of the large quantity of common Bark they
have in their warehouses.

The taste and flavor of the Red Bark is more difficultly evolved* and is
therefore at first not so obv^ous from the closeness of its texture, and from
the resinous coat being so well defended and enclosed between other two layers.
It is evidently heavier thin any other kind of Bark, and seems to have been
prepared and dried with g^eater attenti^n, its original appearance and form
being better preserved.

I think it probable from a more attentive view of the subject that it may be
the Bark of the trunk of the tree, and I am the more confirmed in this opinion
by the ideas of my friends Dr. WITHERING and Dr. FOTHERGILL, conveyed in their
letters to me; in which, they observe that the essential and active parts of
the Oak Bark are more entire, and in larger quantity in the trunk and larger
branches, than in the twigs or smaller branches, which are comparatively of an
imperfect growth, perhaps the Small and Quilled Bark may be procured from
younger trees not yet arrived at their full maturity and therefore yielding a
Bark of a weaker quality. Mr. ARROT, a Scotch Surgeon who had gathered the Bark
in the place where it grows, says that the small curled Bark so much esteemed
in England is the Bark of younger Trees, which frequently recover the Barking,
while the older Trees never do. This affords a strong proof that the early Bark
introduced into Europe was of the larger kind and from the older Trees, while
the difficulty of procuring it, has been the means of introducing a smaller and
younger Bark. Mr. ARROT, and all other Travelers agree, in preferring the Red
Bark to any other. Encyclopaedia. Cortex. Vol. I.




If the execution of this work was equal to its importance, it would challenge
the attention of the public, in a degree far above most medical subjects. This
will be unquestionably admitted by those who have been eye witn^sses to the
fatality and malignancy of intermittent and remittent Fevers in every part of
the globe, but more especially in warm climates; this fatality is by no means
owing to the ignorance or unskifulness of the practitioners in those countries,
but to the inefficacy of the Common Bark in general use.

The numbers, who fall a sacrifice to the Epidemic and Seasoning Fevers of warm
Climates, are admitted infinitely to exceed those who are destroyed by the
Enemy. In almost all the dangerous Fevers which occur in our East and West
India Settlements, the Bark is a principal Remedy.

I think it therefore an object of the greatest national importance, that our
Fleets and Armies should be liberally supplied with this Bark which will seldom
or ever disappoint them. I have been told by a Druggist, that its great
activity rendered it a dangerous remedy, my answer was that wine mixed with
water was much safer in the hands of an unskilful practitioner, than wine
alone, but that did not prove that wine was not a better cordial than water.
The some reasoning may be applied to prove, that weak and decayed remedies, by
being much milder in their operations, are therefore preferable to such as are
more perfect of their kind. I believe the general and best founded complaint is
against the want of power and efficacy of Bark, and not that it is too powerful
and active. In proof of this I refer my Readers to the Letters annexed, which
evidently demonstrate that such was the stubborness and obstinacy of the
Intermittent Fevers of this year, even in this country, that they resisted
common Bark, and only gave way to the Red Bark.

Notwithstanding I formed very early a favorable opinion of this Bark, yet it
fell far short of that which I am now justified in maintaining from the
collected evidence of so many Gentlemen in distant and remote parts of the
country. Many letters which I have received are wrote with such zeal in favor
of its superior efficacy, that they could only be dictated by the strongest
conviction arising from extensive and diligent observations.

I have persuaded many of my Medical friends to use the Red Bark in our foreign
settlements, and, shall take pleasure in communicating to the public the result
of their observations so soon as I am favored with them. A more powerful Bark
is particularly desirable in those countries, where the violence and danger of
the paroxysm is so great. In the following observations, I have confined myself
very much to the use of the Red Bark in febrile Diseases, but I am in
possession of many facts in proof of its superior powers in other diseases in
which the common Peruvian Bark has been found useful.

The public may be always assured of the fidelity of my observations, and that
my only motive is that of rest^ring to general use a remedy which was found so
efficacious by MORTON and SYDENHAM, and which in the hands skilful Physicians
may be considered as an antidote to the fatal influence of Marshy Grounds and
Unhealthy Climates.

INTRODUCTION.
IN the Year 1779, a Spanish Ship from Lima, bound to Cadiz, was taken by the
Hussar Frigate and carried into Lisbon; her cargo consisted chiefly of this
Bark, a part of which was afterward brought into this country, and purchased
by several Druggists in London. It is of so large a kind, and has so coarse an
appearance, that it was with much difficulty they could prevail on Medical
Practitioners to prescribe it. Its reputation was first established by trials
made in the public Hospitals, and its superior efficacy has been well
ascertained by the most attentive observation.

In the following pages are contained some very interesting matters of fact,
which will throw much light on the choice of this drug, and on the general
application of Bark in the cure of Agues and other Fevers. Although the general
title, by which it was sold, was that of Quinquina, yet it was supposed by our
Druggists to be a new medicine. They called it the red Bark; it appears
however, both from an attention to its sensible qualities and the information
procured from Spain, that it is the true Peruvian Bark, of a quality probably
superior to any ever known in this country. This fact is farther proved by its
being found sometimes in small detached pieces amongst other Bark, it seems
however hitherto to have escaped our particular notice.

The Author highly sensible of the difficulty of establishing facts either on
the effects of remedies, or on any branch of medicine which regards the Animal
Economy, has solicited the opinion of many ingenious and attentive
practitioners, who from their situation have had frequent opportunities of
trying the Red Bark. This caution appeared the more necessary, because he is
well persuaded that the love of novelty, and too great a credulity in admitting
false facts, on very doubtful authorities, have corrupted medicine more than
any other Science, and proved more injurious than the most absurd and fanciful
theories, the errors of which are easily detected.

Jeffries Square, June, 25th 1782.
Of its Natural History.
IT is the Bark of a Tree which grows in the neighborhood of Loxa chiefly on
the mountain of Cajanuma. It is propagated spontaneously. The tree is seldom
more than fifteen feet high. Its trunk and branches of a proportional
thickness. The Bark is carefully cut off in the dry season, and gently dried by
the heat of the Sun, before it is packed for foreign use. It has been
distinguished into the white, yellow and red, the last is generally preferred,
but they are only to be considered as varieties of the same tree, depending on
soil, exposure and other accidental circumstances. Perhaps the age of the tree
and the size of it branches, from whence the Bark is taken, as well as the care
and attention bestowed in the preparing it, may influence its powers and
efficacy. I am persuauaded that the Bark of which we are now treating is the
"Cinchona officinalis Linn. Sp. pl. 244 mat. Med. 71 Quinquina De la Condamine
Memoir del' Acad. d. Sc. 1738 p. 226 t. 5 fig. A. E. and t. 6 f. F. S.

The Inhabitants of Old Spain always preferred the larger Bark, and from the
account of travelers, I am disposed to believe that more attention is paid in
collecting and drying the Bark which is consumed in Spain, than what is brought
to a foreign market. I hope that the information which I shall give on this
subject will stimulate Druggists to procure the Red Peruvian Bark, and remove
the prejudices which have prevailed against so large a Bark in favor of the
small, thin, and quilled Bark, hitherto the subject of their choice.

This Red Bark is very distinguishable from those large coarse woody and
fibrous masses, occasionally mixed with the common Peruvian Bark.

Of its Sensible Qualities.
THE Red Bark is in much larger and thicker pieces than the common Peruvian
Bark. It evidently consists of three distinct layers. The external thin,
rugged, and frequently covered with a mossy substance, and of a reddish brown
color. The middle, thicker, more compact, and of a darker color. In this
appears chiefly to reside its resinous part, being extremely brittle, and
evidently containing a larger quantity of inflammable matter than any other
kind of Bark.

The innermost has a more woody and fibrous appearance, of a brighter red than
the former.

The entire piece breaks in that brittle manner described by writers on the
Materia Medica, as a proof of the superior excellence of the Bark.

In reducing it to powder, the middle layer, which seems to contain the
greatest proportion of Resin, will not give way to the pestle so easily as the
other layers; this should be particularly attended to when it is used in fine
powder. Its flavor is chiefly discoverable either in powder or solution, is
evidently more aromatic, and has a greater degree of bitterness than the common
Bark.

Of its Chemical and Pharmaceutical History.
EXPERIMENT, I.
To an ounce of red Bark, reduced to a fine powder, were added sixteen ounces
of distilled water; and, after remaining together twenty-four hours in a
florence flask, the liquid was carefully filtered. The same experiment was made
with the Peruvian Bark commonly in use.

The color of the two infusions was very different, that made with the Red
Bark being much deeper. The taste and flavor of the infusion of the red Bark
were considerably more powerful than of the other. In the opinion of many
Gentlemen who tasted the infusions, the cold infusion of the red Bark was more
sensibly impregnated than even the strongest decoction of the common Bark.

EXPERIMENT II.
To two ounces of the cold infusion of the red Bark, were added twenty drops of
the Tinctura Florum Martialium. It immediately became of a darker color, soon
lost its transparency, and after a short time precipitated a black powder.

EXPERIMENT III.
To two ounces of the cold infusion of the common Bark, were added twenty drops
of the Tinctura Florum Martialium in the same manner as to the other. It
retained its transparency some time, and afterward became of a dark color,
but there was no precipitation from it as from the last.

EXPERIMENT IV.
To an ounce of red Bark, reduced to a coarse powder, were added sixteen ounces
of distilled water, and after boiling until one half was evaporated, the liquid
while hot was strained through a piece of linen. The same experiment under
similar circumstances, was made with the common Bark. The superior taste and
flavor of the decoction of the red Bark was equally observable with that in
the infusion. The decoction of the red Bark, under cooling, precipitated a
larger quantity of resinous matter than the decoction of the common Bark. The
difference of color was likewise very distinguishable.

EXPERIMENT V.
To an ounce of red Bark, reduced to a coarse powder, were added eight ounces
of proof spirit, and, after standing a week together, the Tincture was filtered.

The same experiment, under similar circumstances, was made with the common
Bark. The Tincture of the red Bark, both when tasted by itself and under
precipitation by water, had more flavor and taste than that of the common Bark.

The Tincture from the red Bark is of a much deeper color than the other.

EXPERIMENT VI.
To each residuum of the above Tinctures were added eight ounces of proof
spirit, which were infused in a moderate sand heat for the space of twenty four
hours, and afterward allowed to remain together a week, occasionally agitating
them. The Tinctures were then poured off, that of the red Bark evidently
appearing to be the strongest.

The Tinctures both of Experiments 5. and 6. were by a gentle hen evaporated to
the consistance of a resinous extract.

The Extract from the Tincture of the red Bark was of a smooth homogeneous
appearance, not unlike the Balsam of Peru, when thickened: The flavor and
taste of the original Tincture were entirely preserved in it.

The Extract from the common Bark had a very different appearance. It seemed
coarse and gritty, and by no means so characteristic of its original tincture.

The quantity of extract procured from the red Bark was considerably more than
from the same quantity of common Bark; but, as the residuum of neither was
rendered entirely inert, the absolute quantity could not be ascertained. To 26
lb. of red Bark were added 26 Gallons of proof spirit, after remaining together
for some time the Tincture was poured off, and submitted to a distillation in a
water bath, the quantity of spiritous extract obtained was lb. 12 a quantity of
water being poured on the residuum of the Tincture, the watery extract obtained
was lb. 4. In another experiment, with lb. 30 of red Bark, treated in the same
manner as the former, only lb. 11 of spiritous extract was procured, and lb. 4
of watery extract.

The best Peruvian Bark hitherto in use gives from lb. 6 to 7 lb. of spiritous
extract.




EXPERIMENT VII.
A tea spoonful of each of the tinctures, prepared by experiment 5th. was added
to two ounces of water: the resinous precipitation from the red Bark was not
only more copious, but fell more quickly to the bottom of the glass than the
other, and yet, what remained still dissolved in the water, was infinitely more
in the red Bark than the common Bark, so far as we could judge from the taste
and flavor of both.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
In imitation of the experiments of my ingenious Friend Dr. PERCIVAL, I added
to two ounces of the watery infusion of each Bark a few drops of the Sp.
Vitriol. ten. The acid lost its taste more in the infusion of the red, than in
the common Bark, so that there were more obvious appearences of its being
neutralized.

EXPERIMENT IX.
A decoction of both red and common Peruvian Bark was prepared by taking an
ounce of each and boiling them in a pint and a half of water, to one pint; the
former had greatly the superiority in strength and power as mentioned in a
preceding experiment. A pint of fresh water was added to each decoction; the
boiling still continued 'till that quantity was evaporated. The decoction of
the common Peruvian Bark seemed gradually to lose its sensible qualities while
that of the red Bark still retained its own.

The same quantity of water was added as before to each, and the decoction
repeated until a gallon of water was exhausted; at the expiration of which
time, the common Peruvian Bark was rendered almost tasteless; the red Bark
still retaining nearly its former sensible qualities. This experiment proves
that the common practice of boiling the Bark is hurt-full to its powers.

The conclusions to which the above experiments evidently lead, are 1st. That
the red Bark is more soluble than the Peruvian Bark, both in water and spirit.
2ly. That it contains a much larger proportion of active and resinous parts.
3ly. That its active parts, even when greatly diluted, retain their sensible
qualities in a higher degree than the most saturated solutions of common Bark.
4ly. That it does not undergo the same decomposition of its parts by boiling as
the common Peruvian Bark.


The advantages therefore to be expected from the red Bark cannot be obtained
from any quantity of common Bark. The best common Bark, compared with the red
Bark, appears inert and effete.

All the above experiments were executed in the presence of several Gentlemen.

I was led more particularly to prosecute this subject, from ah opinion that
the red Bark might sufficiently impregnate cold water by infusion, so as to
cure intermittent fevers with more certainty than could be done even by the
decoction or powder of common Bark. The sensible qualities which appear from
the above experiments, being so much greater, in the cold infusion of the one
than in the decoction of the other.

As a proof of the superior antiseptic power of the red Bark, both its cold
infusion and decoction preserved entire their bitter and other medicated
powers, while the infusion and decoction of the common Bark, prepared at the
same time, had altogether lost their sensible qualities. In the month of June,
a large quantity of the decoction of red Bark, which had been kept for five
weeks in the Elaboratory of GUYS HOSPITAL, was equally good at the expiration
of that time, as when first prepared; while a decoction of common Bark, gave
evident appearances of a change in a few days. In the decoction of the red Bark
the powder which is separated during the cooling of it, remains intimately
diffured through Liquor, so that it continues loaded, and turbid while at rest.
In the decoction of common Bark, it seperates and easily subsides to the Bottom.




It seems reasonable to hope that the introduction of this kind of Bark may be
attended with the happiest effects, and enable us to oppose more successfully
those malignant and remittent fevers of warm climates, and unfavourable
situations, so destructive to our fleets and armies.

Of the general Operation of Bark on the Human Body.
The following remarks are intended to apply to the Peruvian Bark, generally in
use; but I am certain that the effects enumerated are found to be produced in a
much higher degree by the red Bark.

The cold infusion of Bark seems evidently to promote both appetite and
digestion, it increases the tone and action of the stomach, by which the
Gastric liquor, the great Menstruum of our solid aliment, is more perfectly
prepared.

In most cases, the Bark rather promotes costiveness, the common effect of
strong and vigorous intestines. In very large doses however it proves
purgative, but this effect ceases after a short time.

It renders the pulse stronger and fuller in health, and in most diseases
unaccompained with fever.

In low and malignant fevers, and more especially under remission, it renders
the pulse stronger and even flower.

In particular circumstances of fever marked with debility and a tendency to
remission, though of a very irregular type, it deminishes febrile heat.

It increases the animal heat and aggravates every Symptom, in fevers
accompanied either with much local inflammation, or a general inflammatory
diathesis, which is strongly indicated by the pulse the manner of the original
attack, the want of due freedom in the secretions, and the painful and
oppressive exercise of every function.

It checks profuse and colliquative discharges, especially those by the skin,
while it does not seem to diminish insensible perspiration, or other natural
evacuations.

It checks every tendency to putrefaction or gangrene, occurring under
circumstances of debility, but if may promote both, if injudiciously employed,
while the action of the system is too violent, or the inflammatory diathesis is
too prevalent. It seems more reasonable to refer its action, as an antiseptic,
to its tonic power on the moving system, than to any primary action on the
animal fluids.

Perhaps this doctrine will apply in explaining the history of remedies used in
the Scurvy, a disease invited and avoured by every means which can induce
debility, and evidently preceded by symptoms of a ^im^nished vis vitoe which
necessarily lead to others that in a secondary manner only take place in the
animal fluids. An Enquiry into the source from whence the symptoms of Scurvy
and of putrid diseases arise by Dr. MILMAN.


It promotes under many circumstances a favorable suppuration and improves the
nature of sanious and ichorous discharges.

Its action here can only be explained from its general tonic power, for either
general or local debility retards suppuration and favors the obstinacy of ill
conditioned ulcers.

Upon the same principle its power of promoting the suppuration, and generation
of true pus in the small pox may be explained.

The period of debility is that only in which the Bark should be employed.

I have seen patients under the most confluent Small Pox require Bark in the
progress of suppuration, and yet, in the more advanced state of the discase,
the same persons have been saved by the seasonable and repeated use of the
Lancet in the secondary Fever, which attacked with fresh rigors and
inflammatory symptoms of a true Peripneumony.

In delicate and irritable habits, which seem more especially to favor
scrophulous affections, and which produce inflammation of a peculiar nature,
that gives way sooner to tonics than evacuants, the Bark has been found the
best remedy: This may probably admit of the explanation already given on the
subject of Scurvy.

Of its use in the Cure of Intermittent Fevers.
What I have to offer on this subject is the result of careful and diligent
observation, totally unconnected with prejudice of any kind, ill favor of any
particular theory, or a blind attachment to system.

Notwithstanding the cautious and timid practitioner has very generally forbid
the use of Bark until evacuations should have been made; I am very well
persuaded from observation that in intermittent fevers, such as rage and are
endemic, particurlarly in low and marshy situations, and such as frequently
occur on the banks of the Thames, and the lower parts of this metropolis the
Bark cannot be given too early, the use of either emetics or purgatives, as
preparatory, is not only unnecessary, but in some cases productive of more
debility, and therefore to be avoided.

The doctrine of concoction however just it may be in continued fevers, and in
some cases of inflammation, does not apply in intermittents produced by the
Miasmata of low and swampy grounds, and which afford the principal source of
agues in the environs of this City.

In this opinion I am confirmed by the testimony of Dr. CLEGHORN and others;
who frequently found it necessary to give it on the first accession of the
disease in order effectually to obviate, or weaken the return of a second
paroxysm, which in many cases would inevitably have proved fatal, and Dr. LIND
has very properly observed that such symptoms from visceral obstructions, which
have been attributed to Bark, are rather the effect of the paroxysm being
allowed to return, from the omission of that medicine.

There are many symptoms which would forbid the use of Bark, did they occur
distinct and independent of intermittent fever, such as cough, difficulty of
breathing and pain in the side: they are frequently brought on by the paroxysm
of the intermittent, and only give way to the use of the Bark by which that
paroxysm may be prevented. Such symptoms do not admit of a distinct and
separate treatment, but are always aggravated by the use of Evacuants, more
especially bleeding, the most probable means of relieving in common depuratory
fevers.

I have sometimes found a complication of Intermittent and Hectic fever in the
same person, and could distinguish between the paroxysms of each: the Bark
while it cured the intermittent, has even moderated the Hectic; though Hectic
fever of itself, especially as a symptom of Phthisis Pulmonalis does not appear
to give way at any time under the use of the Bark; I think it probable,
therefore, that although in the treatment of intermittents complicated with other
diseases, our chief attention should be first directed to the cure of the
intermittent, yet it may be necessary to pursue an indication that may have in
view the other disorders, not incompatible with the treatment of the
intermittent. In dropsies, which accompany intermittents, I have found more
benefit from the use of Bark, joined to the neutral salts, and other mild
diuretics, than from active purgatives, which always tend to protract the
intermittent. Every returning paroyxsin of an ague confirms more and more the
cause of that disease which it has produced.

It is not intended to insinuate that no cases do occur, in which it may not be
prudent to administer a vomit, especially to persons subject to bilious
accumulations in the stomach: but this is more with a view of removing an
obstacle to the operation of Bark, than as necessary to render it safe, and I
have frequently seen nausea and vomiting so much a symptom of the paroxysm,
that they gave way only to the free use of Bark itself.

A practice more absurd than that of preceding evacuations has been adopted and
recommended. viz. that of evacuating by purgatives after the cure had been
completed by the Bark, this seldom fails of bringing back the intermittent, as
one cause of inducing debility, the most favorable state of the body for the
attack of intermittent fevers.

In persons who are rendered costive by the use of the Bark, I would recommend
the common practice of giving a few grains of Rhubarb, or Pilul. Rufi. If on
the other hand it should prove purgative, a few drops of the Thebaic Tincture
is the usual and best means of checking that operation.

Intermittent fevers are frequently so very anomalous in their appearances and
assume so much the character of other diseases that an unskilful, or an
inattentive practitioner may be deceived; they however, under any form or any
type, generally give way to the Bark; sometimes aided and assisted by other
means.

Both the Vernal and Autumnal intermittents of Dr. SYDENHAM yield to it, the
latter however sometimes with more obstinacy than the former.

In several cases I have experienced the superior efficacy of the red Bark in
removing Tertians and Quartans which had resisted the common Bark, this however
is not to be wondered at, when we consider the diversity in the power even of
different kinds of the common Bark in general use.

I hope I shall be excused in digressing so far, as to mention the useful
effects I have frequently experienced from the exhibition of Opium in
intermittent fevers. We are chiefly indebted for this practice to Dr. LIND. It
moderates so effectually the force of the paroxysm by shortening the duration
of the cold fit, as well as by diminishing the violence of the hot fit, that I
had often flattered myself it was capable of curing intermittents. In this
however I was disappointed.

From the experience of it in many hundred cases, I conclude with Dr. LIND.
"That an Opiate given soon after the commencement of the hot fit, by abating
the violence and lessening the duration of the fever, preserves the
constitution so entirely uninjured, that since I used Opium in agues, neither a
dropsy nor jaundice has attacked any of my patients in these diseases." The
manner in which I employ it, is either by giving a grain of the Thebaic extract
upon the accession of the cold fit, or twenty drops of the Thebaic tincture
upon the accession of the hot fit, the action of the former being later from
its flower solubility.

The red Bark is so much warmer than the other, that it would seem to answer
all the purposes derived from the union of cordials, aromatics, serpentaria and
the like so much recommended in the obstinate Quartan intermittents of elderly
people.

Some difference in opinion has prevailed regarding the manner of giving the
Bark. Most practitioners concur in thinking that it cures intermittents more
readily when taken in substance than in any other form. In this state, it is
both a bulky and nauseous dose in the quantity necessary to cure an
intermittent, at any rate, it ought rather to be diffused in some liquid, than
given in the form of an electuary or pills, which are sometimes difficultly
soluble.

I have found milk cover the taste of Bark and make it more acceptable to
children than any other vehicle. The extract of liquorice dissolved in water,
may be likewise employed to cover the taste of Bark. Its taste is also
corrected by wine, especially by Old Hock.

It would appear from the general preference given to Bark in substance, that
its decoction, infusion or tincture are found too weak in any quantity for the
purpose of curing intermittents, otherwise as they are much lighter to the
stomach and act more quickly, they should be preferred.

I hope to make it appear that in this respect the red Bark has evidently the
advantage of any other kind now in use, since either its infusion or decoction
will cure intermittents, and that its powder in a much smaller dose than that
of common Bark will produce similar effects.

The best time for giving the Bark is in the intermission between the paroxysms
and when the stomach is empty. In Quartan fevers, where there are two days of
Apyrexia, we should be particularly desirous of getting down a large quantity
on the day immediately preceding the approaching paroxysm, and in other
intermittents as near the period of the returning paroxysm as the stomach will
bear it.

It is unnecessary to limit the dose. One dram may be given every hour, if
the stomach will retain it, and will remove the disease more quickly than a
smaller quantity given at longer periods. I have likewise frequently adopted
the practice recommended by Dr. HOME, of giving the Bark so soon as the
sweating fit of the fever has sufficiently carried off the hot fit; this is
particularly proper when the interval is short between the paroxysms.


The following facts will best determine how far I am justified in favoring
the opinion of the superior excellence of the red Bark.

EDWARD VIRGOE, aged 21, had labored under an intermittent fever five months.
It was first a tertian and afterward became a regular Quotidian, accompanied
with cough, dyspnoea and hoarseness particularly in the paroxysm. The common
Peruvian Bark, given in the dose of one dram every hour prevented the return
of the paroxysm for a few days; the patient however soon relapsed not
withstanding the Bark was continued, he was at last cured by taking one dram
of the red Bark every second hour for the space of ten days.

It appears from the above case of Edward Virgoe, and several others which have
occurred to me, that intermittent fevers which had resisted common Bark and
other remedies, have yielded to the red Bark, even under very complicated and
unfavourable appearances.

In this opinion I am likewise justified by the experience and testimony of
many eminent practitioners, and so decided are they in its favor that the
demand for it every day increases, especially in some of the neighboring
counties where intermittents are not only more frequent, but more obstinate.

I began now to suspect that its powers were even sufficient in cold infusion
in most cases to cure intermittent fevers, and in all other cases to answer
every purpose which might be expected from common Peruvian Bark, in any form in
which it had hitherto been employed.

The following facts are sufficient to authorize this opinion.

JAMES YOUNGMAN, aged 16, had labored under a tertian intermittent many
months; it was accompanied with a severe cough, and his strength was
considerably impaired. He was ordered to take four ounces of the cold infusion
of the red Bark every third hour; after taking it for two days the paroxysm did
not return. Its use was persevered in fourteen days, and he continued perfectly
well.

THOMAS PUGH, aged 22, from Woolwich in Kent, had an intermittent fever of five
weeks standing of the Tertian type, accompanied with a considerable degree of
cough, occurring especially in the cold fit, he took the cold infusion, as
recommended in the former case, since which time he had only one flight return
of the paroxysm, his cough is likewise totally removed.

JOHN WELDING, aged 25, had an intermittent fever at Sheerness for near a year,
he took, large quantities of common Peruvian Bark without effect. It was of the
Quotidian type. After taking a cold infusion of the red Bark in the quantity of
a quart in twenty-four hours for three days, the paroxysm disappeared and has
never since returned. It proved at first purgative but soon lost that effect.
His strength and appetite were greatly improved, under the use of the infusion.

The cold infusion employed in the above cases was prepared by pouring a quart
of cold water on two ounces of the red Bark in fine powder, frequently,
agitating them for the space of twentyfour hours. Though the cases above
mentioned evidently prove that the cold infusion will cure Agues, yet they are
not intended to divert the attention from other more effectual means of giving
this Medecin.


Of its use in the cure of other Fevers.
Remittent fevers are frequently equally steady in their periods of remission
and accession with those of the intermittent kind, but the Apyrexia being less
perfect and complete has given rise to many doubts regarding the safety of
giving Bark. As remittent fevers are more particularly marked by appearances
indicating the prevalence of bile in the stomach; the propriety of giving an
Emetic, prior to the use of the Bark, seems well ascertained, and the remission
is frequently rendered more complete by such a practice.

In the remitting fevers, however, of warm climates, the accession of the
paroxysm is so extremely violent, and the strength of the patient so quickly
exhausted, that it becomes absolutely necessary to catch the first opportunity
of the most trifling remission, and to give the Bark with the same freedom that
you would do in common intermittents.

In remitting fevers, the concomitant symptoms are more to be regarded than in
intermittents, because they more especially disturb, interrupt, and shorten the
periods of remission; even in the warmest climates, and under the severest
prejudices, it has been sound necessary to take away a few ounces of blood to
relieve pain in the head, oppression in breathing, an intense dry heat on the
skin, and other symptoms protracting the paroxysm; by such means the remission
has been brought on, and the Bark given with more effect.

The fevers of this country seldom have regular remissions, until they have
been properly treated by evacuations; the inflammatory by bleeding, and the
bilious by vomiting and purging.

When fevers are brought into a state of obvious remission, that is, when the
pulse becomes from 10 to 20 slower at some particular time in the 24 hours;
when the restlessness, anxiety, and tendency to delirium abate; when the mouth
and fauces are moist; when the organs of secretion, and especially the skin are
more open and pervious, such symptoms of remission admit the use of Bark with
the same freedom as in intermitting fevers.

The acute rheumatism, notwithstanding its inflammatory attack, and the
appearance of the blood, and although the joints often continue inflamed
several weeks, very early assumes the form of a remitting fever.

Under such circumstances, a perseverance in the Antiphlogistic plan is
generally found to be ineffectual. I have, in several cases of this kind,
employed a cold infusion of the red Bark, and the disease seemed to give way
only to this treatment.

The acute rheumatism in its remissions assumes the form of a double Tertian,
and the patient is frequently greatly exhausted by the profuse sweatings which
terminate the paroxysm.

It is in such cases that I would particularly recommend the use of Bark. I
have found this practice more successful, and it must be allowed to be more
rational than the use of Volatiles and Guaiac.

It does not appear to me in any degree repugnant to just theory founded on
observations made in similar cases, that at a time when the lancet may be used
moderately or topical bleeding with more freedom, the Bark may be given so as
to obviate the debility of a long and tedious disease, and by keeping up the
strength of the system, prevent that torpor and disposition to chronic
rheumatism so frequently the effect of the acute.

In that low fever, which HUXHAM has so well described under the title of
nervous, I have prescribed the cold infusion of the red Bark with advantage,
where the skin has been soft, and the pulse under one hundred and ten.

In such fevers, it chiefly acts as a cordial in supporting the Vis Vitae, and
for which reason I think it may be given with advantage in the decline of all
fevers, even where the symptoms on the attack of the disease were evidently
inflammatory.

Almost every Fever remits in its decline.

Fevers originally putrid and malignant, as arising from Miasmata and putrid
vapor, very seldom occur in this City, they are most generally to be found in
Fleets and in Camps, and in situations where air stagnates or where animal
bodies are confined in a close place.

In such fevers, the cure is effected by vomiting and warm cordials, of the
last is the red Bark in an eminent degree.

It may be infused in wine, which will render its operation more antiseptic.

It intimately unites with the several acids, from which a very favorable
operation in such cases may be expected.

In the putrid fever, attended with a gangrenous sore throat, I have in many
instances experienceed the efficacy of Bark, but care should be taken not to
confound this disease with the Angina Mucosa of Dr. HUXHAM, or the Angina
Erysipelatosa of Dr. GRANT, diseases, though contagious and accompanied with
Eruptions on the skin, evidently of the most inflammatory nature and requiring
the use of Evacuations.

In Petechial Fevers with symptoms of great prostration of strength, I have
frequently seen the pulse not much quickened and the animal heat very little
increased. In such cases I would recommend the use of the red Bark infused in
Old Hock.

I have seen a Jail Fever with no other distinguishing symptoms than Petechiae
and Debility; the Tongue clean, the pulse moderate though small, and the
secretions apparently not disturbed. In that case, blisters on the Extremities,
Bark and Wine are the best remedies.

In general we find that Fevers marked with symptoms of debility are chiefly
found to remit, and therefore they admit of the use of Bark; by increasing the
Tone and Vigor of the system, it opposes a returning Paroxysm.

Fevers of more violent action, such as we denominate inflammatory, do not
remit at least so obviously, until that action is moderated by Evacuations, so
that they chiefly remit only in their decline.

The primary attack of most severs in this country, is attended with violent
action, which is best moderated sometimes by the prudent use of the lancet, but
most frequently by the Tart. Emetis with the infusion of Sena and some of the
neutral salts. All severs beginning with a violent Rigor, and followed with
great heat, require early evacuations, while such as creep on slowly and
imperceptibly in the beginning, with giddiness in the head, rather than acute
pain, much anxiety and watchfulness, tremor and debility, give way to Opiates,
Bark, Serpentaria and Wine. Blisters applied to the arms are extremely useful
in keeping up the pulse, especially if the skin be soft, the tongue and fauces
sufficiently moist; much more may be learned by attending to this last
appearance than is generally known.

It is necessary, however, to distinguish between the dryness of the tongue and
mouth, as a symptom of the fever, and as arising from the circumstance of a
patient sleeping with his mouth open.

I hope the observations here offered to the public on the subject of this
invaluable remedy, will remove all prejudices against a Peruvian Bark of a
large and coarser appearance, than is generally employed.

It is at present in very great demand, the difficulty of procuring it will
not, I hope, instigate Druggists and Dealers in the article, to substitute at
any time a spurious kind in its room.

Extract of a Letter from Mr. EDWARD JACOB, junr. an eminent Surgeon, at
Feversham, in Kent.
I HAVE had such repeated opportunities of trying the Red Bark, that I hope to
be able to give you every satisfaction, you can wish, of its superior efficacy
over the Bark in common use.

Our situation being in a country not far distant from the marshes, renders the
inhabitants more exposed to intermittent complaints than those of cities and
more inland counties; and, I assure you, before the use of the Red Bark was
known, the Ague, from its particular stubborness, (as we then thought, or what
we have since observed from the want of efficacy in the other Bark,) might be
truly called the opprobrium Medicorum; but, now I think, that stain is entirely
removed, for I have not met with one single case, where (when I could persuade
the patient to adhere steadily to my advice) I have ever found the Red Bark to
fail.

The Peruvian Bark, with which I was formerly provided, was of the best kind,
and always had in the quill; yet, it was even much inferior in its effects to
what ought reasonably to be expected from it.

The first knowledge that ever we had of the Red Bark was in March, 1781, when
a few pounds was sent us to try its effects; our Druggist informed us that it
was then in use at St. Bartholomew's Hospital, and was there found effectual.
It remained in our house till May following, when I was attacked with an Ague;
I did not at first think of trying the new Bark, for I guessed, by taking of
the old in great quantity, which would not be disagreeable to me, that my Ague
would soon leave me; but, to my great disappointment, fit succeeded fit,
without showing the least good effect of the remedy applied. I was then
determined to try the new Bark; but, finding my Ague stubborn I emptied the
Primae Viae by an Emetic and Carthartic, and immediately, on the fever going
off, I took one dram of the Red Bark in fine powder, mixed with three ounces
of the decoction, and a small quantity of the tincture, which being a draught
well loaded with Bark, at first seemed to sit uneasy on the stomach; (which I
have several times on being first taken, found the case with some of my
patients, but which never took from its effect,) but, after resting for some
time, I found myself in a state to continue its use. My Ague from that time
kept off; till, from omitting the Bark two soon, (and finding myself quite
well) in a few weeks after, slight symptoms appeared again; but, which never
formed a direct fit, the Bark being again repeated, eradicated the disorder.

My father, now in the 70th year of his age, has since that time been attacked
with an Ague; but, from his having been before seized with a chilliness without
subsequent sever, suffered himself to have three fits without trying any
remedy: being then convinced of the reality of the Ague, applied to this Bark
in decoction, with some tincture made of the same; he found it so effectual,
that after taking it, the fit did not once return; he omitted the Bark too
soon, and had one slight fit; but, after repeating the same remedy a few days,
it has not since returned, and he is now perfectly well.

The patients, who have received immediate relief from the new Bark, are so
numerous, that I cannot with any degree of certainty guess the number.

The quantity that we have used, from July, 1781, to the present time, is
upwards of sixty pounds. The manner in which we have used it, with a view to
prevent the return of an approaching paroxysm, is by giving a dram or 1
dram of the Powder, mixed with two ounces of the decoction, and a small
quantity of the tincture. The decoction we have used, has been prepared by
boiling three ounces of the gross powder boiled in two quarts of water to one
quart. When the patient has been of a more delicate frame, or when it has been
used as a corroborant, we have given the decoction and tincture without the
powder. When the Ague has been but recently contracted, we have seldom trusted
to any thing but the Bark, but when stubborn, evacuants have been first given;
half an ounce of the powder has very frequently cured an Ague without
evacuants, or more Bark, when the fit was a recent one; we have now entirely
left off giving the old Bark in any form since we have found so good effects
from the Red Bark, and we used the Resin of Red Bark with good success, in many
cases, where the Patient could take it only in the form of Pills. I heartly
hope the above account will prove satisfactory to you, if not I shall think
myself very happy in answering at any time any future enquiries.

I am, Sir, With great respect, Your most obedient and humble Servant, EDWARD
JACOB, junr.
Feversham, June, 23d 1782.

A Letter from Mr. BOYSE, an eminent Surgeon and Apothecary, at Sandwich, in
Kent.
SIR,
I AM sorry it is not in my power to send you particular Cases of the effects
of the Red Bark. Having made no memorandums, I can only say, in general, that
it is a much better Kind of Bark, than any I have been able to procure
hitherto. Whether the Intermittents have been worse than common, or the Gray
Bark has been of inferior Quality, I will not take upon me to determine; but we
were all unusually foiled in our attempts to cure that Complaint, till we were
furnished with the New Bark. I can have no Inducement to give a higher
Character of this Drug, than it deserves: but, I do assure you, that, since I
began to use it, it has not once failed me, when the Patient has taken it in a
proper manner. Hence, I have a firm persuasion of its superior efficacy, and I
am the more confirmed in my Opinion, by knowing that my Sentiments correspond
with yours, and with those of all my medical acquaintance, in this
Neighborhood, who have made trial of it. My best wishes attend your
publication; not only because I am persuaded it will operate to the advantage
of Mankind, by extending the knowledge and use of this valuable Medicine, but,
likewise because I am in hopes it will hasten a fresh Importation of the
Article, of which I have very little left, and I know not where to go for a
supply.

I have the Honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W. BOYS.
Sandwich, June 19th, 1782.

In addition to the character given of the Red Bark, by several practitioners
in the country, is a letter I received a few days ago from Sir WILLIAM BISHOP,
an eminent Surgeon, at Maidstone, in Kent, dated June 16th.
IN which he shows, by a variety of cases, that in the cure of intermittents,
in that part of the world, the Red Bark had not only been infinitely more
effectual than the common Peruvian Bark, or any other remedy usually employed,
but that it had radically cured where cold bathing, emetics, opiates, bitters
and friction failed, and where the best Pale Bark, both by itself, and with a
variety of other medicines, was exhibited without effect, even to the quantity
of sixteen ounces. The form he gives it in, is that of an electuary, with the
addition of a small quantity of the essential oil of pepper-mint and
caraway-seed; and he seldom has occasion, he says, to use more than from 4 to 6
ounces. One case he mentions, where a sphacelus had taken place in a malignant
fever, accompanied with delirium and every other bad symptom, the patient was
recovered by the use of the Red Bark, Anodynes, and Wine; the sphacelus
separating kindly, the fever and bad symptoms speedily gave way.

I am likewise favored with another letter from Sir WILLIAM BISHOP, dated June
23d, which contains many sensible and judicious hints upon this subject.
HE recommends the grinding Red Bark into the finest powder by a mill, and
afterward sifting it through the finest cypress sieve, in order that it may
sit lightly on the stomach, and that its parts may be uniformly blended
together: he observes, that if, after breaking the Bark, you examine the broken
pieces, by means of a glass in the sun shine, you will see the resin like
spangles of gold between the internal woody fibers and the outward gray coat;
by comparing this appearance with the best Pale Bark, you will discover that
the Red Bark contains a much larger quantity of resinous parts.

Two scruples of Bark, as coarsly powdered as is commonly fold by the
apothecaries, will be as disagreable to take, as a dram or four scruples
finely ground. One dram is the dose he generally gave to an adult, although
he sometimes met with patients, who would choose to take two or three drachms
at a dose, and those doses, at longer intervals; and from experience he found
that, when this last practice agreed with the stomach, it was the most
effectual way of curing the intermittent. One patient took three oun^es in
twelve hours, and had no return of an obstinate Quartan.

Many Intermittents, which could not be cured by small doses, were removed by
larger doses, more frequently employed.

He mentions that a period of five or six hours, before the expected return of
a Quotidian, or Ter^ian Intermittent, is all that is necessary for the taking a
sufficient quantity of the Red Bark, in order to obviate the approaching
Paroxysm. Some have been cured by taking two ounces, as quick as possible after
the fit, but such as persevered in the use of it, until four or six ounces were
taken acted most prudently, their health was soonest and most perfectly
restored. He likewise observes, that such Persons ought to take the greatest
quantity of Bark, whose blood is in the most dissolved state, and where the
fibers have been relaxed by the most profuse sweating, which frequently takes
place in obstinate Quartans.

Quotidians require but a small quantity, Tertians will yield to fewer doses
than our Kentish Quartans.

He found it better to get down five or six ounces of Bark, in eight or ten
days, than to allow a larger time for the same quantity. Laboring people, who
work out of doors in cold foggy mornings, either in marshy grounds or wet
lands, from sun rife till the dew of the evening, and who sweat profusely, and
suffer their wet linen to dry on their backs, will not be safe from a return of
the quartan fever, with less than five ounces taken after the last fit, as the
good effects of all they had taken before, are very probably carried off and
dissipated in the ensuing paroxysm.

He likewise observes that the Bark in large doses will not cure the irregular
fits of an ague and fever, which so often afflicts persons, when matter is
forming in the lungs, in the Phthisis Pulmonalis.

The letter from Sir William Bishop, which convey these observations; likewise
contain much valuable information on other medical subjects, and I hope the
ingenious author will, on some future occasion, favor the public with them.

A letter from Dr. WITHERING, an eminent Physician, at Birmingham, June 29,
1782.
Dear Sir,
I AM much pleased, that you have undertaken to give us an account of the Red
Peruvian Bark. A Publication upon that subject, cannot fail to produce good
effects, by removing the prejudices of some, the ignorance of others, and
ultimately by exciting our merchants to obtain liberal supplies of a medicine
so truly valuable. The universal prevalence of intermittent fevers this spring
gave us a large experience of its effects. We have not many intermittents in
the town of Birmingham; but, in other parts of the county of Warwick, in
Staffordshire, Shropshire, Worcestershire and Oxfordshire, so far as my rides
extend, they have been more general than ever known before in the memory of the
oldest practitioners I have conversed with.

After taking pains to recommend the Red Bark to all the Apothecaries I met
with, and consequently not less anxious to learn their observations relative to
its effects, I can say that they unanimously concur in asserting "that they
have never been disappointed in their expectations when they exhibited it to
Patients laboring under Intermittents."

Now the Intermittents which I have seen, have pretty generally assumed the
Tertian Type in light soils, and the Quartan Type in clayey countries. Of the
latter, I have had the care of some which were from 6 to 18 Months duration,
originating in Kent and Essex. I have known two instances only of Quartans in
which the Red Bark did not prevent a recurrence of the Fits; I saw one of these
patients afterward; he labored under Hepatic and anasarcous symptoms, these
were removed in a fortnight by the usual methods, and then the Bark effected a
cure. The other case was at a considerable distance from this place, and I have
not yet learnt its termination.

It will require some farther experience to ascertain the necessary doses. I
know some practitioners who have given one or two drachms every four hours
betwixt the fits, but I have never had occasion to give more than thirty or
forty grains at similar intervals of time.

As to its preparations I can say but little; preferring always in my own
practice the simple powder; but, I am told, that it makes a very rich tincture,
and, I have seen decoctions of it very high colored and turbid.

But it may be asked -- would not the common or Quill Bark, have produced
similar good effects in the intermittents of the present year? From the reports
of other practitioners; I believe it would not. From my own experience, I can
give no other answer, to such a question, than, by saying, that after frequent
and almost continual disappointments, from the use of common Quill Bark, I have
not tried to cure a single intermittent with it for more than seven years past;
relying entirely upon the use of evacuants, opium and metallic salts. To render
this last assertion reconcilable to the daily experience of others, it may be
necessary to observe, that with us, a Physician is seldom consulted in fevers
of the intermittent kind, unless some unusual appearance, or some uncommon
obstinacy in the recurrence of the attack, alarms the patient or his friends.

Whether the medicine in question, be the product of the same tree from which
the Quill Bark is derived, may be difficult to determine, but I am persuaded it
is the medicine that was used by MORTON and SYDEN^^M, or its efficacy could
never have been so proverbial. I know not what could first induce the writers
upon the Materia Medica, to prefer the Quill Bark; but, I know if you were to
ask an English Tanner, whether the Bark from the trunk; or, that from the twigs
of the Oak is the strongest, he would laugh at your ignorance.

I communicated the contents of your letter, to my worthy friend and colleague
Dr. ASH, together with my opinion upon the subject: he authorizes the to say
that the result of his experience perfectly coincides with mine.

I remain, With the truest esteem, Yours, W. WITHERING.
P. S. Thus my good friend, have I freely communicated my sentiments and
observations upon the subject you have in hand. You are at liberty to make what
use you please of them, and I shall think myself happy in having contributed a
little toward the extensive usefulness of your design. I have seen no bad
effects from it, notwitstanding the reports of some of the London Druggists;
but, their motives were too evident to need a comment.




I feel, with you that distance alone has interrupted our communications; but,
I feel too, that distance can never abate the regard with which I once more
subscribe myself,

Affectionally, Yours, W. W. To Dr. SAUNDERS,
Jefferies Square.

A Letter from Mr. SHERWIN, an ingenious Surgeon, at Enfield.
SIR,
SINCE we have used the Red Peruvian Bark, we have had great success in curing
Agues and intermitting Fevers. These disorders returned so frequently after the
use of the best Peruvian Bark, which we could formerly procure that our credit,
as well as that of the medicine, began to fail very much, and numbers of our
patients got into the hands of persons unacquainted with physic. They seemed
willing to trust rather to nostrums and charms, than to a medicine which they
have seen so repeatedly fail, and to the effects of which they very ingeniously
ascribe every ache and pain which continue after Agues, or which are the
consequences of Agues when imperfectly cured.

I could give a very ample detail of the inefficacy of the common Bark; but, as
the complaint is general, it would be unnecessary. I shall therefore, only take
the liberty to present you with the more agreeable history of a few cases that
have immediately yielded to the Red Peruvian Bark, and that even when given in
very moderate doses, after having obstinately resisted large quantities of the
other.

RICHARD PARSLEY, a hard working young man, about 28 years of age, was seized
with an Ague last autumn; which continued either as a Quotidian, Tertian or
Quartan, with very little intermission, till the 20th of April last, when I saw
him accidentally. He gave me the following account. That he had taken every
thing that had been recommended to him; and that his master, a worthy and
respectable gentleman in this neighborhood, had procured him the advice of
different practitioners of physic, who had prescribed Bark for him in large
quantities, but without benefit, as the disorder always returned with greater
violence after it had been checked a few Days. He added, that the last
medicine, which he had been advised to take, was half an ounce of alum boiled
in a pint of ale, to half a pint, which he was ordered to repeat three
different times, as soon as he felt the Ague approach. He had in this way, he
said, taken seven half ounces upon the approach of as many different fits of
the Ague.

I suspected, that so large a quantity of alum, taken at one dose, must have
produced some dangerous effects, and doubted whether he had swallowed the whole
of it; but, I sound upon more particular enquiry, that he really swallowed half
an ounce each time; as he says, that he stirred it up from the bottom and felt
it gritty in his Teeth. It gave him great pain in his stomach. So large a
quantity of Alum being taken at one dose, without materially injuring the
system, is a fact, which I am persuaded you will think worthy of notice.

I took compassion upon this poor Fellow, and sent him 8 papers of the Red
Peruvian Bark, containing a dram in each, which he finished in two
intermediate days, the disorder being then a Quartan. It is now seven weeks
since he took this medicine, and he has had no return of the complaint, but to
use an expression of his own "has felt ever since as if he had a new Inside."

ANNE PIGOT, a poor Girl 14 years old, has been afflicted with an Ague since
Autumn last in the same Family with PARSLEY, and has also tried various
medicines without effect. I prescribed small doses of the Vitriolum Coerul.
fourteen days without gaining any advantage. I gave her also 3 or 4 doses of a
hot aromatic powder recommended by Van SWIETEN consisting of Bay Berries and
China Pepper which I have frequently seen to cure, but she found no benefit
from it. I cannot say whether this Girl had given the common Bark a fair trial.
She begged to have some of the same medicine that cured her Relation, and about
a month since had three papers, containing only one scruple in each, and, I
assure you, she has been perfectly free from the complaint ever since.

Mr. BARNS, a very strong hard working Man, was seized last Autumn with a very
violent intermitting Fever, attended with Delirium, and apparently much danger.
After three or four paroxysms I removed the disorder by giving him one dram
of the best common Peruvian Bark every Hour, and continuing the same quantity
twice a day afterward; but, at the end of fourteen days, the Fever returned
with the same violence as before, and was again stopped by the same quantity of
Bark. From Autumn till the beginning of last April, it returned in this manner
(at the end of about fourteen days from the time it was stopped) five or six
times and always with uncommon violence. The common Peruvian Bark newly
powdered was repeatedly given.

In the beginning of April, I prescribed six doses, of the Red Peruvian Bark,
of one dram each, which he took upon the going off of the Paroxysm, and I
have the pleasure to inform you, that, he has had no return since that time;
though I no longer used the precaution of continuing the daily use of the same
medicine.

It is not worth while to mention common cases, where the Red Bark has cured
without the other having had the trial. A few have occurred, and I have not yet
had any instance of a relapse.

I was lately called to a very severe case, like that of Mr. BARNES, where the
intermission was not longer than 6 or 8 hours. I prescribed, and the patient
took 6 drachms of the Red Bark, without interrupting the paroxysm, which came
at the expected hour; and during the sickness and horripilatio the Bark seemed
to be entirely rejected by vomiting; however the succeeding paroxysm abated
something of its fury. My patient was extremely averse to Bark in every shape;
but by deceiving him, during the following intermission, I got him to swallow
two drachms at once, which rendered him so entirely averse to the medicine,
that he would take no more afterward. However, to his great joy, and my
surprise, the sever left him. He ascribes his cure to three or four draughts of
camphorated julep, which were prescribed as a placebo upon his refusing to
persevere in the use of the Bark. But it may with more justice be ascribed to
the two drachms of Red Bark, taken at one dose; as I think the first six were
in a great measure lost.

I consider the Red Peruvian Bark as a valuable acquisition to the Materia
Medica: or, perhaps it may be only a restoration of what was used in the days
of SYDENHAM, and some time after, when it was common for medical writers to
say, that this, or that medicine would cure, with as much certainty as Bark
would an Ague. An eulogium to which the Bark in this country has not been of
late years entitled.

Before I became acquainted with the superior efficacy of the Red Peruvian
Bark, I had tried a variety of tonics, with very indifferent success in
general, but now and then with very happy effects, such as the Cuprum
Ammoniacum, Vitriolum Coeruleum, Sal Vitrioli, Sal Martis, etc.

WILLIAM KING, an athletic young man, applied to me last autumn, on account of
a tedious irregular intermittent, complicated with acute fixed pain in the
side, and a full strong pulse* much cough and hoarseness. Under these
circumstances, I thought it imprudent to administer the Bark in any Form and
had recourse to a plentiful bleeding, applying blisters to the part affected,
and giving the Decoct. Taraxac. with Tart. Solubile, and honey in large
quantities. The disorder was clearly an Ague; but attended with symptoms that
threatened a pulmonary consumption. His blood was remarkably sizy, which
induced me to make use of venesection four times, which with the above
medicines, and a very strict antiphlogistic regimen, removed the cough and pain
in the side, though the Ague still continued. I ventured at last to give him
eight doses of common Bark, one dram in each, which removed the Ague several
weeks, and mended his habit much. A continuance of the Bark, twice a day, for
sometime after the Ague stopped, brought on a frequent bleeding at the nose.

The Ague returned twice during the winter; but gave way soon to the same Bark,
and he kept tolerably well till the setting-in of cold north-east winds in
spring, when his Ague again returned, and brought with it the pain in the side,
a bloated icteric countenance, much hoarseness and cough. After one more
bleeding and the use of the Apozem for a month, I gave him six drachms of the
Red Peruvian Bark in April last, and have had the pleasure to see him continue
free from the Ague since that time, though be never repeated the dose after it
stopped.

I was unwilling to persist in the use of the Bark after the Ague stopped lest
it should increase the circulation too much and again excite a bleeding at the
nose.

I have now indeed almost entirely laid aside the custom of persevering in the
use of the Bark after the intermittent is stopped. I have for sometime
suspected that it answers no good purpose, and that it may possibly now and
then be the reason why large quantities of good Bark have been given in vain.
It is a well known Fact, that every species of intermittent complaint
frequently returns in fourteen days after being interrupted by means of Bark,
notwithstanding that medicine is continued every day. May not the daily use of
Bark so habituate the constitution to its effect as to render it useless when
the Intermittent returns?

I am now satisfied when I have put a stop to the expected paroxysm, and
prescribe an anodyne to be in readiness if ever the cold fit returns, advising
my patient to have recourse to the same quantity of Bark which he found
necessary at first, and to take it as soon as the succeeding sever abates. I
adopted this practice a little time before I became acquainted with the
superior efficacy of the Red Bark, and thought it an improvement, but since
that time I have succeeded so well by giving six or eight drachms between the
paroxysms that I have seldom had occasion to repeat a single dose.

I am, Sir, With great respect, Your obliged and most obedient Servant, JOHN
SHERWEN.
Endfield, June, 23d 1782.

A Letter from Dr. FOTHERGILL, an eminent Physician, in Harpur Street.
Dear Sir,
IN answer to your obliging request, I shall now proceed to lay before you, the
best information I can concerning the New Bark, lately introduced into
practice, under the name of CORTEX RUBER OR RED BARK. As it was found on board
a Spanish prize intermixed with a small quantity of common Peruvian Bark, it
would seem to be no other than the produce of the trunk or large branches of
the same tree. It seems to be possessed of the same sensible qualities only in
a much higher degree, hence it yields a much larger proportion of resinous
extract, and gives a more saturated tincture, and decoction than the common
Bark. Hence too I have found (according to what you lately observed) that the
decoction may be exposed a long time to the open air, without contracting the
degree of acidity, which manifestly takes place in that of the common Bark in a
few days.

It has been remarked for many years past, that the Peruvian Bark has often
disappointed the expectation of the public; having fallen greatly short of that
high degree of efficacy, for which writers of the last century, have so highly
extolled it. Few Physicians of extensive practice, but must sometimes have had
the mortification to observe their favorite specific entirely baffled by a
regular intermittent, without being able to assign any probable cause of the
defeat, except the ungenuineness of the medicine; Whence it would seem to
follow, either that the intermittents of late years, have been more obstinate
in their nature, or that the Bark has been of an inferior quality to that which
was used by Dr. SYDENHAM, and many of his respectable contemporaries, of whose
veracity we can entertain no reasonable doubt. The latter appears to me to be
the more probable, especially when it is considered that of late years, it has
been customary (for what reason I cannot imagine) to select the Bark of the
small branches, under the denomination of Quilled Bark, in preference to that
of the trunks. Should this preference hereafter be discovered to have been
groundless, (agreeable to what I have long suspected) it may perhaps contribute
to explain the principle cause of our disappointments. In the art of tanning,
experience has long determined in favor of large Oak Bark, as being greatly
preferable to that of the smaller twigs. Why the reverse of this should take
place in a medicinal view, is by no means evident, especially if the virtue of
the Peruvian Bark keeps pace in any degree with its astringency.

Spanish practitioners, as I have been lately informed, are so well convinced
of this, that they always prefer the large Peruvian Bark; separating it from
the smaller sort, for all important purposes, of which the late capture indeed
seems to afford a proof. This must not however be confounded with those coarse
woody flakes, which constitute a large proportion of the worst kind of Bark,
now in use. For these, having been already stripped of the outer rind, consist
of a mere ligneous substance divested of resin, and consequently of medioinal
virtue.
Future observations may probably discover that this was the real genuine Bark,
with which our ancestors cured all the various kinds of Intermittents, with a
degree of certainty, which now astonishes their successors.

If Bark taken from the large branches should be sound to be more efficacions
than that of the small, is it not reasonable to believe, that, that of the
trunk, or rather of the root, might surpass both in virtue? Political reasons,
however, respecting the preservation of the trees, which produce so important
an article of commerce, will, it is to be apprehended effectually deter the
inhabitants from every experiment of this nature.

A very eminent Druggist, who purchased a large share of the above cargo,
assures me, that many of the Apothecaries whom he has supplied with the Red
Bark, and who have carefully compared its effects with those of the common
cortex, make no scruple of deciding in its favor. He further adds that the
demand for it has increased so rapidly of late, that the stock in hand is
already nearly exhausted.

It is to be regretted that the passion for interlarding this simple febrifuge
with other bitters and astringents (after the usual mode of practice) but still
too much prevails! Under this false idea of adding to its efficacy, its virtue
may often be greatly diminished, and at all events, the result of the trial
must be rendered extremely equivocal. In justice to the remedy, and to obviate
this uncertainty concerning its effects, I have embraced every opportunity
(which so short a space would admit,) of administering it in its simple state,
without intermixing it with other medicines. The cases in which I have chiefly
tried it, have been low putrid Fevers, attended with extreme prostration of
strength, delirium during the evening exacerbations, with short, and obscure
remissions in the day time. In one instance of this kind, Petechiae appeared,
and were succeeded by a nasal haemorrhage, which generally returned with the
exacerbations, till the patients strength seemed to be nearly exhausted,
accompanied with cold sweats, and involuntary twitchings, etc. His narrow
escape from this most critical situation, I attribute to a liberal use of this
Bark, and acidulated liquors drank copiously. From its success in this, and
several other instances, which have fallen under my own observation, I am
strongly inclined to believe that it will soon become an object worthy of
attention, but must decline, giving a decisive opinion concerning its
superiority, till I know the result of a variety of cases, in which it is now
under trial, and also receive additional confirmation from such correspondents,
as are less prepossessed in its favor than myself, because they may be
supposed to p^ove in reality more impartial judges. Therefore in the interim, I
shall wait with impatience for your intended publication, hoping that by thus
collecting the sentiments, and observations of several practitioners in
different parts of the kingdom, we may at length be enabled to ascertain the
true comparative merit of the Red Bark, which cannot but afford great
satisfaction to the public at large, as well as to,

SIR, Your most obedient servant, A. FOTHERGILL.
Harpur-Street, July 6th, 1782. P. S. A detail of particulars has been
purposely omitted in order to avoid unnecessary prolixity, espicially as
similar cases occur almost daily It ought, however, to have been mentioned that
common Peruvian Bark had been prescribed for WILLIAM HENTON (the person who
labored under the petechial Fever, and haemorhage, as above described) before
I saw him, and that his case was pronounced to be desperate. I have now the
further satisfaction to add that on my entering his room this day, ( July 12th)
he assured me, with a joyful countenance, that since he had taken the Red Bark
(or as might now perhaps with more propriety be said the Real Bark) he had
suffered no symptoms of relapse, and that he remains perfectly free from all
complaints, except a little weakness of sight. It may not be improper to add,
that I have generally administered it in substance, from two scruples to a
dram, every two hours, except during the paroxysm or midnight exacerbation,
when it has been cautiously avoided. Because I have long been convinced by
experience, and attentive observation, that the febrile symptoms are commonly
exasperated whenever common Bark is taken at that period. If the Red Peruvian
Bark should be found to answer completely, and that in smaller doses, it will
be extremely interesting to the Patients, and no less pleasing to the Physician
especially when he can with confidence pronounce,

"Hi motus, atque haec certamina tanta,
Pulveris Exigui jactu compressa quiescunt."
VIRGIL.


I Hope, I shall not be considered as presumptuous, in concluding that the
foregoing observations are sufficient for determining the superior efficacy of
the Red Peruvian Bark.

I can not however finish without returning my best thanks to the Gentlemen who
have favored me with their correspondence; and I think it necessary to express
my obligations to many Gentlemen, whose letters were too late for publication.

They all concur in recommending the Red Peruvian Bark, as more efficacious and
powerful than any other kind.

From the numerous trials I have made with it, in Intermittent Fevers, and
other diseases, I am disposed to conclude that it need be employed only in half
the quantity we generally recommend of other Bark.

I have likewise the satisfaction of assuring my Readers, that it is now in
general use in all the large Hospitals in London; and, such is the preference
given to it, that the demand is difficultly supplied.

Be careful in the choice of it, by attending to the characters which
distinguish it from the large Bark, hitherto rejected by our Druggists.

I shall continue to be diligent in my enquiries on the subject, and I most
earnestly request the favor of my Friends that they will persevere in
supplying me with accurate observations, so as to determine, with precision, in
what other diseases this valuable remedy may be used with safety and advantage.

The operations and effects of remedies can only be ascertained by the united
industry and experience of intelligent men; who, by being aware of the
difficulty of making observations, are sufficiently guarded against the fallacy
to which they are unavoidably exposed.

FINIS.
MEDICAL LECTURES AT GUY's HOSPITAL.
IN the beginning of October next, DR. SAUNDERS, PHYSICIAN to GUY'S HOSPITAL,
will begin his LECTURES, as usual, on the THEORY and PRACTICE of MEDICINE, in
which, the chief Objects of Discussion will be the History, Diagnosticks,
Nature and Cure of Diseases.

At the same Place, and about the same Time, DR. KEIR, PHYSICIAN to ST.
THOMAS'S HOSPITAL, will begin his LECTURES on CHEMISTRY, in which, while the
Principles of that Science are taught by reasoning and Experiment, the Practice
of it may be learned from the numerous Processes carried on in the Elaboratory
of the Hospital.

DR. KEIR will also begin his LECTURES on the MATERIA MEDICA, about the same
Time.

CLINICAL LECTURES are likewise delivered at GUY'S HOSPITAL, on the Cases of
Patients, by means of which the Student may enjoy every Advantage, that actual
Practice can afford, in the Study of his Profession.

Each of these Courses continue Four Months; they are all carried on at the
same Time; and are repeated Three Times in the Year, beginning in October,
February and June.

To accomodate these Lectures to the Gentlemen who attend the Practice of the
Hospitals, Care is taken that they shall not encroach on the Hours appropriated
to the Transaction of the Hospital Business.


