OBSERVATIONS ON THE GOUT and RHEUMATISM.

EXHIBITING Instances of Persons who were greatly relieved in the Fit of the
GOUT; and of others who were cured of the GOUT in the Head, Stomach, and
Bowels; of obstinate RHEUMATISMS; and of the Swellings, Stiffness, and
Contractions of the Limbs, after irregular or long-continued Fits of the GOUT:
by Medicines discovered in AMERICA.

WITH A SHORT ACCOUNT OF Some MEDICINES, and Ways of curing DISEASES, used by
the Native INDIANS.

To which are added, A few remarkable CASES of other DISEASES.

Humbly Inscribed to the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS By HENRY FLOWER, an AMERICAN.

New Things do I declare: before they spring forth, I tell you of them. Isaiah.
LONDON: Printed for E. COOK, at the Royal Exchange.

MDCCLXVI.

TO THE PRESIDENT and MEMBERS OF THE COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS OF LONDON, THESE
OBSERVATIONS OF THE GOUT AND RHEUMATISM, Are Humbly Inscribed, BY THEIR Most
Obedient Servant, HENRY FLOWER.

TO THE PRESIDENT and MEMBERS OF THE COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS LONDON.
GENTLEMEN,
THOUGH I have not the honor of being known to any one of you, I think I
cannot address the following pages but to you.

Every person who is sick and takes medicines is sensible of the relief he
meets with from them, and therefore is the best judge of their merit and
efficacy: but God be praised for his goodness to us poor mortals, the
discoveries and improvements I have made in treating the Gout and Rheumatism
are so successful, that while they meet with the blessings of the afflicted,
they can abide the severest examination of you gentlemen of the faculty, which
emboldens me to lay this account before you.

I present you with only a few cases out of a great number; these will serve to
show you what has been done; and as several patients have applied to me since I
have been in this city, whom I have not yet had leisure, on account of other
business, to attend, I may hereafter lay before you some observations made on
the spot, when I have completed those affairs that to me are more material;
and for your further satisfaction, and for the satisfaction of the public, you
may then examine my patients before I begin with them, visit them under the
operation of the medicines, and see the event.

Some of the following cases are well known to several gentlemen in London; one
of the patients (Captain Samuel Bayard) is now in town, and may be examined on
the subject; and I could moreover refer to a physician of eminence, at present
in this city, who can, if he pleases, give a full and satisfactory account of
these matters, as he attended several of my patients while under cure; and I
openly and honestly communicated to him, for his candid behavior to me, the
medicines I use in the Gout, Rheumatism, and other obstinate diseases; and I
find he has made some considerable cures with them in these countries.

It will be no disadvantage, I hope, in your eyes, that the person whom
providence made the instrument of these discoveries, was not regularly brought
up to the business of physic; for the race is not to the swist, nor the battle
to the strong. My own ill health first made me read physic: I afterward
searched into chemistry and the virtues of plants, and made numberless
wearisome experiments in those ways, and on human bodies in sickness and in
health; by which means, I fell upon some of the medicines I now use with such
uncommon success in various stubborn, and till now, incurable maladies.

In the year 1754, I was called to a gentleman, who was threatened with a
mortification while he was in a violent fit of the Gout. He had been frequently
attacked with the Gout, and at this time was greatly afflicted with it in the
wrist, fingers, feet, ancles and knees. I gave him some medicines to prevent
the impending mortification; and, to my great surprise, that was not only
effected, but in a few days all the gouty complaints went off, which he
informed me used to continue between two and three months. This unexpected
success encouraged me to pursue the lucky hint, and I have ever since that time
made many experiments in relation to the Gout and the means to relieve or cure
it, till I brought the practice to the present degree of certainty and success.

That you may kindly receive this account of a new discovery, and that it may
hereafter, by your superior abilities, be made more useful to the afflicted, is
the hearty wish of

Your humble servant, H. FLOWER.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE GOUT AND RHEUMATISM.
THE Gout has been so long esteemed an incurable disorder, that mankind have at
last brought themselves to think an attempt to cure it to be imprudent, as well
as impracticable; as if it was more advantageous to enjoy health for nine
months in the year at the severe penance of a painful illness the other three,
than, by eradicating the cause of those evils, to pass the whole year in full
vigor and strength. This absurd notion puts me in mind of what I have read
somewhere of the inhabitants of the Alps, who being in general subject to
monstrous swellings about the throat, look upon those horrid deformities as so
many real beauties. It is a comfort indeed that we can thus draw pleasure out
of pain, and persuade ourselves that what we cannot obtain would be improper
for us to possess.

For my part, I do not pretend to cure the Gout so that it will never return;
but I am by no means convinced that it is impossible to do it. I do not pretend
to do it, because the experience I have had is not long enough to warrant me to
say so, or to think so; and yet the experience I have had gives me great reason
to imagine it not impossible. It is upon experience alone that I ground my
judgment and my reasoning upon these matters. I shall say nothing of the nature
of the Gouty matter, and how it is formed in the body, or how the fits of the
Gout are brought on, for all that is mere theory and supposition; I shall only
argue from what I have seen and from what I have done. We may say of the Gout
what we do of Fevers, Pleurisies, Agues, Dropsies, Jaundice, etc. that though
they be once cured they may return again: but, for my part, experience, and
plain reasoning from it, authorize me to carry the matter much further; and I
can readily conceive, that the constitution and habit of body of Gouty persons,
which dispose them to the disorder, may, by the use of medicines, be so
amended, altered, and as it were changed, (like unto that of a healthy person
who never had the Gout) that it will never afterward, or at least for a long
time, generate or collect any Gouty matter. Now to judge whether this can be
done let experience be our guide. Many things have been recommended as
infallible for radically curing the Gout; but what happened on useing them?
Some of them indeed prevented the returns of the disorder, but then, as far as
I can find, the patient never enjoyed sound and strong health; from whence it
is plain those things did not cure, but suppressed the disorder: Now, on the
contrary, if the patient had become active, vigorous, strong and robust, we
might pronounce the medicines were truly beneficial, and the end proposed to be
properly answered by them. With regard to the medicines I use, I must honestly
confess that many of my patients have had returns of the Gout since I first
took them in hand, (but not oftener, nor indeed so often, as before) so that all
the merit of the medicines in those cases consisted in completely carrying off
a fit in some intermediate time, from two days to about twelve, according to
the violence of the disorder and constitution of the person that in all
appearance would have tortured the patient for two or three months. But whether
the return of the disorder in these patients was owing to their irregularity in
the use of the medicines, or to the insufficiency of the medicines to work a
thorough change in the constitution, I cannot pretend to say; I speak only what
I know: I have, however, had other patients who used to be afflicted with a fit
once or twice in a year, or in two years, but who after going through a course
of my medicines regularly, and living prudently for sometime afterward, have
never had a return, but grown hearty and strong, as indeed every Gouty person
who took them have done. It is now above twelve years since I administered the
medicines to some of these patients, and it is from thence that I am inclined
to think a radical cure may be made, though, as I said before, the short
experience of so few years will not allow me to be entirely of that opinion,
much more to affirm it as a fact; and therefore, notwithstanding the
probability of the thing, I leave it to time and further experience to
determine, whether the Gout can be radically cured or not.

I thought it necessary to say thus much to prevent people being carried away
with wrong notions of things, or forming wrong notions of what I say; but after
all, all I know by experience is, that these medicines completely carry off the
present regular fit with expedition and safety; but that, where the disorder is
lest to itself, nature seldom makes a perfect despumation of the Gouty matter,
which I take to be the reason that one fit comes so quickly upon the back of
another, and that the joints are so greatly injured by the disorder: whereas,
by these medicines, the body is perfectly cleared of the Gouty particles, the
next fit does not come on so soon, and the limbs and joints are preserved. I
know too by experience that they bring the irregular Gout to be regular, or
expel it the body without going through those regular stages, as frequently
happens where the Gout affects the head, stomach or bowels: and I also know by
experience that they cure the swellings, stiffness, and contractions of the
limbs, which are occasioned by catching cold in the fit, or by the long
continuance or frequent return of the disorder. As for the Sciatica and
Rheumatism, they are in general so nearly allied to the Gout, that I need say
nothing about them.

It may be asked how the medicines work upon the body to perform such cures
with so much ease to the patient; to which I answer, that I don't know, nor
don't care. Facts speak for themselves, and put it beyond all doubt, that such
cures have been wrought, and I am ready to show before any body that they may
be done again; but putting the evidence of facts out of the question, I would
beg to ask those gentlemen who are for judging of the practicability of things
by the weak powers of human reason, whether it is not accusing the goodness and
wisdom of Providence, who has enriched this world with thousands of plants to
nourish our bodies and relieve our infirmities, to suppose that he has left us
destitute of assistance in the Gout? or is it not more reasonable to think,
that, amidst the vast variety of plants he has created for our use, he may
have endued some with virtues and powers to cure this the most painful and
grievous disease mankind is liable to, though their manner of operation should
be concealed from us? Intermitting Fevers and Agues puzzled the faculty before
the Peruvian Bark was known in Europe; the bite of the Rattle Snake is mortal
in a few hours; the best physicians and Surgeons cannot check the poison, but
the Indians have taught us to cure it with a common herb.

Those poor Savages the American Indians, with no other assistance than
experience, and the natural light of reason, have cured many diseases that
baffled the most ingenious of the faculty. In Sinous Ulcers they make a
decoction of certain herbs and roots, with which they bath and wash the Ulcers,
pouring part of it into the cavities; these applications soon soften and
dissolve the hardness, new flesh sprouts up, and the Ulcer heals. I have
attempted to imitate their practice in this respect, and have succeeded in it
in some cases of fistulas of the Anus, and particularly in one who had been cut
in vain. The use of the Seneca Snake-root, and some other medicines we learned
from the Indians, need not be mentioned to prove their knowledge of useful
herbs. By the abuse of strong liquor, they are much troubled with nervous
diseases, that in women occasion miscarriages, and many other female
complaints; for all which they take a decoction of an Aromatic-root, that is of
great service. I have given it myself in Nervous cases, and have experienced
better effects from it than from any vegetable or chemical medicine I ever
tried. This root is very difficult to be got, growing only in particular
places; and it is of so delicate a nature, that it does not retain its virtues
so long as one could wish. The Indians are much exposed to cold, and frequently
have their hearing much hurt by it, which they cure with the juice of a certain
herb mixed with Bear's grease, or fish oil, and put into the ears. Some who
have tried it told me that it excited the sensation of an explosive noise in
the ear, which opened the organ, after which their hearing returned: but the
most curious thing in their practice, that I have seen, is the different kinds
of baths (I mean baths prepared from different herbs) and ways of sweating for
different diseases: with these and the decoctions they give the patient to
drink at the same time, they do wonders in many diseases. There is now in
London a person of indisputable veracity, who had the operation of sweating
performed upon him by an Indian for a violent toothache, and pain in the face,
he had been long troubled with, which was soon and so effectually removed that
he has never had the least return of it since.

CASES.
MR. THOMAS WHITE, Merchant. This gentleman was about forty years old when he
became my patient; about eight years before, he was attacked, for the first
time, with the Gout; he had several fits in the following years; for two or
three years past the fits were very violent, and usually continued from six
weeks to two months, sometimes three months, before he was able to walk abroad.
Eight months before I saw him he was taken with an intermitting fever: in that
disorder he complained of a pain in the right side, which grew more troublesome
at times afterward. The next fit of the gout came on with its usual violence,
and the pain in his right side returned with it. In the nights his pains became
so violent, as not only to deprive him of sleep, but almost of his senses. The
disorder had continued about three days before the medicines were given, and in
ten days after the first dose he walked to the coffee house; nothing but a
slight tenderness in the soles of his feet remaining, which also soon went off:
and what is remarkable, he never felt any thing of the pain in his side since.
He continued perfectly strong, hearty, and active for four years, without
refraining from those indulgencies which a hospitable, social, and friendly
disposition led him into. He then underwent such another fit as the above, and
from that time he has also enjoyed the same firm state of health as before.

Mr. LEASHELEAR, being attacked with pains in the feet, resembling the first
fits of the Gout, sent for a doctor, who gave him the volatile tincture of
Guaicum, and applied pultices to his feet, which repelled the disorder into his
breast, neck, and head, with such violence, that he was thought to be expiring.
The medicines I administered relieved him in two days; but in crossing a wide
ferry before he had recovered his strength, he caught cold and had a relapse,
which, however, was carried off in two or three days by the same medicines, and
he has from that time continued perfectly well, active, and strong.

JAMES LOWEY, aged about 70 years, had been bedridden, at times, for several
months with the Hip Gout. He had tried many practitioners, and taken various
medicines, but could get no relief. His thigh and leg were diminished.
Notwithstanding these discouraging circumstances, I administered things to him,
and in process of time the thigh and leg recovered their size and strength, and
he came to walk as well as ever.

Capt. SAMUEL BAYARD, aged 60, about 23 years ago was attacked with the Gout,
and from that time, till he applied to me, commonly had a fit once a year, or
thereabouts. During the fit he not only had violent pains in all his limbs, but
in his stomach and bowels. The fits seldom went off in less than six weeks, but
in general they continued much longer, as two or three months. He always lived
high and free. From the very first fit his feet and hands never recovered their
natural feeling, but were dry, hard, and scaly, with great heat in them; and
this, as well in the intervals between the fits, as in the fit itself. His
knees and ancles at last were enlarged, his feet and toes always swelled, and
all those joints were so weak and stiff that he could scarce move them;
walking, as he expressed it, as if he had no joints, or as if his legs and feet
were made of wood. His wrists, hands, and fingers, were not quite so bad,
though in a similar condition, his fingers particularly being so stiff that he
could not by any means extend them out strait, nor bend them without
difficulty: all this while he was much troubled with the gravel, and passed
several small stones. When he applied to me in January, 1760, he was in the
height of a fit: the first night I did nothing, the second I gave him some
medicines, the day following he was free of pain, and in a few days more began
to walk about the room. By continuing the medicines a fortnight, his feet and
hands began to regain their natural feeling, the hardness, heat, and dryness
going off; and in about six weeks or two months his limbs and joints became so
pliant, that he walked with as much ease as before he had the Gout. He went on,
however, taking the medicines for several weeks longer. Since that time he has
felt so little of the Gravel, that, as he says, it was not worth notice. Two
years after this course for the Gout he had a slight touch of the Gravel, and
being costive, took an opening medicine when he went to bed, and drank some
warm whey after it: but contrary to my directions, to take it upon an empty
stomach, he made a very hearty supper, which, with the medicine and the whey
disagreeing with his stomach and bowels, occasioned it to work sooner than was
intended: he fell into a sweat, and the medicine beginning to operate
downwards, he very imprudently got up, with the sweat upon him, and went to a
necessary in the yard. The night was very cold and wet; he was suddenly struck
with a Palsy of all the left side of his body; for five of six days he had
violent pains in that side, but none in the other: the whole side gradually
withered, and became emaciated. He was confined to his bed for some weeks; the
withered parts at last began to recover their plumpness and strength, and, with
my best endeavors, it was about three months before he regained his strength,
and walked with his usual firmness. From that time to the present he has
enjoyed perfect health and the free use of his limbs. He is now as well as any
man of his years. His hands have their natural feeling, his feet perspire
freely, his joints are of their natural size, he has had no pain in his stomach
or bowels, his appetite is good, and he sleeps well. He has had nothing of the
Gou^ since I first took him in hand till within these six months, that he once
or twice felt slight twichings in his feet, but they went off directly with a
copious perspiration on the parts.

I SAMUEL BAYARD, now in London, having read the above account, declare it to
be true in every particular, and am ready, if required, to attest the same; and
that several other Gouty persons, whom I am well acquainted with, have received
great benefi^ from Mr. Flower.

Mr. GOMEZ, Merchant, near 60 years of age, but much more in constitution, ha^
been subject to the Gout for 30 years: for many of the last years he neither
had a complete fit, nor was ever entirely free of pain his legs feet and ancles
were greatly enlarged, and so weak that he could scarce wal^ or stand. He was
very desirous of trying these remedies; and though it was represented to him
that his disorder was too much riveted to admit of a cure, or of much relief,
he insisted upon taking them. He did so for about four weeks: in that time his
legs were somewhat reduced, and the motion of his joints became easier and
freer, but these alterations were of short continuance; for in two or three
months his joints and legs relapsed nearly into their old state. It is to be
observed, that the medicines brought his irregular pains to a regular though
slight fit, which was soon relieved: after this he had much less pain, and
enjoyed much better health.

Mrs. K. aged 49. This lady for some years had been afflicted with a Rheumatism
in her limbs and back, attended with hysterical complaints, as they were
called. In three weeks she was freed of all her complaints, and since that time
has grown fat, hearty and strong.

WILLIAM POST, though but 26 years of age, has had several very severe fits of
the Gout, and between them was much troubled with what were called Rheumatic
pains. He was perfectly cured of a Fit of the Gout in eight or ten days, and is
now in a better state of health than he has been in from the first attack,
having felt nothing of the Gout or Rheumatism ever since.

Mrs. ROSEVELT, aged 54, had been troubled many years with violent Rheumatic
and Hysteric complaints: her hands and fingers were greatly deprived of their
motion, and the joints of the fingers were considerably enlarged and
contracted; several of the faculty had attempted to relieve her. She had also
tried a variety of things recommended by her acquaintances; from some of which
she received a little temporary relief. After a course of these medicines her
pains became easier, and she acquired the use of her hands and fingers, the
swellings that were upon them being softened and diminished.

Captain HICKEY, aged about 38. This gentleman for several years had been
afflicted, at least once a year, with a violent fit of the Gout. Latterly it
seized his arms, hands and knees as well as feet. These fits not only confined
him to his bed or room for two months or more, but even after the fit was gone
off he was liable to have short but painful returns of the disorder upon
catching the least cold. He was cured of the fit in less than half of the time
it usually took to go off, and has not felt any thing like the returns of it,
which formerly happened upon being exposed to the cold.

Captain PAVEY, aged about 50, had been subject to the Gout about 18 years.
While he was in a frontier garrison, in 1759, he was seized with a violent
return of the disorder in his hands, knees and feet, and from the badness of
the accommodations at that place suffered greatly. The disorder, instead of
going off in about six or eight weeks, as usual, confined him almost entirely
for four months to his bed; and though his pains by that time became less
violent and constant, they still continued to afflict him. His ancles, feet and
toes became thicker, and grew so weak and stiff that he could not walk without
great uneasiness and difficulty. In this condition he was brought to town in
1761. He took the medicines, and lived very regularly for about four weeks, and
received so much benefit from them, that, being able to walk or go abroad with
greater ease and facility, he met with too many temptations not to be guilty of
some intemperance: but notwithstanding these irregularities, and repeated
neglects in taking his medicines, in about two months, from the time he began
to take them, he got almost rid of the frequent pains he had been troubled with
since the last fit; his ancles, etc. became less, the joints grew stronger and
more supple, and he might now have walked with firmness and ease on any ground,
but for a pointed hardness or cornlike substance on the ball of the great toe,
that gave him pain whenever, in walking the streets, he happened to tread on a
round stone. In May following he went to sea, and was 28 days on his passage to
Bristol; during the voyage he was very well, hearty and lived free. A few weeks
after his arrival in England he had a slight fit of the Gout, the pains were
but trifling, and in three days, his feet having sweat plentifully, the
disorder went entirely off. He continued after that perfectly well, and felt no
inconveniency or pain but what the induration occasioned when he happened to
tread directly upon it: he found himself indeed so well and hearty, that he
thought of procuring a commission again in the army, which he had quitted on
account of being rendered unfit for service by this disorder.

I am far from thinking this gentleman is cured of the Gout, but I am
persuaded, that if he had behaved with more regularity the time he was taking
the medicines, he would have received relief sooner, and continued a longer
time free from a return of the disorder.

Captain VALENTINE, aged about 50. This gentleman had always indulged too much
in social pleasures to escape the Gout: for several years he had been very much
subject to it: the attacks of it were sometimes regular and of a longer or
shorter duration: the last fit happened when he commanded a Privateer, and was
on a cruise at sea: his arms, wrists, fingers, knees, ancles, feet and toes
were cruelly afflicted: he was confined on ship board to his bed about three or
four months, and was afterward grievously troubled with pains in all the above
mentioned parts. Those joints were all swelled, and so stiff and weak, that he
could not write, and he fed himself and walked with great difficulty. In this
condition he had been several months when he sent to me. He took the medicines
with some interruption about four months, and by that time regained, in a great
measure, the use of his limbs, and got quit of his pains; the thickness of some
of his joints went off, in others it was much reduced: he got a good appetite,
a good healthy complexion, slept well, and walked with ease and firmness. This
happened in 1761: since that time he has had a fit or two, which went off in
two or three days, without any assistance from medicine.

Mr. WILLIAM DARLINGTON, Wine Merchant, aged 45 years, had been severely
afflicted with the Gout, once or twice a year, for 15 years. For two or three
years past his legs were frequently swelled, and his ancles and upper part of
the feet, for the most part of that time, were much enlarged and weaker than
formerly. One leg was much more swelled than the other, and had several
Scorbutic Ulcers upon it. The former fits of the Gout usually lasted eight or
ten weeks. He had labored under the present attack about four days when I was
called to him, and from the violence of the symptoms imagined it would continue
the usual time: he took the medicines regularly; the pains were carried off in
24 hours; the thickness and swellings of his leg, ancles and feet, which had
lasted so long, diminished gradually; his appetite, strength and spirits
returned; and he was able to walk about the house in 10 days: his feet
continued tender, though free of pain, for a few days longer: but at the end of
the fortnight he put on a pair of smaller shoes than he had wore for some
years, and went abroad about his business. He has continued active, strong and
hearty, without any illness whatever, or the least return either of his Gouty
or Scorbutic complaints, though it is now above five years since he applied to
me. He is much accustomed to stamp his feet with all his force, to show how
strong and free of disorders they are.

JOHN DUNSCOMB, Wine Merchant, 52 years of age, almost every spring and fall
for near 20 years had been tormented with the Gout: he seldom got the better of
a fit in less than two months, and they frequently continued longer. In the
winter, 1760, he was taken with a return of the disorder in his hands, knees,
and feet, attended with violent pains in his stomach, bowels, hips, etc. The
fourth day from the beginning of the fit his breath was much oppressed, his
knees, legs, and feet vastly swelled, and so much discolored, that it was
apprehended, by a gentleman of the faculty who saw him in the afternoon, that a
mortification would come on before the next morning. In the evening he became
delirious at times; in one of the intervals of sense he sent for me; I did for
him what I thought proper; in a few hours afterward his pains became easier;
he passed a good night; the next morning the swelling of the knees, legs, and
feet, was greatly abated, and they had regained their natural color; he felt
no pain, except a very little in an old scar on one knee, was lively and full
of spirits, without thirst, and had a good appetite: in 10 days more he was
perfectly well, a tenderness only remaining in his feet for some days longer.
He has had lately a slight attack, that was too inconsiderable to deserve
notice, going off in a day or two of itself; and when I left him in New York
last January he was hearty and strong.

Mrs. ZURACHER, aged 32, having taken cold in lying-in, was seized with pains
in all her joints, that fixed at last in her left knee, which swelled greatly,
and became excessive hard and painful. It had been in this situation between
two and three months when I was called, and was daily growing worse in spite of
the internal and external medicines she used: but in a week after she was able
to walk about, and at the end of the fortnight was quite well.

Mr. TROOP, Merchant. This gentleman, between 40 and 50 years of age, had been
confined to his chamber in the winter for above six weeks, with a violent
Rheumatism affecting most of his limbs. In the summer following he came to town
and caught cold, which brought on a return of his disorder: the pain affected
every limb, and almost every joint: his servants were obliged to put him to bed
and take him up, being unable to help himself. Notwithstanding the advantage of
the season, he apprehended, from the violence of the disease, that it would
continue some weeks. When I saw him he had been ill but two or three days. I
gave him some medicines in the evening, the next morning his pains were gone,
the limbs were supple and easy, he got up without assistance, and in the
afternoon went, in a carriage, a dozen miles to his country seat, and I never
heard that he had the least return of it, though it is now above four years ago.

I insert the following case because I think it singular; and as I have
mentioned the Indian Antispasmodic root, I shall add an instance or two of its
effects.

JOHN ABEL, about 40 years of age. This man had been subject to the Epilepsy or
Falling Sickness for many years: the fits had latterly become more frequent
than before: instead of attacking him once in ten days or a fortnight, they
came on almost every day, and sometimes he had two or three fits in a day. The
most remarkable thing in this case, and for which I relate it, was a sensation
of intense coldness he complained of in his stomach: he described it to be like
a piece in his stomach of the size of a dollar or greater, that was like so
much ice. He took many things to warm his stomach, but the strongest spirits
and the warmest medicines he could swallow gave him no relief. He had taken
bark, Valerian, Steel, and other things, without benefit. Within a week from
the time I began with him he got rid of the coldness in his stomach, and his
fits stopped. I went on giving him medicines, and the fits did not return for
three months; and in all probability he would have been completely cured, if he
had not thought himself well, and upon the strength of that laid aside all
restraint, and made too free with his constitution. The disorder then returned
and gradually became worse; but before it had got to the former height he
applied to a foreign practitioner, and died, as I was informed, of an apoplexy.

Mrs. B. a gentlewoman about 40 years old, had a numbness in one leg; had been
long troubled with Dropsical swellings of the legs, and afflicted with various
nervous complaints to a terrible degree. I gave her an infusion of the root I
mentioned before; it promoted the discharge by urine, expelled vast quantities
of wind, procured a good appetite, sweet refreshing sleep, and restored her to
perfect health as a person now in London can testify.

Mrs. PELHAM, about forty years old, for a dozen years, and more, was afflicted
with many nervous complaints, and many disorders in consequence of them: wind
and swellings of the stomach and bowels, indigestion, costiveness, lowness of
spirits, pains in the head, giddiness, universal languor and debility, pains in
the breast, obstructions in the monthly evacuations, little urine, rising in
the throat, cough, swelled legs, etc. In this long course of years she tried
many doctors, and many medicines, that were recommended to her; but nothing
gave her any more than momentary relief, except the Indian root; which, in a
few weeks, removed all her complaints, and restored her to perfect health and
strength.

I could relate many instances of persons who were rescued from destruction by
these medicines, when the Gout, after destroying the joints, and going through
the tragical scene described by Sydenham, had, at last, brought on most
dangerous symptoms, by invading the noble parts, as the head, stomach, bowels,
lungs, etc. The foregoing histories, however, sufficiently prove their great
efficacy in the most stubborn cases; and therefore, instead of swelling this
little tract with superfluous instances of the like nature, I shall throw
together a few loose observations that may be of real use.

The Gout, it is well known, oftentimes puts on the appearance of other
diseases: many such cases I have cured. In some instances I tried these
medicines without any suspicion of the Gout being the cause of the disorder, or
for any other reason than because the medicines were safe, and every thing else
had been tried in vain; and I was agreeably surprised to see my patients get
rid of their old complaints upon falling into a fit of the Gout. I have known
this happen to several people who had been long afflicted with nervous and
scorbutic diseases, as they were supposed to be; such as giddiness, dimness of
sight, noise in the ears, pains and stiffness in the head and in the eyes,
asthmas, pains in the breast, consumptions, palsies, pains in the loins
mistaken for gravel or stone, oppression and lowness of spirits, fluxes,
obstructions in the liver, certain female complaints, etc. all which arose from
a Gouty cause, as the effects of the medicines, and the recovery of the
patients, proved.

In the treatment of Gouty persons I do not confine myself to my own remedies:
I take all the assistance I can from the medicines in common use; and, for that
reason, I generally mix other medicines with my own, to assist or determine
their operation and effects, as I think best, according to the constitution of
the person, and the nature and seat of the disorder in different patients: I
also vary the method of proceeding as to bleeding, vomiting, sweating, purging,
etc. in different cases, in the management and regular application of which
particulars I received considerable assistance and information, while I was in
America, from Sir James Jay, to whom I communicated my discoveries and
improvements, in return for his candid behavior to me. And since I have
mentioned that gentleman's name, I must take the liberty to add, that he saw
several of the patients whose cases are related in this tract, and attended
some of them, at the request of the persons, to assist me in the treatment of
them.

I do not assert it as a fact, but I am inclined to think that these medicines,
after carrying off the Gouty matter that occasions the present fit, prevent the
return of the disorder by rectifying those particular secretions and excretions
which are naturally destined to discharge those morbid particles that, when
they are retained in the body, and collected in sufficient quantity, bring on
the fit: and what particularly makes me think so is, that many people who are
liable to the Gout feel slight pains whenever the perspiration in the feet is
obstructed; that many people who have been troubled for years together with
constant heat, dryness, and frequent sharp pains in the feet, were perfectly
cured when their feet were brought to perspire freely and naturally by the use
of these medicines: and further, as far as I have been able to observe, those
persons are most severely afflicted with the Gout who have the least
perspiration in the feet.

The affinity between the nature of the Gout and Stone is well known; but I
don't know that any one has taken notice that there is an affinity also in
their cure. It has indeed, I think, been thought that some things which were
supposed to have given relief in the Gout, increased the calculous complaints
the patients were troubled with. If this be true, it amounts to no more than
what I have said before, that those Gout medicines did not cure, but suppressed
the disorder, and instead of expelling the Gouty matter, only diverted the
natural course of it. But I have had the pleasure to observe, that some
patients of mine, who were afflicted with both these cruel diseases, have met
with relief for the Stone while I was treating them for the Gout alone. I shall
say no more of the Stone at present, but defer the account of the experiments I
made with various solvents, and of their effects on the body, till another
opportunity.

I selected the preceding cases for publilication because they are all of long
standing, and therefore the fittest to determine the merit of my discoveries
and improvements; most of them happened above five years, none less than four
years ago. Instances of a later date would be inconclusive; we could not depend
on the continuance of the good effects of the medicines, nor could we be
certain that bad consequences would not ensue: but in these cases both those
points are sufficiently determined. These cases are some of the most
favorable, as well as unfavourable, that occurred. I could relate some others
of a more striking nature, which I suppress, that I might not give uneasiness,
or seem to reflect on any person. I hope the public will excuse the
inaccuracies of style, etc. in this little performance, for I have bestowed
more time and pains in searching into the works of nature, the powers of
natural bodies, the productions of chemistry, and their effects on the human
frame in various diseases, than in studying the beauties of language.

N. B. Captain BAYARD, whose case has been related, may be seen at the NEW YORK
Coffee-House in Sweetings-Alley, Cornhill, every day, about Change hours.

FINIS.

