OBSERVATIONS ON THE USE of BATHING; WARM and COLD: AND THE Diseases it will
cure without a Doctor.

WITH An Account of the Cicer Venereum, or (...); the celebrated Restorative
among the ancient Greeks, used in their BATHS and at their TABLES.

Illustrated with its Figure.

LONDON: Printed for J. DAVIS in Piccadilly, and M. COOPER in Paternoster-Row.

MDCCLIX.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

TO The Right Honorable the Lord SOUTHWELL.
My LORD,
IF I could want better motives for laying this slight treatise at your
lordship's feet, there is a duty would compel me to it: the thought on which
it is built was wholly yours: and though my very just sense of its imperfections
forbids my putting my name to the piece; I may, without boasting, say, that I
felt an extreme pride when your lordship thought me equal to the undertaking of
reducing it to form. The world will say I have cause: for it knows no person of
whose favorable opinion an author may so reasonably be proud.

YOU were pleased to demand of me no more than a sketch; nor does this attempt
claim any higher title. If it should lead those to think more upon the subject,
within whose province it lies to explain the matter perfectly, and whose
authority can bring the practice into use, I shall have done all I presumed to
undertake.

YOUR lordship will be pleased to pardon this address: It breathes no flattery,
for he who writes it has none of their views, whose rank praise offends even
the ears to which it is addressed. His whole pride was to say how perfectly,
and with what true respect he is,

My LORD, Your LORDSHIP'S Most obedient Servant, The AUTHOR.

INTRODUCTION.
MORE deseases may be prevented, and more actually cured by one or the other
kind of bathing than by medicines. This the concurrent testimony of all ages,
and all countries avows: but there may be also danger attending the
inconsiderate and unskilful use of either. This is the occasion of the present
treatise, in which it is proposed to give in a succinct view what is already
known upon the subject; and preserving a middle course between the rash zeal of
the advocates for this practice, and their vain terrors who oppose it;
absolutely to show wherein it may be useful, wherein dangerous; to limit the
cases and prescribe the circumstances in which it will do good; and by free
cautions against its use in those wherein it may be mischievous, to prevent all
accidents: to restore the original credit of the practice, and to do some
service to mankind.

THE USE of BATHING.
CHAP. I.
BATHING has doubless been coeval with mankind: cleanliness and pleasure would
lead them early to it, and the advantages were evident. The cold bath was the
first; for every pond and river gave the opportunity: and they who used it
found that they were stronger in their bodies, and more lively in their
imaginations than those who did not. They found they escaped sickness also: it
was natural to attribute this to the coldness, and thence to seek for the same
purpose the coldest waters. Religion countenanced the practice, and
purifications with water were made essential ceremonies. Fraud followed: for an
artful race of priests, sensible of the good from bathing in extreme cold
water, dedicated springs to saints, and the cures the water made were
attributed to the patron of the fountain.

WARM bathing followed naturally. The earth in many places sends out hot
springs: these were more pleasant to the flesh in washing, and they were
therefore more used: some who had coarse eruptions on their skin were cured by
this entirely; in others headachs ceased, and in many more complaints of long
continuance vanished. One, tortured with the cholic, when he bathed found
instant ease; another who was dumb, from hoarsness, spoke; and was frighted at
the unaccustomed sound of his own voice; a third bursting with suppressed
urine, expecting only ease, grew instantly relieved of his complaints.

THE effects appeared miraculous; and lying doctors as ignorant as priests were
cunning, attributed these cures to they knew not what minerals imprequating the
Spring: ignorant: and desirous their patiant should continue ignorant that all
these diseases, and with these many more, might be cured by warm water only.

BUT before physicians interferred the practice spread; and became, wherever
there were these hot springs universal.

WHERE they were wanting plain reason taught their nature, and tutored people
to imitate them: common water was easily warmed, and this performed the service.

THIS was all nature taught, and this they found sufficient: ingenious art,
ingenious for the uses of the artist, soon introduced a multitude of folly.
Thus doctors who had fancied minerals in all the hot baths, because they found
them in a few, added them under various preparations to these they made art.
Iron and copper became general ingredients, and they dreamed something of the
vague acid, though they had not yet its name. The red hot slags from iron-works
and copper furnaces were thrown into the water and miracles attributed to them:
and hence the unfeeling folly of the physicians came by degrees to baths of
INFANTS BLOOD.

BUT while we charge barbarous antiquity with these abuses, let us except those
nations among whom science flourished, and with it all true knowledge; from
whom we have deduced our best discoveries; and from whom we might borrow many
more, if it were as much a custom to study, as it is a glory to pretend to study
them.

THE Greeks considered warm baths as warm water; but then they added plain and
simple things to assist the intention; bran, soap, emollient herbs: no more.
And they had fragrant oils and precious ointments to use afterward, which
served the two great needful purposes, refreshing the spirits, and preventing
those mischiefs which might ot herwise have followed sudden cold.

What these were is a point involved in some obscurity, for the originals speak
a broken language; and howsoever learned their commentators may have been in
words, they were all wholly unacquainted with the things concerned. The Greek
plants are less known than almost any other subject of antiquity: with what
success they have been sought by the nameless author of these enquiries, those
who have most learning will be best able to determine: at least they have been
sought with diligence and candor.

WHILE priesthood, physic, fraud, and folly were obscuring the great light of
nature in this instance, among people who were distinguished by the fine term
civilized, honest nature taught the Savages of other quarters not only the use
of cold water, but to roll themselves in snow: and not alone to plunge into the
natural warm bath, or make one by the help of fire; but to seize whatsoever
offered like it.

IN some places there rise hot vapors out of the earth, and on these they
placed themselves to grow warm by them: when this advantage did not offer they
seated themselves against a sand bank of earth which faced the south. In the
middle of a clear hot day; and covering their feet with the loose dust, stood
to be heated thoroughly; in other places they heated turfs; and lay on them,
and were covered with them: and elsewhere threw their bodies upon heaps of
fermenting dung.

THUS nature led the way to the use of bathing, and it was well for the world
while science only followed her steps. Health was presorved by the cold baths,
before 'twas known diseases could be cured by them; and half the destructive
legion of chronic complaints were cured familiarly. So much plain reason
taught, and they were happy who obeyed her guidance.

CHAP. II. Of the Use of Bathing among the Greeks and Romans.
EGYPT in the earliest times whereof we have account, adopted and improved the
natural use of bathing, in both hot and cold water; and from that people
probably the Greeks derived its rational use, together with their other
knowledge. In this case as all others, they soon became more eminent than their
originals: for whatsoever they adopted they improved. In their heroic ages we
read they bathed in rivers or the sea, and there is reason to believe though
facts are handed down from these uncertain times very obscurely, that they
distinguished the salt from fresh water. Even hot baths were as early as the
times when Homer lived: perhaps as those concerning which he wrote. Pythagoras
taught to his countrymen what he had learned in Egypt of their use; and from
his time, though for some ages slowly, they were made a regular part of medicine.
From thence they were soon brought into the lists of luxury, and then the
chaste manners of that honorable people would not suffer them public. Those
who had occasion made them in their houses, and they were again given back to
the relief of sickness; their natural and original use.

ROME borrowed them from Greece. Even the name Thermae is not of the other
origin. They considered them as an article of luxury and pleasure, as much as
of medicinal virtue: and after the fatigue of the day they prepared themselves
by bathing, rubbing and anointing, for the table and the pleasures of the
evening: both nations were wise enough to know, that which could preserve might
also restore their health; and, by both the hot and the cold baths were used
also in the cure of diseases. The Greek and Latin medicinal writers equally
name them in this light, from Hippocrates downward to the last.

THE accounts we have of the manner of bathing for medicinal purposes are very
obscure, but it is most probable they proceeded thus. The person who was to have
the advantage of a warm bath, was led into an antichamber of the stove; here he
took off part of his habit: when warmed in this place he was led into the
stove; there he was soon made very hot, and being wholly stripped he was set in
a tub, and a quantity of warm water was poured upon his head: after this he
plunged into the warm bath; and when he came out of this he was rubbed dry, and
then anointed with oils.

THIS was the complete method: but in many cases a part of the ceremony only
was used, the warm rooms alone, or these and the warm water were esteemed
sufficient; but always anointing with the oils closed the ceremony.

THE cold bathing was conducted with less ceremony; but as rationally. The
person was plunged into the water headlong; then when he came out he was rubbed
dry, and afterward he was anointed with oils.

THESE were the customs of the Greeks, and from these the Romans varied but
little. They grew careless, and made both kinds of bathing slighter and more
frequent among those in health: but for the sick the same methods still were
used. Mischief happened sometimes from bathing, as well as often good: we
better undestand the danger, but we have less sense of the real advantages; it
may be therefore useful to endeavor to introduce again some of the neglected
practices of the Greeks; and to lay down before the public the diseases in
which bathing will be a cure; and the danger which may attend its improper use.

CHAP. III. Of the Uses of the Warm Bath.
PERSPIRATION is a first essential to health: the obstruction of this brings on
fullness, fevers, pains in the head, and a multitude of other disorders, all
which may be removed at once by a proper use of the warm bath. The obstruction
of perspiration arises usually at once from the effect of cold; or more slowly
by cutaneous foulnesses: These often begin from a stoppage of perspiration, and
they always increase it. In either case the warm bath is a cure.

IT relaxes the skin and opens the pores, and nothing is so effectual in
cleaning away every kind of foulness. The slighter disorders which rise from an
obstructed perspiration, COLDS as we call them, and the whole train of their
attendant symptoms vanish at once, by the effect of a warm bath: this would
make the recourse to it universal in these cases, but that there follows the
immediate danger of taking cold again: the effect of the chill air being the
greater, as the pores have been left so particularly open. Our custom is to be
put immediately into bed from a warm bath; but this is neither necessary nor
right, the effect has been produced in the bath, and to what purpose should the
person weaken himself, and open the pores yet more by a continued heat.

THE Greeks went from the bath into their heating rooms, and cooled gradually
before they went to bed. They understood the danger of exposing themselves
suddenly to the cold air which they avoided, and even took precautions that the
difference between the air of the bathing room and that of the apartment into
which they went should not hurt them. These were rubbing and anointing; and
with these we, though our country is colder, might return from the warm bath into
a warm apartment without danger. We should thus have all the advantages of the
heat without weakening ourselves by it; and it would set aside half the need of
medicine.

THE uses of warm bathing among the Greeks, exclusive of the mere consideration
of luxury and amusement, may be reduced to three. 1st. The relaxing of the skin
and opening of the pores. 2d. The cleansing of cutaneous foulness and cure of
the disorders of the skin. 3d. The strengthening the parts, and conveying the
virtues of powerful medicines immediately to them.

THE two first are plain and obvious; but to the third slight readers will
object, because it seems contradictory: the absolute effect of warm baths being
not to strengthen but relax: yet to this seeming argument it is easy to oppose
facts. The Greeks were faithful, and they name the effects: and to confirm
this, we have in Hoffman, a writer scarce less accurate than themselves, a
singular account of the Caroline baths, which, though hot, he says, strengthen,
not relax the parts, because of the astringency of an ochreous earth contained
in them.

THEREFORE the thing is practicable: what we have found done in one place by
nature, they did by art at pleasure; and it is certain they might do it better:
for the virtues of astringent plants are much more easily conveyed to water
than those of astringent earths.

A WARM bath is a general fomentation: we may do what they did, and we have the
means: Whatsoever effect a warm fomentation can take upon a limb by means of
its ingredients, the same a warm bath impregnated with the same ingredients may
on the whole body. Where the complaint is local we plainly see the good effects
of medicated water, for fomentations in general are no other; and where the
malady is universal the same good will be attained by a bath made with the same
ingredients.

WARM water answers the common purposes alone; and whether this; or the
medicated baths be used, the same precautions will prevent all bad accidents.

WHAT is here advanced is the doctrine of plain reason supported by ancient
medicine, I hope it will be soon corroborated farther by the modern: I can
propose it only: for it is an age in which some think, and others practice.

CHAP. IV. Of bathing for relaxation only.
IN the first and most natural use of warm bathing, which is only to relax the
skin and open the pores, nothing more need be considered than to have a pure
light water for the purpose; and to avoid cold afterward.

THE Greeks, whom I would propose as models, we see, first warmed the body
gradually, for this practice, by the air of a heated room; then poured on warm
water, and immediately gave the bath: then after rubbing dry, they used their
oils: It will be an addition to our common practice to observe this gradual
preparation for the bath; and it is worth while to enquire diligently after the
Composition of those medicines, which they have mentioned as of so much
importance.

THE effects ascribed to them by candid writers, show they deserved that
praise: but as to the composition of them we are altogether (...) and
negligent; neither affecting to know them, nor attempting to imitate them. We
want them more than they did: for our climate being colder, the danger of
taking cold, which they were invented to obviate, is with us greater.

CHAP. V. Of the Grecian oils and ointments.
IF we would learn any thing truly of the oils and ointments used by the
ancient Greeks after warm bathing, we must first distinguish them from those
employed upon different occasions. They had in all three kinds: the first were
an article of luxury, and in these only fragrance was considered; the second
kind were for those who used great bodily exercise; and the third for health.
These last alone were for the use of those who bathed.

THE fragrant ointments came in at all great entertainments with the second
course, when the guests dressed themselves in flowery garlands; the second sort
were very simple, and were furnished at the public expense; the third alone
employed the care of the physicians. These were composed with so good a choice
of the ingredients, and so much care, and such perfect art in compounding, that
it would be well if modern pharmacy would copy them.

THE receipts for several of these are preserved by Dioscordes; but the
earliest and most celebrated must be traced much higher. These researches are
so slightly practiced now, that men think it a great thing if they can quote
Pliny. An author is produced as an authority whose errors are more numerous
than his paragraphs: for often one of these has been compiled from half a dozen
former writers; no two of whom were of the same opinion. In the present
instance, if we take this collector's word we shall believe the Greeks adopted
Persian customs only in this matter; and that the first chest of ointments
their country saw was taken by Alexander in the tent of Darius.

WHERE Pliny found such a piece of history none knows, but it is astonishing he
should adopt it. Ointments of these kinds are named by authors who wrote long
before the time of Alexander; and the Greek comedies, of the earliest date,
rally this piece of luxury. Alcaeus Sappho and Anacreon we find plainly knew
them, and spoke of them as things in common use: Sophocles scents with these
precious unguents his Venus, and anoints his Pallas: the verses of Archilochus
named them; and it would be ridiculous to think the (...) of Homer meant any
other than an ointment of which roses were the base, and the receipt of which
is yet extant in Dioscordes. (...) is the more common term, but they meant
nothing else also by their (...).

THE Romans had the like ointments early; and were extravagant in them to an
excess: they imported such as they fancied Asia produced better than their own,
after the defeat of Antiochus; and it was an article of luxury, carried soon to
so high an abuse, that the censors passed a solemn ordonance that no exotic
oils should be brought into the country.

THESE were the compositions with which Toti madebant, as their Poets spoke it;
and these only were interdicted. They had at home the choicest saffron, and the
drugs for many others; and they were at liberty still to to import myrrh and
spices, the principal ingredients of the rest, useful in the preservation of
health. These they had learned from the chaste and hardy Greeks: others from
softer, and effeminate nations.

AMONG the oils and ointments sacred to health, the principal were those which
made a part of the bathing operations: by which they prevented all the
dangerous consequences that could have attended the warm bath; and availed
themselves of all its possible benefits.

THEIR intent in these compositions was to stop the pores, warm the body, and
refresh the spirits. The very nature of the oil answered, in a great measure,
the first purpose; the warmth of the spices did the second; and the natural
fragrance of these and the rest of the ingredients, took the place of Asiatic
luxury in performing the last. We in our baths want these helps; and it is to
the inventors of the receipts we are to look up for them.

THE general ingredients were oil and spices: and the usual method of
composition was this. They boiled the common spices in the oil, and afterward
added the more rich and fragrant; cautious that their virtues would have been
lost if added before boiling. They were usually composed of many ingredients;
and had their names from the principal. Sometimes they made them by insolation,
exposing the oils and ingredients a long time to the sun, to answer the purpose
of fire: to some they added a little wax; and sometimes, if we believe Galen,
resin: to others also they plainly added vinegar. The (...) as they expressed
themselves were those which had wax, and were to be rubbed into the flesh; and
their (...) were such as had only the oils and spices, and were just poured
upon the body. The latter were properly oils, and the former ointments.

WE should do well to imitate the care wherewith the Greeks selected their
ingredients. The oil for this purpose was pressed from unripe olives; and had
therefore an astringency, which no common oil has: and as they found this
necessary quality was lost after a time, the oil mellowing with keeping, they
never used it except fresh. We know the danger of cold after a bath is from the
relaxed state of the skin, and extreme openness of the pores; we understand oil
fills them, and that way prevents taking cold: but we see also the Greek oil
constringed them; even before it had the virtue of the spices.

THE oil in most frequent use with the Greeks after bathing was the (...), the
oil of roses. The composition we have in Dioscordes, and it was excellent. The
single red rose was the flower used in this; it was taken just in the bud, and
only the red put in, the white heel being cut off because less astringent:
these rose buds were pressed to pieces in the hands, anointed first with honey.
They were put into this oil of unripe olives: as many were used as the oil
would contain; and they were worked about in it: after this they stood all
night, and in the next morning they pressed out the oil. They added then fresh
rose buds, in an equal quantity, and managed them in the same manner: they
repeated this to the seventh time. To this oil they added some more of the same
kind scented with schaenanth, by boiling that ingredient first in oil and water.

WE have no such compositions as this now made. Those who prepare medicines
have not the Grecian industry, nor those who prescribe the receipts, the
Grecian knowledge. We have an oil of roses: but how is it made? roses are
boiled in oil till they are crisp, and the oil is then pressed out. The
preparation is easy, but having no virtue it is neglected. Those who make
medicines should be told this seven times repeated maceration of the Greeks
gives seventy times the virtue of one boiling; and their directors should also
know, that he who first ordered the breaking of the roses to be performed
depiction of the leaves and flowers of a plant Cicer Venereum
with hands anointed with honey, knew there was a peculiar power in that
substance of dissolving the best part of the rose, and making it mix with the
oil.

WE see how things incapable of mixture by themselves are brought to it by the
addition of some third substance, the yolk of an egg thus mixes turpentine and
water; and the volatile alkalies mix water and oil: Honey has the same effect
in mixing oil with the most perfect and effectual part of this flower. It is
originally itself a vegetable substance, and has the quality of uniting the
oleaginous and astringent parts of other vegetables.

WE see the path we are to follow if we would recover the advantages of
bathing: we must pursue their steps who first discovered them. Our oil of roses
would act merely as fat: But this is something more. The unripe oil has its own
austere quality, and by this repeated maceration it would have all the
astringency of that noble flower. We cannot well scent it with schaenanth, for
the light flavor of that herb is lost in drying: but as they expected only a
scent from this, we need not lament the loss: a very small quantity of winter's
bark boiled the same way would answer its purpose; or the medicine would have
equal effect without it.

THUS we may supply ourselves with the plain and familiar oil used in the
Grecian and Roman baths: and we may for the delicate or curious go much
farther. Great Persons among them used on these occasions oils or unguents
approaching to the nature of those imported from the Asiatics, for luxury.
These were cordial as well as properly astringent: for it is certain cordials
may in a certain degree, be conveyed by the scent.

AMONG their costly ointments, the principal were three: they took their names
from spikenard, cinnamon, and saffron. The first and last of these were merely
articles of luxury; but that which had its name from cinnamon, was an invention
of Theophrastus; and he, who was too great and honest to encourage the follies
of his countrymen, meant it for use after bathing. It long continued the first
and most reputed unguent for that purpose. According to the accounts extant,
concering it 'twas made thus.

Grind to a fine powder four ounces of the purest myrrh; add to this three
ounces of thin honey, such as runs freely from the comb, rub these a long time
together, adding some juice of the blossoms of the vine.

THESE flowers of the vine were what the old Greeks called aenanthe, and 'twas
the plain sense of the word (...). Some rash translators fancied they meant the
plant which we call now aenanthe, the water dropwort. They made an unguent from
rough oil and blossoms of the vine alone: but the most judicious preferred the
(...) to that; and used those flowers only in this composition.

WHEN the myrrh honey and juice have been a long time worked together, add oil
of the ben nut (this was the famous (...)) two quarts: mix these, and then stir
in of costus and amomum, each one ounce, bruised, and schaenanth cut small,
half an ounce; put in a pint of water, and boil the whole till the water is
evaporated. Powder three ounces of choice cinnamon. Cover the sides and bottom
of an earthen vessel with honey; put into it the powder of cinnamon, and then
strain in the oil from the other ingredients. Expose this to the sun a month:
then add one ounce of more cinnamon powdered; let it stand ten days longer, and
then strain it off.

THIS with the common qualities of oil, had a sufficient astringency, and a
cordial virtue. This the great persons among the Greeks used when they arose
from the bath; and prepared for their evening entertainments: Their slaves
rubbed it all over their bodies. It was expensive, but 'twas well worth the
Price. The receipt here given is not any where entire; for it was among the
lost works of Theophrastus; but we collect it piece meal among the inestimable
remnants of antiquity. Dioscorides has an ointment of the same name, but it
wants some of the original ingredients; and seems an imperfect receipt only of
one of the luxurious unguents of the soft Asiaticks.

CHAP. VI. Of the Use of the warm Bath in England, with the Grecian Ointments.
BEFORE we proceed to the other uses of warm bathing, let us consider what
might be the benefit of the practice, with this assistance, in the most common
cases.

COLDS are very frequent from the irregular weather of our climate: they are
troublesome and painful in themselves; and they bring on three fourths of the
other diseases. A warm bath will be a certain cure for these; and this ointment
will prevent all danger.

LOWNESS OF SPIRITS is another national disorder. This rises often from
repletion only; and this will be always cured as infallibly by the same
practice.

HEAD-ACHS are almost as common; and often they are inveterate. We know, that
placing the feet in warm water frequently cures them: a complete warm bath
would do it always.

WE shall treat presently of those other disorders, which may be cured by warm
bathing; the person being secured from danger by one of these ointments.

FOR the common purpose bagnio's must not be used, for there will be danger
always in returning from them. The bath must be at home: and nothing is so
easy. Let the bathing tub be large enough, let rain water be used; or if that
cannot be had, any soft water; and let the person go into it between seven and
eight in the evening.

HE should remain in it about twelve minutes; then let warm cloths be ready to
wipe him dry, and with his own hands let him rub over his body with a little of
one or the other of these ointments. This should be the common practice; and
for this use, the cinnamon ointment is most proper. Or when an extreme cold, or
a desperate headache require staying longer in the water, the rose oil should
be used.

AFTER rubbing with this, he should put on easy and warm clothes, and going
into his dining room, warmed by a good fire; wait there for supper.

IF there were only pleasure meant by this, it would be excellently worth the
trouble; for the ease and refreshment which follow, are not to be described:
cheerfulness and a good appetite attend uon it; and there will be less danger
even in too much wine, after this, than at any other time.

IF every gentleman in England would thus far copy the manners of the Greeks
and Romans, he would feel what he so often hears, that they were the happiest
people in the world.

CHAP. VII. Of the Use of the warm Baths, with the assistance of the Smegmata
of the Greeks.
WHEN cutaneous diseases are to be cured by the warm bath, the first article is
perfectly cleaning the skin; and to this purpose it is easy to add some
ingredient to the water, which will assist. The Greeks, whom I would make our
masters in this article, had many such, exceeding one another in power; which
they used severally according to the obstinacy of the disorder. These they
called smegmata: and to these it will be proper we have recourse for the same
service. The mildest of them were the chaffy substance, separated from the
pulse kinds, as bran from the flour of wheat. Of all the pulse kind, they
preferred for this purpose the cicer or chich: this was their Erebinthos, so
celebrated and so justly. We know the effect of bran; but this has much more.
They separated only a part of the meal from this, and beating up the husky
remains into a paste, with a little water, they used this as soap. The person
after he had been some time in the warm water, to soften the scurff and other
foulness, rubbed himself gently with this paste of the chich bran, and letting
it melt off with the water, washed himself, and then rubbed on more of it. Thus
by degrees the foulness was got away. It was not the work of one day or of two,
but they were contented to bring it on by slow degrees. After this had been
done a week, or more, they began scraping the whole body while in the bath,
with knives, whose blades were of gold. This perfected the cleansing of the
surface, after the opening of the pores by the bath, as we shall show in the
next chapter.

WHEN this was not sufficient, they used also an alkaline salt. This has been
little understood, for it was called an earth. There rises at this time upon
the surface of the ground, a salt of the fixed alkaline kind, in many parts of
the east: they have it about Smyrna now, and it is called soap earth, because
it answers the purposes of soap; the principal ingredient of which is a fixed
alkali.

A small quantity of this salt was dissolved in the water of the bath; and the
chich bran was used as before, which with this assistance had double effect. It
is the quality of the fixed alkaline salts to soften water, and a small
quantity of some of them should always be added, when no sufficiently soft
water can be had.

IT would be easy to obtain these Ingredients, though they are not at present in
common use; and it would be highly proper: I would recommend not only the sense
and spirit of the Greek instruction, but the very letter. One alkaline salt may
indeed serve this purpose, as well as another, for there is very little
difference between them: but it is not so with regard to the farinaceous
vegetable substances. A little pearl ashes may be used in the place of the soap
earth, but we have nothing that will supply equally well the place of the cicer.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Virtues of the Grecian Cicer.
THE mealy part of this pulse is the softest of all farinaceous powders; and
the skins have not the harsh and husky nature of bran, or of the hulls of
oatmeal; every one knows the rinds of corn are hard: the chich is of the pea
kind, and its skin is naturally soft and tough. It mellows in the warm water,
and becomes extremely fit for rubbing on the skin; and its emollient quality is
lasting.

IT IS easy to be raised in our gardens; being as hardy as the common pea: and
there is another virtue which it possesses in an eminent degree, and which
should recommend it farther: It may be eaten as pease; and is the most
strengthening of all foods. Its peculiar virtue is as a provocative to venery.
This it does safely; not by stimulating the organs, but by supplying the
juices, therefore the use of it is innocent, and the benefit is natural and
lasting. Men whose desires outlived their faculties among the old Greeks,
prolonged the season of delight by this pulse, many years: and if a greater
instance may be given of its effects from their time to the present, it is in
those countries where the use is known, and where it is given to stallions,
when too much exhausted; and always with success. The old Greeks eat these
Chiches stewed in gravy; they appeared at all general entertainments, and this
was called the old man's dish. Young people were ashamed to be seen eating of
it: they thought it acknowledged want of vigor.

THE fruit in the pod is sometimes white, sometimes red, and sometimes black;
the red was always chosen for the table for this purpose, and it obtained among
them the name CICER VENEREUM the POVOCATIVE CHICH. The seeds may be had with
us: but as our people through ignorance or fraud, often sell lentills under
their name, it will be proper to add a description and a figure of the plant,
that those who wish to have the benefit of its virtues, may not be
disappointed. It grows to eighteen inches high, with a weak, yet hard stalk:
the leaves are of delicate pale green, and the flower is crimson; the pods are
bloated and the seeds are red. If it be sown in April in a common kitchen
garden, there will be many gatherings during summer; and if a quantity of the
chiches be dried as we do pease for keeping, they will preserve all their
virtue.

CHAP. VIX. Of the medicated Baths of the Ancients.
WHEN more was required from bathing than opening the pores and cleansing the
skin, the ancients used ingredients proper for the relief of persons in such
particular cases, and made their baths, as has been observed before, a kind of
general fomentations.

IN cases of cutaneous foulness, which did not yield to single bathing, they
infused the roots of docks and figwort in the water: where more softening was
required, they had recourse to large quantities of mallows; and for extreme
weakness, they used myrtle. The wood of the Juniper was also famous baths for
pains.

NOTHING can be plainer then the reasonableness of this practice: and it would
be an honor to our physicians to introduce and recommend it. This is their
province: the subject here is bathing in the general; and it would be departing
from the purpose to enter upon the medicinal additions for peculiar cases.

CHAP. X. Of the Dangers which attend warm Bathing.
THE principal and most obvious of these is taking cold afterward; which it is
easy to avoid: But there are also particular constitutions with which the
Practice will not agree; and some disorders in which it is hurtful. More is said
of this by systematic writers than is true: but what experience seems to show
is this.

IN all hectic habits it is hurtful: in the jaundice it has been known to do
mischief; and in the dropsy it would be madness to think of it; nor should it
be used by any, even by those who are well, in times of contagious disorders.

THESE are the cases wherein the warm bath never should be employed; but with
these exceptions it may be recommended generally.

THE cases wherein it may be serviceable, are many. Hysteric complaints will be
cured by this without the help of medicines; and hypocondrical cases in men, as
they are nearly allied to these in their symptoms, give way to the same remedy.

THERE is no headache but may be cured by it: and if it were more practiced in
England, we should hear of fewer apoplexies.

THE convulsive asthma, which mocks the common remedies, will be cured by this.

MORE has been said in favor of its efficacy: but thus much sure experience
warrants. More may be true; and farther experience may hereafter equally
confirm it: in the mean time this is enough to recommend the practice. Indeed
if there were no other benefit to be received from it, the certain relief it
affords in habitual headachs no one of which ever withstood it, were sufficient
to authorize all here said in its favor.

CHAP. XI. Of Cold Bathing.
THE cold bath, though of vast and various use, is a more limited subject: for
the plain and simple plunging into cold water is all. Here need no ointments,
nor no smegmata, the immediate action of the water upon the body is the whole;
and there is no danger of cold afterward.

YET even here there must be some caution: for whatsoever can do good, may also
do harm; and generally the power of mischief is proportioned to that of
advantage.

NOT only the physicians of antiquity recommended the cold bath; but all their
rational authors, in whose way it came to mention the subject. The sea and
rivers have been cold baths from all time: but those are better which are
covered from the sun, and fed immediately from the living spring. The coldness
is all, and therefore the more cold, certainly the better. They talk idly who
call in mechanic principles, and measure the density of the atmosphere, and the
pressure of the water. The immediate effect of plunging into cold water, is a
sudden and violent contraction of the fibers: this may naturally produce all
the great effects we find from the cold bath; and do the mischief also which we
sometimes hear from its improper use. Reason is the best guide in matters of
health; and when her doctrines are confirmed by experience, she is placed above
the reach of error: Those who go farther fool themselves; and it were well if
that were all, but where the doctor doats the patient dies.

IT IS certain that cold bathing gives relief in very many and desperate cases,
where all medicines fail: nor is its power less in preventing others

WHICH of the various maladies, whereto this weak frame is subjected, do not
arise from, or may not be aggravated by the effect of colds? These, cold
bathing obviates entirely. It strengthens the whole body, and defends it from
those injuries of the weather to which our fickle climate makes us subject
hourly. It Is therefore a practic usefulevery where, yet in a manner
appropriated here.

IN regard to particular cases, we see daily that pains and sickness, lowness
of spirits, and the most dejecting weakness which oppress people who are
accustomed to warm rooms and delicate management, are all cured by the cold
bath; the person scarce believing that he is the same man. His mind seeming to
have shared the advantage of his body; cheerful good humor succeeding pining
peevishness, and vigor faintness.

IN those discharges which remain after frequent or ill cured venereal
disorders, there is nothing equal to the cold bath. Balsams and astringent
electuaries, vomits, and styptic injections, have in many cases been used even
years in vain; when a few days of this practice have made a perfect cure.

THAT miserable weakness which wastes the strength of some young men, from a
different and less excuseable cause, which robs them at once of the enjoyments
and advantages of marriage; and in the end often entails upon them epelipsies,
is cured constantly and certainly by this: injecting the cold water after
bathing.

WE know what cures, indeed what miracles are recorded of the famous PFEFFER
WATER on the ALPS, a remedy for half the diseases to which men are subject:
many have tried, and several among them who disbelieved; but they have found it
true. The water of this celebrated cavern is clear and tasteless; nor could
those who wondered at the cures which it performed, ever discover any
ingredient in it, to which they should attribute them. The sagacious Scheukzer
foiled the famous Arabian, he found the water was mere water, and that cold
bathing was the mystery. The place where this strange flood bursts from the
rock assists; for it is so high upon the mountain, that the air itself is colder
than below, and the spot where nature has provided the first reservoir of it is
in a hollow, open to the coldest winds, but so defended to the Southward that
the sun never shines into it.

TRUTH and plain reason therefore give to cold bathing, all the virtues of this
famous spring; and they are no small addition to the received and certain
number of the benefits of cold baths. Those who would know these perfectly must
try: they need not visit the frozen Alps, nor any of the other famous
fountains; spring water kept cold, will work as many wonders.

FINIS.

