NEW THOUGHTS ON Medical Electricity.

The Reader is desired to correct the following ERRATA with his Pen.

P. 7 l. 22, for she was read she then was: l. 24, for persuaded read persuaded
P. 15, l. 4, after the Word Limbs, add etc. P. 18, l. 3, after the Word
contracted add Fibers P. 27, l. 21, for Tensions read Tension P. 30. l. 3, for
Colds read Cold -- l. 10 and 11, for in a Palsy read in this Kind of Palsy P.
34, l. 26, for it is Accord read it is own Accord
There are a few Mistakes in the Punctuation, which the Reader will be kind
enough to correct according to his Discretion.

NEW THOUGHTS ON Medical Electricity. OR, An ATTEMPT to DISCOVER THE REAL USES
OF ELECTRICITY in MEDICINE. In Two LETTERS to a FRIEND.

Quaere Fugam Morbi.

HOR. SEVENOAKS: Printed by THO. CLOUT Jun. Sold by S. A. CUMBERLEGE, Successor
to Mr. J. HINTON. Pater-nostre-row, LONDON. 1782.

[Price One Shilling.]

PREFACE.
AS the Author of the following Letters professes not to write for Honor or
Profit, but entirely for the Benefit of Mankind, it cannot reasonably be
expected that he should take vast Pains, or spend much Time, in embellishing
his Performance with Elegance and Ornament. His Aim is not to be entertaining,
but useful. -- It is almost certain that his Pamphlet cannot be long lived,
because if the few Hints therein contained shall not be thought worthy of
Consideration, it will immediately sink into Obscurity; if otherwise, they will
soon be taken up, improved, enlarged, and given to the World in a more finished
Dress by some abler Pen. If therefore he has not always expressed himself like
a Surgeon or Anatomist, or if there be any other Defects in his Performance, he
trusts these will not be deemed sufficient Reasons for condemning it: as he has
doubtless a Right to be judged, not from the Accuracy of his Style, but from
the Importance of his Subject, and the Originality and Truth of his
Observations,

New Thoughts ON MEDICAL ELECTRICITY.
DEAR SIR, Feb. 27, 1781.
HAVING lately met with as remarkable a Case in Medical Electricity, as perhaps
has yet appeared in the World, I give myself the Pleasure of sending you an
Account of it.

In the Month of June, 1779, a young Person had the Misfortune to break her
right Arm; which, as it was only a simple Fracture was easily reduced. But
unhappily the Bandage being made too tight, the Arm was soon invaded with a
very severe Pain, which in about twenty-four Hours became intolerable. A
Surgeon happening to pass by the House in which the Patient then was, was
called in, who immediately cut open the Bandage; when great Part of the Arm
appeared to be in a gangrenous State, and a Mortification had actually begun at
the Elbow. These Symptoms however were without much Difficulty overcome by
proper Applications, and the Cure of the Fracture went on very well; but from
that Time the Use of the Arm was lost. About three Months after this, the whole
Arm and Hand began to waste, and gradually became an Object too full of
Distress, to be beheld without exciting the Emotions of Surprise and
Compassion. A large and hard Knob was formed on the Forepart of the Arm, a
little above the Bend of the Elbow; and another on the Hinder-side, near the
upper Head of the Shoulder Bone. The Fracture itself was near the Middle of the
Bone. The whole Arm was so weak, that when it hung by her Side, she was not
able to raise it without the Assistance of the other: and when supported in an
horizontal Posture, the Wrist fell as in a Palsy. The Fingers were drawn
backwards to such a Degree, that the Heads of the Finger-bones were forced out
of the Sockets, where they join to the Palm of the Hand. At the same Time the
other Joints of all the Fingers were contracted forwards, so that the Hand
could not be opened or shut; and according to her own Expression, looked more
like a Bird's Claw than a Hand. Both the Hand and Arm were almost void of
Sensation, except of an obtuse Pain at Times with a pricking Numbness, and so
emaciated as to become a mere Skeleton. Every Application of Baths, Liniments,
Fomentations, Cataplasms, etc. etc. was tried without the least Appearance of
Success; but it was observed that those of the astringent Kind, seemed to be
most injurious: and the Calamity was much heightened by the melancholy Prospect
of it is growing continually worse; to which was added, the Mortification of the
Patient's being assured, that if she did not find Relief in a very little Time,
she would have a completely withered Arm. In this deplorable Situation she
remained at the Beginning of March, 1780; when the Surgeon under whose Care she
was, advised her to try the Effect of ELECTRICITY: adding, that he was
thoroughly persuaded, that nothing within the Practice of Surgery could
possibly be of any Service to her. On this she went to London, and after
consulting several Surgeons (some of whom very earnestly recommended it, and
others as earnestly dissuaded her from it,) at length determined to put herself
under the Direction of Mr. LONG, of Little Compton Street, Soho; an experienced
Practitioner, who has made Medical Electricity great Part of his Study and
Employment for many Years. This Gentleman heartily told her, that her Case
appeared so bad, that he could not give her any great Hopes of Success; that
she might try if she pleased, but if she should receive Benefit, it would be
next to a Miracle.

Willing to try, though in a Manner without Hope, about the latter End of the
same Month, she began to enter on a Course. At first the Operation was carried
on very gently, as by drawing the electric Stream, small Sparks, and slight
Shocks, which were attended with no visible Alteration. The Operator then
proceeded to electrify more sharply, after which she soon began to find some
small Signs of Relief. Thus she went on for about six Months, continuing to be
electrified every Day, Sundays excepted. The Method in general was, to draw
Sparks with a large and powerful Machine on one Day, and to give strong Shocks
another Day; both which were continued as long as the Patient could well endure
it. I cannot determine how strong the Shocks were, but by the Patient's own
Description, some of them might be from a three-pint or two-quart Jar full
charged. Sometimes the Number of Shocks amounted to one hundred and fifty, and
even to two hundred, so insensible was the Arm at that Time. They were however
sufficient in Number and Strength, to make the whole Limb swell exceedingly.
The Effect was, a slow Improvement of the Sensation, Use, and Strength of the
Limb; insomuch; that by Michaelmas, 1780, her Condition was become quite happy,
in Comparison of what it had been. She could now lift the Arm without
Assistance, move the Elbow and Wrist, and had some Power of moving the Fingers.
The Heads of the Finger-bones were reduced into their Sockets; but the Hand
remained about half open; without the Ability of extending or clenching the
Fingers. The fleshy Parts of the Arm were visibly increased in Bulk, as were
those of the Hand, though in a less Degree. At this Time her Affairs calling
her into the Country, the Electrification was discontinued until about the
Middle of January, 1781; when the Patient came into my Neighborhood on a Visit
to a Relation, and being within a convenient Distance of my House, an
Opportunity presented itself for carrying on the Operation; which I have
endeavored to perform, in the same Manner as it was practiced in London, as
near as I can collect from the Patient's Account. It is now about six Weeks
since I began, and I have the Satisfaction of perceiving the Arm, and
especially the Hand, improved in a Degree that has exceeded my warmest
Expectation. The Power of clenching and extending the Fingers is wonderfully
increased, and the whole Limb better covered with Flesh. About a Week ago, the
Muscles on the Back of the Arm were (upon moving the Fingers) observed, for the
first Time, to work under the Skin; and she now began to make a feeble Use of
her Needle, to lace her Stays, and dress her Head: and remains in a pleasing
Expectation of receiving further Benefit, from the Continuation of the same
Means that have hitherto been so successfully applied.

From the aforementioned Appearances (particularly the Wasting of the Limb) may
we not conclude, that not only the Muscles and Tendons of the Os Humeri, but
also the great Nerve itself was injured; especially if it be considered that
the Patient is a Person of a very slender Make; her Arms being so exceeding
small, that it would require no violent Pressure to injure every Muscle,
Tendon, and Nerve between the Skin and the Bone? There was undoubtedly a
violent Tension of the Muscles and Tendons, if not of the great Nerve itself,
to which Electricity seems to be a Remedy peculiarly adapted. For my own Part,
I never could perceive any great Benefit arising from it, unless there was
Reason to suspect something of this Kind: and in Cases of this Nature, I do not
recollect a single Instance in all my Practice, where it sailed in affording
more or less Relief. In a slight Burn or Scald, it is well known there is a
Tension on the Skin; and I will venture to say, that Electricity properly
applied will afford more immediate Ease to the Pain occasioned thereby, than
any thing contained in the whole Materia Medica.

I am, Sir, etc.

FROM the Date of the foregoing Letter, till past the Middle of April
following, the Patient, whose Case is related therein, continued the
Electrification, with little or no Alteration to the afflicted Limb; the
Weather being all that Time very dry, and the Wind North, or North-east. But
about the 21st, or 22nd, the Weather becoming of a Sudden remarkably mild and
soft, as remarkable and sudden a Change was experienced by her, which
exceedingly flattered our Hopes: the Numbness and pricking Sensation, which had
never ceased from the Time the Misfortune happened, was now entirely gone off:
but as the fine mild Weather did not last long, and the Wind returned into the
North-east, the disagreeable Numbness returned with it; and has ever since
continued in a greater or less Degree, in proportion as the Air has been more
or less cold, sharp, or dry.

It is further observable, that the Limb during that Season, and at Times ever
since, has been more painful than when the Calamity was at the Worst: for from
Christmas, 1779, till March, 1781, notwithstanding the great Improvements made
in the Summer of 1780, so great was its Insensibility, that all Kinds of
Weather were alike to it: at the same Time the Patient began to be more shy of
the electric Stroke, which obliged us to diminish the Strength and Number of
the Shocks. At the latter End of June, 1781, a free Perspiration first appeared
on the Hand and Fingers; and the Skin, which had hitherto wore a very shining
Polish, began to look more like that of the other Hand. On the 7th of July, we
were agreeably surprised on discovering the Fingers to have a much greater
Power of Extension than usual; since which Time, nothing has happened that
requires particular Description. It is sufficient to say in general, that the
Limb continues improving in all Respects; that these Improvements are seldom
observed to be regularly gradual, but appear mostly on a sudden; and after such
long Intervals, that we more than once began to despair of farther Success: and
that the Progress of the Cure is always very much advanced or retarded by good
or bad Weather.

That the Powers of Nature alone were not sufficient to work such wonderful
Alterations, as I have described, appears very plain from the State of the Arm
between Michaelmas, 1780, and the Middle of January, 1781; in which Space of
Time, the Patient declares she did not perceive the Arm grow better or worse,
during the Omission of Electricity. That Omission therefore seems to be a very
fortunate Circumstance, as it enables us to determine, with a great Degree of
certainty, the vast Importance of Electricity in Medicine.

AT the latter End of the last Summer, the Writer of the preceding Letter had
an Opportunity of seeing his Friend, to whom it was addressed; when the
Conversation turning on Medical Electricity, furnished some Hints that
occasioned a second Letter, as follows.

LETTER II.
DEAR SIR, Jan. 10, 1782.
OUR last Conversation, which turned chiefly on the different, and opposite
Success of Electricity on contracted Limbs, has to me been a Subject of much
Consideration: and I am not without Hope that such seemingly various Effects
may be accounted for, without imputing any uncertainty to the Operation itself.

We are to observe, that a Limb or Joint may become contracted from opposite
Causes: either from a real Injury, or morbid Contraction of a Muscle, or from
the mere Relaxation of its Antagonist. The Consideration of this Difference you
well know to be of the utmost Importance in Practice; and it often requires
great Skill and Attention to make the Distinction. If a Muscle or Tendon be
relaxed in any great Degree, its Antagonist may, by its own natural contractile
Power, shrink in such a Manner, as to give the Limb a srightful Appearance: and
if this should be mistaken for a Tension or unnatural Contraction, the
Treatment will consequently be a perverse one: and instead of Relief, the
Patient will most probably find his Malady increased. Hence we may see why the
same Method of Treatment shall sometimes succeed, and sometimes fail, in Cases
apparently the same: and also why Complaints seemingly different, shall often
yield to the very same Medicines: and hence may arise that Uncertainty of
Success so frequently attributed to Electricity by those who are no Friends to
it. Electricity as well as other Medicines, may be used contrary to the true
Intention of Cure. There is however one happy Circumstance attending it, viz.
That if it should happen to be used improperly (unless in a very imprudent
Manner,) there is not so much Danger in it as may be imagined. A fair Proof of
this, is that noted Case, mentioned by diverse Writers, of a Girl who had a
Palsy in her right Arm, which was twice increased by electric Shocks, and as
often restored to the State in which it was before Electrification. Now if we
consider Electricity as a Relaxer of the Solids; we may, I presume, reasonably
enough conclude the true State of that Case to be this. The first Complaint was
a Relaxation, consequently the Electricity was ill applied. Yet
notwithstanding, as the Accounts declare, the Shocks were pretty fevere, it did
but a temporary Damage; for the Fibers, although much injured before, had
Elasticity sufficient to recover their former debilitated State. Whence we may
infer, that in Cases of Uncertainty, a moderate Degree of Electricity may, nay
sometimes ought to be applied, were it only to find out, whether the Distortion
arose from an unnatural Tension of one Muscle, or an unnatural Distension of
another. Hence also appears a Reason why, even in Cases wherein Electricity is
properly applied, it can afford but a temporary Relief: as in Persons whose
Fibers are become habitually rigid, from the several Causes of Time, Heats,
Colds, Labor, Strains, hard Drinking, etc. etc. In such Subjects, nothing more
than a temporary Relief can reasonably be expected; because the dry, impervious
Fibers will inevitably return to their rigid State, for Want of that vital
Warmth, and lubricating Moisture which are necessary to preserve their
Flexibility. But in young and healthy Persons, the contracted shall be restored
to their due Tone (provided the Injury be not too great,) of which there are
many authentic Proofs. And it has often happened, that when the Injury has been
too great to admit of a perfect Cure, a partial one has been obtained, which
never relapsed; and this after the most approved Remedies had been tried in
vain. From all which I infer, that where there is already too great a
Relaxation of the Solids, Electricity is at best but useless.

Experience proves Electricity to be a great Promoter of the purulent Discharge
in Issues, Blisters, etc. which Discharge arises from the Relaxation of the
Mouths of the cuticular Vessels, after the Tension is destroyed: for otherwise,
they discharge only a thin watery Humor, or rather no Moisture at all. From
whence it is plain, that Electricity ought not to be administered in Fluxes
proceeding from Weakness, except (as sometimes happens) there be a Tension on
the injured Vessels. Mr. CAVALLO observes, that before Fluxes discover any
Signs of Amendment from Electricity, they appear to be increased.

BUT perhaps you will say, "If Electricity be so efficacious in destroying
Tensions as is pretended, it should seem to be a probable Means of Cure for
ardent Fevers, Pleurisies, inflammatory Rheumatisms, and such Kind of
Disorders, in which there is a manifest Tension on the Vessels." -- But it
ought to be considered, that in such Cases as these, there is something more
than bare Tension; there is a latent Cause which produces and continues the
Tension, and counteracts the Operation of the Electricity. Electricity will
soon remove the Tension and Pain attending a slight Burn or Scald: here the
Cause of the Tension and Pain, i. e. the Fire or scalding Liquor, has already
ceased to act upon the affected Part; and the Cause being taken away, the
Effect is soon made to cease. On the other Hand, it can give little or no
Relief in Bites or Stings of venomous Animals, so long as the Cause of the
Tension and Pain, i. e. the injected Poison, remains. Indeed I cannot say, what
a long continued Use of Electricity might bring about, by relaxing the
Capillaries and promoting Perspiration, or the impeded Circulation: or how far
it may contribute to dissolve the Viscidities of the Blood and Humors: but as
such tedious Operations are, in these Cases, hardly practicable, on account of
the Pain, Weakness, and Impatience of the Sick, it seems to be scarce worth our
While to consider much about it. My humble Opinion is, that such Attempts would
serve only to bring a very valuable Acquisition in Medicine into Disrepute.

In old callous Ulcers, Electricity is said to have proved efficacious: in
such, I presume, as were owing to too tight and continued Bandages, or other
Mismanagement, rather than a bad Habit of Body. But for the Reasons given
before, I would not wish a Practitioner to risk the Credit of his Art, by
applying it to such as arise from a Malignity of the Humors.

It is also said to be a good Remedy for sore Throats; and I verily believe it
may: but it must be for such as spring from some recent Cause, (such as sudden
Gold, etc.) which may bring on a Tension, that may be removed before the
Humors become vitiated.

In like Manner, perhaps, it may be of wonderful Service in preventing the
excruciating Pains of the Rheumatism; I mean of the true, acute, inflammatory,
rheumatic Fever; a Distemper which seems to have it is Beginning in the Solids;
viz. a Tension caused by sudden Cold, especially after the Body has been much
heated. -- It has been observed by Men of great Skill, that this is a Disorder
that seldom or never attacks any but those who are otherwise sound and healthy.
And for my own Part, I doubt not, but that whoever is afflicted with it, might
(if he paid due Attention) tell when, and how he contracted it. Supposing this
to be true, it is highly probable that, could the Tension of the Fibers be
removed before the Blood and Humors become inflamed, the Disease would be
eradicated while in Embryo: for a little Experience might be sufficient to
convince any one, of the great Power Electricity has to take off that Rigidity,
so commonly felt after violent Exercise in a cold Air.

So great a Stress has of late been laid on drawing or throwing the electric
Stream with Points, that Shocks, and even Sparks, have been almost laid aside
as useless or dangerous. There are certainly many Cases in which gentle Methods
are highly proper, and the rougher Kinds of Treatment both painful and
dangerous: as when the affected Part is very tender, such as an Eye, Ear, etc.
also, if the Tension be slight, or easily removable, it is unnecessary to
torment the Patient with strong Shocks, or even Sparks. But when the Tension is
obstinate, and not situated in a tender Part, the Degree of Electricity ought
to be proportioned thereto, as far as the Patient can bear it. There are
certainly many Cases, in which the very gentle Kinds of Electricity would
signify little or nothing. I have often relieved very slight Burns or Scalds,
by only drawing the Stream; but I had lately an Opportunity of observing that
Method fail in a Scald that was somewhat severe: I drew the Stream a long Time
to no Purpose; at length I proceeded to draw Sparks which soon had the desired
Effect. This Scald was so great, that a Blister arose before the Person who
received it, could come to the Machine, although the Accident happened in the
House. Electricity in this Case, effected no other Cure than relieving the
Pain: the Blister was healed as other Blisters usually are.

A Person who lives in a neighboring Parish, about a Year ago, broke his Leg,
and was confined to his Bed eleven Weeks. The Fracture being a bad one, he was
obliged to lie all that Time, in one Posture; the Consequence of which was, an
Anchylosis at the Knee of the same Leg; which continued for many Weeks after he
left his Bed, without the least perceiveable Alteration. As soon as he was able
to ride, he was brought to me, and electrified twice every Day for a Fortnight.
The Method I used was to draw Sparks, and give four or five moderate Shocks: i.
e. from a pint Vial about one-third charged. The Success answered our
Expectation; every Operation being attended with a visible Improvement, except
one, wherein I purposely omitted the Shocks for the Sake of Experiment. At the
End of the Fortnight, the Knee, which was at first nearly straight, was become
so flexible, that he could bring the Sole of his Foot to the Ground, while
sitting in a common Chair. He has been with me three Times since, and not
without more of less Improvement according to the State of the Weather, which I
always found to be of great Importance toward a Cure. But the Grand Proof of
the great Expediency, and even Necessity, of strong Shocks in obstinate
Tensions of the larger Nerves and Tendons, was exhibited in the Case of the
contracted Arm, of which I have already given you an Account.

IT has been said by an eminent Physician, a Friend to Medical Electricity,
That he never knew the Cure advance, after the Patient had undergone six or
seven Times of Trial. With Submission, I think, that either the Patients were
not proper Subjects for Electrification; or that the Electrification was not
sufficiently continued.

If the Rigidity, Tension, etc. be too stubborn to admit of a perfect Cure on
the forementioned Number of Trials, the Practitioner may almost depend upon it,
that he will not observe any farther Improvement for a considerable Time; nay
in some Cases for many Weeks. Of this I have already produced a remarkable
Instance in the Patient, who is the Subject of my first Letter, and of whom I
then took Notice, that the Improvements did by no Means proceed in a regular
Manner, but by sudden Fits or Starts. And indeed I must acknowledge, that had
it not been for the Patient's amazing Perseverance, which I sometimes took for
Obstinacy, the Affair had been long ago given up. Something like this I have
observed in another Case, but that already related is sufficient. And here I
desire Leave to recommend one Thing to your serious Attention; viz. To consider
whether, under such Circumstances, it be better to continue, the
Electrification constantly as a Preparative toward a farther Improvement: or,
when it is found that the Part will suffer no greater Degree of Distension for
the Present, to let it rest a While, that Nature may have Time to supply the
new-stretched Fibers with Nourishment, and sit them for Distension again. This
is an Object of great Importance; for if (as I am most inclined to believe) the
Omission be no Hindrance to the Progress of the Cure, it will be happy for
those Patients whose Occupations and Circumstances, will not allow of a long
and constant Attendance, as well as for those of all Degrees, who will in a
great Measure be freed from suffering perpetually, a disagreeable Sensation.

From the foregoing Considerations we may discover the Reason why, even in
Cases to which Electricity is well adapted, it is more difficult to perfect a
Cure, than to begin it; for at the first Application, when the Fibers are in
the most stiff and rigid State, the inflating or distending Power of the
Electricity will have the greatest Influence upon them; the Effects of which
will naturally decrease, in proportion as the Fibers grow pliable: because
through their new-acquired Elasticity, they will become capable of eluding the
Force. A Smith, with a Stroke of his great Hammer or Sledge, can, without much
Difficulty, bend or break a stiff iron Bar of considerable Size; but if the Bar
be first made elastic, it will, in Proportion to the Degree of it is Elasticity,
require a greater Degree of Violence to produce the same Effect. Thus we may
easily account for an Observation made by the Generality of Electricians; viz.
That Electricity, if not unreasonbly applied, never injures an healthy Fiber:
and also why it is injurious to such, as through Weakness or Laxity, have lost
the Power of recovering their Tone. And hence we may conclude, that the farther
the Cure of a Contraction, Tension, etc. is advanced, the more slow will be
it is future Progress; and consequently that the electric Force ought under such
Circumstances, (provided the Patient's Constitution will bear it) to be rather
increased than diminished. But as the Patient's Sensibility always increases as
the Fibers become more elastic, it will, in many Cases, require a large Share
of Resolution and Perseverance to perfect the Cure, or even to make any
considerable Advances toward rendering it complete.

'THE Reason why some Sprains receive much Benefit from Electrization, and
others none at all, but rather Injury, is, because some are attended with
Tensions, others with Relaxation. Hence a Reason why the Cold Bath, and other
Bracers, will Sometimes do much Good, and at other Times great Mischief. -- One
Evening, about a Year and a Half ago, the Servant Boy, who then lived with me,
happened to sprain his Wrist: the Cure was attempted by Pumping, which was
continued till the Wrist was greatly swelled, with much Inflammation and Pain.
As soon as I was informed of the Accident, I caused the Pumping to cease, and
directed the Hand and Wrist to be bathed in warm Water. After the Pain and
Inflammation were, by these Means, somewhat abated, I electrified with Sparks
and Shocks, which soon reduced the Swelling much more, and the Pain was now
become very tolerable. The next Morning the Warm Bath and Electricity were
repeated, and the Cure perfected. Here indeed I lost a fine Opportunity of
trying the Efficacy of Electricity alone; but I was, at that Time, hardly got
into this Train of Thinking. It however serves to show; that Electricity and
the Warm Bath belong to the same Class; and that they may be successfully used
together. -- I have also known Electricity fail of curing a Sprain. -- A
Person, wringing some Clothes out of the Water, sprained her Hand in such a
Manner, that on the Back of it there arose a small Swelling, the same as is
usually called, the Springing or Starting of a Tendon. It was soft, and without
Pain or Inflammation; this was several Times electrified without Success; but
was soon after cured by the Cold Bath and a Bandage.

Hence we may venture to conclude, that to Nervous Cases in general,
Electricity does not seem to be well adapted. So far indeed as weak Fibers are
sometimes liable to Tension, as well as strong ones, it will (if judiciously
administered) be attended with great Probability of Success. But whoever
expects Electricity to strengthen a weak Habit, will most certainly be deceived.

The Degree of Electricity, proper to be administered at a Time, should be
determined by the Degree of Obstinacy in the Tension, Contraction, etc. -- the
Strength, Weakness or Tenderness of the Part affected -- the Age, Strength,
Constitution, etc. of the Patient, considered together; as in the
Administration of other Medicines.

From what has been advanced, the following Quaere will naturally arise, -- "If
Electricity be indeed injurious to Weakness or Laxity, how comes it to be of
Service in a Palsy, the very Definition of which is, A lax Immobility of a
Muscle?" ANSW. Though a Palsy be a lax Immobility of a Muscle, it frequently
arises from Causes which astringe the Nerves; as Colds, astringent Aliments or
Medicines, Ligatures, etc. whence the Muscles become lax and collapsed, and
lose the Power of Motion, from the Defect of the Influx of the vital Spirit
into them; so that it is not the relaxed Muscle, but the astringed Nerve that
is the immediate Object of Cure or Relief in a Palsy; because from the Nerves,
the Muscles derive their Power of Motion. If the Palsy proceed from Laxity or
Debility of the Nervous System, doubtless Electricity will be so far from
Restoring the Patient's Strength, that it will rather increase his Calamity.

CONCERNING the Use of Electrometers, and the nice Distinction between metal
and wooden Points, which at Present are considered as of great Importance, my
Opinion is, that they are more curious than useful. I am very sensible, that
Electricity imprudently applied may do much Harm; but the very severe Manner in
which many Patients have been treated, without any fatal Consequence,
sufficiently proves, that it is not necessary to dispense it like a strong
chemical Preparation, of which Half a Grain too much may endanger Life. The
Case being once hit on, he must be but an indifferent Practitioner; who cannot
charge his Jar within the Bounds of Discretion, according to Circumstances, be
the Jar of whatever Size it may. He may take Care to begin with Moderation, and
increase till he has found the Degree that will answer his Intention; and when
he has once discovered it, he may (if he has any tolerable Degree of Judgment)
keep near enough to it to answer any good Purpose. Moreover, the Apparatus of
an Electrometer, Wires, etc. added to the Conductor, will cause so great a
Waste of the Electricity, as to render the Operation extremely tedious;
especially, if the Globe or Cylinder be small, and a large Number of Shocks are
required at a Time; which often happens in obstinate Tensions of the larger
Nerves or Tendons. Add to this the disagreeable Situation of the Patient,
waiting with Terror for the Stroke, which happens sooner or later, according as
the Jar may acquire it is Charge; and that will be in proportion to the Number
of Wires and other Encumbrances; and as those Encumbrances are more or less
loaded with Dust, Damps, etc. My present Method of giving the Shock is this: --
I take the Jar (a pint Vial in general) in my right Hand, and a metal Rod in my
left, and having a Wire (not a Chain) of any convenient Length, form the
Circuit by grasping one End of the Wire with the Rod, and the other End with
the Jar. Being thus prepared, I charge the Jar to what Height I judge proper;
which may be done with certainty sufficient: then pressing the Rod against that
Part of the Body which Occasion may require, and advancing the Ball of the Jar
to any other proper Part, I direct the Shock at Pleasure. But if I suspect
Danger of a Shock to myself, from any Cause, that may turn the Force of the
Electricity by Way of the Ground or Floor, as thick Clothes, a paralytick Limb,
the bare Earth, a brick or damp Floor; I insulate the Patient, or mount the
Stool myself, which gives perfect Security. Sometimes I fasten one End of a
Chain to one Part of the Patient, and connecting the other End with the charged
Vial, in one Hand only, give the Shock without Fear. By this Means, at least
Two-thirds of the Labor and Wear, attending the Use of Electrometers and
Wires, are saved; which is of no small Importance to those who practice much.
With respect to Points, I could never discover but that metal Points would
answer every Purpose, for which Points may be required: because they may be
made to operate in any Degree, that can possibly be procured by those made of
Wood; and to exceed them either in Mildness or Sharpness. They are also more
certain in their Operation, not being liable to grow moist or dry. The Operator
may be furnished with as many as he pleases; but in this, as in Shocks or
Sparks, he must be directed by the Feelings of his Patient, on whom he may
rely, that he will not willingly bear enough to do himself any great Harm.

For a Proof of the relaxing Power of Electricity, take the Account of two Men
killed by Lightning at Eastbourn, in Sussex, Sep. 17th, 1780; whose Bodies,
after they had been dead two Days, were as pliable as when alive. See Univ.
Mag. for Nov. 1781; where the same is transcribed from the Philos. Transact.
Vol. LXXI.

MR. FERGUSON, in his Introduction to Electricity, says, "I have often drawn
Sparks from Chilblains, and have always found they were cured thereby." I have
often done the same, but never found it succeed. Were it certain, that
Chilblains were curable by Electricity alone, it might furnish an Argument that
would be fatal to my chief Position, viz. That Electricity is peculiarly
adapted to the Removal of Rigidity, Tension, etc. but pernicious in Cases of
Laxity. Now I presume, Chilblains are allowed to be the Effect of Blood
stagnated in relaxed Vessels; few being subject to them except Children, and
Persons of lax Habits. But perhaps it may be possible to give some Account for
the Mistake; -- It was that Gentleman's Method, (and a very proper One it is in
all Cases, where an electrical Operation is performed,) to order the
electrified Part to be kept very warm: and this alone was sufficient for the
Cure of the Chilblains, and that in a little Time too. Now an Objection starts
of it is Accord, -- "If Electricity be indeed a good Remedy for Tensions, it
should, according to the Rule laid down by myself, be a likely Means of Cure
for the Complaint of which we are speaking, wherein there is a manifest
Tension, as appears by the Inflammation and Hardness of the Part affected." --
That there is such Tension I readily admit; yet still insist on it, that
Electricity alone is not sufficient for the Cure. For unless it could
strengthen the Part, alter the Habit, or remove the astringing Cold along with
the Tension, there is nothing to prevent it is immediate Return: whereas a good
warm Flannel, a double Pair of worsted Stockings, or whatever else may preserve
the Part in sufficient Warmth, will seldom or never fail of answering every
Purpose.

ELECTRICITY has been known to cure Blindness and Deafness; but it is
acknowledged, that it has much more frequently disappointed the Expectation.
This affords no Argument for the Uncertainty of it is Effects, but rather the
Contrary; for let it be but considered, that though the Diseases of the Eyes
and Ears are sometimes attended with a Tension, yet much the greatest Part of
them arise from Laxity.

CONCERNING the Cure of Agues, I must acknowledge my Opinion to be, at present,
unsettled for want of Experience. That such Cures have been effected by
Electricity is affirmed by Writers of Credit, and therefore is not to be
questioned. But being thoroughly persuaded, that Electricity operates directly
contrary to such Medicines as are in general Esteem for the Cure of Agues, as
the Peruvian Bark, and diverse other Astringents; I find it difficult to suppose
how it should be attended with Success, unless Agues may be allowed to proceed
from two very different Causes: and indeed the Body appears to be both
astringed and relaxed, at different Periods in the same Intermittent. Perhaps
then, the good Effects of the Electricity might be owing to a fortunate
Application of it in Point of Time; what that Point of Time may be, I cannot
say, but if there be any Ground for the Conjecture, I should think it might be
easily determined by one who has the Advantage of frequent Practice. Mr.
CAVALLO, in his Medical Electricity, thinks it should be, a little before the
Fit is expected, which may perhaps answer the Expectation, by Removing the
Tension before it begins to show itself. Perhaps also it may Sometimes succeed
at the End of the Fit, when, notwithstanding the apparent Relaxation of the
Solids, there may be some small Remains of a Tension, that may give Birth to
another Fit. -- Early in the Spring of 1781. many Persons in my Neighborhood,
were attacked with a Fever resembling a Tertian; which was very obstinate,
baffling, for a long Time, all the Endeavors of the Faculty. One of my Family
being seized with it, I embraced the Opportunity of trying Electricity; and at
a Time when I thought the Fits were become pretty regular, passed two or three
very slight Shocks, through the Sides and Stomach, those being the Parts in
which the Patient complained of a troublesome Pain. After this the Fit went off
so very light, that I was much pleased, and began to look on Electricity as a
Specific for an Ague, consequently did not fail to repeat it at the next
Return; but how great was my Disappointment, when I observed that Fit to be
attended with Symptoms more than ordinary severe; I then desisted for Fear of
Mischief: For instead of believing Electricity to be a Specific for an Ague, I
now began to consider it in the Light of certain boasted Medicines for the
Gout, serving only to avert the Paroxysm for a While, which will be sure to
come at last, and make the greater Havoc.

It must be acknowledged however, that this was not a perfect Ague, for upon a
more exact Observation, I could plainly discern, that, between the Paroxysms,
the Fever did not entirely subside. But the Case may be offered in Support of
the Opinion before laid down, viz. That Electricity does not seem to be a good
Remedy for Continual Fevers, and Disorders where a morbid Cause is supposed to
lie concealed: for unless it has a Power of expelling the morbific Matter from
the Blood, the Complaint must remain; and I do not know, that Experience has
shown it to have any such Power. It has indeed been found to cause a very
sudden Translation of Pain, from a Limb or Joint, to the Stomach or Bowels, and
back again: but surely such sudden Translations are not always to be effected
without Danger, especially where there is a great Malignity of the Humors: and
one fatal Accident might do infinite Prejudice, both to the Professor and his
Art.

There have been many Instances of Agues cured by such Accidents as have caused
great Surprise; thus Electricity may stand a good Chance to succeed; for it is
certainly surprising enough, especially to those who are unacquainted with it;
but curing by Accident does not prove it fitted for any particular Purpose.
Were it once established in regular Practice, it would be a Benefit to Mankind;
but while it is used at Random, it cannot be deemed better than a Quack
Medicine, the Effects of which, whether good or bad depend on Accident.

If any Electrification were proper in Inflammatory Fevers, and others
proceeding from a morbific Cause, it seems to be the Simple, which is equally
distributed throughout the whole Habit, and creates the least Disturbance. But
as the most gentle Electrification will quicken the Circulation, and increase
Perspiration, whether Increase of Circulation can be of any Service at a Time
when the Velocity of the Blood is already too great; or Promotion of
Perspiration produce any great Good, while the Blood and Humors are too clammy
and viscid, and robbed of their fluid Parts, must with me remain a Question
till it be proved, that it is also a good Divider and Dissolver of the
Viscidities, and suited to bring the Disease to a happy Crisis; or to effect a
Cure by expelling the latent Cause at once. Till this be proved, I must repeat
it, I cannot place any Confidence in Electricity for the Cure of inflammatory
Fevers; much less in putrid Fevers, where the Solids have already lost too much
of their Cohesion.

In Fevers of the Nervous Kind there seems to be as little Reason to expect
Relief: nevertheless it often happens that in Fevers merely nervous, the Nerves
and Tendons are terribly affected with Tensions, Spasms, Contractions, etc.
therefore (as I before hinted concerning nervous Cases in general) in that
respect it may prove of wonderful Service; provided it be used no farther than
to answer the Intention of Removing such Spasms, etc. and nothing more ought to
be expected from it. In such Cases it frequently happens that the Patient
appears to receive surprising Relief at first, but on frequent Repetitions
finds it disagree with him. But for such Rigidities, Contractions, etc. as
frequently remain after severe Fevers, Inflammations, Rheumatisms, and such
like, it is most certainly an admirable Remedy; and very little Experience is
sufficient to prove it.

ELECTRICITY has been said to cure a Dropsy. -- Without repeating what has been
said, concerning Palsies, Agues, etc. it may be sufficient to observe -- That
large Draughts of cold Liquors taken by Persons much heated with Exercise, are,
by Physicians, enumerated among the principal Causes of a Dropsy: if then
Electricity be, as is here affirmed, an efficacious Remedy in Tensions, etc. it
will follow, that where such a Cause has preceded, while the Disease is recent,
and before the Waters become viscid, it may prove one of the best Remedies that
ever was introduced into Practice: because as CAVALLO says in Med. Elect. Page
7, "It seems to act even within those Parts of the Body which, especially when
diseased, are mostly out of the Reach of other Remedies." As on the Contrary,
when the Disease arises in a languid and worn-out Constitution, it will bid
fair to hasten the Patient's Departure.

FROM what has been advanced it is easy to infer,

1st. That the most immediate Effect, to be expected from Electricity,
administered in the medical Way, is, the Removal of Tension, Rigidity, Spasm,
etc.

2ndly. That the best Chance for Success is, when the primary Cause is removed.
If a burning Coal be laid on the Hand, no Benefit is to be expected from
Electricity until the Coal be taken away, and then it will remove the
secondary Cause of the Pain, i. e. the Tension. Nevertheless, in Cases where
the primary Cause acts with less Rigor, it may, perhaps, be of Service in
Relieving or Mitigating the Pain, at least from Time to Time, until the
primary Cause shall cease. Thus in some Fevers, the Convulsions and Pain may
probably be rendered tolerable while the Fever is running it is Course; but this
being Conjecture only, I shall not dwell on it, but leave it to your
Consideration and Experience: only this I have to say, that in the imperfect
Ague abovementioned, and a few other feverish Cases that have fallen within my
Observations, it did not seem to be attended with great Success.

3dly. That in Cases of Laxity it is generally pernicious, but under some
Circumstances may (if managed with Prudence) be applied with great Advantage.

From whence it will follow, that Sometimes it ought to be accompanied with
such Assistants, as seem best adapted to promote the Intention, whether
Astringents, Corroborants, Discutients, Laxitives, Emollients, etc. etc.

AFTER the strictest Enquiries I have been able to make, as well as from my own
Experience, it appears to me, that simple Electrification, drawing or throwing
the Stream, Sparks and Shocks of all Degrees, differ only in the Power and
Strength of their Operation: they all relax and render pliable. And yet the
milder Kinds may relieve a Malady, which the more powerful would increase. We
know that mild Astringents, mild Purgatives, etc. are frequently of the
greatest Service, at Times when strong Ones would do great Mischief: not
because they differ in Quality, but because the Patient's Constitution cannot
bear them all alike. The Peruvian Bark, given in small Doses, often proves a
salutary Bracer to the Bowels; but if dispensed in too large Quantities, has a
contrary Effect. Thus, I presume, it is with Electricity: strong Shocks may, by
over-acting their Part, increase a Palsy they were intended to relieve.
Suppose, for Instance, a large Nerve leading to a Limb, from some injurious
Cause, to be astringed, the Consequence will be, that the Muscles of that Limb
will become paralytic: if now that Nerve can by any Means be so far relaxed, as
to recover it is exact due Tone, the whole Limb will be restored to Health. But
if the Nerve by a too powerful Application of the very same Means, be over
relaxed, the Muscles will be still paralytic in proportion to the Degree of
that over Relaxation. Hence the Limb may be cured, or made worse, by a skilful
or unskilful Application of the same Means: and thus an electric Stroke may
either relieve a Palsy, or increase it.

But although the mildest Operations in Electricity may, many Times, be of the
greatest Service; yet I could wish every Practitioner, in this infant State of
the Science, to be very cautious, that he does not impute to the Mildness of
his Operations, the Credit of Cures toward which Electricity never afforded
the smallest Assistance. This is of immense Importance to the Practice in
general; for so long as Men remain under Mistakes, or Uncertainties, concerning
the real Effects of Medicines, it will be impossible for them ever to arrive at
any regular Method of proceeding. Let us suppose a Limb to be weakened from a
Luxation, and to be free from Tension, (this, I trust you will grant, is no
wild Supposition,) and that strong Shocks are repeated to no Purpose, or rather
to the Patient's Prejudice. Suppose also, that the Operator, perceiving this
severe Treatment to be more injurious than useful, should omit the Shocks and
have recourse to Sparking, or drawing the Stream; this, though a perverse
Treatment likewise, may not be powerful enough to prevent the relaxed Fibers
recovering their Tone, by their own elastic Power. Here kind Nature performs
the Cure of a Malady that was begun by Misfortune, increased by Mismanagement,
and at last is, by Mistake, imputed to one particular Species of Electricity,
which, in Truth, did not in the least contribute toward it: and the Use of
Shocks is condemned, as generally if not universally prejudicial, only because
they were injudiciously applied.

Although I insist so much on Shocks, and the frequent Expediency of strong
Ones, I do not at present make use of any thing more powerful than an
Apothecary's Pint Vial, and that very seldom full charged; by which you may
judge that I am far enough from recommending desperate, or dangerous
Experiments: Experience has however demonstrated that, on proper Occasions,
double, treble, and even four Times that Force may be advised with great Safety
and advantage.

What Alteration Electricity may make in the Blood and Humors, I do not
pretend to determine; that I never perceived any, I can with Truth declare.
From the surprising Power it has of hastening the Fluids through the Orifices
of the Vessels, and consequently of very much increasing Perspiration, it must,
I conjecture, leave the Blood somewhat more dry than it was before the
Operation; but I could never observe, or indeed hear of any Proof of it is
attenuating Qualities. On the Solids it is Influence is unquestionably very
great: It is most certainly a Relaxer and Remover of Rigidity, etc. and
frequently in a most astonishing Manner. I am therefore thoroughly persuaded,
that if medical Philosophers had attended to this single Circumstance; it had,
long before this Time, been brought into regular Practice: and many miserable
Objects might have received the Benefit of a Relief, which the whole Faculty,
armed with the most powerful Medicines, were not able to afford.

How, or by what Means, the Removal of Tensions, etc. is performed, I will not
undertake to account. There is no Necessity to search into, analyze, or explain
the Nature of Electricity: perhaps it is more than the most ingenious Man will
ever be able to do. It is sufficient for our Purpose, if Electricity be found
to produce certain regular Effects; and he who knows what those Effects are,
may apply it with as much Certainty and Success, as if he understood the whole
Theory of Effluvia and subtle Mediums; and could descant, in the most learned
Manner, on the Arcana of Nature: however from several very common Experiments
in Electricity, it appears to act by a wonderful Kind of Inflation, which
forces the Particles of Bodies, both solid and fluid, either suddenly or
gradually, into, or toward a Separation. Hence you may easily guess the Reason
why the Particles of all Fluids, and particularly the Globules of the Blood,
are carried through Tubes and Vessels with an increased Velocity. And perhaps
Mr. CAVALLO, in his ingenious Essay on Medical Electricity, Page 17.
is very near the Point, where he says, "Admitting Dr. FRANKLIN's Hypothesis of
Electricity; we see that it is not the Direction of the electric Fluid that
determines the Fluids of the Body one Way or the other; but that the Effects
usually observed upon the Body when electrized, must be owing to the Irritation
or DILATATION occasioned by the Action of that Fluid."

I am, Sir, etc.

FINIS.

