AN ACCOUNT OF THE MEDICINAL VIRTUES OF MAGNESIA ALBA, MORE PARTICULARLY OF
CALCINED MAGNESIA; WITH PLAIN DIRECTIONS FOR THE USE OF THEM.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A CONCISE DETAIL OF THE INVENTION AND GRADUAL
IMPROVEMENT OF THESE MEDICINES.

BY THOMAS HENRY, APOTHECARY, F. R. S.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD, MDCCLXXV.

AS A TESTIMONY OF FRIENDSHIP, GRATITUDE, AND ESTEEM, THE FOLLOWING PAGES ARE
INSCRIBED TO MR. JOHN AIKIN, SURGEON AT WARRINGTON, BY HIS FAITHFUL AND
AFFECTIONATE FRIEND, THOMAS HENRY.

^ANCHESTER, ^. June, 1775.
THE Reader is desired to correct the following errors of the press with a pen.

Page 12, line last in the note, for others read other. Page 21, line 3 from
the bottom, after spoonsful read of water. Page 28, line 20, for two read five
penny-weights. Page 29, line last, for headed read heaped.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE MEDICINAL VIRTUES OF MAGNESIA ALBA, etc.
ABOUT two years since I published a small volume of Experiments and
Observations on various Subjects, which also contained some account of the
diseases in which Magnesia Alba is particularly useful, and a recommendation of
that medicine in a state of calcination, as preferable, in many instances, to
the uncalcined Magnesia. But as the remarks on this subject are intermixed with
a number of others which are only interesting to medical or philosophical
readers, I have been frequently requested to draw up a plain detail of the
history and medicinal uses of Magnesia, for the use of those persons who may be
purchasers of the medicine, and to whom the other part of my former publication
would be entirely useless.

Previous therefore to the recital of the virtues of Magnesia, it may not be
improper to give a short history of the invention of this medicine, and of the
gradual progress by which it has arrived at the degree of estimation in which
it now stands.

To those mineral bodies which contain metallic earths, the earlier Chemists
gave the name of Marcasites; and those earths, which were capable of attracting
the acid from the atmosphere, and thereby forming salts, were termed Magnesia.
The first preparers of Magnesia Alba, who procured it from the mother-ley of
nitre, or liquor remaining after the crystallization of that salt, imagining it
to be the proper absorbent of the nitrous acid, are supposed to have given it
the name of Magnesia, and the epithet Alba appears to have been added as a
distinction, on account of its superior whiteness.

Magnesia Alba was first introduced by the Jesuits at Rome, and the preparation
of it was concealed by them, for some time, as a nostrum. But the secret, at
length, was divulged, and its use became more general in several countries on
the continent. It has been observed above that it was at first prepared from
the mother-ley of nitre, and it was sometimes obtained by evaporating the
liquor, and afterward driving off, by means of a strong fire, the acid with
which it was combined; and sometimes by precipitating the Magnesia by pouring
in a sufficient quantity of an alkaline lixivium.

The powder, thus prepared, was not however pure Magnesia. A quantity of wood
ashes and quicklime are necessary to the crystallization of nitre, and, in
consequence, the Magnesia, separated from the liquor remaining maining after
that process, contained a proportion of these substances. Besides, as but
little nitre is prepared in Europe, the difficulty of obtaining the liquor in
sufficient quantity was an impediment to the general preparation of Magnesia.
That excellent Physician and ingenious Chemist, Hoffman, Hoffman, Vol. 4. p.
500.
was induced, from the similarity between that lixivium and the brine remaining
after the crystallization of sea salt, to try whether Magnesia might not be
precipitated from the latter. The experiment succeeded to his wishes, and he
even found the powder, thus obtained, to be more purgative than the other. His
animadversions and experiments on this preparation were published, and engaged
the attention of physicians to a medicine so strongly recommended by that
celebrated professor. Dr. Black, to whom we are obliged for many ingenious
experiments tending to investigate the Chemical History of Magnesia, rendered
the process still more easy by substituting the bitter purging salt, commonly
known by the name of Epsom Salt, which is prepared from the last mentioned
brine, instead of the brine itself, thereby enabling chemists to prepare the
medicine, though at a distance from those places where seawater is evaporated.

The process, notwithstanding, published by Dr. Black, was little known, and in
some respects defective. Magnesia Alba was indeed sold in the shops, but ill
prepared, coarse and adulterated. Scarcely any was to be met with, in a
tolerable state of purity, except what was prepared by the late Mr. Glass of
Oxford, who, having bestowed much attention on the subject, produced it greatly
superior to any at that time vended. This gentleman however had not the
generosity to divulge his process, but carefully concealed it as a profitable
nostrum.

About sixteen years ago, I happened to reside in the neighborhood of Mr.
Glass; I had before that time frequently prepared Magnesia, but had never been
able to make it equally fine as his, though far superior to what was commonly
sold. My ambition was excited, I wished to attain to a like degree of
perfection, and, after many trials I arrived at the desired point, and found,
by repeated comparisons, that the Magnesia which I prepared, equalled that of
Mr. Glass in every respect.

When I left Oxford, I made no other use of the discovery I had made than
preparing Magnesia for my own shop, and freely communicating what I knew on the
subject to my acquaintance. After some years it occurred to me that it might be
of public utility to draw up an account of the method I had made use of, and to
deliver it to the College of Physicians, who are the proper guardians of
medicine in this kingdom. I accordingly transmitted my process to the College,
who did me the honor of publishing it in their Transactions. Vide Medical
Transactions, Vol. 2. p. 226.


Some time after the publication of the Volume of Transactions which contained
my method of preparing Magnesia; Dr. Saunders, a very ingenious physician in
London, whose extensive knowledge in chemistry has been displayed in several
publications, mentioned in conversation, to Dr. Percival, the great improvement
which Magnesia was capable of receiving by calcination. That by this means it
might be deprived of those disagreeable qualities which occasioned flatulencies
in the bowels of some tender people, and had brought the medicine into a degree
of disrepute. My worthy friend, sensible how much I was interested in every
discovery on that subject, communicated the information to me, and on trial of
this process, I found the Magnesia improved to the utmost of my expectation; it
was perfectly mild, and as free from causticity after as before calcination; it
operated in half the dose, and occasioned none of those disagreeable sensations
in the bowels which often follow the use of common Magnesia.

From hence I was insensibly led into a train of other experiments which have
been since published, Experiments and Observations on various Subjects, by
Thomas Henry, London, 1773.
and it is hoped may have contributed to explain the nature of Magnesia, and
determine its medicinal properties more accurately than had hitherto been done.
In the course of these experiments, it was observed that the Calcined Magnesia
did not dissolve so rapidly in the vitriolic acid as the uncalcined, and being
desirous of comparing some other with my own, and imagining I might depend on
the purity of that vended under the name of Mr. Glass, who had, some time
before, sold his process to Mr. Delamotte, who then resided, as a stationer, at
Weymouth; I purchased a box, from the agent for the sale of it in Manchester,
that I might calcine it, and observe whether it acquired the same or different
properties from that which I had prepared.

The result of these experiments, and the caution with which I proceeded, has
been already delivered to the public; and the torrent of abuse, which has so
plentifully flowed upon me in consequence of the discovery, is notorious.
Conscious of my own integrity, I have stood undaunted at the attacks which
malice and revenge suggested. The unchemical doctrines, the absurd inferences,
the glaring contradictions, and illiberal language, with which the publications
of my antagonists abounded, served only to convince the public of the badness
of a cause so meanly, so ungenerously defended.

ON THE ACTION OF ABSORBENT MEDICINES IN GENERAL.
WHEN a mixture of animal and vegetable food has remained a short time in the
stomach, a fermentation ensues, which is necessary to carry on the work of
digestion, but which, when it becomes excessive, degenerates into disease.
During this fermentation a considerable quantity of air is produced, and the
alimentary mixture gradually tends to acidity.

To restrain the inordinate ferment in the stomach, nature has wisely given us
the saliva or spittle, which ha^ the property of preventing it from rising to a
degree injurious to health. But where the saliva is either corrupted or
insufficient in quantity, where the tone of the stomach is so weak, as to
detain the aliment too long before it be pushed forward through the pylorus
into the small intestines, or where the nature of the aliment itself is too
much disposed to ferment; in all these cases the air, which is of the same
nature as that discharged in the fermentation of vinous liquors, distends the
stomach, and an obnoxious, and sometimes most austere acid is produced, which
irritates the coats of that bowel, particularly that plexus of nerves which is
diffused about its upper orifice, and occasions pain, four belchings, vomiting
and heart-burn.

As this was the most obvious kind of acrimony, it became the fashion, among
the chemists of the seventeenth century, to ascribe the origin of almost all
diseases to a redundant acid; and their practice consisted in giving to their
patients alkaline salts and absorbent earths, such as chalk, calcined oyster
shells, crab's claws, etc. and these were frequently administered in cases
where, perhaps, remedies of a very opposite kind were requisite.

But when science became more founded on rational principles than on imaginary
hypotheses, this practice lost ground, and the use of absorbents was confined
to its proper bounds, to the correction of acidities when obviously prevailing
in the first passages. And here indeed was a large field for the employment of
these medicines, a field which, perhaps, daily became more spacious, as luxury
more prevailed, and as the increase of arts and manufactures tended to enervate
the people by inducing them to lead more sedentary lives.

Even in this state of things, inconveniences arose from the property which all
the common absorbents possessed of being astringent. For though they, for a
time, corrected acidity, yet they produced such a degree of costiveness, as in
effect rather added to the disease they were intended to cure, and an absorbent
earth of a different nature was a desideratum in practice.

Dr. Cadogan appears to have been the first physician who introduced the use of
Magnesia Alba into these kingdoms. In his excellent treatise on the management
of children, he recommended this powder as being more easily soluble in acids
than the common absorbents, and as a most safe and efficacious purgative. The
opinion of physicians was, for some time, suspended by the difficulty of
obtaining it in a state of sufficient purity. I have used my utmost endeavors
to remove that difficulty; and by the great improvement of calcining it, which
was first suggested by Dr. Saunders, the medicine is rendered much more
extensively useful. I am obliged to Dr. Saunders, for his permission to insert
the following note. Dr. Saunders, in his public lectures both on the practice
of physic and chemistry, has frequently recommended my process for preparing
Magnesia, and has declared, that my Magnesia was the purest and most soluble of
any others.




It may be necessary to premise, for the information of those readers who may
not be acquainted with medical subjects, that alkaline salts and absorbent
earths, when united with acids, have their nature entirely changed, and form
salts of a different kind, neither acid not alkaline, which salts differ
according to the different acid or alkaline employed. It has been too customary
to consider the action of these medicines as solely confined to the absorption
and neutralization of acids in the stomach and bowels; whereas, when thus
united, they form a combination capable of being admitted into the lacteals,
and from thence into the circulation, and thus acquire the property of acting
by urine and by increasing the perspiration.

ON THE DISEASES IN WHICH MAGNESIA ALBA IS USEFUL.
DURING the first months after the birth of a child, the state of the solids is
lax, and the juices thin and dilute. These circumstances contribute to the more
easy growth of the body; yet to prevent the tone of the parts from becoming too
much relaxed, nature, with that providential care which pervades her whole
creation, has given an acid to the stomach of young animals to strengthen their
fibers and prevent too great a tendency to alkaline acrimony. But this, like
her other provisions, sometimes exceeds the bounds which were intended, and
degenerates into a disease of an opposite tendency to those it was designed to
prevent. From the excess of acidity in the bowels of infants, the milk is
coagulated, and, by oppressing the stomach, becomes the source of many
diseases. The bowels are irritated, and spasmodic contractions of the guts
occasion severe gripings to the tender infant, and as the nerves are, at that
period, exceedingly irritable, convulsions of some particular part or of the
whole system are frequently the consequence. Green stools and sour vomitings
discover this acidity in the bowels of young children so frequently, that one
of the best writers on the subject of their diseases, attributes the origin of
all infantile disorders to this cause. Harris de Morbis Infantum.


Children thus affected always lose their florid complexion and become pale and
wan. Sometimes they declare the severe gripings which torment them, by the most
piercing cries; and sometimes, when their stomachs are oppressed with
coagulated milk or viscid phlegm, they lie in a state of stupidity, refusing
all nutriment. Their stools and what they vomit show evident signs of acidity,
not only in the color but the smell.

Under these circumstances it is too common a practice among nurses, neglecting
the primary cause of the disease, to pour in hot cordials, and often to quiet
the complainings of the infant by administering opiates, instead of attempting
to correct and carry off the acidity which occasions the disorder. Remove the
cause and the effect will cease. To this end, where the child vomits up phlegm
or coagulated milk, or appears oppressed with them, it it may be proper to
clear the stomach by giving a grain or two of ipecacuanha, or a tea-spoonfull
of a dilute solution of emetic tartar; either of which may be administered with
great safety; and after the operation of the vomit, a small dose of Magnesia
may be given and repeated occasionally so as to keep the body of the child
gently open. It is a great recommendation of Magnesia, that its insipidity
renders it more agreeable to infants than any other purgative; and it has this
advantage over all the other absorbents, that it acts as an easy purgative,
whereas they tend to bind and render the body costive; a state which should be
studiously avoided during infancy, for a plentiful discharge by stool is always
so favorable to the health of children, that we ought to be very cautious how
we hastily check even the excesses which may sometimes happen in that
evacuation. As the loosenesses of infants are generally occasioned by some
acrid stimulus in the bowels, they are best cured by changing the nature of the
offending matter and dislodging it from its seat. The method, therefore, which
has been proposed above should first be used, before any astringents are called
in to our aid.

The rash, commonly known by the name of the red gum, and the disorder called
the thrush or frog, which so often affect children during the first months, may
in general be cured by the same treatment. In the former, should the body be
too loose, oyster-shell powder, or shalk may supply the place of Magnesia. In
the latter, some topical application may be necessary; the following ^ormula is
very efficacious.

Take of egg-shells, cleared from the internal skin or ^embrane, dried before
the fire, and reduced to a fine powder, and of sugar, each a quarter of an
ounce, of borax ^n grains, mix them together. Let a small quantity of his be
placed now and then on the child's tongue, that ^e may roll it about in his
mouth.

It has been a common practice to give Magnesia to children as a preventive,
and to mix it for this purpose with their food, in order to correct that
disposition which milk and the farinaceous aliments have to turn four. This
however should be done with caution, for it is only the excess of acidity which
is prejudicial to infants: some degree of it is necessary; and should we too
officiously and entirely destroy, what we ought only to restrain within due
bounds, we may create disorders of an opposite nature to those we have
endeavored to prevent, and instead of an acid, produce an alkalescent
disposition in the first passages. Indeed, I fear that diseases have been more
frequently created than obviated by the use of preventive medicines, and they
should only be allowed in cases where the approach to disease is manifest. But
when a child is in a healthy state, the best means to preserve him from a
superabundant acidity, is to pay due attention to the regulation of his diet,
to give him proper exercise, not to confine him too much in the foul air of hot
unventilated rooms, to wash his whole body every day in cold water, and to rub
him very well night and morning with a dry flannel, taking care that his
stomach be not too full at the time when this friction is performed.

Nor would I advise parents to rely with too much security on the virtues of
this medicine, where the disorders of their children are complicated or
obstinate. The advice of the sagacious and distinguishing practitioner will
then be necessary, to direct what method of treatment is to be pursued. Nor can
I here avoid lamenting that the management of children, when diseased, is so
often in the hands of nurses and ignorant women, from an absurd notion that
their diseases are not proper subjects of medical investigation; when, in
truth, there are none which require a clearer judgment, a quicker penetration,
or a greater share of medical knowledge in the prescriber.

During the period between dentition and puberty, the diseases attendant on a
lax fiber still continue, though not so predominantly as in the former stage;
yet acescency is the manifest cause, or at least the concomitant of many of the
complaints to which children are at this time liable. To this they are
disposed, notwithstanding the change in their diet to a more alkalescent kind,
by the great quantities of fruit, frequently crude and unripe, cakes, and other
sweet and greasy food with which they are too often indulged. By these errors,
their bowels are overcharged; their digestion impaired, and the aliment
remaining too long in the stomach becomes sour, and occasions vomitings,
head-achs, and other complaints which are thought to proceed from worms, and
indeed are frequently attended with that disorder; as the crudities thus
generated in the bowels serve as a nidus for these destructive vermin. Here
likewise Magnesia may be of considerable advantage, as an alkaline purgative,
neutralizing the offending acid, and at the same time promoting its discharge
by stool. But if the stomach be overloaded with mucus, or undigested aliment, a
gentle vomit ought to precede the exhibition of the Magnesia.

And even in a more advanced stage of life, persons of weak habits, and who
lead sedentary lives, are often afflicted with indigestion, four eructations,
heartburn, vomitings, and costiveness. These disorders very frequently attend
women during their state of pregnancy, and are sometimes almost instantly
removed by the use of Magnesia. Doctor Watson Medical Observations and
Inquiries, Vol. 3. p. 335.
has published the case of a pregnant woman, who was afflicted with such severe
vomitings as to bring on convulsions, hiccoughing, and violent pain at her
stomach. What she brought up was acid, and so very acrimonious, as to inflame
and excoriate her mouth and throat; and the great uneasiness she felt at her
stomach, upon swallowing any liquor that had the least degree of acrimony, or
was more than lukewarm, made it probable that the internal surface of the
stomach was affected in the same manner. In this desperate situation, after
variety of remedies had been tried in vain, the stomach was washed with
unsalted mutton broth, till the liquor was discharged without any acid taste.
Her pain was by this means abated, but in about two hours was apparently
returning with the same violence as before. This ingenious physician then
directed a dram of Magnesia to be given in mutton broth, and to be repeated
as often as her pain returned, without any regard to the quantity the whole
might amount to, supposing her pain to continue severe. The first dose relieved
her, and in three days she took three ounces of Magnesia; and in the next three
days, two ounces more, by which time all her symptoms were removed. It is
remarkable in this case, that an excessive purging was not the consequence of
taking so large a quantity of Magnesia, where there was so much acid to
neutralize it.

In bilious habits, where there is generally a disposition in the stomach
contrary to acidity, Magnesia is usually esteemed to be improper, taken alone:
but I am dubious whether this opinion is well founded, and many reasons for
these doubts may be deduced from some experiments which have been recited in a
former work. Henry's Experiments and Observations, p. 68, and seq. By these
experiments it appears that Magnesia, though remarkably septic to animal flesh,
retards the putrefaction of bile, and restores sweetness to it when actually
putrid: that these last effects are still more strongly produced by the
Calcined Magnesia, which also powerfully resists the corruption of flesh: that
some of the other absorbents prove antiseptic to bile; and, consequently, that
the opinion of the universal septic property of the absorbent class of
medicines, and of the impropriety of prescribing them in fevers of a putrescent
type, may admit of some exceptions; for as the bile is by many supposed to be
the great source of putrid diseases, ought not the antiseptics, which are
prescribed in these cases, to be such as more particularly impede the
corruption of this fluid, rather than that of flesh?


However, where putrid bile is to be corrected and discharged by stool, very
good purposes may, perhaps, be answered by taking the Magnesia, joined with a
sufficient quantity of acid to neutralize it, while in a state of
effervescence; or by swallowing the Magnesia and the acid, one immediately
after the other, so as to produce the fermentation in the stomach: for thus the
fixed air, with which the Magnesia abounds, being let loose, may powerfully
correct the tendency to putridity in the contents of the primae viae, and at
the same time evacuate them downwards.

It is probable Magnesia may be of service in diseases of the skin. Several
authors have attributed cutaneous eruptions, and indeed the ancient chemists,
as has been before observed, ascribed almost all disorders to the presence of
an acid in the blood; whilst others absolutely deny that an acid can be
admitted into the lacteals, or if admitted, exist in the blood in a state of
acidity. In these cases, however, if an acid acrimony abounds in the stomach
and bowels, with a costive habit, and pale complexion, Magnesia will be a
useful corrector, and entering the circulation in the form of a mild neutral
salt, may act as an excellent alterative; or, where there is no suspicion of
acidity in the stomach, an equal quantity of cream of tartar may be mixed with
the Magnesia.

HAVING thus given a cursory detail of the medicinal properties of Magnesia in
its natural state, I shall now proceed to consider it in a state of calcination.

MAGNESIA ALBA, etc. ON THE MEDICINAL VIRTUES OF CALCINED MAGNESIA.
THOUGH, in the preceding chapter, notice has been taken of the good effects
arising from the fixed air of the Magnesia being let loose in the stomach, by
drinking some acid beverage immediately after the powder, in diseases of a
putrid tendency; yet in disorders of a different type, and in persons of
flatulent habits, the discharge of this air by the acid of the stomach often
occasions uneasy sensations in the bowels, inflating and distending them
overmuch, inducing griping pains, and above all, a sense of debility or
sinking, which is not easily described. In order to obviate these
inconveniences, I was induced, by the reasons mentioned in chapter first, to
deprive the Magnesia of this part of its composition by calcination. By this
process it lost seven twelfths of its weight, and though it produced no
effervescence with acids, yet it had not acquired any degree of acrimony to the
taste; and when thirty grains of it were diluted with a few spoonsful, and
swallowed, it occasioned no uneasy sensation in my stomach, nor sense of heat
in my throat, proved nearly as aperient as a double quantity of uncalcined
Magnesia, and operated without the least griping.

Thus Magnesia Alba is not only divested of the disagreeable qualities which
have been alluded to, but acquires new properties which render it likely to
answer some very important practical purposes.

Calcareous earths, alkaline salts, and Magnesia, being deprived of their air,
attract it from every substance with which it has a smaller degree of affinity.
The two former becoming highly caustic by the loss of their air, cannot be
administered but in very small doses. But Calcined Magnesia, being absolutely
divested of air, though not rendered acrimonious, and being able to absorb a
large quantity of this elastic vapor, may act more powerfully than the whole
tribe of carminatives, yet essentially differs from them in many respects. They
contain a large quantity of air; Magnesia in this state is entirely free from
it; Aromatics may be apt to ferment, and increase acidities; the Calcined
Magnesia is incapable of effervescence, and corrects an acescent disposition in
the gastric juices; the former constipate the belly, the latter is laxative.

From this property of Magnesia, when calcined, of absorbing air, it occurred
to me that it would, of all others, be the most proper purgative for patients
laboring under the stone who might be taking the lixivium saponarium, or soap
ley, having the advantage over all the vegetable purgatives, which abound with
air, and consequently have a tendency to render the caustic alkali mild and
inert: I even flattered myself that it might coincide in promoting the efficacy
of that powerful solvent of the human calculus. Doctor Macbride's theory, that
the lixivium acts by depriving the calculus of its fixed air, appears to be
well founded; and Mr. Chittick, in the exhibition of his nostrum, which,
notwithstanding all his arts to disguise it, is now known to have been the soap
ley, kept his patients from every kind of diet abounding with air. We may
therefore venture to recommend it, though not as a lithontriptic, being
insoluble in water, yet as an assistant to the lixivium, by absorbing a part of
that air in the primae viae, which would otherwise be attracted by the caustic
alkali, and thereby render it incapable of acting on the calculus.

In all the diseases attended with an acescent disposition in the first
passages, in which Magnesia has, in another place, been recommended, the
calcined powder may be given with superior advantages, as it will not produce
any of those inconveniences which have been attributed to that medicine when
uncalcined. Besides that it will act in a threefold capacity, viz. as an
absorbent of air, and of acidity, and also as an easy purgative. I know several
who could never bear to take the common Magnesia, with whom the calcined
perfectly agrees. This medicine has been very serviceable in flatulent cholics;
and even in gouty habits, joined with some warm aromatic, it has been found
useful in correcting the very great flatulency which so much afflicts persons
of this constitution; and the Cayenne pepper appears to be the most proper
addition to it, on account of the small quantity of this spice that is
necessary to make the Magnesia gratefully warm to the stomach. Hypochondriacs,
and those persons who, from leading studious and sedentary lives, labor under
obstinate costiveness, and obstructions of the bowels, have generally recourse,
for the cure of these complaints, to warm aloetic purgatives, and with
propriety, where their habits are not too full, and disposed to inflammation:
but in these cases, the use of such medicines frequently induces piles, and
inflammatory irritation; whereas the Calcined Magnesia succeeds much better,
correcting the acidity which is so prevalent in such patients, and removing
constipation, without occasioning the disagreeable consequences of more
stimulating medicines.

The Calcined Magnesia appears, in general, to be a preferable medicine for
children to the uncalcined. It is an agreeable circumstance that so much
smaller a dose of the former is necessary, as it operates in half the quantity
that is requisite of the latter, and proves an effectual corrector of the
flatulencies which give so much disturbance to the tender bowels of infants. I
have administered it to children of but few days old, with safety and success,
nor have I ever observed any disagreeable consequences from its use.

My ingenious friend Dr. Lettsom Lettsom's Medical Memoirs, p. 139, et seq.
has related the case of a woman, aged 43, who was seized with convulsive
twitchings in the left side, accompanied with a most acute pain under the short
ribs, shooting toward the region of the stomach. She had labored under this
disease for about two years before her admission into the Dispensary in
Aldersgate Street. The fits attacked her two or three times a day, and
generally continued from half an hour to three hours. During the paroxysms, she
suffered the most excruciating torture, till at length, nature being exhausted,
she sunk into a state of stupefaction. In some of the fits, a spontaneous
vomiting terminated them sooner, but no particular matter was ejected.

Besides bleeding, blistering, and laxative medicines, she had tried a great
variety of remedies in vain. Dr. Lettsom, from the frequent eructations of
wind, joined with the other symptoms, judiciously concluded that flatulence in
the stomach and bowels principally excited this direful disease; and that
besides opiates to quiet the convulsive motions, it was necessary to absorb the
superabundant air that seemed detached in these viscera, and sometimes
distended them sensibly to the touch.

An emetic was prescribed to be taken every week, and in order to absorb the
fixed air which might be accumulated in the intestines, and to correct acidity,
she was directed to take four ounces of lime water, and also two drachms of
Calcined Magnesia three times a day, and one dram of the Paregoric elixir was
exhibited once a day at least.

By the use of these medicines, and due attention to her diet, she experienced
ease the first week; the fits gradually diminished in violence and in
frequency, and ^n two months nearly subsided; at which time the elixir was
omitted. She continued to take Calcined Magnesia and limewater for a week
afterward, and since she was discharged from the hospital, the Doctor assures
us that her health has remained uninterrupted, without the use of any medicine.

Calcined Magnesia is a medicine very well adapted to counteract the
costiveness occasioned by the use of the Bath, Tunbridge, and Bristol waters;
and may be a convenient substitute for the saline purging waters, being taken
in small doses, washed down with a large draught of pure water, or, in cases
where acidity does not prevail in the stomach, of lemonade or any acidulated
liquor.

As a preparative for the smallpox, few medicines can be given to infants
preferable to Calcined Magnesia. And from its antiseptic property, or power of
resisting the putrefaction of flesh and of bile, it seems well deserving the
attention of practitioners, as a purgative in putrid diseases.

GENERAL DIRECTIONS RELATIVE TO THE DOSES OF MAGNESIA.
THE following general directions may be useful, in respect to the doses of
Calcined Magnesia. But it is to be remembered, that a double quantity of the
Uncalcined Magnesia will be requisite to produce the same effects.

A child during the month may take from three to six grains of Calcined
Magnesia; and the dose may be repeated, at proper intervals, till a sufficient
number of stools be obtained.

Children during the time they are cutting their teeth may take five, ten, or
twenty grains of the Calcined Powder, in proportion as it is intended to act as
a purgative, or only as an alterative. As they advance in years, the dose must
be increased accordingly.

The doses for adults, as well as for children, must differ greatly, according
to their different constitutions, or the degree of acidity in their stomachs.
It may be proper therefore to begin with smaller doses, and to increase them if
necessary. In general, twenty or thirty grains will be sufficient to procure a
gentle purging for an adult person, who is easily moved; but much larger doses
may be necessary for the more robust. While acidity prevails in the stomach,
and occasions costiveness, heartburn, and vomiting, the dose is only to be
regulated by the effects which the medicine produces.

The Magnesia is much more agreeable, when mixed well with the vehicle in which
it is taken; to this end, only such a quantity of water should be added to it,
at first, as may be necessary to reduce it to a paste, which should be rubbed
till it be quite smooth, and then gradually diluted.

Water sweetened with sugar, milk and water, or almond milk, are proper liquids
in which to mix the powder. To children it may be given mixed with their food,
in such a manner as not to be perceived by them.

As most people are now provided with scales and weights for weighing gold, it
may be proper to mention the proportions which these weights bear to those used
by the apothecaries. Two penny-weights are equal to 120 grains, or two drachms;
and the grain weights, each of which contain as many grains as there are round
marks on the surface, are exactly similar to those by which medicines are
weighed. The money weights which are marked with the names of the several
coins, bear the following proportions, viz. that marked one guinea, contains
129 grains, or 9 grains above two drachms; that marked 10s. 6d. sixty-four
grains and a half, or four and half grains above one dram, etc. So that the
quantities of Magnesia to be given may thus be accurately determined.

But where weights are wanting, the quantity may be measured in a tea-spoon;
one of a moderate size contains about six grains, upon a level with the edge of
the spoon; and when headed up, about twenty grains.

THE END.

