A SECOND LETTER TO THE Bishop of BANGOR; Wherein his Lordship's NOTIONS OF
Benediction, Absolution, and Church Communion Are proved to be Destructive of
every Institution of the Christian Religion.

To which is added, a POSTSCRIPT, In Answer to the OBJECTIONS that have been
made against his former Letter.

By WILLIAM LAW, M. A.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for W. INNYS at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1717.

Price One Shilling.

ERRATA.
PAGE 81. Line 20. for sincere, read insincere. p. 83. l. 11. for easily, r.
equally, p. 84. l. 12. for Liberty, r. Liberties. Ibid. l. 20. for, of Quakers,
r. of the Quakers. p. 87. l. 4. for themselves, r. them. Ibid. l. 15. for can,
r. cannot. Ibid. l. 19. for 12 th, r. l st. p. 88. l. 30. for Kings, r. things.

MY LORD,
A Just Concern for Truth, and the First Principles of the Christian Religion,
was the only Motive that engaged me in the Examination of your Lordship's
Docrines in a Former Letter to your Lordship. And the same Motive, I hope, will
be thought a sufficient Apology for my presuming to give your Lordship the
Trouble of a Second Letter.

Amongst the Vain Contemptible Things, whereof your Lordship would create an
Abhorrence in the Layity, are, the Trifles and Niceties of Authoritative
Benedictions, Absolutions, Excommunications. Preservative, p. 98.
Again, you say, that to expect the Grace of God from any Hands, but his own,
is to affront him -- P. 89.
. And that all depends upon God and our selves; That Human Benedictions, Human
Absolutions, Human Excommunications, have nothing to do with the Favor of God.
P. 101.


It is evident from these Maxims (for your Lordship asserts them as such) that
whatever Institutions are observed in any Christian Society, upon this
Supposition, that thereby Grace is conferred through Human Hands, or by the
Ministry of the Clergy, such Institutions ought to be condemned, and are
condemned by your Lordship, as trifling, useless, and affronting to God.

There is an Institution, my Lord, in the yet Established Church of England,
which we call Confirmation: It is founded upon the express Words of Scripture,
Primitive Observance, and the Universal Practice of all succeeding Ages in the
Church. The Design of this Institution is, that it should be a Means of
conferring Grace, by the Prayer and Imposition of the Bishop's Hands on those
who have been already Baptized. But yet against all this Authority, both Divine
and Human, and the express Order of our own Church, your Lordship teaches the
Layity, that all Human Benedictions are useless Niceties; and that to expect
God's Grace from any Hands but his own, is to affront him.

If so, my Lord, what shall we say in Defense of the Apostles? We read ( Acts
8. 14.) that when Philip the Deacon had baptized the Samaritans, the Apostles
sent Peter and John to them, who having prayed, and laid their Hands on them,
they received the Holy Ghost, who before was fallen upon none of them; only
they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

My Lord, several things are here out of Question; First, That something else,
even in the Apostolical Times, was necessary, besides Baptism, in order to
qualify Persons to become complete Members of the Body, or Partakers of the
Grace of Christ. They had been baptized, yet did not receive the Holy Ghost,
till the Apostles Hands were laid upon them. 2 dly, That God's Graces are not
only conferred by means of Human Hands; but of some particular Hands, and not
others. 3 dly, That this Office was so strictly appropriated to the Apostles,
or Chief Governors of the Church, that it could not be performed by Inspired
Men, though empowered to work Miracles, who were of an inferior Order; as Philip
the Deacon. 4 thly, That the Power of the Apostles for the Performance of this
Ordinance, was entirely owing to their superior Degree in the Ministry; and
not to any extraordinary Gifts they were endowed with: For then Philip might
have performed it; who was not wanting in those Gifts, being himself an
Evangelist, and Worker of Miracles: Which is a Demonstration, that his
Incapacity arose frorn his inferior Degree in the Ministry.

And now, my Lord, are all Human Benedictions Niceties and Trifles? Are the
Means of God's Grace in his own Hands alone? Is it wicked, and affronting to
God, to suppose the contrary? How then comes Peter and John to confer the Holy
Ghost by the Imposition of their Hands? How comes it, that they appropriate
this Office to themselves? Is the Dispensation of God's Grace in his own Hands
alone? And yet can it be dispensed to us by the Ministry of some Persons, and
not by that of others?

Were the Apostles so wicked, as to distinguish themselves by a Pretense to
vain Powers, which God had reserved to himself? And which your Lordship
supposes from the Title of your Preservative, that it is inconsistent with
Common Sense, to imagine that God would, or could have communicated to Men.

Had any of your Lordship's well-instructed Layity lived in the Apostles Days,
with what Indignation must they have rejected this senseless Chimerical Claim of
the Apostles? They must have said, Why do you, Peter or John, pretend to this
Blasphemous Power? Whilst we believe the Gospel, we cannot expect the Grace of
God from any Hands but his own. You give us the Holy Ghost! You confer the
Grace of God! Is it not impious to think, that He should make our Improvement
in Grace depend upon your Ministry; or hang our Salvation on any particular
Order of Clergymen? We know, that God is Just, and Good, and True, and that all
depends upon Him and our selves, and that Human Benedictions are Trisles.
Therefore whether you Peter, or you Philip, or both, or neither of you lay your
Hands upon us, we are neither better nor worse; but just in the same State of
Grace as we were before.

This Representation, has not one Syllable in it, but what is founded in your
Lordship's Doctrine, and perfectly agreeable to it.

The late most Pious and Learned Bishop Beveridge has these remarkable Words
upon Confirmation: How any Bishops in our Age dare neglect so considerable a
Part of their Office, I know not; but fear, they will have no good Account to
give of it, when they come to stand before God's Tribunal First Volume of
Sermons.
.

But we may justly, and therefore I hope, with Decency, ask your Lordship, how
you dare perform this Part of your Office? For you have condemned it as
Trifling and Wicked; as Trifling, because it is an Human Benediction; as
Wicked, because it supposes Grace conferred by the Hands of the Bishop. If
therefore any baptized Persons should come to your Lordship for Confirmation,
if you are sincere in what you have delivered, your Lordship ought, I humbly
conceive, to make them this Declaration.

My Friends, for the sake of Decency and Order, I have taken upon me the
Episcopal Character; and, according to Custom, which has long prevaild against
Common Sense, am now to lay my Hands upon you: But, I beseech you, as you have
any Regard to the Truth of the Gospel, or to the Honor of God, not to imagine,
there is any Thing in this Action, more than an useless empty Ceremony: For if
you expect to have any Spiritual Advantage from Human Benedictions, or to
receive Grace from the Imposition of a Bishop's Hands, you affront God, and in
effect, renounce Christianity.

Pray, my Lord consider that Passage in the Scripture, where the Apostle speaks
of Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and going on unto
Perfection; not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from dead Works, of
Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands, and
of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal Judgment,( Heb. 6. 12.)

My Lord, here it is undeniably plain, that this Laying on of Hands (which is
with us called Confirmation) is so fundamental a Part of Christ's Religion,
that it is called one of the First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; and is
placed amongst such primary Truths, as the Resurrection of the Dead, and of
Eternal Judgment.

St. Cyprian speaking of this Apostolical Imposition of Hands, says, The same
is now practiced with us; they who have been baptized in the Church, are
brought to the Presidents of the Church, that by our Prayer and Imposition of
Hands, they may receive the Holy Ghost, and be consummated with the Lord's Seal.

And must we yet believe, that all Human Benedictions are Dreams, and the
Imposition of Human Hands trifling and useless; and that to expect God's Graces
from them, is to affront him? Though the Scriptures expressly teach us, that God
confers his Grace by means of certain particular Human Hands, and not of
others; though they tell us, this Human Benediction, this Laying on of Hands, is
one of the first Principles of the Religion of Christ, and as much a Foundation
Doctrine as the Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment; and though every
Age since that of the Apostles, has strictly observed it as such, and the
Authority of our own Church still requires the Observance of it?

I come now, my Lord, to another Sacred and Divine Institution of Christ's
Church, which stands exposed and condemned by your Lordship's Doctrine; and
that is, the Ordination of the Christian Clergy; where, by means of an Human
Benediction, and the Imposition of the Bishop's Hands, the Holy Ghost is
supposed to be conferred on Persons toward consecrating them for the Work of
the Ministry.

We find it constantly taught by the Scriptures, that all Ecclesiastical
Authority, and the Graces whereby the Clergy are qualified and enabled to
exercise their Functions to the Benefit of the Church, are the Gifts and Graces
of the Holy Spirit. Thus the Apostle exhorts the Elders to take heed unto the
Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, (Ephesians. 4. 7.) But
how, my Lord, had the Holy Ghost made them Overseers, but by the Laying on of
the Apostles Hands? They were not immediately called by the Holy Ghost; but
being consecrated by such Human Hands as had been authorized to that purpose,
they were as truly called by him, and sanctified with Grace for that
Employment, as if they had received an immediate or miraculous Commission. So
again, St. Paul puts Timothy in mind, to stir up the Gift of God that was in
him, by laying on of his Hands, (2 Timothy 2. 6.)

And now, my Lord, if Human Benedictions be such idle Dreams arid Trifles; if
it be affronting to God, to expect his Graces from them, or through Human
Hands; do we not plainly want new Scriptures? Must we not give up the Apostles
as Furious High-Church Prelates, who aspired to presumptuous Claims, and talked
of conferring the Graces of God by their own Hands? Was not this Doctrine as
strange and unaccountable then, as at present? Was it not as inconsistent with
the Attributes and Sovereignty of God at that time, to have his Graces pass
through other Hands than his own, as in any succeeding Age? Nay, my Lord, where
shall we find any Fathers or Councils, in the Primitive Church, but who owned
and asserted these Powers? They that were so ready to part with their Lives,
rather than do the least Dishonor to God, or the Chiristian Name, yet were all
guilty of this horrid Blasphemy in imagining that they were to bless in God's
Name; and that by the Benediction and Laying on of the Bishop's Hands, the
Graces of the Holy Ghost could be conferred on any Persons.

Agreeable to the Sense of Scripture and Antiquity, our Church uses this Form
of Ordination: The Bishop laying his Hands on the Person's Head, says, Receive
the Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Priest in the Church of God,
committed unto thee, by the Imposition of our Hands. From this Form, it is
plain, First, that our Church holds, that the Reception of the Holy Ghost is
necessary to constitute a Person a Christian Priest. 2 dly, That the Holy Ghost
is conferred through Human Hands. 3 dly, That it is by the Hands of a Bishop
that the Holy Ghost is conferred.

If therefore your Lordship is right in your Doctrine, the Church of England is
evidently most corrupt. For if it be dishonorable and affronting to God, to
expect his Grace from any Human Hands; it must of necessity be dishonorable
and affronting to him, for a Bishop to pretend to confer it by his Hands. And
can that Church be any ways defended, that has established such an Iniquity by
Law, and made the Form of it so necessary? How can your Lordship answer it to
your Layity, for taking the Character or Power of a Bishop from such a Form of
Words? You tell them, it is affronting to God, to expect his Grace from Human
Hands; yet to qualify your self for a Bishopric, you let Human Hands be laid
on you, after a manner which directly supposes you thereby receive the Holy
Ghost! Is it wicked in them to expect it from Human Hands? And is it less so in
your Lordship, to pretend to receive it from Human Hands? He that believes, it
is affronting to God, to expect his Grace from Human Hands, must likewise
believe, that our Form of Ordination, which promises the Holy Ghost by the
Bishop's Hands, must be also affronting to God. Certainly, he cannot be said to
be very jealous of the Honor of God, who will submit himself to be made a
Bishop by a Form of Words derogatory, upon his own Principles, to God's Honor.

Suppose your Lordship was to have been consecrated to the Office of a Bishop
by these Words; Take thou Power to sustain all things in Being given thee by my
Hands. I suppose, your Lordship would think it entirely Unlawful to submit to
the Form of such an Ordination. But, my Lord, receive thou the Holy Ghost, etc.
is as impious a Form, according to your Lordship's Doctrine, and equally
injurious to the Eternal Power and Godhead, as the other. For if the Grace of
God can only be had from his own Hands, would it not be as innocent in the
Bishop to say, Receive then Power to sustain all things in Being, as to say,
Receive the Holy Ghost, by the Imposition of my Hands? And would not a
Compliance with either Form be equally unlawful? According to your Doctrine, in
each of them God's Prerogative is equally invaded; and therefore the Guilt must
be the same.

It may also well be wondered, how your Lordship can accept of a Character,
which is, or ought to be chiefly distinguished by the Exercise of that Power
which you disclaim, as in the Offices of Confirmation and Ordination. For, my
Lord, where can be the Sincerity of saying, Receive the Holy Ghost by the
Imposition of our Hands, when you declare it affronting to God, to expect it
from any Hands but his own? Suppose your Lordship had been preaching to the
Layity against owning any Authority in the Virgin Mary; and yet should
acquiesce in the Conditions of being made a Bishop in her Name, and by
recognizing her Power: Could such a Submission be consistent with Sincerity?
Here you forbid the Layity to expect God's Grace from any Hands but his; yet
not only accept of an Office, upon Supposition of the contrary Doctrine; but
oblige your self, according to the Sense of the Church wherein you are ordained
a Bishop, to act frequently in direct Opposition to your own Principles.

So that, I think, it is undeniably plain, that you have at once, my Lord, by
these Doctrines condemned the Scriptures, the Apostles, their martyred
Successors, the Church of England and your own Conduct; and have hereby given
us some reason (though I wish, there were no Occasion to mention it) to suspect,
whether you, who allow of no other Church, but what is founded in Sincerity,
are your self, really a Member of any Church.

I shall now proceed to say something upon the Consecration of the Lord's
Supper; which is as much exposed as a Trifle, by your Lordship's Doctrine, as
the other Institutions. St. Paul says. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is
it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? My Lord, is not this Cup still to
be blessed? Must there not therefore be such a thing as an Human Benediction?
And are Human Benedictions to be all despised, though by them the Bread and
Wine become Means of Grace, and are made the Spiritual Nourishment of our
Souls? Can any one bless this Cup? If not, then there is a Difference between
Human Benedictions: Some are authorized by God, and their Blessing is
effectual; whilst others, only are vain and presumptuous. If the Prayer over
the Elements, and the Consecration, be only a Trifle and a Dream; and it be
offensive to God, to expect they are converted into Means of Grace by an Human
Benediction; why then did St. Paul pretend to bless them? Why did he make it
the Privilege of the Church? Or, why do we keep up the same Solemnity? But if
it be to be blessed only by God's Ministers, then how can your Lordship answer
it to God, for ridiculing and abusing Human Benedictions; and telling the
World, that a particular Order of the Clergy are not of any necessity, nor can
be of any Advantage to them. For if the Sacrament can only be blessed by God's
Ministers; then such Ministers are as necessary, as the Sacraments themselves.

St. Paul says, the Cup must be blessed: If you say, any one may bless it,
then, though you contemn the Benedictions of the Clergy, you allow of them by
every body else: If every body cannot bless it; then, you must confess, that
the Benedictions of some Persons are effectual, where others are not.

My Lord, the great Sin against the Holy Ghost, was the Denial of his Operation
in the Ministry of our Savior. And how near does your Lordship come to it, in
denying the Operation of that same Spirit, in the Ministers whom Christ has
sent? They are employed in the same Work that he was. He left his Authority
with them; and promised, that the Holy Spirit should remain with them to the
End of the World; that whatsoever they should bind on Earth, should be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever they should loose on Earth, should be loosed in Heaven;
that whosoever despises them, despises Him, and Him that sent him. And yet your
Lordship tells us, we need not to trouble our Heads about any particular Sort
of Clergy; that all is to be transacted betwixt God and our selves; that Human
Benedictions are infignisicant Trifles.

But pray, what Proof has your Lordship for all this? Have you any Scripture
for it? Has God any where declared, that no Men on Earth have any Authority to
bless in his Name? Has he any where said, that it is a wicked, presumptuous
Thing for any one to pretend to it? Has he any where cold us, that it is
inconsistent with his Honor, to bestow his Graces by Human Hands? Has he any
where told us, that he has no Ministers, no Ambassadors on Earth; but that all
his Gifts and Graces are to be received immediately from his own Hands? Have
you any Antiquity, Fathers or Councils on your side? No: The whole Tenor of
Scripture, the whole Current of Tradition is against you. Your Novel Doctrine
has only this, to recommend it to the Libertines of the Age, who universally
give into it, that it never was the Opinion of any Church, or Churchman. It is
your Lordship's proper Assertion, That we offend God in expecting his Graces
from any Hands but his own.

Now it is strange, that God should be offended with his own Methods; or that
your Lordship should find us out a Way of pleasing him, more suitable to his
Nature and Attributes, than what he has taught us in the Scriptures. I call
them his own Methods: For what else is the whole Jewish Dispensation, but a
Method of God's Providence; where his Blessings and Judgments were dispensed by
Human Hands? What is the Christian Religion, but a Method of Salvation, where
the chief Means of Grace are offered and dispensed by Human Hands? Let me here
recommend to your Lordship, the excellent Words of a very Learned and Judicious
Prelate on this Occasion.

This will have no Weight with any Reasonable Man, against the Censures of the
Church, or any other Ordinance of the Gospel, that they make the Intervention
of other Men necessary to our Salvation; since it has always been God's
ordinary Method, to dispense his Blessings and Judgments by the Hands of Men
Dr. Potter's Church Government, p. 336.
.

Your Lordship exclaims against your Adversaries, as such Romantic strange
sort of Men, for talking of Benedictions and Absolutions, and of the Necessity
of receiving God's Ordinances from proper Hands: Yet, my Lord, here is an
Excellent Bishop, against whose Learnings Judgment and Protestantism, there can
be no Objection; who says, if a Person have but the Use of his Reason, he will
have nothing to object to any Ordinances of the Gospel, which make the
Intervention of other Men necessary toward the Conveyance of them; since that
has always been God's ordinary Method. The Bishop does not say, it is
necessary, a Man should be a Great Divine to acknowledge it; so he be but a
Reasonable Man, he will allow it. Yet your Lordship is so far from being this
Reasonable Man, that you think your Adversaries void both of Reason and common
Sense, for teaching it. You expressly exclude All Persons from having any thing
to do with our Salvation; and say, it wholly depends upon God and our selves.

You tell us, that Authoritative Benediction is another of the Terms of Art
used by your Protestant Adversaries; in which they claim a Right, in one
Regular Succession, of Blessing the People Page 91.
. An ingenious Author, my Lord, (in the Opinion of many, if not of most of your
Friends) calls the Consecration of the Elements Conjuration Rights of the
Christian Church.
; your Lordship calls the Sacerdotal Benediction a Term of Art; too plain an
Intimation, though in more remote and somewhat softer Terms, that in the Sense of
a Certain Father of the Church, her Clergy are little better than so many
Jugglers.

Your Lordship says, If they only meant hereby to declare upon what Terms God
will give his Blessings to Christians, or to express their own hearty Wishes
for them, this might be understood. So it might, my Lord, very easily; and, I
suppose, every body understands that they may do this, whether they be Clergy
or Layity, Men or Women: For I presume, any one may declare what he takes to be
the Terms of the Gospel, and wish that others may faithfully observe them. But
I humbly presume, my Lord, that the Good Bishop abovementioned, meant
something more than this, when he spoke of Ordinances, which make the
Intervention of other Men necessary to our Salvation, and of God's dispensing
his Blessings in virtue of them through their Hands.

There is a superstitious Custom (in your Lordship's Account it must be so) yet
remaining in most Places, of sending for a Clergyman to minister to sick
Persons in imminent Danger of Death: Even those who have abused the Clergy all
their Lives long, are glad to beg their Assistance when they apprehend
themselves upon the Confines of another World. There is no reason, my Lord, to
dislike this Practice, but as it supposes a Difference between the Sacerdotal
Prayers and Benedictions. and those of a Nurse.

We read, my Lord, that God would not heal Abimelech, though he knew the
Integrity of his Heart, till Abraham had prayed for him. He is a Prophet, said
God, he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live, (Genesis 20. 7.)

Pray, my Lord, was not God Just, and Good, and True, in the Days of Abraham,
as He is now? Yet you see, Abimelech's Integrity was not available it self. He
was to be pardoned by the Prayer of Abraham; and his Prayer was effectual; and
so represented, because it was the Prayer of a Prophet.

Suppose, my Lord, that Abimelech had said with your Lordship, That it is
affronting to God, that we should expect his Graces from any Hands but his own;
that all is to be transacted between God and our selves; and so had rejected
the Prayer of Abraham, as a mere Essay of Prophet-Craft; He had then acted with
as much Prudence and Piety as your Lordship's Layity would do, if you could
persuade them to despise Benedictions and Absolutions, to regard no particular
sort of Clergy; but entirely depend upon God and themselves, without any other
Assistance whatever.

We read also, that Joshua was full of the Spirit of Wisdom; for Moses had laid
his Hands upon him, (Deuteronomy. 34. 9.) Was it not as absurd, my Lord, in the Days
of Joshua, for Human Hands to bless, as it is now? Did there not then lie the
same Objection against Moses, that there does now against the Christian Clergy?
Had Moses any more Natural Power to give the Spirit of Wisdom, etc. by his
Hands, than the Clergy have to confer Grace by theirs? They are both equally
weak and insufficient for these Purposes, of themselves, and equally powerful
when it pleases God to make them so.

Again, when Eliphaz, and his Friends had displeased God, they were not to be
reconciled to God by their own Repentance, or transact that Matter only between
God and themselves; but they were referred to apply to Job. My Servant Job shall
pray for you; for him will I accept, (Job 42. 8.) Might not Eliphaz, here have
said, shall I so far affront God, as to think I cannot be blessed without the
Prayers of Job? Shall I be so weak or senseless, as to imagine, my own
Supplications and Repentance will not save me; or that I need apply to any one
but God alone, to quailfie me for the Reception of his Grace?

Again, The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, speak unto Aaron and his Sons,
saying, on this wise shall ye bless the Children of Israel, saying unto them,
The Lord bless and keep thee, etc. and I will bless them, ( Numb. 6. 22.)

Again, The Priests of the Sous of Levi shall come near; for them has the Lord
thy God chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the Name of the Lord, (
Deuteronomy. 21. 5.)

Now, my Lord, this is what we mean by the Authoritative Administrations of the
Christian Clergy; whether they be by way of Benediction, or of any other kind.
We take them to be Persons whom God has chosen to minister unto him, and to
bless in his Name. We imagine, that our Savior was a greater Priest and
Mediator than Aaron, or any of God's former Ministers. We are assured,, that
Christ sent his Apostles, as his Father had sent him; and that therefore they
were his true Successors: And since they did commission others to succeed them
in their Office, by the Imposition of Hands, as Moses commissioned Joshua to
succeed him; the Clergy who have succeeded the Apostles, have as Divine a Call
and Commission to their Work, as those who were called by our Savior; and are
as truly his Successors, as the Apostles themselves were.

From the Places of Scripture above mentioned, it is evident; and indeed, from
the whole Tenor of Sacred Writ, that it may consist with the Goodness and
Justice of God to depute Men to act in his Name, and be ministerial toward the
Salvation of others; and to lay a Necessity upon his Creatures of qualifying
themselves for his Favor, and receiving his Graces by the Hands and
Intervention of mere Men.

But, my Lord, if there be now any Set of Men upon Earth, that are more
peculiarly God's Ministers, than others; and through whose Administrations,
Prayers, and Benedictions, God will accept of returning Sinners, and receive
them to Grace; you have done all you can, to prejudice People against them: You
have taught the Layity, that all is to be transacted between God and
themselves; and that they need not value any particular sort of Clergy in the
World.

I leave it to the Great Judge and Searcher of Hearts, to judge, from what
Principles, or upon what Motives your Lordship has been induced to teach
tesethings: But must declare, that for my own part, if I had the greatest
Hatred to Christianity, I should think, it could not be more expressed, than by
teaching what your Lordship has publicly taught. If I could rejoice in the
Misery and Ruin of Sinners, I should think it sufficient Matter of Triumph, to
drive them from the Ministers of God, and to put them upon inventing new
Schemes of saving themselves, instead of submitting to the ordinary Methods of
Salvation appointed by God.

It will not follow from any thing I have said, that the Layity have lost their
Christian Liberty; or that no body can be saved, but whom the Clergy please to
save; that they have the arbitrary Disposal of Happiness to Mankind. Was
Abimelech's Happiness in the Disposition of Abraham, because he was to be
received by means of Abraham's Intercession? Or could Job damn Eliphaz, because
he was to mediate for him, and procure his Reconciliation to God.

Neither, my Lord, do the Christian Clergy pretend to this despotick Empire
over their Flocks: They don't assume to themselves a Power to damn the
Innocent, or to save the Guilty: But they assert a sober and just Right to
reconcile Men to God; and to act in his Name, in restoring them to his Favor.
They received their Commission from those whom Christ sent with full Authority
to send others, and with a Promise that he would be with them to the End of the
World. From this they conclude, that they have his Authority; and that in
consequence of it, their Administrations are necessary, and effectual to the
Salvation of Mankind; and that none can despise Them, but who despise Him that
sent them; and are as surely out of the Covenant of Grace, when they leave such
his Pastors, as when they openly despise, or omit to receive his Sacraments.

And what is there in this Doctrine, my Lord, to terrify the Consciences of
the Layity? What is there here, to bring the profane Scandal of Priestcraft
upon the Clergy? Could it be any ground of Abimelech's hating Abraham, because
that Abraham was to reconcile him to God? Could Eliphaz, justly have any
Prejudice against Job, because God would hear Job's Intercession for him? Why,
then, my Lord, must the Christian Priesthood be so horrid and hateful an
Institution, because the Design of it is to restore Men to the Grace and Favor
of God? Why must we be abused and insulted, for being sent upon the Errand of
Salvation, and made Ministers of eternal Happiness to our Brethren? There is a
Woe due to us if we preach not the Gospel, or neglect those ministerial Offices
that Christ has entrusted to us. We are to watch for their Souls, as those who
are to give an Account. Why then must we be treated as arrogant Priests, or
Popishly affected, for pretending to have any thing to do in the Discharge of
our Ministry, with the Salvation of Men? Why must we be reproached with
Blasphemous Claims, and Absurd Senseless Powers* for assuming to bless in God's
Name; or thinking our Administrations more effectual, than the Office of a
common Layman?

But farther, to what purpose does your Lordship except against these Powers in
the Clergy? from their common Frailties and Infirmities with the rest of
Mankind? Were not Abraham, and Job, and the Jewish Priests, Men of like
Passions with us? Did not our Savior command the Jews to apply to their
Priests, notwithstanding their Personal Faults, because they sat in Moses's
Chair? Did not the Apostles assure their Followers, that they were Men of like
Passions with them? But did they therefore disclaim their Mission, or
Apostolical Authority? Did they teach, that their Natural Infirmities made them
less the Ministers of God, or less necessary to the Salvation of Men? Their
Personal Defects did not make them depart from the Claim of those Powers they
were invested with, or desert their Ministry: But indeed, gave St. Paul
Occasion to say, We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, ( i.e. this
Authority committed to mere Men) that the Excellency of it may be of God, and
not of Men. The Apostle happens to differ very much from your Lordship. He
says, such weak Instruments were made use of, that the Glory might redound to
God? Your Lordship says, to suppose such Instruments to be of any Benefit to
us, is to lessen the Sovereignty of God, and in consequence, his Glory.

Your Lordship imagines, you have sufficiently destroyed the Sacerdotal Powers,
by showing, that the Clergy are only Men, and subject to the common Frailties
of Mankind. My Lord, we own the Charge; and don't claim any Sacerdotal Powers
from our Personal Abilities, or to acquire any Glory to our selves. But, weak
as we are, we are God's Ministers; and if we are either afraid or ashamed of
our Duty, we must perish in the Guilt. But is a Prophet therefore proud,
because he insists upon the Authority of his Mission? Cannot a Mortal be God's
Messenger, and employed in his Affairs, but he must be insolent and assuming,
for having the Resolution to own it? If we are to be reproved, for pretending
to be God's Ministers, because we are but Men, the Reproach will fall upon
Providence; since it has pleased God, chiefly to transact his Affairs with
Mankind, by the Ministry of their Brethren.

Your Lordship has not One Word from Scripture against these Sacerdotal Powers;
no Proof, that Christ has not sent Men to be effectual Administrators of his
Graces: You only assert, that there can be no such Ministers, because they are
mere Men.

Now, my Lord, I must beg leave to say, that if the Natural Weakness of Men
makes them incapable of being the Instruments of conveying Grace to their
Brethren; if the Clergy cannot be of any Use or Necessity to their Flocks, for
this Reason; then it undeniably follows, that there can be no positive
Institutions in the Christian Religion, that can procure any Spiritual
Advantages to the Members of it; then the Sacraments can be no longer any Means
of Grace. For, I hope, no one thinks, that Bread and Wine have any natural
Force or Efficacy, to convey Grace to the Soul. The Water in Baptism has the
common Qualities of Water, and is destitute of any intrinsic Power to cleanse
the Soul, or purify from Sin. But your Lordship will not say, because it has
only the common Name of Water, that therefore it cannot be a Means of Grace.
Why then may not the Clergy though they have the common Nature of Men, be
constituted by God, to convey his Graces, and to be ministerial to the
Salvation of their Brethren? Can God consecrate inanimate Things to Spiritual
Purposes, and make them the Means of Eternal Happiness? And is Man the only
Creature that he cannot make subservient to his Designs? The only Being who is
too Weak for an Omnipotent God to render effectual toward attaining the Ends
of his Grace?

Is it just and reasonable, to reject and despise the Ministry and Benedictions
of Men, because they are Men like our selves? And is it not as reasonable, to
despise the sprinkling of Water, a Creature below us, a senseless and inanimate
Creature?

Your Lordship therefore, must either find us some other Reason for rejecting
the Necessity of Human Administrations, than because they are Human; or else
give up the Sacraments, and all Positive Institutions along with them.

Surely, your Lordship must have a mighty Opinion of Naaman the Syrian; who,
when the Prophet bid him go wash in Jordan seven times, to the end he might be
clean from his Leprosy, Very wisely remonstrated. Are not Abana and PharlPar,
Rivers of Damascus, better than all the Waters of Israel?

This, my Lord, discovered Naaman's great Liberty of Mind; and it is much this
has not been produced before, as an Argument of his being a Free-Thinker. He
took the Water of Jordan to be only Water; as your Lordship justly observes a
Clergyman to be only a Man: And if you had been with him, you could have
informed him, that the washing seven times was a mere Nicety and Trifle of the
Prophet; and that since it is God alone who can work miraculous Cures, we ought
not to think, that they depend upon any external Means, or any stated Number of
repeating them.

This, my Lord, is the true Scope and Spirit of your Argument: If the Syrian
was right in despising the Water of Jordan, because it was only (...); your
Lordship may be right in despising any particular Order of Clergy; because they
are but Men. Your Lordship is certainly as right, or as wrong, as he was.

And now, my Lord, let the common Sense of Mankind here judge, whether, if the
Clergy are to be esteemed as having no Authority, because they are mere Men; it
does not plainly follow, that every thing else, every Institution that has not
some natural Force and Power to produce the Effects designed by it, is not also
to be rejected as equally Trifling and Ineffectual.

The Sum of the matter is this: It appears from many express Facts, and indeed,
from the whole Series of God's Providence, that it is not only consistent with
his Attributes; but also agreeable to his ordinary Methods of dealing with
Mankind, that he should substitute Men to act in his Name, and be
Authoritatively employed in conferring his Grace and Favors upon Mankind. It
appears, that your Lordship's Argument against the Authoritative
Administrations of the Christian Clergy, does not only contradict those Facts,
and condemn the ordinary Method of God's Dispensations; but likewise proves the
Sacraments, and every positive Institution of Christianity to be ineffectual,
and as mere Dreams and Trifles, as the several Offices and Orders of the Clergy.

This, I hope, will be esteemed a sufficient Confutation of your Lordship's
Doctrine, by all who have any true Regard or Zeal for the Christian Religion;
and only expect to be saved by the Methods of Divine Grace proposed in the
Gospel.

I shall now in a Word or two set forth the Sacredness of the Ecclesiastical
Character, as it is founded in the New Testament; with a particular regard to
the Power of conferring Grace, and the Efficacy of Human Benedictions.]

It appears therein, that all Sacerdotal Power as derived from the Holy Ghost.
Our Savior himself took not the Minstry upon him, till he had this
Consecration: And during the time of his Ministry he was under the Guidance and
Direction of the Holy Ghost. Through the Holy Spirit he gave Commandment to the
Apostles whom he had chosen. When he ordained them to the Work of the Ministry,
it was with these Words, Receive the Holy Ghost. Those whom the Apostles
ordained to the same Function, it was by the same Authority: They laid their
Hands upon the Elders, exhorting them to take care of she Flock of Christ, over
which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers.

Hereby they plainly declared, that however this Office was to descend from Man
to Man through Human Hands, that it was the Holy Ghost which consecrated them
to that Employment, and gave them Authority to execute it.

From this it is also manifest, that the Priesthood is a Grace of the Holy
Ghost; that it is not a Function founded in the Natural or Civil Rights of
Mankind; but is derived from the Special Authority of the Holy Ghost; and is as
truly a positive Institution as the Sacraments. So that they who have no
Authority to alter the Old Sacraments, and substitute New ones, have no Power
to alter the Old Order of the Clergy, or introduce any other Order of them.

For why can we not change the Sacraments? Is it not, because they are only
Sacraments, and operate as they are instituted by the Holy Ghost? Because they
are useless ineffectual Rites without this Authority? And does not the same
Reason hold as well for the Order of the Clergy? Does not the same Scripture
tell us, they are equally instituted by the Holy Ghost, and oblige only by
virtue of his Authority? How absurd is it therefore, to pretend to abolish, or
depart from the Settled Order of the Clergy, to make New Orders, and think any
God's Ministers, unless we had his Authority, and could make New Sacraments, or
a New Religion?

My Lord, how comes it, that we cannot alter the Scriptures? Is it not, because
they are Divinely inspired, and dictated by the Holy Ghost? And since it is
express Scripture, that the Priesthood is instituted and authorized by the same
Holy Spirit, why is not the Holy Ghost as much to be regarded in one
Institution, as in another? Why may we not as well make a Gospel, and say, it
was writ by the Holy Ghost, as make a New Order of Clergy, and call them His;
or esteem them as having any relation to him?

From this it likewise appears, that there is an absolute Necessity of a strict
Succession of Authorized Ordainers, from the Apostolical Times, in order to
constitute a Christian Priest. For since a Commission from the Holy Ghost is
necessary for the Exercise of this Office; no one now can receive it, but from
those who have derived their Authority in a true Succession, from the Apostles.
We could not, my Lord, call our present Bibles the Word of God, unless we knew
the Copies from which they are taken, were taken from other true ones, till we
come to the Originals themselves. No more could we call any True Ministers, or
Authorized by the Holy Ghost, who have not received their Commission by an
uninterrupted Succession of Lawful Ordainers.

What an Excellent Divine would he be, who should tell the World, it was not
necessary that the several Copies and Manuscripts, through which the Scriptures
have been transmitted through different Ages and Languages, should be all true
ones, and none of them forged; that this was a thing subject to so great
Uncertainty, that God could not hang our Salvation on such Niceties. Suppose,
for Proof of this, he should appeal to the Scriptures; and ask, where any
Mention is made of ascertaining the Truth of all the Copies? Would not this be
a Way of Arguing very Theological? The Application is very easy.

Your Lordship has not one Word to prove the uninterrupted Succession of the
Clergy a Triste or Dream; but that it is subject to so great Uncertainty, and
is never mentioned in the Scriptures. And to the Uncertainty of it, it is
equally as uncertain, as whether the Scriptures be genuine. There is just the
same sufficient Historical Evidence for the Certainty of one, as the other. As
to its not being mentioned in the Scripture, the Doctrine upon which it is
founded, plainly made it unnecessary to mention it. Is it needful for the
Scriptures to tell us, that if we take our Bible from any false Copy, that it
is not the Word of God? Why then need they tell us, that if we are Ordained by
Usurping False Pretenders to Ordination, not deriving their Authority to that
end from the Apostles, that we are no Priests? Does not the thing it self speak
as plain in one Case, as in the other? The Scriptures are only of use to us, as
they are the Word of God: We cannot have this Word of God, which was written so
many Years ago, unless we receive it from Authentic Copies and Manuscripts.

The Clergy have their Commission from the Holy Ghost: The Power of conferring
this Commission of the Holy Ghost, was left with the Apostles: Therefore the
present Clergy cannot have the same Commission, or Call, but from an Order of
Men, who have successively conveyed his Power from the Apostles to the present
time. So that, my Lord, I shall beg leave to lay it down, as a plain,
undeniable, Christian Truth, that the Order of the Clergy is an Order of as
necessary Obligation, as the Sacraments; and as unalterable as the Holy
Scriptures; the same Holy Ghost being as truly the Author and Founder of the
Priesthood, as the Institutor of the Sacraments, or the Inspirer of those
Divine Oracles. And when your Lordship shall offer any fresh Arguments to
prove, that no particular sort of Clergy is necessary; that the Benedictions
and Administrations of the present Clergy of our most Excellent Church, are
Trifling Niceties; if I cannot show, that the same Arguments will conclude
against the Authority of the Sacraments and the Scriptures, I faithfully
promise your Lordship to become a Convert to your Doctrine.

What your Lordship charges upon your Adversaries, as an Absurd Doctrine, in
pretending the Necessity of one regular, successive, and particular Order of
the Clergy, is a True Christian Doctrine; and as certain from Scripture, as
that we are to keep to the Institution of particular Sacraments; or not to
alter those particular Scriptures, which now compose the Canon of the Old and
New Testament.

By Authoritative Benediction, we do not mean any Natural or Intrinsic
Authority of our own: But a Commission from God, to be Effectual Administrators
of his Ordnances, and to bless in his Name. Thus, a Person who is sent from God
to foretell things, of which he had before no Knowledge or Notion, or to
denounce Judgments, which he has no Natural Power to execute, may be truly said
to be an Authoritative Prophet; because he has the Authority of God for what he
does. Thus, when the Bishop is said to confer Grace in Confirmation; this is
properly an Authoritative Benediction; because he is then as truly doing what
God has commissioned him to do, as when a Prophet declares upon what Errand he
is sent.

It Is in this Sense, my Lord, that the People are said to be Authoritatively
blessed by the Regular Clergy; because they are God's Clergy, and act by his
Commission; bacause by their Hands the People receive the Graces and Benefits
of God's Ordinances; which they have no more Reason to expect from other
Ministers of their own Election, or if the Word may be used in an abusive
Sense, of their own Consecration, than to receive Grace from Sacraments of
their own Appointment. The Scriptures teach us, that the Holy Ghost has
instituted an Order of Clergy: We say, a Priesthood so authorized, can no more
be changed by us, than we can change the Scriptures, or make New Sacraments,
because they are all founded on the same Authority, without any Power of a
Dispensation delegated to us in one Case more than in another. If therefore we
have a mind to continue in the Covenant of Christ, and receive the Grace and
Benefit of his Ordinances, we must receive them through such Hands as he has
authorized for that Purpose, to the end we may be qualified to partake the
Blessings of them. For as a True Priest cannot benefit us by administering a
False Sacrament; so a True Sacrament is nothing, when it is administered by a
False Uncommission'd Minister. Besides this Benediction which attends the
Ordinances of God, when they are thus performed by authorized Hands; there is a
Benediction of Prayer, which we may justly think very effectual, when
pronounced or dispensed by the same Hands.

Thus when the Bishop or Priest intercedes for the Congregation, or pronounces
the Apostolical Benediction upon them, we do not consider this barely as an Act
of Charity and Humanity, of one Christian praying for another; but as the Work
of a Person who is commissioned by God* to bless in his Name, and be
effectually ministerial in the Conveyance of his Graces; or as the Prayer of
one who is left with us in Christ's stead, to carry on his great Design of
saving us; and whose Benedictions are ever ratified in Heaven, but when we
render our selves, in one respect or other, incapable of them.

Now, my Lord, they are these Sacerdotal Prayers, these Authorized Sacraments,
these Commissioned Pastors, whom the Holy Ghost has made Overseers of the Flock
of Christ, that your Lordship encourages the Layity to despise. You bid them
contemn the vain Words of Validity or Invalidity of God's Ordinances; to heed
no particular sort of Clergy, or the pretended Necessity of their
Administrations.

Your Lordship sets up in this Controversy for an Advocate for the Layity,
against the Arrogant Pretenses, and False Claims of the Clergy. My Lord, we are
no more contending for our selves in this Doctrine, than when we insist upon
any Article in the Creed. Neither is it any more our particular Cause, when we
assert our Mission, than when we assert the Necessity of the Sacraments.

Who is to receive the Benefit of that Commission which we assert, but They?
Who is to suffer, if we pretend a False one, but Our selves? Sad Injury,
indeed, offered to the Layity! That we should affect to be thought Ministers of
God for their sakes! If we really are so, they are to receive the Benefit; if
not; we are to bear the Punishment.

But your Lordship comes too late in this glorious Undertaking, to receive the
Reputation of it: The Work has been already, in the Opinion of most People,
better done to your Lordship's hands. The Famous Author of the Rights of the
Christian Church, has carried this Christian Liberty to as great Heights as
your Lordship. And though you have not one Notion, I can recollect, that has
given Offense* to the World, but what seems taken from that pernicious Book;
yet your Lordship is not so just, as ever once to cite or mention the Author;
who, if your Lordship's Doctrine be true, deserves to have a Statue erected to
his Honor, and receive every Mark of Esteem which is due to the greatest
Reformer of Religion.

Did not mine own Eyes allure me, that he has cast no Contempt upon the Church,
no Reproach upon the Evangelical Institutions, or the Sacred Function, but what
has been seconded by your Lnrdship, I would never have placed your Lordship in
the same View with so scandalous a Declaimer against the Ordinannances of
Christ. Whether I am right or not, in this Charge, I freely leave to the
Judgment of those to determine, who are acquainted with both your Works. Yet
this Author, my Lord, has been treated by the greatest and best Part of the
Nation, as a Free-thinking Infidel. But for what my Lord? Not that he has
declared against the Scriptures; not that he has rejected Revelation; (we are
not, blessed be God, still so far corrupted with the Principles of Infidelity)
but because he has reproached every particular Church, as such, and denied all
Obligation to Communion; because he has exposed Benedictions, Absolutions and
Excommunications; denied the Divine Right of the Clergy, and ridiculed the
pretended Sacredness and Necessity of their Administrations, as mere Niceties
and Trifles, though commonly in more distant, I was going to say, more decent
Ways: In a word, because he made all Churches, all Priests, all Sacraments,
however administered, equally valid, and denied any particular Method necessary
to Salvation. Yet after all this profane Declamation, he allows, my Lord, that
Religious Offices may be appropriated to particular Men, called Clergy, for
Order sake only; and not on the Account of any peculiar Spiritual Advantages,
Powers or Privileges, which those who art set apart for them, have from Heaven
Page 131.
.

Agreeable to this, your Lordship owns, that you are not against the Order, or
Decency, or Subordination belonging to Christian Societies Answer to Dr. Snape,
p. 48.
.

But, pray, my Lord, do you mean any more by this, than the abovementioned
Author? Is it for any thing, but the sake of a little external Order or
Convenience? Is there any Christian Law that obliges to observe this kind of
Order? Is there any real essential Difference between Persons ranked into this
Order? Is it a Sin for any body, especially the Civil Magistrate, to leave this
Order, and make what other Orders he prefers to it? This your Lordship cannot
resolve in the Affirmative; for then you must allow, that some Communions are
safer than others, and that some Clergy have more Authority than others.

Will your Lordship say, that no particular Order can be necessary; yet some
Order necessary, which may be different in different Communions? This cannot
hold good upon your Lordship's Principles: For since Christ has left no Law
about any Order, no Members of any particular Communion need submit to that
Order; since it is confessed by your Lordship, That in Religion no Laws, but
those of Christ, are of any Obligation. So that, though you don't disclaim all
external Order and Decency your self, yet you have taught other People to do it
if they please, and as much as they please.

Suppose, my Lord, some Layman, upon a Pretense of your Lordship's Absence, or
any other, should go into the Dlocess of Bangor, and there pretend to Ordain
Clergymen; could your Lordship quote one Text of Scripture against him? Could
you allege any Law of Christ, or his Apostles, that he had broken? Could you
prove him guilty of any Sin? No, my Lord, you would not do that; because this
would be acknowledging such a thing as a Sinful Ordination; and if there be
Sinful Ordinations, then there mus be some Law concerning Ordinations: For Sin
is the Transgression of the Law: And if there be a Law concerning Ordinations,
then we must keep to the Clergy lawfully Ordained; and must confess, after all
your Lordship has said, or can say, that still some Communions are safer than
others.

If you should reprove such a one, as an Englishman, for acting in Opposition
to the English Laws of Decency and Order; he would answer, That he has nothing
to do with such Trifles; That Christ was sole Lawgiver in his Kingdom; That he
was content to have his Kingdom as Orderly and Decent as Christ had left it;
and since he had instituted no Laws in that matter, it was presuming for others
to take upon them to add any thing by way of Order or Decency, by Laws of their
own: That as he had as much Authority from Christ, to Ordain Clergy, as your
Lordship, he would not depart from his Christian Liberty.

If he should remonstrate to your Lordship in these, or Words to the like
effect, he would only reduce your Lordship's own Doctrine to Practice. This, my
Lord, is pare of that Confusion the Learned Dr. Snape has charged you with
being the Author of, in the Church of God. And all Persons, my Lord, whom you
have taught not to regard any particular sort of Clergy, must know (if they
have the common Sense to which you appeal) that then no Clergy are at all
necessary; and that it is as lawful for any Man to be his own Priest, as to
solicit his own Cause. For to say, that no particular sort of Clergy are
necessary, and yet that in general, the Clergy are necessary, is the same as to
say, that Truth is necessary to be believed; yet the Belief of no particular
Truth is necessary.

The next thing to be considered, my Lord, is your Doctrine concerning
Absolutions. You begin thus: The same you will find a sufficient Reply to their
presumptuous Claim to an Authoritative Absolution. An infallible Absolution
cannot belong to fallible Men. But no Absolution can be Authoritative, which is
not Infallible. Therefore no Authoritative Absolution can belong to any Man
living. Preservative, p. 92.


I must observe here, your Lordship does not reject this Absolution, because
the Claim of it is not founded in Scripture; but by an Argument drawn from the
nature of the Thing: Because you imagine, such Absolution requires
Infallibility for the Execution of it; therefore it cannot belong to Men.
Should this be true, it would prove, that if our Savior had really so
intended, he could not have given this Power to his Ministers. But, my Lord,
who can see any Repugnancy in the Reason of the Thing it self? Is it not as
easy to conceive, that our Lord should confer his Grace of Pardon by the Hands
of his Ministers, as by Means of the Sacraments? And may not such Absolution be
justly called Authoritative, the Power of which is granted, and executed by his
Authority?

Is it impossible for Men to have this Authority from God, because they may
mistake in the Exercise of it? This Argument proves too much; and makes as
short work with every Institution of Christianity, as with this Power of
Absolution.

For if it is impossible, that Men should have Authority from God to Absolve in
his Name, because they are not Infallible; this makes them equally incapable of
being entrusted with any other Means of Grace; and consequently, supposes the
whole Priests Office to imply a direct Impossbility in the very Notion of it.

Your Lordship's Argument is this: Christians have their Sins pardoned upon
certain Conditions; but Fallible Men cannot certainly know these Conditions;
therefore Fallible Men cannot have Authority to Absolve.

From hence I take occasion to argue thus: Persons are to be admitted to the
Sacraments on certain Conditions; But Fallible Men cannot tell, whether they
come qualified to receive them according to these Conditions; Therefore
Fallible Men cannot have Authority to administer the Sacraments.

2 dly, This Argument subverts all Authority of the Christian Religion it self,
and the Reason of every instituted Means of Grace. For if nothing can be
Authoritative, but what a Man is infallibly assured of; then the Christian
Religion cannot be an Authoritative Method of Salvation; since a Man, by being
a Christian, does not become infallibly certain of his Salvation: Nor does
Grace infallibly attend the Participation of the Sacraments. So that though your
Lordship has formed this Argument only against this Absolving Power; yet it has
as much Force against the Sacraments, and the Christian Religion it self. For
if it be absurd to suppose, that the Priest should absolve any one, because he
cannot be certain that he deserves Absolution; does it not imply the same
Absurdity, to suppose, that he should have the Power of Administering the
Sacraments, when he cannot be infallibly rtain, that those who receive them,
are duly qualified? If a Possibility of Error destroys the Power in one Case,
it as certainly destroys it in the other. Again, if Absolution cannot be
Authoritative, unless it be Infallible; then, it is plain, that the Christian
Religion is not an Authoritative Means of Salvation; because all Christians are
not infallibly saved: Nor can the Sacraments be Authoritative Means of Grace;
because all who partake of them, do not infallibly obtain Grace.

Your Lordship proceeds with your Layity by way of Expostulation: If they amuse
you with that Power which Christ left with his Apostles, Whose soever Sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever Sins ye retain, they are
retained unto them Page 93
.

But why amuse, my Lord? Are the Texts of Holy Scripture to be treated as only
Matter of Amusement? Or does your Lordship know of any Age in the Church, when
the very same Doctrine which we now teach, has not been taught from the same
Texts?

Do you know any Successors of the Apostles, that thought the Power there
specified, did not belong them? But however, your Lordship has taught your
Layity to believe what we argue from this Text, all Amusement; and told them,
They may securely answer, that it is impossible for them to depend upon this
Right as any thing certain, till they can prove to you, that every thing spoken
to the Apostles, belongs to Ministers in all Ages Page 94.
. The Security of this Answer, my Lord, is founded upon this False Presumption,
viz. That the Clergy can claim no Right to the Exercise of any Part of their
Office, as Successors of the Apostles, till they can prove, that every thing
that was spoken to the Apostles, belongs to them.

This Proposition must be true; or else there is no Force or Security in the
Objection you here bring for the Instruction of the Layity. If it is well
founded, then the Clergy cannot possibly prove, they have any more Right to the
Exercise of any Part of their Office than the Layity. Do they pretend to
Ordain, Confirm, to admit or exclude Men from the Sacraments? By what Authority
is all this done? Is it not, because the Apostles, whose Successors they are,
did the same things? But then, say your Lordship's well-instructed Layity, this
is nothing to the purpose: Prove your selves Apostles; prove, that every thing
said to the Apostles, belongs to you; and then it will be allowed, that you may
exercise these Powers, because they exercised them: But as this is impossible
to be done; so it is impossible for you to prove, that you have any Powers or
Authorities, because they had them.

And now, my Lord, if the Case be thus, what Apology shall we make for
Christianity, as it has been practiced in all Ages? How shall we excuse the
noble Army of Martyrs, Saints and Confessors, who have boldly asserted the
Right to so many Apostolical Powers? Could any Men in those Ages pretend, that
every thing that was spoken to the Apostles, belonged to themselves? False
then, was their Claim, and presumptuous their Authority, who should pretend to
any Apostolical Powers, because the Apostles had them; when they could not
prove, that every thing that was spoken to the Apostles, belonged to them.

Farther; to prove, that the abovementioned Text does not confer the Power of
Absolution in the Clergy, you reason thus: Whatever contradicts the natural
Notions of God, and the Design and Tenor of the Gospel, cannot be the true
Meaning of any Passage in the Gospel: But to make the Absolution of weak and
fallible Men, so necessary, or so valid, that God will not pardon without them;
or that all are pardoned, who have them pronounced over them, is, to contradict
those Notions, as well as the plain Tenor of the Gospel Page 94.
.

Be pleased, my Lord, to point out your Adversary: Name any one Church of
England Man that ever taught this Romantic Doctrine which you are confuting.
Whoever taught such a Necessity of Absolutions, that God will pardon none
without them? Whoever declared, that all are pardoned, who have them pronounced
over them? We teach the Necessity and Validity of Sacraments; but do we ever
declare, that all are saved who receive them? Is there no Medium between Two
Extremes? No such thing, my Lord, as Moderation! Must every thing be thus
Absolute and Extravagant, or nothing at all?

In another Page, we have more of this same Coloring: But to claim a Right to
stand in God's stead, in such a Sense, that they can absolutely and certainly
bless, or not bless, with their Voice alone: This is the highest Absurdity and
Blasphemy, as it supposes God to place a Set of Men above himself; and to put
out of his own Hands the Disposal of his Blessings and Curses Page 91.
.

If your Lordship had employed all this Oratory against worshipping the Sun or
Moon, it had just affected your Adversaries as much as this. For whoever
taught, that any Set of Men could Absolutely bless, or withold Blessing,
independent of God? Whoever taught, that the Christian Religion, or Sacraments,
or Absolution saved People on course, or without proper Dispositions? Who ever
claimed such an Absolving Power, as to set himself above God, and to take from
him the Disposal of his own Blessings and Curses? What has such extravagant
Descriptions, such Romantic Characters of Absolution, to do with that Power
the Clergy justly claim? Cannot there be a Necessity in some Cases of receiving
Absolution from their Hands, except they set themselves above God? Is God
robbed of the Disposal of his Blessings, when in Obedience to his own Commands,
and in virtue of his own Authority, they admit some as Members of the Church,
and exclude others from the Communion of it? Do they pretend to be Channels of
Grace, or the Means of Pardon, by any Rights or Powers naturally inherent in
them? Do they not in all these things consider themselves as lnstruments of
God, that are made ministerial to the Edification of the Church, purely by his
Will, and only so far as they act in Conformity to it? Now if it has pleased
God to confer the Holy Ghost in Ordination, Confirmation, etc. only by them,
and to annex the Grace of Pardon to the Imposition of their Hands, on returning
Sinners; is it any Blasphemy for them to claim and exert their Power? Is the
Prerogative of God injured, because his own Institutions are obeyed? Cannot he
dispense his Graces by what Persons, and on what Terms he pleases? Is he
deprived of the Disposal of his Blessings, because they are bestowed on Persons
according to his Order, and in obedience to his Authority? If I should affirm,
that Bishops have the sole Power to Ordain and Confirm, would this be robbing
God of his Disposal of those Graces that attend such Actions? Is it not rather
allowing and submitting to God's own Disposal, when we keep close to those
Methods of it, which himself has prescribed?

Pray, my Lord, consider the Nature of Sacraments. Are not they necessary to
Salvation? But is God therefore excluded from any Power of his own? Has he for
that reason, set Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, or Water in Baptism, above
Himself? Has he put the Salvation of Men out of his own Power, because it
depends on his own Institutions? Is the Salvation of Christians less his own
Act and Deed, or less the Effect of his own Mercy, because these Sacraments in
great measure contribute to effect it? Why then, my Lord, must that Imposition
of Hands, that is attended with his Grace of Pardon, and which has no Pretense
to such Grace, but in obedience to his Order, and in virtue of his Promise, be
thus destructive of his Prerogative? Where is there any Diminution of his
Honor or Authority, if such Actions of the Clergy are made necessary to the
Salvation of Souls in some Circumstances, as their washing in Water, or their
receiving Bread and Wine? Cannot God institute Means of Grace, but those Means
must needs be above Himself? They owe all their Power and Efficacy to his
Institution; and can operate no farther than the Ends for which he instituted
them. How then is he Dethroned for being thus obeyed?

My Lord, you take no notice of Scripture; but in a new Way of your own contend
against this Power, from the Nature of the Thing: Yet I must beg Leave to say,
this Power stands upon as sure a Bottom, and is as consistent with the Goodness
and Majesty of God, as the Sacraments. If the annexing Grace to Sacraments, and
making them necessary Means of Salvation, be a reasonable Institution of God;
so is his annexing Pardon to the Imposition of Hands by the Clergy on returning
Sinners. The Grace or Blessing received in either Case, is of his own giving,
and in a Method of his own prescribing. And how this should be any Injury to
God's Honor, or Affront to his Majesty, cannot easily be accounted for.

The Clergy justly claim a Power of Reconciling Men to God, from express Texts
of Scripture; and of delivering his Pardons to penitent Sinners. Your Lordship
disowns this Claim, as making Fallible Men the Absolute Dispensers of God's
Blessings, and putting it in their Power to damn and save as they please. But,
my Lord, nothing of this Extravagance is included in it. They are only
entrusted with a Conditional Power; which they are to exercise according to the
Rules God has given; and it only obtains its Effect when it is so exercised.
Every instituted Means of Grace is Conditional; and is only then effectual,
when it is attended with such Circumstances, as are required by God. If the
Clergy, through Weakness, Passion or Prejudice, exclude Persons from the Church
of God, they injure only themselves. But, my Lord, are these Powers nothing,
because they may be exercised in vain? Have the Clergy no Right at all to them,
because they are not Absolutely infallible in the Exercise of them?

Can you prove, my Lord, that they are not necessary, because they have not
always the same Effect? May not that be necessary to Salvation, which is only
effectual on certain Conditions? Is not the Christian Religion necessary to
Salvation, though all Christians are not saved? Are not the Sacraments necessary
Means of Grace, though the Means of Grace obtained thereby is only Conditional?
Is every one necessarily improved in Grace, who receives the Sacrament? Or is
it less necessary, because the salutary Effects of it are not more universal?
Why then must the Imposition of Hands be less necessary, because the Grace of
it is Conditional, and only obtained in due and proper Circumstances? Is
Absolution nothing, because if witheld wrongfully, it injures not the Person
who is denied it; and if given without due Dispositions in the Penitent, it
avails nothing? Is not this equally true of the Sacraments, if they are denied
wrongfully, or administered to unprepared Receivers? But do they therefore cease
to be standing and necessary Means of Grace?

The Argument therefore against this Power, drawn from the Ignorance or
Passions of the Clergy, whereby they may mistake or pervert the Application of
it, can be of no Force; since it is as Conditional as any other Christian
Institution. The Salvation of no Man can be endangered by the Ignorance or
Passions of any Clergyman in the Use of this Power: If they err in the Exercise
of it, the Consequences of their Error only affect themselves. The
Administration of the Sacraments is certainly entrusted to them: But will any
one say, that the Sacraments are not necessary to Salvation; because they may,
through Ignorance or Passion, make an ill Use of this Trust?

There is nothing in this Doctrine to gratify the Pride of Clergymen, or
encourage them to Lord it over the Flock of Christ. If you could suppose an
Atheist or a Deift in Orders; he might be arrogant, and domineer in the
Exercise of his Powers: But who, that has the least Sense of Religion, can
think it matter of Triumph, that he can deny the Sacraments, or refuse his
Benediction to any of his Flock? Can he injure or offend the least of these;
and will not God take Account? Or, if they fall through his Offense, will not
their Blood be required at his Hands?

Neither is there any thing in it that can enslave the Layity to the Clergy; or
make their Salvation depend upon their Arbitrary Will. Does any one think his
Salvation in danger, because the Sacraments (the necessary Means of it) are
only to be administered by the Clergy? Why then must the Salvation of Penitents
be endangered, or made dependent on the sole Pleasure of the Clergy, because
they alone can reconcile them to the Favor of God? If Persons are unjustly
denied the Sacraments, they may humbly hope, that God will not lay the Want of
them to their Charge. And if they are unjustly kept out of the Church, and
denied Admittance, they have no Reason to fear, but God will, notwithstanding,
accept them, provided they be in other respects proper Objects of his Favor.

But to proceed, your Lordship says, The Apostles might possibly understand the
Power of Remitting and Retaining Sins, to be that Power of Laying their Hands
upon the Sick Pagex
.

Is this Possible, my Lord? Then it is possible, the Apostles might think, that
in the Power here intended to be given them, nothing at all was intended to be
given them. For the Power of Healing the Sick, was already conferred upon them.
Therefore if no more was intended to be given them in this Text, it cannot be
interpreted, as having entitled them properly to any Power at all.

2. The Power mentioned here, was something that Jesus promised he would give
them Hereafter: Which plainly supposes, they had it not then: But they then had
the Power of Healing; therefore something else must be intended here.

3. The Power of the Keys has always been looked upon as the highest in the
Apostolical Order. But if it related only to the Power of Healing, it could not
be so; For the Seventy, who were inferior to the Apostles, had this Power.

4. The very Manner of Expression in this Place, proves, that the Power here
intended to be given, could not relate to Healing the Sick, or to any thing of
that nature; but to some Spiritual Power, whose Effects should not be Visible;
but be made good by virtue of God's Promise. Thus, Whomsoever ye shall heal on
Earth, I will heal in Heaven, borders too near upon an Absurdity. There is no
occasion to promise to make good such Actions as are good already, and have
antecedently produced their Effects. Persons who were restored to Health, to
their Sight, or the Use of their Limbs, did not want to be assured, that the
Apostles, by whom they were restored, had a Power to that End; the Exercise of
which Power, proved and confirmed it self. There was no need therefore of a
Divine Assurance, that a Person who was healed, was actually healed in virtue
of it. But when we consider this Promise, as relating to a Power whose Effects
are not visible; as the Pardon of Sins, the Terms whereby it is expressed, are
most proper: And it is very reasonable to suppose God promising, that the
Spiritual Powers exercised by his Ministers on Earth, though they do not here
produce their visible Effects, shall yet be made good and effectual by him in
Heaven.

These Reasons, my Lord, I should think, are sufficient to convince any one,
that the Apostles could not possibly understand these Words in the Sense of
your Lordship.

Let us now consider the Commission given to Peter. Our Savior said to him,
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it: And I will give unto thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

Now, my Lord, how should it enter into the Thoughts of Peter, that nothing was
here intended, or promised by our Savior, but a Power of Healing; which he not
only had before, but also many other Disciples, who were not Apostles? I will
give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, according to your
Lordship, I will give thee Power to heal the Sick. Can any thing be more
contrary to the plain obvious Sense of the Words? Can any one be said to have
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, because he may be the Instrument of
restoring People to Health? Are Persons Members of Christ's Kingdom, with any
regard to Health? How then can He have any Powers in that Kingdom; or be said
to have the Keys of it, who is only empowered to cure Distempers? Could any one
be said to have the Keys of a Temporal Kingdom, who had no Temporal Power given
him in that Kingdom? Must not he therefore who has the Keys of a Spiritual
Kingdom, have some Spiritual Power in that Kingdom?

Christ has told us, that his Kingdom is not of this World. Your Lordship has
told us, that it is so foreign to every thing of this World, that no Worldly
Terrors or Allurements, no Pains or Pleasures of the Body, can have any thing
to do with it. Yet here your Lordship teaches us, that He may have the Keys of
this Spiritual Kingdom, who has only a Power over Diseases. My Lord, are not
Sickness and Health, Sight and Limbs, Things of this World? Have they not some
relation to Bodily Pleasures and Pains? How then can a Power about Things
wholly confined to this World, be a Power in a Kingdom that is not of this
World? The Force of the Argument lies here: Our Savior has assured us, that
his Kingdom is not of this World: Your Lordship takes it to be of so Spiritual
a Nature, that it ought not, nay, that it cannot be encouraged or established
by any Worldly Powers. Our Savior gives to his Apostles the Keys of this
Kingdom. Yet you have so far forgotten your own Doctrine, and the Spirituality
of this Kingdom, that you tell us, He here gave them a Temporal Power of
Diseases; though He says, they were the Keys of his Kingdom which he gave them.
Suppose any Successor of the Apostles should from this Text pretend to the
Power of the Sword, to make People Members of this Kingdom: Must not the Answer
be, that he mistakes the Power, by not considering, that they are only the Keys
of a Spiritual, not of a Temporal Kingdom, which were here delivered to the
Apostles.

I humbly presume, my Lord, that this would be as good an Answer to your
Lordship's Doctrine, as to Theirs, who claim the Right of the Sword. till it
can be shown that Health and Sickness, Sight and Limbs, do not as truly relate
to the Things of this World as the Power of the Sword.

If this Power of the Keys must be understood, only as a Power of inflicting or
curing Diseases; then the Words, in the proper Construction of them, must run
thus: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, i. e. a
peculiar Society of Healthful People, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against it; i. e. They shall always be in a State of Health. I will give unto
Thee, the Keys of this Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. Thou shall have the Power of
inflicting and curing Distempers; and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth,
shall be bound in Heaven, i.e. on whomsoever thou shall inflict the Leprosy on
Earth. He shall be a Leper in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven, i. e. whomsoever thou shall cure of that Disease on
Earth, shall be perfectly cured of it in Heaven.

This, without putting any Force upon the Words, is your Lordship's own
Interpretation; which exposes the Honor and Authority of Scriptures as much as
the greatest Enemy to them can wish. If our Savior could mean by these Words,
only a Power of healing Distempers; or if the Apostles understood them in that
Sense, we may as well believe, that when He said, His Kingdom was not of this
World, that he meant, it was of this World; and that the Apostles so understood
him too.

But however, for the Benefit and Edification of the Layity, your Lordship has
another Interpretation for them: You say, if they (the Apostles) did apply this
Power of remitting Sins to the certain Absolution of particular Persons, it is
plain, they could do it upon no other Bottom but this; that God's Will, and
good Pleasure, about such particular Persons was infallibly communicated to
them.

Pray my Lord, how, or where is this so plain? Is it plain, that they never
baptized Persons, till God had infallibly communicated his good Pleasure to
them about such particular Persons? Baptism is an Institution equally Sacred
with this other, and puts the Person baptized in the same State of Grace, that
Absolution does the Penitent. Baptism is designed for the Remission of Sin. It
is an Ordinance to which Absolution is consequent, but I suppose, Persons may
be baptized without such Infallible Communication promised, as your Lordship
contends for. If therefore it be not necessary for the Exercise of Absolution
by Baptism, why must it be necessary for Absolution by the Imposition of Hands?

Can Pastors without Infallibility, baptize Heathens, and absolve, or be the
Instruments of absolving them thereby from their Sins? Are they not as able to
absove Christian Penitents, or restore those who have Apostatized? If Human
Knowledge, and the common Rules of the Church, be sufficient to direct the
Priest to whom he ought to administer the Sacraments; they are also sufficient
for the Exercise of this other Part of the Sacerdotal Office.

But your Lordship proceeds thus: Not that they themselves Absolved any.

No, my Lord, no more than Water in Baptism of it self purifies the Soul from
Sin. This Baptismal Water, is, notwithstanding necessary or the Remission of
our Sins.

Again you say, Not that God was obliged to bind and loose the Guilt of Aden,
according to their Declarations, considered as their own Decisions, and their
own Determinations Page
. No, my Lord; whoever. ever thought so? God is not obliged to confer (race by
the Baptismal Water, considered only as Water; but He is, considered as his own
Institution for that End and Purpose. So, if these Declarations are considered
only as the Declarations of Men, God is not obliged by them: But when they are
considered as the Declarations of Men whom he has especially Authorized to make
such Declarations in his Name, then they are as effectual with God, as any
other of his Institution's whatever.

I proceed now to a Paragraph that bears as hard upon our Savior, as some
others have done upon his Apostles and their Successors; where your Lordship
designs to prove, that though Christ claimed a Power of remitting Sins Himself,
or in his own Person, yet that he had really no such Power.

You go upon these Words: If we look back upon our Savior himself, we shall
find, that when he declares that the Son of Man had Power upon Earth to forgive
Sins, even He himself either meant by it, the Power of a miraculous Releasing
Man from his Affliction; or if it related to another more Spiritual Sense of
the Words, the Power of declaring, that the Man's Sins were forgiven by God
Preservative, p. 94.
.

The Words of our Savior, which we are to look back upon, are these: Whether
is it easier to say, thy Sins are forgiven thee; or to say, arise, take up thy
Bed and walk? But that ye may know, the Son of Man has Power on Earth to
forgive Sins, (Mark 2. 9, 10.) As if he had said, Is not the same Divine
Authority and Power required? Is it not a Work as peculiar to God, to perform
miraculous Cures, as to forgive Sins? The Reason therefore, why I now choose to
declare my Authority, rather by saying, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, than by
saying, Arise and walk, was, purely to teach you this Truth, that the Power of
the Son of Man is not confined to Bodily Cures; but that he has Power on Earth
to forgive Sins.

This, my Lord, is the first obvious Sense of the Words; and therefore I take
it to be the True Sense. But your Lordship can look back upon them, till you
find, that Christ has not this Power, though he claims it expressly; but that
he only intends a Power of doing something or other, which no more imports a
Power of forgiving Sins, than of remitting any Temporal Debt or Penalty.

If our Blessed Savior had intended to teach the World, that he was invested
with this Power, I would gladly know, how he must have expressed himself, to
have satisfied your Lordship that he really had it? He must have told you, that
he had not this Power; and then possibly, your Lordship would have taught us,
that he had this Power. For no one can discover any Reason why you should deny
it him; but because he has in express Words claimed and asserted it. I hope,
your Lordship has not so low an Opinion of our Savior's Person, as to think it
unreasonable in the Nature of the Thing, that He should have this Power. Where
does it contradict any Principle of Reason, to say, that a King should be able
to pardon his Subjects? Since there is no Absurdity then in the Thing it self;
and it is so expressly asserted in Scripture; it is just Matter of Surprise,
that your Lordship should carry your Reader from a plain consistent Sense of
the Words, to either this or that Something or other, the Origin whereof is
only to be sought for in your Lordship's own Invention; rather than not exclude
Christ from a Power which he declared he had, and declared he had it for this
very Reason, that we might know that he had it. Our Savior has told us, that
the Way to Heaven is narrow. Your Lordship might as reasonably prove from
hence, that he meant, it was broad, as that he did not mean he could forgive
Sins, when he said, that ye may know, that the Son of Man has Power on Earth
to forgive Sins.

Your Lordship has rejected all Church Authority, and despised the pretended
Powers of the Clergy, for this reason; because Christ is the sole King, sole
Lawgiver, and Judge in his Kingdom. But, it seems, your Lordship,
notwithstanding, thinks it now time to depose him: And this sole King in his
own Kingdom, must not be allowed to be capable of pardoning his own Subjects.

This Doctrine, my Lord; is delivered, I suppose, as your other Doctrines, out
of a hearty Concern and Christian Zeal for the Privileges of the Layity; and to
show, that your Lordship is not only able to limit as you please, the Authority
of Temporal Kings; but also to make Christ himself sole King, and yet no King,
in his Spiritual Kingdom. For, my Lord, the Kingdom of Christ is a Society,
founded in order to the Reconciliation of Sinners to God. If therefore Christ
could not pardon Sins, to what End could he either erect, or how could he
support his Kingdom, which is only in the great and last Design of it, to
consist of Absolved Sinners? He that cannot forgive Sins in a Kingdom that is
erected for the Remission of Sins, can no more be sole King in it, than he that
has no Temporal Power, can be sole King in a Temporal Kingdom. Therefore your
Lordship has been thus mighty serviceable to the Christian Layity, as to teach
them, that Christ is not only sole King, but no King in his Kingdom.

This is not the First Contradiction your Lordship has unhappily fallen into,
in your Attempts upon Kingly Authority. Not is it the Iast; which I shall
presume to observe to the Common Sense of your Layity.

Again, in this Account of our Blessed Savior, your Lordship has made no
difference between Him and his Apostles, as to this Absolving Authority. For
you say, the Great Commission given to them, implied either a Power of
Releasing Men from their Bodily Afflictions; or of declaring such to be
pardoned, whom God had assured them that he had pardoned: And this is all that
you here allow to Christ himself.

Your Lordship's calling him so often King, and sole King, etc. in his Kingdom,
and yet making him a Mere Creature in it, is too like the Insult, and designed
Sarcasm of the Jews, who, when they had nailed him to the Cross, writ over his
Head, This is the King of the Jews.

But to proceed: Your Lordship proves, That our Savior had not the Power of
forgiving Sins; because His Way of Expression was. Thy Sins are forgiven thee.
This was plainly to acknowledge, and keep up that True Notion, that God alone
forgiveth Sins.

Let us therefore put this Argument in Form. Christ has affirmed, that he had
Power to forgive Sins: But his Way was, to say, Thy Sins are forgiven thee:
Therefore Christ had not Power to forgive Sins. Q. E. D.

It is much, your Lordship did not recommend this to your Layity as another
Invincible Demonstration. For by the help of it, my Lord, they may prove, that
our Savior could no more heal Diseases, than forgive Sins. As thus; Christ
indeed pretends to a Power of Healing Diseases; but his usual way of speaking
to the diseased Person, was, Thy Faith has made Thee whole; therefore He had
not the Power of Healing Diseases. The Argument has the same force against one
Power, as against the other. If He did not forgive Sins, because he said, thy
Sins are forgiven Thee; no more did He heal Diseases, because he said, thy
Faith has, made Thee whole.

I have a Claim of several Debts upon a Man: I forgive him them all, in these
Words, Thy Debts are remitted Thee. A Philosophical Wit stands by, and pretends
to prove, that I had not the Power, of remitting these Debts; because I said,
Thy Debts are remitted Thee. What can come up to, or equal such profound
Philosophy, but the Divinity, of one who teaches, our Savior could not forgive
Sins, because He said, Thy Sins are forgiven Thee?

But your Lordship says, the Reason why our Savior thus expressed Himself, Thy
Sins are forgiven Thee, was plainly to keep up that true Notion, that God alone
forgiveth Sins. Therefore, my Lord, according to this Doctrine, our Savior was
obliged not to claim any Power that was peculiar or appropriated to God, alone.
For if this be an Argument, why He should not forgive Sins, it is also an
Argument, that He ought not to claim any other Power, any more than this; which
is proper to God, and only belongs to Him. But, my Lord, if He did express
himself thus, that he might not lay Claim to any thing that was peculiar to
God, how came He in so many other Respects, to lay Claim to such things, as are
as truly peculiar to God, as the Forgiveness of Sins? How came He in so many
Instances to make Himself equal to God? How came He to say, Ye believe in God,
believe also in me? And that Men should Worship the Son, even as the Father?
That He was the Son of God; That he was the Way, the Truth, and the Life?

Are not Evangelical Faith, Worship and Trust, Duties that are solely due to
God? Does He not as much invade the Sovereignty of God, who lays claim to these
Duties, as He that pretends to forgive Sins? Did not Christ also give his
Disciples Power and Authority over Devils and Unclean Spirits, and Power to
heal all manner of Diseases? Now, if Christ did not assume a Power to forgive
Sins, because God alone could forgive Sins, it is also as unaccountable, that
He should exercise other Authorities and Powers which are as strictly peculiar
to God, as that of forgiving Sins. As if a Person should disown that Christ is
Omniscient, because Omniscience is an Attribute of God Alone; and yet confess
his Omnipotence, which is an Attribute equally Divine.

But farther, my Lord: Did our Savior thus designedly express himself, least
He should be thought to assume any Power which was Divine, then it is certain
(according to this Opinion) that if He had assumed any such Power, or pretended
to do what was peculiar to God, he had been the Occasion of misleading Men into
Error. For if this be a plain Reason, why He expressed himself so as to disown
this Power, it is plain, that if He had owned it. He had been condemned by this
Argument, as teaching false Doctrine.

Now if this would have been interpretatively false Doctrine in Christ, to take
upon Himself any thing that was peculiar to God, the Apostles were guilty of
propagating this false Doctrine. For there is scarce any known Attribute or
Power of God, but they ascribe it to our Savior. They declare him Eternal,
Omnipotent, Omniscient, etc. Is it not a true Notion, that God alone can
Create, and is Governor of the Universe? Yet the Apostles expressly assure us
of Christ, that all things were created by Him, and that God has put all
things in Subjection under his Feet. It Is very surprising, that your Lordship
should exclude Christ from this Power of forgiving Sins, though he has expressly
said He could forgive Sins, because such a Power belongs only to God; when it
appears through the whole Scripture, that there is scarce any Divine Power which
our Savior himself has not claimed, nor any Attribute of God, but what his
Apostles have ascribed to him. They have made Him the Creator, the Preserver,
the Governor of the Universe, the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey
him; and yet your Lordship tells us, that He did not pretend to forgive Sins,
because that was a Power peculiar to God.

Here is then (to speak in your Lordship's elegant Style) an immovable
Resting Place for your Laity to set their Feet upon; here is an Argument that
will last them for ever; They must believe that our Savior did not forgive
Sins, because this was a Power that belonged to God, though the Scriptures assure
us that every other Divine Power belonged to Christ. That is, they must
believe, that though our Savior claimed all Divine Powers, yet not this Divine
Power, because it is a Divine Power. And, my Lord, if they have the common
Sense to believe this, they may also believe that though our Savior took human
Nature upon him, yet that he had not a human Soul, because it is proper to Man.
They may believe, that any Person who has all Kingly Power, cannot remit or
reprieve a Malefactor, because it is an Act of Kingly Power to do it; or that a
Bishop cannot suspend any Offender of his Diocese, because it is an Act of
Episcopal Power to do it. All these Reasons are as strong and Demonstrative as
that Christ, who claimed all Divine Powers, could not forgive Sins, because it
was a Divine Power.

Lastly, In this Argument your Lordship has plainly declared against the
Divinity of Christ, and ranked him in the Order of Creatures. Your Lordship
says, Christ did not forgive Sins, because it is God alone who can forgive
Sins; as plain an Argument as can be offered, that in your Lordship's Opinion,
Christ is not God: For if you believed him, in a true and proper Sense, God,
how could you exclude him from the Power of forgiving Sins, because God alone
can forgive Sins? It is inconsistent with Sense and Reason to deny this Power
to Christ because it is a Divine Power, bat only because you believe him not to
be a Divine Person. If Christ was God, then he might forgive Sins, though God
alone can forgive Sins: But you say, Christ cannot forgive Sins, because God
alone can forgive Sins; therefore it is plain, that according to your
Lordship's Doctrine, Christ is not truly, or in a proper Sense, God.

Here, my Lord, I desire again to appeal to the Common Sense of your Laity; let
them judge betwixt the Scriptures and your Lordship. The Scriptures plainly and
frequently ascribe all Divine Attributes to Christ: They make him the Creator
and Governor of the World; God over all, blessed for ever. Yet your Lordship
makes him a Creature, and denies him such a Power, because it belongs only to
God.

You your self, my Lord, have allowed him to be absolute Ruler over the
Consciences of Men; to be an arbitrary Dispenser of the Means of Salvation to
Mankind; than which Powers, none can be more Divine: And yet you hold, that he
cannot forgive Sins, because Pardon of Sin can only be the Effect of a Divine
Power.

Is it not equally a Divine Power, (even according to your Lordship) to rule
over the Consciences of Men, to give Laws of Salvation, and to act in these
Affairs with an uncontrollable Power, as to forgive Sins?

My Lord, let their Common Sense here discover the Absurdity (for I must call
it so) of your New Scheme of Government in Christ's Kingdom. Christ is absolute
Lord of it, (according to your self) and can make or unmake Laws relating to
it; can dispense or withold Grace as he pleases in this Spiritual Kingdom, all
which Powers are purely Divine, yet you say he cannot forgive Sins, though every
express Power which you have allowed him over the Consciences of Men, be as
truly a Divine Power as that of forgiving Sins. Has not Christ a proper and
personal Power to give Grace to his Subjects? Is he not Lord over their
Consciences? And are not these Powers as truly appropriated to God? And has not
your Lordship often taught them to be so, as that of Forgiveness of Sins? Is it
not as much the Prerogative of God to have any natural intrinsic Power, to
confer Grace, or any Spiritual Benefit to the Souls of Men, as to forgive Sins?
Has not your Lordship despised all the Administrations of the Clergy, because
God's Graces can only come from himself, and are only to be received from his
own Hands? The Conclusion therefore is this, either Christ has a Personal
intrinsic Power to confer Grace in his Kingdom, or he has not; if you say he
has not, then you are chargable with the Collusion of making him a King in a
Spiritual Kingdom, where you allow him no Spiritual Power: If you say he has,
then you fall into this Contradiction, that you allow him to have Divine
Powers, though he cannot have Divine Powers; that is, you allow him to give
Grace, though it is a Divine Power, and not to forgive Sins, because it is a
Divine Power. My Lord, I wish your Laity (if there be any to whom you can
render it intelligible) much Joy of such profound Divinity. Or if there are
others who are more taken with your Lordship's Sincerity, I desire them not to
pass by this following remarkable Instance of it: Your Lordship has here as
plainly declared, as Words can consequentially declare any thing, that you do
not believe Christ to be God, yet profess your self Bishop of a Church, whofse
Liturgy in so many repeated Testimonies declares the contrary Doctrine, and
which obliges you to express your Assent and Consent to such Doctrine. My Lord,
I here call upon your Sincerity, either Declare Christ to be Perfect God, and
then show why he could not forgive Sins, or Deny him to be Perfect God, and
then show how you can sincerely declare your Assent and Consent to the
Doctrines of the Church of England.

This, my Lord, has an Appearance of Prevarication, which you cannot, I hope,
charge upon any of your Adversaries; who if they cannot think, that to be
sincere is the only thing necessary to recommend Men to the Favor of God, yet
may have as much, or possibly more Sincerity, than those who do think so.

Before I take leave of your Lordship, I must take Notice of a Resting Place, a
strong Retreat a lasting Foundation, i. e. a Demonstration in the strictest
Sense of the Words, that all Church Communion is unnecessary.

Your Lordship sets it out in these Words.

I am not now going to accuse you of a Heresy against Charity, but of a
Heresy against the Possibility and Nature of Things. As thus, Mr. Nelson (for
Instance) thinks himself obliged in Conscience to Communicate with some of our
Church. Upon this you declare he has no Title to God's Mercy; and you and all
the World allow, that if he communicates with you whilst his Conscience tells
him it is a Sin, he is self-condemned and out os God's Favor. That Notion,
(viz. the Necessity of Church Communion) therefore, which implies this great
invincible Absurdity, cannot be true.

Pray, my Lord, what is this wondrous Curiosity of a Demonstration, but the
common Case of an erroneous Conscience? Did the strictest Contenders for
Church Communion ever teach, that any Terms are to be complied with against
Conscience? But its a strange Conclusion to infer from thence, that there is no
Obligation to Communion, or that all Things are to be held indifferent, because
they are not to be complied with against one's Conscience.

The Truths of the Christian Religion have the same Nature and Obligation,
whatever our Opinions are of them, and those that are necessary to be believed,
continue so, whither we can persuade our selves to believe them or not. I
suppose your Lordship will not say, that the Articles of Faith and necessary
Institutions of the Christian Religion, are no otherways necessary, than
because we believe them to be so, that our Persuasion is the only Cause of the
Necessity; but if their Necessity be not owing merely to our belief of them,
then it is certain that our Disbelief of them, cannot make them less necessary.
If the Ordinances of Christ, and the Articles of Faith are necessary, because
Christ has made them so, that Necessity must continue the same, whether we
believe and observe them or not.

So that, my Lord, we may still maintain the necessity of Church Communion, and
the strict observance of Christ's Ordinances, notwithstanding that People have
different persuasions in these Matters, presuming that our Opinions can no more
alter the nature or necessity of Christ's Institutions, than we can believe
Error into Truth, Good into Evil, or Light into Darkness. I shall think my self
no Heretic against the Nature of Things, though I tell a Conscientious Socinian,
that the Divinity of Christ is necessary to be believed, or a Conscientious
Jew, that it is necessary to be a Christian in order to be saved. But if your
Lordships Demonstration was accepted, we should be obliged to give up the
necessity of every Doctrine and Institution, to every Disbeliever that
pretended Conscience. We must not tell any Party of People, that they are in
any danger for being out of Communion with us, if they do but follow their own
Persuasion.

Your Lordship's Invincible Demonstration proceeds thus.

We must not insist upon the Necessity of joining with any particular Church,
because then Conscientious Persons will be in Danger either way; for if there
be a Necessity of it, then there is a Danger if they do not join with it, and
if they comply against their Consciences, the Danger is the same.

What an inextricable Difficulty is here! How shall Divinity or Logic be able
to relieve us!

Be pleased my Lord, to accept of this Solution in lieu of your Demonstration.

I will suppose the Case of a Conscientious Jew; I tell him that Christianity
is the only covenanted Method of Salvation, and that he can have no Title to
the Favor of God, 'till he professes the Faith of Christ. What, replies he,
would you direct me to do? If I embrace Christianity against my Conscience, I
am out of God's Favor, and if I follow my Conscience, and continue a Jew, I am
also out of his Favor. The Answer is this, my Lord; The Jew is to obey his
Conscience, and to be left to the uncovenanted, unpromised Terms of God's
Mercy, whilst the Conscientious Christian is entitled to the express and
promised favors of God.

There is still the same absolute necessity of believing in Christ,
Christianity is still the only Method of Salvation; though the sincere Jew cannot
so persuade himself; and we ought to declare it to all Jews and Unbelievers
whatsoever, that they can only be saved by embracing Christianity. That a false
Religion, does not become a true one; nor a true one false, in Consequence of
their Opinions; but that if they are so unhappy, as to refuse the Covenant of
Grace, they must be left to such Mercy as is without any Covenant. And now, my
Lord, what is become of this mighty Demonstration? Does it prove that
Christianity is not necessary, because the Conscientious Jew may think it is
not so? It may as well prove, that the Moon is no larger than a Man's Head,
because an honest ignorant Countryman may think it no larger.

Is there any Person of Common Sense, who would think it a Demonstration, that
he is not obliged to go to Church, because a Conscientious Dissenter will not?
Could he think it less necessary to be a Christian, because a sincere Jew
cannot embrace Christianity? Could he take it to be an indifferent Matter,
whether he believed the Divinity of Christ, because a Conscientious Socinian
cannot? Yet this is your Lordship's invincible Demonstration, that we ought not
to insist upon the necessity of Church Communion, because a Conscientious
Disbeliever cannot comply with it.

A small Degree of Common Sense, would teach a Man that true Religion, and the
Terms of Salvation must have the same obligatory Force, whether we reason
rightly about them or not; and that they who believe and practice according to
them, are in express Covenant with God, which entitles them to his Favor;
whilst those who are sincerely Erroneous, have nothing but the sincerity of
their Errors to plead, and are left to such Mercy of God, as is without any
Promise. Here, my Lord, is nothing frightful or absurd in this Doctrine, they
who are in the Church which Christ has founded, are upon Terms which entitles
them to God's Favor; they who are out of it, fall to his Mercy.

But your Lordship is not content with the Terms of the Gospel, or a Doctrine
that only saves a particular Sort of People; this is a narrow View, not wide
enough for your Notions of Liberty. Particular Religions, and particular
Covenants, are demonstrated to be absurd, because particular Persons may
Dis-believe, or not submit to them.

Your Lordship must have Doctrines that will save all People alike, in every
way that their Persuasion leads them to take: But, my Lord, there needs be no
greater Demonstration against your Lordship's Doctrine, than that it equally
favors every way of Worship; for an Argument which equally proves every Thing,
has been generally thought to prove nothing; which happens to be the Case of
your Lordship's Important Demonstration.

Your Lordship indeed only instances in a particular Person, Mr. Nelson; but
your Demonstration is as serviceable to any other Person who has left any other
Church whatever. The Conscientious Quaker, Muggletonian, Independent, or
Socinian, etc. have the same right to obey Conscience, and blame any Church
that assumes a Power of censuring them, as Mr. Nelson had; and if they are
censured by any Church, that Church is as guilty of the same Heresy against
the Nature of Things, as that Church which censured Mr. Nelson, or any Church
that should pretend to censure any other Person whatever.

I am not at all Surpised, that your Lordship should teach this Doctrine, but
its something strange, that such an Argument should be obtruded upon the World
as an unheard of Demonstration, and that in an Appeal to common Sense. Suppose
some Body or other in defense of your Lordship, should take upon him to
demonstrate to the World, that there is no such Thing as Color, because there
are some People that cannot see it; or Sounds, because there are some who don't
hear them; He would have found out the only Demonstrations in the World that
could equal your Lordships, and would have as much reason to call those
Heretics against the Nature of Things, who should dis-believe him, and insist
upon the reality of Sounds, as your Lordship has to call your Adversaries so.

For, is there no necessity of Church Communion, because there are some who
don't conceive it? Then there are no Sounds, because there are some who don't
hear them; for it is certainly as easy to believe away the Truth and Reality,
as the Necessity of Things.

Some People have only taught us the innocence of Error, and been content with
setting forth its harmless Qualities; but your Lordship has been a more hearty
Advocate, and given it a Power over every Truth and Institution of
Christianity. If we have but an erroneous Conscience, the whole Christian
Dispensation is cancelled; all the Truth and Doctrines in the Bible are
Demonstrated to be unnecessary, if we do not believe them.

How unhappily have the several Parties of Christians been disputing for many
Ages, who if they could but have found out this intelligible Demonstration,
(from the Case of an erroneous Conscience) would have seen the absurdity of
pretending to necessary Doctrines, and insisting upon Church Communion; but it
must be acknowledged your Lordship's new invented Engine for the Destruction of
Churches; and it may be expected the good Christians of no Church will return
your Lordship their Thanks for it.

Your Lordship has thought it a mighty Objection to some Doctrines in the
Church of England, that the Papists might make some Advantage of them: But yet
your own Doctrine defends all Communions alike, and serves the Jew and
Socinian, etc. as much as any other sort of People. Though this sufficiently
appears, from what has been already said, yet that it may be still more obvious
to the Common Sense of every one, I shall reduce these Doctrines to Practice,
and suppose for once, that your Lordship intends to convert a Jew, a Quaker, or
Socinian.

Now in order to make a Convert of any of them, these Preliminary PROPOSITIONS
are to be first laid down according to your Lordship's Doctrine.

Some Propositions for the Improvement of true Religion.

Proposition I. That we are neither more or less in the Favor of God, for
living in any particular Method or Way of Worship, but purely as we are
sincere. Preserv. page 90.

Propos. II. That no Church ought to unchurch another, or declare it out of
God's Favor. Preserv. p. 85.

Propos. III. That nothing loses us the Favor of God, but a wicked
Insincerity. Ibid.

Propos. IV. That a conscientious Person can be in no Danger for being out of
any particular Church. Preserv. page 90.

Propos. V. That there is no such Thing as any real Perfection or Excellency in
any Religion, that can justify our adhering to it, but that all is founded in
our Personal Persuasion. Which your Lordship thus proves, When we left the
Popish Doctrines, was it because they were actually corrupt? No; The Reason
was, because we thought them so. Therefore if we might leave the Church of
Rome, not because her Doctrines were corrupt, but because we thought them so,
then the same Reason will justify any one else, in leaving any Church, how true
soever its Doctrines are; and consequently there is no such Thing, as any real
Perfection or Excellency in any Religion considered in it self, but it is right
or wrong according to our Persuasions about it. Preserv. page 85.

Propos. VI. That Christ is sole King and Lawgiver in his Kingdom, that no Men
have any Power of Legislation in it; that if we would be good Members of it, we
must show our selves Subjects of Christ alone, without any Regard to Man's
Judgment.

Propos. VII. That as Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, so when Worldly
Encouragements are annexed to it, these are so many Divisions against Christ
and his own express Word. Sermon. page 11.

Propos. VIII. That to pretend to know the Hearts and Sincerity of Men, is
Nonsense and Absurdity. Sermon. page 93.

Propos. IX. That God's Graces are only to be received immediately from
himself. Sermon, p. 89.

These, my Lord, are your Lordships own Propositions, expressed in your own
Terms without any Exaggeration.

And now, my Lord, begin as soon as you please, either with a Quaker, Socinian,
or Jew; use any Argument whatsoever to convert them, and you shall have a
sufficient Answer from your own Propositions.

Will you tell the Jew that Christianity is necessary to Salvation? He will
answer from Propos. I. That we are neither more or lesas in the Favor of God,
for living in any particular Method or way of Worship, but purely as we are
Sincere.

Will your Lordship tell him, that the Truth of Christianity is so well
asserted, that there is no Excuse left for Unbelievers? He will answer from
Propos. V. That all Religion is founded in personal Persuasion; that as your
Lordship does not believe that Christ is come, because he is actually come, but
because you think he is come; so He does not disbelieve Christ because he is
not actually come, but because he thinks he is not come. So that here, my Lord,
the Jew gives as good a reason why he is not a Christian, as your Lordship does
why you are not a Papist.

If your Lordship should turn the Discourse to a Quaker, and offer him any
Reasons for Embracing the Doctrine of the Church of England, you cannot possibly
have any better Success; any one may see from your Propositions, that no
Argument can be urged but what your Lordship has there fully answered. For
since you allow nothing to the Truth of Doctrines, or the Excellency of any
Communion as such, it is demonstrable that no Church or Communion can have any
Advantage above another, which is absolutely necessary in order to persuade any
sensible Man to exchange any Communion for another.

Will your Lordship tell a Quaker that there is any Danger in that particular
Way that he is in?

He can answer from Propos. lst, 3d, and 4th. That a Conscientious Person cannot
be in any Danger for being out of any particular Church.

Will your Lordship tell him that his Religion is condemned by the Universal
Church?

He can answer from Propos. 2d, That no Church ought to unchurch another, or
declare it out of God's Favor.

Will you tell him that Christ has instituted Sacraments as necessary Means of
Grace, which he neglects to Observe?

He will answer you from Propos. IX. That God's Graces are only to be received
immediately from himself. And to think that Bread and Wine, or the sprinkling
of Water is necessary to Salvation, is as absurd, as to think any Order of the
Clergy, is necessary to recommend us to God.

Will your Lordship tell him that he displeases God, by not holding several
Articles of Faith, which Christ has required us to believe?

He can reply from Propos. III. That nothing loses us the Favor of God but a
wicked Insincerity. And from Propos. V. That as your Lordship believes such
Things, not because they are actually to be believed, but because you think so;
so he disbelieves them, not because they are actually false, but because he
thinks so.

Will your Lordship tell him he is insincere?

He can reply from Propos. VI. That to assume to know the Hearts and Sincerity
of Men, is Nonsense and Blasphemy.

Will your Lordship tell him that he ought to conform to a Church established
by the Laws of the Land?

He can answer from Propos. VIII. that the very Establishment is an Argument
against Conformity, For as Christ's Kingdom is not of this Worl^ so when
Worldly-Encouragements are annexed to it, the^ are somany Decisions against
Christ, and his own express Words. And from Propos. VII. That seeing Christ is
sole King and Lawgiver in his Kingdom, an^ no M^n have any Power of Legislation
in it, they wh^ would be good Members of it, must show themselves Subjects to
Christ alone, without any Regard to Man's Judgment.

I am inclined to think, my Lord, that it is now demonstrated to the common
Sense of the Laity, that your Lordship cannot urge any Argument, either from
the Truth, the Advantage, or Necessity of embracing the Doctrines of the Church
of England. to either Jew, Heretic, or Schismatic, but you have helped him to
a full Answer to any such Argument, from your own Principles.

Are we, my Lord, to be treated as Popishly affected for asserting some Truths,
which the Papists join with us in asserting? Is it a Crime in us not to drop
some necessary Doctrines, because the Papists have not dropped them? If this is
to be popishly affected, we own the Charge, and are not for being such true
Protestants, as to give up the Apostles Creed, or lay aside the Sacraments,
because they are received by the Church of Rome. I cannot indeed charge your
Lordship with being well affected to the Church of Rome or of England, (...)
the Jews, the Quakers, Or Socinians, but this I ^ave demonstrated, and will
undertake the De^nce of it, that your Lordships Principles equally ^^rve them
all alike, and don't give the least Ad^antage to one Church above another, as
has ^^fficiently appeared from your Principles.

I will no more say your Lordship is in the In^erest of the Quakers, or
Socinians, or Papists, ^han I would charge you with being in the In^erest of
the Church of England, for as your Do^trines equally support them all, he ought
to ask ^our Lordship's Pardon, who should declare you ^^ore a Friend to one
than the other.

I intended, my Lord, to have considered another very obnoxious Article in your
Lordship's Doctrines, concerning the Repugnancy of temporal Encouragements to
the Nature of Christ's Kingdom; ^ut the Consistency and Reasonableness of
guard^ng this Spiritual Kingdom with human Laws, ^as been defended with so much
Perspicuity and Strength of Argument, and your Lordship's Objections so fully
confuted by the judicious and learned Dean of Chichester, that I presume this
Part of the Controversy is finally determined.

I hope, my Lord, that I have delivered nothing here, that needs any Excuse or
Apology to the Laity, that they will not be persuaded, through any vain Pretense
of Liberty, to make themselves Parties against the first Principles of
Christianity; or imagine, that whilst we contend for the positive Institutions
of the Gospel, the Necessity of Church Communion, or the Excellency of our own,
we are robbing them of their natural Rights, or interfering with their
Privileges. Whilst we appear in the Defense of any part of Christianity, we are
engaged for them in the common Cause of Christians. and I am persuaded better
things of the Laity, than to believe that such Labors will render either our
Persons or Professions hateful to them. Your Lordship has indeed endeavored to
give an invidious Turn to the Controversy, by calling upon the Laity to assert
their Libertys, as if they were in Danger from the Principles of Christianity.
-- But, my Lord, what Liberty does, any Layman lose, by our asserting, that
Church Communion is necessary? What Privilege is taken from them by our
teaching the Danger of certain Ways and Methods of Religion? Is a Man made a
Slave because he is cautioned against the Principles of the Quakers, against
Fanaticism, Popery, or Socinianism? Is he in a State of Bondage, because the
Sacraments are necessary, and none but Episcopal Clergy ought to administer
them? Is his Freedom destroyed because there is a particular Order of Men
appointed by God to minister in Holy Things, and be serviceable to him in
recommending him to the Favor of God? Can any Persons, my Lord, think these
things breaches upon their Liberty, except such as think the Commandments a
Burden? Is there any more Hardship in saying, thou shall keep to an Episcopal
Church, than thou shall be baptized? Or in requiring People to receive
particular Sacraments, than to believe particular Books of Scripture to be the
Word of God? If some other Advocate for the Laity, should, out of Zeal for
their Rights, declare that they need not believe one half of the Articles in
the Creed; if they would but assert their Liberty, He would be as true a
Friend, and deserve the same Applause, as he who should assert the Necessity of
Church Communion, is inconsistent with the natural Rights and Liberties of
Mankind.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant, William Law.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Hope your Lordship will not think it Unnatural or Impertinent, to offer here
a word or two in answer to some Objections against my former Letter.

To begin with the Doctrine of the uninterrupted Succession of the Clergy.

I have, as I think, proved that there is a Divine Sommission required to
qualify any one to exercise the Priestly Office, and that seeing this Divine
Commission can only be had from such particular Persons as God has appointed to
give it, therefore it is necessary that there should be a continual Succession
of such Persons, in order to keep up a Commissioned Order of the Clergy. For if
the Commission it self be to descend through Ages; and distinguish the Clergy
from the Laity; it is certain the Persons who alone can give this Commission
must descend through the same Ages, and Consequently an uninterrupted Succession
is as necessary, as that the Clergy have a Divine Commission. Take away this
Succession, and the Clergy may as well be Ordained by one Person as another; a
Number of Women may as well give them a Divine Commission, as a Congregation of
any Men, they may indeed appoint Persons to Officiate in Holy Orders, for the
sake of Decency and Order; but then there is no more in it, than an external
Decency and Order, they are no more the Priests of God, then those that
pretended to make them so. If we had lost the Scriptures, it would be very well
to make as good Books as we could, and come as near them as possible; but then
it would be not only Folly, but Presumption, to call them the Word of God. But
I proceed to the Objections against the Doctrine of an uninterrupted Succession.

First, It is said, that there is no mention made of it in Scripture, as having
any relation to the being of a Church.

Secondly, That it is subject to so great Uncertainty, that if it be necessary,
we cannot now be sure we are in the Church.

Thirdly, That it is a Popish Doctrine, and gives them great Advantage over us.

I begin with the 1st Objection, that there is no mention made of it in the
Scriptures, which though I think 1 have sufficiently answered in this Letter, I
shall here farther consider.

Pray, my Lord, is it not a true Doctrine, that the Scriptures contain all
things necessary to Salvation? But, my Lord, it is no where expressly said, that
the Scriptures contain all things necessary to Salvation. It is no where said,
that no other Articles of Faith need be believed. Where does it appear in
Scripture, that the Scriptures were writ by any Divine Command? Have any of the
Gospels or Epistles this Authority to recommend them? Are they necessary to be
believed, because there is any Law of Christ concerning the Necessity of
believing them?

May I reject this uninterrupted Succession, because it is not mentioned in
Scripture? And may I not as well reject all the Gospels? Produce your
Authority, my Lord, mention your Texts of Scripture, where Christ has hung the
Salvation of Men upon their believing, that St. Matthew or St. John wrote such
a Book seventeen Hundred Years ago. These, my Lord, are Niceties and Trifles
which are not to be found in Scripture, and consequently have nothing to do
with the Salvation of Men.

Now if nothing be to be held as necessary, but what is expressly required in so
many Words in Scripture, then it can never be proved that the Scriptures
themselves are a standing Rule of Faith in all Ages, since it is no where
expressly asserted, nor is it any where said, that the Scriptures should be
continued as a Rule of Faith in all Ages. Is it an Objection against the
Necessity of a perpetual Succession of the Clergy, that it is not mentioned in
the Scripture? And is it not as good a one against the Necessity of making
Scripture the standing Rule of Faith in all Ages, since it is never said, that
they were to be continued as a standing Rule in all Ages? If things are only
necessary for being said to be so in Scripture, then all that are not thus
taught are equally unnecessary, and consequently it is no more necessary that
the Scripture should be a fixed Rule of Faith in all Ages, than that there
should be Bishops to ordain in all Ages.

Again, where shall we find it in Scripture, that the Sacraments are to be
continued in every Age of the Church? Where is it said, that they shall always
be the ordinary Means of Grace necessary to be observed? Is there any Law of
Christ, any Text of Scripture, that expressly asserts, that if we leave the Use
of the Sacraments, we are out of Covenant with God? Is it any where directly
said, that we must never lay them aside, or that they will be perpetually
necessary? No, my Lord, this is a Nicety and Trifle not to be found in
Scripture: There is no Stress laid there upon this Matter, but upon things of a
quite different: Nature.

I now presume, my Lord, that every one who has common Sense plainly sees, that
if this Succession of the Clergy be to be despised, because it is not expressly
required in Scripture; it undeniably follows, that we may reject the
Scriptures, as not being a standing Rule of Faith in all Ages; we way disuse
the Sacraments, as not the Ordinary Means of Grace in all Ages; since this is
no more mentioned in the Scriptures, or expressly required, than this
uninterrupted Succession.

If it be a good Argument against the Necessity of Episcopal Ordainers, that it
is never said in Scripture, that there shall always be such Ordainers; it is
certainly as conclusive against the Use of the Sacraments in every Age, that it
is no where said in Scripture they shall be used in All Ages.

If no Government or Order of the Clergy be to be held as necessary, because no
such Necessity is asserted in Scripture; it is certain this concludes as
strongly against Government, and the Order it self, as against any Particular
Order. For it is no more said in Scripture, that there shall be an Order of
Clergy, than that there shall be any particular Order; therefore if this
Silence proves against any particular Order of Clergy, it proves as much
against Order it self.

Should therefore any of your Lordship's Friends have so much Church-Zeal as to
contend for the Necessity of some Order, though of no particular Order; he must
fall under your Lordship's Displeasure, and be proved as mere a Dreamer and
Trifler, as those who assert the Necessity of Episcopal Ordination. For if it
be plain, that there need be no Episcopal Clergy, because it is not said there
shall always be Episcopal Clergy; it is undeniably plain, that there need be no
Order of the Clergy, since it is no where said, there shall be an Order of
Clergy: Therefore whoever shall contend for an Order of Clergy, will be as much
condemned by your Lordship's Doctrine, as he that declares for the Episcopal
Clergy.

The Truth of the Matter is this, If nothing is to be esteemed of any Moment,
but counted as mere Trifle and Nicety among Christians, which is not expressly
required in the Scriptures; then it is a Trifle and Nicety, whether we believe
the Scripture to be a standing Rule of Faith in all Ages, whether we use the
Sacraments in all Ages, whether we have any Clergy at all, whether we observe
the Lord's Day, whether we baptize our Children, or whether we go to public
Worship; for none of these things are expressly required in so many Words in
Scripture. But if your Lordship, with the rest of the Christian World, will
take these things to be of Moment, and well proved, because they are founded in
Scripture, though not in express Terms, or under plain Commands; if you will
acknowledge these Matters to be well asserted, because they may be gathered
from Scripture, and are confirmed by the universal Practice of the Church in
all Ages, (which is all the Proof that they are capable of) I don't doubt but
it will appear, that this successive Order of the Clergy is founded on the same
Evidence, and supported by as great Authority, so that it must be thought of
the same Moment with these things, by all unprejudiced Persons.

For, my Lord, though it be not expressly said, that there shall always be a
Succession of Episcopal Clergy, yet it is a Truth founded in Scripture it self,
and asserted by the universal Voice of Tradition in the first and succeeding
Ages of the Church.

It is thus founded in Scripture: There we are taught that, the Priesthood is a
Positive Institution; that no Man can take this Office unto himself; that
neither our Savior himself, nor his Apostles, nor any other Person, however
extraordinarily endowed with Gifts from God, could, as such, exercise the
Priestly Office, till they had God's express Commission for that purpose. Now
how does it appear, that the Sacraments are Positive Institutions, but that
they are consecrated to such Ends and Effects, as of themselves they were no
way qualified to perform? Now as it appears from Scripture, that Men, as such,
however endowed, were not qualified to take this Office upon them without God's
Appointment; it is demonstratively certain, that Men so called are as much to
be esteemed a Positive Institution, as Elements so chosen can be called a
Positive Institution. All the Personal Abilities of Men conferring no more
Authority to exercise the Office of a Clergyman, than the natural Qualities of
Water to make a Sacrament: So that the one Institution is as truly Positive as
the other.

Again. The Order of the Clergy is not only a Positive Order instituted by God,
but the different Degrees in this Order is of the same Nature. For we find in
Scripture, that some Persons could perform some Offices in the Priesthood,
which neither Deacons nor Priests could do, though those Deacons and Priests were
inspired Persons, and Workers of Miracles. Thus Timothy was sent to ordain
Elders, because none below his Order, who was a Bishop, could perform that
Office. Peter and John laid their Hands on baptized Persons, because neither
Priests nor Deacons, though Workers of Miracles, could execute that Part of the
Sacerdotal Office.

Now can we imagine that the Apostles and Bishops thus distinguished themselves
for nothing? That there was the same Power in Deacons and Priests to execute
those Offices, though they took them to themselves? No, my Lord; if three Degrees
in the Ministry are instituted in Scripture, we are obliged to think them as
truly distinct in their Powers, as we are to think that the Priesthood it self
contains Powers that are distinct from those of the Laity. It is no more
consistent with Scripture, to say that Deacons or Priests may ordain, than that
the Laity are Priests or Deacons. The same Divine Institution making as truly a
Difference betwixt the Clergy, as it does betwixt Clergy and Laity.

Now if the Order of the Clergy be a Divine Positive Institution, in which
there are different Degrees of Power, where some alone can Ordain, etc. whilst
others can only perform other parts of the sacred Office; if this (as it
plainly appears) be a Doctrine of Scripture, then it is a Doctrine of
Scripture, that there is a Necessity of such a Succession of Men as have Power
to ordain. For do the Scriptures make it necessary that Timothy (or some
Bishop) should be sent to Ephesus to ordain Priests, because the Priests who
were there could not ordain? And do not the same Scriptures make it as
necessary, that Timothy's Successor be the only Ordainer, as well as He was in
his Time? Will not Priests in the next Age be as destitute of the Power of
Ordaining, as when Timothy was alive? So that since the Scriptures teach, that
Timothy, or Persons of his Order, could alone ordain in that Age; they as
plainly teach, that the Successors of that Order can alone ordain in any Age,
and consequently the Scriptures plainly teach a Necessity of an Episcopal
Succession.

The Scriptures declare there is a Necessity of a Divine Commission to execute
the Office of a Priest; they also teach, that this Commission can only be had
from particular Persons: Therefore the Scriptures plainly teach, there is a
Necessity of a Succession of such Particular Persons, in order to keep up a
truly Commissioned Clergy.

Suppose when Timothy was sent to Ephesus to ordain Elders, the Church had told
him, We have chose Elders already, and laid our Hands upon them: That if he
alone was allowed to exercise this Power, it might seem as if he alone had it;
or that Ministers were the better for being ordained by his particular Hands;
and that some Persons might imagine they could have no Clergy, except they were
ordained by him, or some of his Order; and that seeing Christ had no where made
an express Law, that such Persons should be necessary to the Ordination of the
Clergy; therefore they rejected this Authority of Timothy, lest they should
subject themselves to Niceties and Trifles.

Will your Lordship say, that such a Practice would have been allowed of in the
Ephesians? Or that Ministers so ordained, would have been received as the
Ministers of Christ? If not, why must such Practice or such Ministers be
allowed of in any after-Ages? Would not the same Proceeding against any of
Timothy's Successors, have deserved the same Censure, as being equally
unlawful. If therefore the Scripture condemns all Ordination but what is
Episcopal; the Scriptures make a Succession of Episcopal Ordainers necessary.
So that I hope, my Lord, we shall be no more told that this is a Doctrine not
mentioned in Scripture, or without any Foundation in it.

The great Objection to this Doctrine is, that this Episcopal Order of the
Clergy, is only an Apostolical Practice; and seeing all Apostolical Practices
are not binding to us, sure this need not.

In answer to this, my Lord, I shall first show, that though all Apostolical
Practices are not necessary, yet some may be necessary. Secondly, That the
Divine unalterable Right of Episcopacy is not founded merely on Apostolical
Practice.

To begin with the First; The Objection runs thus, All Apostolical Practices,
are not unalterable or obligatory to us, therefore no Apostolical Practices
are. This, my Lord, is just as Theological, as if I should say all
Scripture-Truths are not Articles of Faith, or Fundamentals of Religion,
therefore no Scripture-Truths are: Is not the Argument full as just and solid
in one Case as the Other? May there not be that same Difference between some
Practices of the Apostles and others, that there is betwixt some
Scripture-Truths and others? Are all Truths equally important that are to be
found in the Bible? Why must all Practices be of the same Moment that were
Apostolical? Now if there be any Way, either divine or humane, of knowing an
Article of Faith, from the smallest Truth or most indifferent Matter in
Scripture, they will equally assist us in distinguishing what Apostolical
Practices are of perpetual Obligation, and what are not. But it is a strange
way of Reasoning, that some People are fallen into, who seem to know nothing of
Moderation, but jump as constantly out of one Extreme into another, as if there
was no such Thing as a middle Way, or any such Virtue as Moderation. Thus
either the Church must have an absolute uncontrollable Authority, or none at
all; we must either hold all Apostolical Practices necessary, or none at all.

Again, if no Apostolical Practices can be unalterable, because all are not,
then no Apostolical Doctrines are necessary to be taught in all Ages, because
all Apostolical Doctrines are not; and we are no more obliged to teach the
Death, Satisfaction and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, than we are obliged to
forbid the eating of Blood and Things strangled. If we must thus blindly follow
them in all their Practices, or else be at liberty to leave them in all, we
must for the same Reason implicitly teach all their Doctrines, or else have a
Power of receding from them all.

For if there be any Thing in the Nature of Doctrines, in the Tenor of
Scripture, or the Sense of Antiquity, whereby we can know the difference of
some Doctrines from others, that some were Occasional Temporary Determinations,
suited to particular States and Conditions in the Church, whilst others were
such general Doctrines as would concern the Church in all States and
Circumstances; If there can be this difference betwixt Apostolical Doctrines,
there must necessarily be the same difference betwixt Apostolical Practices,
unless we will say, that their Practices were not suited to their Doctrines.
For Occasional Doctrines must produce Occasional Practices.

Now may not we be obliged by some Practices of the Apostles, where the Nature
of the Thing, and the Consent of Antiquity show it to be equally necessary and
important in all Ages and Conditions of the Church, without being tied down to
the strict observance of every Thing which the Apostles did, though it plainly
appears, that it was done upon accidental and mutable Reasons. Can we not be
obliged to observe the Lord's Day from Apostolical Practice, without being
equally obliged to Lock the Doors where we are met, because in the Apostles
Times they locked them for fear of their Enemies.

My Lord, we are to follow the Practices of the Apostles, as we ought to follow
every Thing else, with Discretion and Judgment, and not run headlong into every
Thing they did, because they were Apostles, or yet think that because we need
not practice after them in every Thing, we need do it in nothing. We best
imitate them, when we act upon such Reasons as they acted upon, and neither
make their Occasional Practices perpetual Laws, nor break through such General
Rules, as will always have the same reason to be observed.

If it be asked, how we can know what Practices must be observed, and what may
be laid aside? I answer, as we know Articles of Faith from lesser Truths; as we
know Occasional Doctrines from Perpetual Doctrines, that is, from the Nature of
the Things, from the Tenor of Scripture, and the Testimony of Antiquity.

Secondly, It is not true, that the Divine unalterable Right of Episcopacy is
founded merely upon Apostolical Practice.

We do not say that Episcopacy cannot be changed, merely because we have
Apostolical Practice for it; but because such is the Nature of the Christian
Priesthood, that it can only be continued in that Method, which God has
appointed for its Continuance. Thus, Episcopacy is the only instituted Method
of continuing the Priesthood; therefore Episcopacy is unchangeable, not because
it is an Apostolical Practice, but because the Nature of the Thing requires it:
A positive Institution being only to be continued in that Method which God has
appointed; so that it is the Nature of the Priesthood, and not the Apostolical
Practice alone, that makes it necessary to be continued. The Apostolical
Practice indeed shows, that Episcopacy is the Order that is appointed, but it
is the Nature of the Priesthood that assures us that it is Unalterable: And-
that because an Office which is of no significancy, but as it is of Divine
Appointment, and instituted by God, can no otherways be continued, but in that
way of Continuance which God has appointed.

The Argument proceeds thus; The Christian Priesthood is a Divine positive
Institution, which as it could only begin by the Divine Appointment, so it can
only descend to after Ages in such a Method, as God has been-pleased to appoint.

The Apostles (and your Lordship owns, Christ was in all that they did) Answer
to Dr. Snape.
instituted Episcopacy alone, therefore this Method of Episcopacy is
unalterable, not because an Apostolical Practice cannot be laid aside, but
because the Priesthood can only descend to after-Ages in such a Method as is of
Divine Appointment.

So that the Question is not fairly stated, when it is asked, whether
Episcopacy, being an Apostolical Practice, may be laid aside? But it should be
asked, whether an instituted particular Method of continuing the Priesthood be
not necessary to be continued? Whether an appointed Order of receiving a
Commission from God be not necessary to be observed, in order to receive a
Commission from Him? If the Case was thus stated, as it ought to be fairly
stated, any one would soon perceive, that we can no more lay aside Episcopacy,
and yet continue the Christian Priesthood, than we can alter the Terms of
Salvation, and yet be in Covenant with God.

I come now, my Lord, to the Second Objection, That this uninterrupted
Succession is subject to so great uncertainty, that if it be necessary, we can
never say that we are in the Church.

I know no Reason, my Lord, why it is so uncertain, but because it is founded
upon Historical Evidence. Let it therefore be considered, my Lord, that
Christianity it self, is a Matter of Fact, only conveyed to us by Historical
Evidence.

That the Canon of Scripture is only made known to us by Historical Evidence;
that we have no other way of knowing what Writings are the word of God; and yet
the Truth of our Faith, and every other Means of Grace depends upon our
Knowledge and Belief of the Scriptures. Must we not declare the Necessity of
this Succession of Bishops, because it can only be proved by Historical
Evidence, and that for such a long tract of Time?

Why then do we declare the belief of the Scriptures, necessary to Salvation?
Is not this equally putting the Salvation of Men upon a Matter of Fact,
supported only by Historical Evidence, and making it depend upon Things done
seventeen hundred Years ago? Cannot Historical Evidence satisfy us in one
Point, as well as in the other? Is there any Thing in the Nature of this
Succession, that it cannot be as well asserted by Historical Evidence, as the
Truth of the Scriptures? Is there not the same bare possibility in the Thing it
self, that the Scriptures may in some important Points be corrupted, as that
this Succession may be broke? But is this any just Reason why we should
believe, or fear, that the Scriptures are corrupted, because there is a
Physical Possibility of it, though there is all the Proof that can be required of
the contrary? Why then must we set aside the Necessity of this Succession from
a bare possibility of Error, though there is all the Proof that can be required,
that it never was broken, but strictly kept up?

And though your Lordship has told the World so much of the Improbability,
Nonsense, and Absurdity of this Succession, yet I prormise your Lordship an
Answer when ever you shall think fit to show, when; or how, or where this
Succession broke, or seemed to break, or was likely to break.

And till then, I shall content my self with offering this Reason to your
Lordship, why it is morally impossible, it ever should have broken in all that
Term of Years, from the Apostles to the present Times.

The Reason is this; it has been a received Doctrine in every Age of the
Church, that no Ordination was valid but that of Bishops: This Doctrine, my
Lord, has been a constant Guard upon the Episcopal Succession; for seeing it
was universally believed that Bishops alone could Ordain, it was morally
impossible, that any Persons could be received as Bishops, who had not been so
Ordained.

Now is it not morally impossible, that in our Church any one should be made a
Bishop without Episcopal Ordination? Is there any possibility of forging
Orders, or satealing a Bishopric by any other Stratagem? No, it is morally
impossible, because it is an acknowledged Doctrine amongst us, that a Bishop
can only be ordained by Bishops? Now as this Doctrine must necessarily prevent
any one being a Bishop without Episcopal Ordination in our Age, so it must have
the same effect in every other Age as well as ours; and consequently it is as
reasonable to believe that the Succession of Bishiops was not broke in any Age
since the Apostles, as that it was not broke in our own Kingdom within these
forty Years. For the same Doctrine which preserves it forty Years, may as well
preserve it forty hundred Years, if it was equally believed in all that space
of Time. That this has been the constant Doctrine of the Church, I presume your
Lordship will not deny; I have not here entered into the Historical Defense of
it, this, and indeed every other Institution of the Christian Church ^aving
been lately so well defended from the Ecclesiastical Records by a very
excellent and ^^dicious Writer.

Original Draught of the Primitive Church.
We believe the Scriptures are not corrupted, because it was always a received
Doctrine in the Church that, they were the standing Rule of Faith, and because
the Providence of God may well be supposed to preserve such Books, as were to
con^^^ey to every Age the Means of Salvation. The ^ame Reasons prove the great
improbability that his Succession should ever be broke, both because it was
always against a received Doctrine (...) break it, and because we may justly
hope ^^e Providence of God would keep up his own ^nstitution.

I must here observe, that though your Lordship often exposes the Impossibility
of this Succes^on, yet at other times, even you your self, and ^our Advocates
assert it. Thus you tell us, That the Papists have one regular Appointment or
un^^terrupted Succession of Bishops undefiled with the ^uch of Lay-hands.
Preserv. p. 80.


Is this Succession then such an improbable, impossible Thing, and yet can your
Lordship assure (...) that it is at Rome; that though it be-seventeen ^undred
Years old there, yet that it is a true ^ne? Is it such Absurdity, and Nonsense,
and every Thing that is Ridiculous when we lay claim to it; and yet can your
Lordship assure us that it is not only possible to be, but actually is in being
in the Church of Rome? What Arguments, or Authority can your Lordship produce
to show that there is a Succession there, that will not equally prove it to be
here?

You assert expressly, that there is a true Succession there; you deny that we
have it here; therefore your Lordship must mean, that we had not Episcopal
Ordination when we separated from the Church of Rome. And here the Controversy
must rest betwixt you and your Adversaries, whether we had Episcopal Ordination
then; for as your Lordship has expressly affirmed, that there is this
uninterrupted Succession in the Church of Rome, it is impossible that we should
want it, unless we had not Episcopal Ordination at the Reformation.

Whenever you? Lordship shall please to appear in Defense of the Nagg's-head
Story, or any other Pretense against our Episcopal Ordination when we departed
for Rome, we shall beg leave to show our selves so far true Protestants. as to
answer any Popish Arguments your Lordship can produce.

Here let the Common Sense of the Laity be once more appealed to: Your Lordship
tells them that an uninterrupted Succession is improbable, absurd, and, morally
speaking, impossible, and, for this Reason, they need not trouble their Heads
about it; yet in another Place you positively affirm, that this true
uninterrupted Succession is actually in the Church of Rome: That is, they are
to despise this Succession, because it never was, or ever can be, yet are co
believe that it really is in the Romish Church. My Lord, this comes very near
saying and unsaying, to the great Diversion of the Papists. Must they not not
laugh at your Lordship's Protestant Zeal, which might be much better called the
Spirit of Popery? Must they not be highly pleased with all your Banter and
Ridicule upon an uninterrup^ed Succession, when they see you so kindly except
theirs? And think it only Nonsense and Absurdity, when claim^d by any other
Church? Surely, my Lord, they must conceive great Hopes of your Lordship, since
you have here rather ch^se to contradict your self, than not vouch for their
Succession: For you have said it is morally impossible, yet affirm that it is
with them.

The third Objection against this uninterrupted Succession, is this, that it is
a Popish Doctrine, and gives Papists advantage over us.

The Objection proceeds thus, we must not assert the Necessity of this
Succession, because the Papists say it is only to be found with them. I might
add, because some mighty zealous Protestants say so too.

But if this be good Argumentation, we ought not co tell the Jews, or Deists,
etc. that there is any Necessity of embracing Christianity, because the Papists
say Christians can only be saved in their Church.

Again we ought not to insist upon a true Fait^ because the Papists say, that a
true Faith is on^ in their Communion. So that there is just (...) much Popery
in teaching this Doctrine, as (...) asserting the Necessity of Christianity to
a (...) or the Necessity of a right Faith to a Socinian, etc.

I shall only trouble your Lordship with a Wor^ or two concerning another Point
in my forme^ Letter. I there proved that your Lordship ha^ put the whole of our
Title to God's Favou^ upon Sincerity, as such, Independent of ever^ Thing else.
That no Purity of Worship, no excellence of Order, no Truth of Faith, no Sort
o^ Sacraments, no Kind of Institutions, or any Church, as such can help us to
the least Degree of God's Favor, or give us the smallest Advantage above any
other Communion. And consequently that your Lordship has set sincere Jews,
Quakers, Socinians, Muggletonians, and all Heretics and Schismatics upon the
same Bottom, as to the Favor of God, with sincere Christians.

Upon this, my Lord, I am called upon to prove that these several Sorts of
People can be Sincere in your account of Sincerity. To which, my Lord, I make
this Answer, either there are some sincere Persons amongst Jews, Quakers,
Socinians, or any kind of Heretics and Schismatics, or there are not; if
there are, your Lordship has given them the same title to God's Favor, that
you have to the sincerest Christians, if you will say, there are no sincere
Persons amongst any of them, then your Lordship Damns them all in the Gross,
for surely Corruptions in Religion, professed with unsincerity, will never save
People.

I have nothing to do to prove the Sincerity of any of them, if they are
Sincere, what I have said is true, if you will not allow them to be Sincere,
you condemn them all at once.

Again, I humbly supposed a Man might be sincere in his Religious Opinions,
though it might be owing to some ill Habits, or something Criminal in Himself,
that he was fallen into such or such a way of Thinking. Bus it seems this is
all Contradiction; and no Man can be sincere, who has any Faults, or whose
Faults have any Influence upon his way of Thinking.

Your Lordship tells all the Dissenters, that they may be easy, if they are
sincere; and that it is the only Ground for Peace and Satisfaction. But pray,
my Lord, if none are to be esteemed sincere, but those who have no Faults, or
whose Faults have no Influence upon their Persuasions, who can be assured that
he is sincere, but he that has the least Pretense to it, the Proud Pharisee? If
your Lordship or your Advocates were desired to prove your Sincerity, either
before God or Man, it must be for these Reasons, because you have no ill
Passions or Habits, no faulty Prejudices, no past or present Vices that can
have any Effect upon your Minds. My Lord, as this is the only Proof that any of
you could give of your own Sincerity in this Meaning of it, so the very
Pretense to it would prove the Wane of it.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by W INNYS, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
PHysico-Theology: Or, a Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God, From
his Works of Creation, with large Notes, and many curious Observations. By
William Derham, Rector of Upminster in Essex, Canon of Windsor, and F. R. S.
The Fourth Edition, 8vo.

Astro-Theology: Or, a Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God, from a
Survey of the Heavens. Illustrated with Copper Plates. The Second Edition, 8
vo. By the same Author, 1715.

Remarks upon the Lord Bishop of Bangor's Sermon, entitled, The Nature of the
Kingdom, or Church of Christ. Humbly address to his Lordship. By Robert
Marsden, B. D. A^chdeacon of N^t^ingham, and late Fellow of Jesus College in
Cambridge. The Second Edition, 1717.

The Bishop of Bangor's late Sermon, and his Letter to Dr. Snape in Defense of
it, answered. And the dangerous Nature of some Doctrines in his Preservative,
Set forth in a Letter to his Lordship. By William Law, M. A. The Sixth Edition.

A Treatise of Algebra, in Two Parts: The First treating of the Arithmetical,
and the Second of the Geometrical Part. By Philip Ronayne, Gent. 1717.

Practical Discourses upon the Lord's Prayer: Preached before the Honorable
Society of Lincoln's Inn. By Thomas Mangy, A. M. Chaplain at Whitehall and
Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge. Published by the special Order bf
the Bench. The 2 d Edition, 8vo. 1717.

An Enquiry after Happiness in Three Parts: 1 st, Of the Possibility of
obtaining Happiness: 2d. Of the true Notion of Human Life: 3 d, Of Religious
Perfection. By (...) Lucas, D. D. late Prebendary of Westminster. The 5 th
Edition, in Two Volumes 8 vo. 1717.

Directions for Studying. 1 st, A general System or Body of Divinity. 2 d, The
39 Articles of Religion. To which is added. St. Jerome's Epistle to Nepo^ianus.
By Tho Bennet, D. D. The 2 d Edition. 1717. Where may be had all his other
Works.


