THE AGE OF REASON.

Price Half a Crown.

THE AGE OF REASON, BEING An INVESTIGATION of TRUE and FABULOUS THEOLOGY, BY
THOMAS PAIN.

SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO CONGRESS IN THE AMERICAN WAR, AND AUTHOR OF
THE WORKS ENTITLED COMMON SENSE AND RIGHTS OF MAN, etc.

PARIS: Printed by BARROIS.

1794. [ Second Year of the French Republic.]

THE AGE OF REASON: BEING AN INVESTIGATION OF TRUE AND OF FABULOUS THEOLOGY.
IT has been my intention, for several years past, to publish my thoughts upon
religion. I am well aware of the difficulties that attend the subject; and from
that consideration, had reserved it to a more advanced period of life. I
intended it to be the last offering I should make to my fellow-citizens of all
nations; and that at a time, when the purity of the motive that induced me to
it, could not admit of a question, even by those who might disapprove the work.

The circumstance that has now taken place in France, of the total abolition of
the whole national order of priesthood, and of every thing appertaining to
compulsive systems of religion, and compulsive articles of faith, has not only
precipitated my intention, but rendered a work of this kind exceedingly
necessary; lest, in the general wreck of superstition, of false systems of
government, and false theology, we lose sight of morality, of humanity, and of
the theology that is true.

As several of my colleagues, and others of my fellow-citizens of France, have
given me the example of making their voluntary and individual profession of
faith, I also will make mine; and I do this with all that sincerity and
frankness with which the mind of man communicates with itself.

I believe in one God, and no more; and I hope for happiness beyond this life.

I believe the equality of man, and I believe that religious duties consist in
doing justice, loving mercy, and endeavoring to make our fellow creatures
happy.

But lest it should be supposed that I believe many other things in addition to
these, I shall, in the progress of this work, declare the things I do not
believe, and my reasons for not believing them.

I do not believe in the creed professed by the Jewish church, by the Roman
church, by the Greek church, by the Turkish church, by the Protestant church,
nor by any church that I know of. My own mind is my own church.

All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish, Christian, or Turkish,
appear to me no other than human inventions set up to terrify and enslave
mankind, and monopolize power and profit.

I do not mean by this declaration to condemn those who believe otherwise. They
have the same right to their belief as I have to mine. But it is necessary to
the happiness of man, that he be mentally faithful to himself. Infidelity does
not consist in believing, or in disbelieving: it consists in professing to
believe what he does not believe.

It is impossible to calculate the moral mischief, if I may so express it, that
mental lying has produced in society. When a man has so far corrupted and
prostituted the chastity of his mind, as to subscribe his professional belief
to things he does not believe, he has prepared himself for the commission of
every other crime. He takes up the trade of a priest for the sake of gain, and
in order to qualify himself for that trade, he begins with a perjury. Can we
conceive any thing more destructive to morality than this?

Soon after I had published the pamphlet, COMMON-SENSE, in America, I saw the
exceeding probability that a Revolution in the System of Government, would be
followed by a revolution in the system of religion. The adulterous connection
of church and state, wherever it had taken place, whether Jewish, Christian, or
Turkish, had so effectually prohibited, by pains and penalties, every
discussion upon established creeds, and upon first principles of religion, that
until the system of government should be changed, those subjects could not be
brought fairly and openly before the world: but that whenever this should be
done, a revolution in the system of religion would follow. Human inventions and
priestcraft would be detected; and man would return to the pure, unmixed, and
unadulterated belief of one God, and no more.

Every national church or religion has established itself by pretending some
special mission from God communicated to certain individuals. The Jews have
their Moses; the Christians their Jesus Christ, their apostles and saints; and
the Turks their Mahomet; as if the way to God was not open to every man alike.

Each of those churches show certain books which they call revelation, or the
word of God. The Jews say that their word of God was given by God to Moses face
to face; the Christians say, that their word of God came by divine inspiration;
and the Turks say, that their word of God (the Koran) was brought by an angel
from heaven. Each of those churches accuses the other of unbelief; and, for my
own part, I disbelieve them all.

As it is necessary to affix right ideas to words, I will, before I proceed
further into the subject, offer some observations on the word revelation.
Revelation, when applied to religion, means something communicated immediately
from God to man.

No one will deny or dispute the power of the Almighty to make such a
communication if he pleases. But admitting, for the sake of a case, that
something has been revealed to a certain person, and not revealed to any other
person, it is revelation to that person only. When he tells it to a second
person, a second to a third, a third to a fourth, and so on, it ceases to be a
revelation to all those persons. It is revelation to the first person only, and
hearsay to every other; and consequently, they are not obliged to believe it.

It is a contradiction in terms and ideas to call any thing a revelation that
comes to us at second hand, either verbally or in writing. Revelation is
necessarily limited to the first communication. After this, it is only an
account of something which that person says was a revelation made to him; and
though he may find himself obliged to believe it, it cannot be incumbent on me
to believe it in the same manner, for it was not a revelation made to me, and I
have only his word for it that it was made to him.

When Moses told the children of Israel that he received the two tables of the
commandments from the hand of God, they were not obliged to believe him,
because they had no other authority for it than his telling them so; and I have
no other authority for it than some historian telling me so. The commandments
carrying no internal evidence of divinity with them. They contain some good
moral precepts, such as any man qualified to be a lawgiver or a legislator
could produce himself, without having recourse to supernatural intervention.
This is, however, necessary to except the declaration, which says, that God
visits the sins of the fathers upon the children. It is contrary to every
principle of moral justice.


When I am told that the Koran was written in heaven, and brought to Mahomet by
an angel, the account comes to near the same kind of hearsay evidence, and
second hand authority, as the former. I did not see the angel myself, and
therefore I have a right not to believe it.

When also I am told that a woman, called the Virgin Mary, said, or gave out,
that she was with child without any cohabitation with a man, and that her
betrothed husband, Joseph, said, that an angel told him so, I have a right to
believe them or not: such a circumstance required a much stronger evidence than
their bare word for it: but we have not even this; for neither Joseph nor Mary
wrote any such matter themselves. It is only reported by others that they said
so. It is hearsay upon hearsay, and I do not choose to rest my belief upon such
evidence.

It is, however, not difficult to account for the credit that was given to the
story of Jesus Christ being the Son of God. He was born when the heathen
mythology had still some fashion and repute in the world, and that mythology
had prepared the people for the belief of such a story. Almost all the
extraordinary men that lived under the heathen mythology were reputed to be the
sons of some of their gods. It was not a new thing at that time to believe a
man to have been celestially begotten: the intercourse of gods with women was
then a matter of familiar opinion. Their Jupiter, according to their accounts,
had cohabited with hundreds: the story, therefore, had nothing in it either
new, wonderful, or obscene: it was conformable to the opinions that then
prevailed among the people called Gentiles, or mythologists, and it was those
people only that believed it. The Jews who had kept strictly to the belief of
one God, and no more, and who had always rejected the heathen mythology, never
credited the story.

It is curious to observe how the theory of what is called the Christian
church, sprung out of the tail of the heathen mythology. A direct incorporation
took place in the first instance, by making the reputed founder to be
celestially begotten. The trinity of gods that then followed was no other than
a reduction of the former plurality, which was about twenty or thirty thousand.
The statue of Mary succeeded the statue of Diana of Ephesus. The deification of
heroes, changed into the cannonization of saints. The mythologists had gods for
every thing; the Christian mythologists had saints for every thing. The church
became as crowded with the one, as the pantheon had been with the other; and
Rome was the place of both. The Christian theory is little else than the
idolatry of the ancient mythologists, accommodated to the purposes of power and
revenue; and it yet remains to reason and philosophy to abolish the amphibious
fraud.

Nothing that is here said can apply, even with the most distant disrespect, to
the real character of Jesus Christ. He was a virtuous and an amiable man. The
morality that he preached and practiced was of the most benevolent kind; and
though similar systems of morality had been preached by Confucius, and by some
of the Greek philosophers, many years before; by the quakers since; and by many
good men in all ages; it has not been exceeded by any.

Jesus Christ wrote no account of himself, of his birth, parentage, or any
thing else. Not a line of what is called the New Testament is of his writing.
The history of him is altogether the work of other people; and as to the
account given of his resurrection and ascension, it was the necessary
counterpart to the story of his birth. His historians, having brought him into
the world in a supernatural manner, were obliged to take him out again in the
same manner, or the first part of the story must have fallen to the ground.

The wretched contrivance with which this latter part is told, exceeds every
thing that went before it. The first part, that of the miraculous conception,
was not a thing that admitted of publicity; and therefore the tellers of this
part of the story, had this advantage, that though they might not be credited,
they could not be detected. They could not be expected to prove it, because it
was not one of those things that admitted of proof, and it was impossible that
the person of whom it was told could prove it himself.

But the resurrection of a dead person from the grave, and his ascension
through the air, is a thing very different as to the evidence it admits of, to
the invisible conception of a child in the womb. The resurrection and
ascension, supposing them to have taken place, admitted of public and occular
demonstration, like that of the ascension of a balloon, or the sun at noon day,
to all Jerusalem at least. A thing which every body is required to believe,
requires that the proof and evidence of it should be equal to all, and
universal; and as the public visibility of this last related act was the only
evidence that could give sanction to the former part, the whole of it falls to
the ground, because that evidence never was given. Instead of this, a small
number of persons, not more than eight or nine, are introduced as proxies for
the whole world, to say, they saw it, and all the rest of the world are called
upon to believe it. But it appears that Thomas did not believe the
resurrection; and, as they say, would not believe, without having occular and
manual demonstration himself. So neither will I; and the reason is equally as
good for me and for every other person, as for Thomas.

It is in vain to attempt to palliate or disguise this matter. The story, so
far as relates to the supernatural part, has every mark of fraud and imposition
stamped upon the face of it. Who were the authors of it is as impossible for us
now to know, as it is for us to be assured, that the books in which the account
is related, were written by the persons whose names they bear. The best
surviving evidence we now have respecting this affair is the Jews. They are
regularly descended from the people who lived in the times this resurrection
and ascension is said to have happened, and they say, it is not true. It has
long appeared to me a strange inconsistency to cite the Jews as a proof of the
truth of the story. It is just the same as if a man were to say, I will prove
the truth of what I have told you, by producing the people who say it is false.

That such a person as Jesus Christ existed, and that he was crucified, which
was the mode of execution at that day, are historical relations strictly within
the limits of probability. He preached most excellent morality, and the
equality of man; but he preached also against the corruptions and avarice of
the Jewish priests; and this brought upon him the hatred and vengeance of the
whole order of priesthood. The accusation which those priests brought against
him, was that of sedition and conspiracy against the Roman government, to which
the Jews were then subject and tributary; and it is not improbable that the
Roman government might have some secret apprehension of the effects of his
doctrine as well as the Jewish priests; neither is it improbable that Jesus
Christ had in contemplation the delivery of the Jewish nation from the bondage
of the Romans. Between the two, however, this virtuous reformer and
revolutionist lost his life.

It is upon this plain narrative of facts, together with another case I am
going to mention, that the Christian mythologists, calling themselves the
Christian church, have erected their fable, which for absurdity and
extravagance is not exceeded by any thing that is to be found in the mythology
of the ancients.

The ancient mythologists tell that the race of Giants made war against
Jupiter, and that one of them threw an hundred rocks against him at one throw;
that Jupiter defeated him with thunder, and confined him afterward under Mount
Etna; and that every time the Giant turns himself, Mount Etna belches fire. It
is here easy to see that the circumstance of the mountain, that of its being a
volcano, suggested the idea of the fable; and that the fable is made to fit and
wind itself up with that circumstance.

The Christian mythologists tell that their Satan made war against the
Almighty, who defeated him, and confined him afterward, not under a mountain,
but in a pit. It is here easy to see that the first fable suggested the idea of
the second; for the fable of Jupiter and the Giants was told many hundred years
before that of Satan.

Thus far the ancient and the Christian mythologists differ very little from
each other. But the latter have contrived to carry the matter much farther.
They have contrived to connect the fabulous part of the story of Jesus Christ,
with the fable originating from Mount Etna: and in order to make all the parts
of the story tie together, they have taken to their aid the traditions of the
Jews; for the Christian mythology is made up partly from the ancient mythology,
and partly from the Jewish traditions.

The Christian mythologists, after having confined Satan in a pit, were obliged
to let him out again, to bring on the sequel of the fable. He is then
introduced into the garden of Eden in the shape of a snake, or a serpent, and
in that shape he enters into familiar conversation with Eve, who is no ways
surprised to hear a snake talk; and the issue of this tete-a-tete is, that he
persuades her to eat an apple, and the eating of that apple, damns all mankind.

After giving Satan this triumph over the whole creation, one would have
supposed that the church mythologists would have been kind enough to send him
back again to the pit; or, if they had not done this, that they would have put
a mountain upon him, (for they say that their faith can remove a mountain) or
have put him under a mountain, as the former mythologists had done, to prevent
his getting again among the women, and doing more mischief. But instead of
this, they leave him at large without even obliging him to give his parole. The
secret of which is, that they could not do without him; and after being at the
trouble of making him, they bribed him to stay. They promised him ALL the Jews,
ALL the Turks by anticipation, nine-tenths of the world beside, and Mahomet
into the bargain. After this, who can doubt the bountifulness of the Christian
mythology?

Having thus made an insurrection and a battle in heaven, in which none of the
combatants could be either killed or wounded -- put Satan into the pit -- let
him out again -- given him a triumph over the whole creation -- damned all
mankind by the eating of an apple, these Christian mythologists bring the two
ends of their fable together. They represent this virtuous and amiable man,
Jesus Christ, to be at once both God and man, and also the Son of God,
celestially begotten on purpose to be sacrificed, because, they say, that Eve
in her longing had eaten an apple.

Putting aside every thing that might excite laughter by its absurdity, or
detestation by its profaneness, and confining ourselves merely to an
examination of the parts, it is impossible to conceive a story more derogatory
to the Almighty, more inconsistent with his wisdom, more contradictory to his
power, than this story is.

In order to make for it a foundation to rise upon, the inventors were under
the necessity of giving to the being, whom they call Satan, a power equally as
great, if not greater, than they attribute to the Almighty. They have not only
given him the power of liberating himself from the pit, after what they call
his fall, but they have made that power increase afterward to infinity. Before
this fall, they represent him only as an angel of limited existence, as they
represent the rest. After his fall, he becomes, by their account, omnipresent.
He exists every where, and at the same time. He occupies the whole immensity of
space.

Not content with this deification of Satan, they represent him as defeating by
stratagem, in the shape of an animal of the creation, all the power and wisdom
of the Almighty. They represent him as having compelled the Almighty to the
direct necessity either of surrendering the whole of the creation to the
government and sovereignty of this Satan, or of capitulating for its redemption
by coming down upon earth, and exhibiting himself upon a cross in the shape of
a man.

Had the inventors of this story told it the contrary way, that is, had they
represented the Almighty as compelling Satan to exhibit himself on a cross in
the shape of a snake, as a punishment for his new transgression, the story
would have been less absurd, less contradictory. But instead of this, they make
the transgressor triumph, and the Almighty fall.

That many good men have believed this strange fable and lived very good lives
under that belief (for credulity is not a crime) is what I have no doubt of. In
the first place, they were educated to believe it, and they would have believed
any thing else in the same manner. There are also many who have been so
enthusiastically enraptured by what they conceived to be the infinite love of
God to man, in making a sacrifice of himself, that the vehemence of the idea
has forbidden and deterred them from examining into the absurdity and
profaneness of the story. The more unnatural any thing is, the more is it
capable of becoming the object of dismal admiration.

But if objects for gratitude and admiration are our desire, do they not
present themselves every hour to our eyes? Do we not see a fair creation
prepared to receive us the instant we were born -- a world furnished to our
hands that cost us nothing? Is it we that light up the sun; that pour down the
rain; and fill the earth with abundance? Whether we sleep or wake, the vast
machinery of the universe still goes on. Are these things, and the blessings
they indicate in future, nothing to us? Can our gross feelings be excited by no
other subjects than tragedy and suicide? Or is the gloomy pride of man become
so intolerable, that nothing can flatter it but a sacrifice of the Creator?

I know that this bold investigation will alarm many, but it would be paying
too great a compliment to their credulity to forbear it upon that account. The
times and the subject demand it to be done. The suspicion that the theory of
what is called the Christian church is fabulous, is becoming very extensive in
all countries; and it will be a consolation to men staggering under that
suspicion, and doubting what to believe and what to disbelieve, to see the
subject freely investigated. I therefore pass on to an examination of the books
called the Old and the New Testament.

These books, beginning with Genesis and ending with Revelations (which by the
bye is a book of riddles that requires a Revelation to explain it) are, we are
told, the word of God. It is therefore proper for us to know who told us so,
that we may know what credit to give to the report. The answer to this question
is, that nobody can tell, except that we tell one another so. The case,
however, historically appears to be as follows:

When the church mythologists established their system, they collected all the
writings they could find, and managed them as they pleased. It is a matter
altogether of uncertainty to us whether such of the writings as now appear,
under the name of the Old and the New Testament, are in the same state in which
those collectors say they found them; or whether they added, altered, abridged,
or dressed them up.

Be this as it may, they decided by vote which of the books out of the
collection they had made, should be the WORD OF GOD, and which should not. They
rejected several; they voted others to be doubtful, such as the books called
the Apocraphy; and those books which had a majority of votes, were voted to be
the word of God. Had they voted otherwise, all the people, since calling
themselves christians, had believed otherwise; for the belief of the one comes
from the vote of the other. Who the people were that did all this, we know
nothing of; they called themselves by the general name of the church; and this
is all we know of the matter.

As we have no other external evidence or authority for believing those books
to be the word of God, than what I have mentioned, which is no evidence or
authority at all, I come, in the next place, to examine the internal evidence
contained in the books themselves.

In the former part of this essay, I have spoken of revelation. I now proceed
further with that subject, for the purpose of applying it to the books in
question.

Revelation is a communication of something, which the person, to whom that
thing is revealed, did not know before. For if I have done a thing, or seen it
done, it needs no revelation to tell me I have done it, or seen it, nor to
enable me to tell it, or to write it.

Revelation, therefore, cannot be applied to any thing done upon earth of which
man is himself the actor or the witness; and consequently all the historical
and anecdotal part of the Bible, which is almost the whole of it, is not within
the meaning and compass of the word revelation, and therefore is not the word
of God.

When Samson ran off with the gate-posts of Gaza, if he ever did so (and
whether he did or not is nothing to us) or when he visited his Delilah, or
caught his foxes, or did any thing else, what has revelation to do with these
things? If they were facts, he could tell them himself; or his secretary, if he
kept one, could write them, if they were worth either telling or writing; and
if they were fictions, revelation could not make them true; and whether true or
not, we are neither the better nor the wiser for knowing them. -- When we
contemplate the immensity of that Being, who directs and governs the
incomprehensible WHOLE, of which the utmost ken of human sight can discover but
a part, we ought to feel shame at calling such paltry stories the word of God.

As to the account of the creation, with which the book of Genesis opens, it
has all the appearance of being a tradition which the Israelites had among them
before they came into Egypt; and after their departure from that country, they
put it at the head of their history, without telling, as it is most probable
that they did not know, how they came by it. The manner in which the account
opens, shows it to be traditionary. It begins abruptly. It is nobody that
speaks. It is nobody that hears. It is addressed to nobody. It has neither
first, second, nor third person. It has every criterion of being a tradition.
It has no voucher. Moses does not take it upon himself by introducing it with
the formality that he uses on other occasions, such as that of saying, "The
Lord spoke unto Moses, saying."

Why it has been called the Mosaic account of the creation, I am at a loss to
conceive. Moses, I believe, was too good a judge of such subjects to put his
name to that account. He had been educated among the Egyptians, who were a
people as well skilled in science, and particularly in astronomy, as any people
of their day; and the silence and caution that Moses observes, in not
authenticating the account, is a good negative evidence that he neither told
it, nor believed it. -- The case is, that every nation of people has been
world-makers, and the Israelites had as much right to set up the trade of
world-making as any of the rest; and as Moses was not an Israelite, he might
not choose to contradict the tradition. The account, however, is harmless; and
this is more than can be said for many other parts of the Bible.

Whenever we read the obscene stories, the voluptuous debaucheries, the cruel
and torturous executions, the unrelenting vindictiveness, with which more than
half the Bible is filled, it would be more consistent that we called it the
word of a demon, than the word of God. It is a history of wickedness, that has
served to corrupt and brutalize mankind; and, for my own part, I sincerely
detest it, as I detest every thing that is cruel.

We scarcely meet with any thing, a few phrases excepted, but what deserves
either our abhorrence, or our contempt, till we come to the miscellaneous parts
of the Bible. In the anonymous publications, the Psalms and the book of Job,
more particularly in the latter, we find a great deal of elevated sentiment
reverentially expressed of the power and benignity of the Almighty; but they
stand on no higher rank than many other compositions on similar subjects, as
well before that time as since.

The proverbs, which are said to be Solomon's, though most probably a
collection (because they discover a knowledge of life, which his situation
excluded him from knowing) are an instructive table of ethics. They are
inferior in keenness to the proverbs of the Spaniards, and not more wise and
oeconomical than those of the American Franklin.

All the remaining parts of the Bible, generally known by the name of the
prophets, are the works of the Jewish poets and itinerant preachers, who mixed
poetry, anecdote, and devotion together; and those works still retain the air
and style of poetry, though in translation. As there are many readers who do
not see that a composition is poetry unless it be in rhyme, it is for their
information that I add this note.

Poetry consists principally in two things: Imagery and composition. The
composition of poetry differs from that of prose in the manner of mixing long
and short syllables together. Take a long syllable out of a line of poetry, and
put a short one in the room of it, or put a long syllable where a short one
should be, and that line will lose its poetical harmony. It will have an effect
upon the line like that of misplacing a note in a song.

The imagery in those books, called the prophets, appertains altogether to
poetry. It is fictitious and often extravagant, and not admissible in any other
kind of writing than poetry.

To show that these writings are composed in poetical numbers, I will take ten
syllables as they stand in the book, and make a line of the same number of
syllables (heroic measure) that shall rhyme with the last word. It will then be
seen, that the composition of those books is poetical measure. The instance I
shall first produce is from Isaiah.

"Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth."
It Is God himself that calls attention forth.
Another instance I shall quote is from the mournful Jeremiah, to which I shall
add two other lines, for the purpose of carrying out the figure, and showing
the intention of the poet.

"O! that mine head were waters, and mine eyes"
Were fountains, flowing like the liquid skies;
Then would I give the mighty flood release,
And weep a deluge for the human race.



There is not, throughout the whole book, called the Bible, any word that
describes to us what we call a poet, nor any word that describes what we call
poetry. The case is, that the word prophet, to which later times have affixed a
new idea, was the Bible word for poet, and the word prophesying meant the art
of making poetry. It also meant the art of playing poetry to a tune upon any
instrument of music.

We read of prophesying with pipes, tabrets, and horns. Of prophesying with
harps, with psalteries, with cymbals, and with every other instrument of music
then in fashion. Were we now to speak of prophesying with a fiddle, or with a
pipe and tabor, the expression would have no meaning, or would appear
ridiculous, and to some people contemptuous, because we have changed the
meaning of the word.

We are told of Saul being among the prophets, and also that he prophesied; but
we are not told what they prophesied, nor what he prophesied. The case is,
there was nothing to tell; for these prophets were a company of musicians and
poets; and Saul joined in the concert; and this was called prophesying.

The account given of this affair in the book called Samuel, is, that Saul met
a company of prophets; a whole company of them! coming down with a psaltery, a
tabret, a pipe, and a harp, and that they prophesied, and that he prophesied
with them. But it appears afterward, that Saul prophesied badly, that is, he
performed his part badly; for it is said, that "an evil spirit from God As
those men, who call themselves divines and commentators, are very fond of
puzzling one another, I leave them to contest the meaning of the first part of
the phrase, that of, an evil spirit of God. I keep to my text. I keep to the
meaning of the word prophesy.
came upon Saul, and he prophesied."

Now were there no other passage in the book, called the Bible, than this, to
demonstrate to us that we have lost the original meaning of the word prophesy,
and substituted another meaning in its place, this alone would be sufficient;
for it is impossible to use and apply the word prophesy in the place it is here
used and applied, if we give to it the sense which later times have affixed to
it. The manner in which it is here used strips it of all religious meaning, and
shows that a man might then be a prophet, or might prophesy, as he may now be a
poet, or a musician, without any regard to the morality or the immorality of
his character. The word was originally a term of science, promiscuously applied
to poetry and to music, and not restricted to any subject upon which poetry and
music might be exercised.

Deborah and Barak are called prophets, not because they predicted any thing,
but because they composed the poem or song that bears their name in celebration
of an act already done: David is ranked among the prophets, for he was a
musician; and was also reputed to be (though perhaps very erroneously) the
author of the psalms. But Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are not called prophets.
It does not appear from any accounts we have that they could either sing, play
music, or make poetry.

We are told of the greater and the lesser prophets. They might as well tell us
of the greater and the lesser God; for there cannot be degrees in prophesying
consistently with its modern sense. But there are degrees in poetry, and
therefore the phrase is reconcilable to the case, when we understand by it the
greater and the lesser poets.

It is altogether unnecessary, after this, to offer any observations upon what
those men, styled prophets, have written. The axe goes at once to the root, by
showing that the original meaning of the word has been mistaken, and
consequently all the inferences that have been drawn from those books, the
devotional respect that has been paid to them, and the labored commentaries
that have been written upon them, under that mistaken meaning, are not worth
disputing about. -- In many things, however, the writings of the Jewish poets,
deserve a better fate than that of being bound up, as they now are, with the
trash that accompanies them, under the abused name of the word of God.

If we permit ourselves to conceive right ideas of things, we must necessarily
affix the idea, not only of unchangeableness, but of the utter impossibility of
any change taking place, by any means or accident whatever, in that which we
would honor with the name of the word of God; and therefore the word of God
cannot exist in any written or human language.

The continually progressive change to which the meaning of words is subject,
the want of an universal language which renders translations necessary, the
errors to which translations are again subject, the mistakes of copyists and
printers, together with the possibility of wilful alteration, are of themselves
evidences, that human language, whether in speech or in print, cannot be the
vehicle of the word of God. -- The word of God exists in something else.

Did the book, called the Bible, excel in purity of ideas and expression, all
the books that are now extant in the world, I would not take it for my rule of
faith, as being the word of God; because the possibility would nevertheless
exist of my being imposed upon. But when I see throughout the greatest part of
this book, scarcely any thing but a history of the grossest vices, and a
collection of the most paltry and contemptible tales, I cannot dishonor my
Creator by calling it by his name.

Thus much for the Bible. I now go on to the book called the New Testament. The
new Testament! that is, the new Will, as if there could be two wills of the
Creator.

Had it been the object or the intention of Jesus Christ to establish a new
religion, he would undoubtedly have written the system himself, or procured it
to be written in his life time. But there is no publication extant
authenticated with his name. All the books called the New Testament were
written after his death. He was a Jew by birth and by profession; and he was
the son of God in like manner that every other person is; for the Creator is
the Father of All.

The first four books, called Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, do not give a
history of the life of Jesus Christ, but only detached anecdotes of him. It
appears from these books, that the whole time of his being a preacher was not
more than eighteen months; and it was only during this short time, that those
men became acquainted with him. They make mention of him, at the age of twelve
years, sitting, they say, among the Jewish doctors, asking and answering them
questions. As this was several years before their acquaintance with him began,
it is most probable they had this anecdote from his parents. From this time
there is no account of him for about sixteen years. Where he lived, or how he
employed himself during this interval, is not known. Most probably he was
working at his father's trade, which was that of a carpenter. It does not
appear that he had any school education, and the probability is that he could
not write, for his parents were extremely poor, as appears from their not being
able to pay for a bed when he was born.

It is somewhat curious that the three persons, whose names are the most
universally recorded, were of very obscure parentage. Moses was a foundling,
Jesus Christ was born in a stable, and Mahomet was a mule driver. The first and
the last of these men, were founders of different systems of religion; but
Jesus Christ founded no new system. He called men to the practice of moral
virtues, and the belief of one God. The great trait in his character is
philanthropy.

The manner in which he was apprehended, shows that he was not much known at
that time; and it shows also that the meetings he then held with his followers
were in secret; and that he had given over, or suspended, preaching publicly.
Judas could no otherways betray him than by giving information where he was,
and pointing him out to the officers that went to arrest him; and the reason
for employing and paying Judas to do this, could arise only from the causes
already mentioned, that of his not being much known, and living concealed.

The idea of his concealment not only agrees very ill with his reputed
divinity, but associates with it something of pusillanimity; and his being
betrayed, or in other words, his being apprehended, on the information of one
of his followers, shows that he did not intend to be apprehended, and
consequently that he did not intend to be crucified.

The Christian mythologists tell us, that Christ died for the sins of the
world, and that he came on purpose to die. Would it not then have been the same
if he had died of a fever, or of the small pox, of old age, or of any thing
else?

The declaratory sentence which, they say, was passed upon Adam in case he ate
of the apple, was not, that thou shall surely be crucified, but thou shall
surely die. The sentence was death, and not the manner of dying. Crucifixion,
therefore, or any other particular manner of dying, made no part of the
sentence that Adam was to suffer, and consequently, even upon their own tactic,
it could make no part of the sentence that Christ was to suffer in the room of
Adam. A fever would have done as well as a cross, if there was any occasion for
either.

This sentence of death which, they tell us, was thus passed upon Adam, must
either have meant dying naturally, that is, ceasing to live, or, have meant
what these mythologists call damnation: and consequently, the act of dying on
the part of Jesus Christ, must, according to their system, apply as a
prevention to one or other of these two things happening to Adam and to us.

That it does not prevent our dying is evident, because we all die; and if
their accounts of longevity be true, men die faster since the crucifixion than
before: and with respect to the second explanation, (including with it the
natural death of Jesus Christ as a substitute for the eternal death or
damnation of all mankind) it is impertinently representing the Creator as
coming off, or revoking the sentence, by a pun or a quibble upon the word
death. That manufacturer of quibbles, St. Paul, if he wrote the books that bear
his name, has helped this quibble on, by making another quibble upon the word
Adam. He makes there to be two Adams; the one who sins in fact, and suffers by
proxy; the other who sins by proxy and suffers in fact. A religion thus
interlarded with quibble, subterfuge and pun, has a tendency to instruct its
professors in the practice of these arts. They acquire the habit without being
aware of the cause.

If Jesus Christ was the Being which those mythologists tell us he was, and
that he came into this world to suffer, which is a word they sometimes use
instead of to die, the only real suffering he could have endured would have
been to live. His existence here was a state of exilement or transportation
from heaven, and the way back to his original country was to die. -- In fine,
every thing in this strange system is the reverse of what it pretends to be. It
is the reverse of truth, and I become so tired with examining into its
inconsistencies and absurdities, that I hasten to the conclusion of it, in
order to proceed to something better.

How much, or what parts of the books called the New Testament, were written by
the persons whose names they bear, is what we can know nothing of, neither are
we certain in what language they were originally written. The matters they now
contain may be classed under two heads: anecdote, and epistolary correspondence.

The four books already mentioned, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are
altogether anecdotal. They relate events after they had taken place. They tell
what Jesus Christ did and said, and what others did and said to him; and in
several instances they relate the same event differently. Revelation is
necessarily out of the question with respect to those books; not only because
of the disagreement of the writers, but because revelation cannot be applied to
the relating of facts by the persons who saw them done, nor to the relating or
recording of any discourse or conversation by those who heard it. The book,
called the Acts of the Apostles, an anonymous work, belongs also to the
anecdotal part.

All the other parts of the New Testament, except the book of enigmas, called
the Revelations, are a collection of letters under the name of Epistles; and
the forgery of letters has been such a common practice in the world, that the
probability is, at least, equal, whether they are genuine or forged. One thing,
however, is much less equivocal, which is, that out of the matters contained in
those books, together with the assistance of some old stories, the church has
set up a system of religion very contradictory to the character of the person
whose name it bears. It has set up a religion of pomp and of revenue in
pretended imitation of a person whose life was humility and poverty.

The invention of a purgatory, and of the releasing of souls therefrom, by
prayers, bought of the church with money; the selling of pardons,
dispensations, and indulgences, are revenue laws, without bearing that name or
carrying that appearance. But the case nevertheless is, that those things
derive their origin from the proxysm of the crucifixion, and the theory deduced
therefrom, which was, that one person could stand in the place of another, and
could perform meritorious services for him. The probability therefore is, that
the whole theory or doctrine of what is called the redemption (which is said to
have been accomplished by the act of one person in the room of another) was
originally fabricated on purpose to bring forward and build all those secondary
and pecuniary redemptions upon; and that the passages in the books upon which
the idea or theory of redemption is built, have been manufactured and
fabricated for that purpose. Why are we to give this church credit, when she
tells us that those books are genuine in every part, any more than we give her
credit for every thing else she has told us; or for the miracles she says she
has performed. That she could fabricate writings is certain, because she could
write; and the composition of the writings in question, is of that kind that
any body might do it; and that she did fabricate them is not more inconsistent
with probability, than that she should tell us, as she has done, that she could
and did work miracles.

Since then no external evidence can, at this long distance of time, be
produced to prove whether the church fabricated the doctrine called redemption
or not (for such evidence, whether for or against, would be subject to the same
suspicion of being fabricated) the case can only be referred to the internal
evidence which the thing carries of itself; and this affords a very strong
presumption of its being a fabrication. For the internal evidence is, that the
theory or doctrine of redemption has for its basis, an idea of pecuniary
justice, and not that of moral justice.

If I owe a person money and cannot pay him, and he threatens to put me in
prison, another person can take the debt upon himself, and pay it for me. But
if I have committed a crime, every circumstance of the case is changed. Moral
justice cannot take the innocent for the guilty, even if the innocent would
offer itself. To suppose justice to do this, is to destroy the principle of its
existence, which is the thing itself. It is then no longer justice. It is
indiscriminate revenge.

This single reflection will show that the doctrine of redemption is founded on
a mere pecuniary idea corresponding to that of a debt which another person
might pay; and as this pecuniary idea corresponds again with the system of
second redemptions obtained through the means of money given to the church, for
pardons, the probability is, that the same persons fabricated both the one and
the other of those theories; and that, in truth, there is no such thing as
redemption; that it is fabulous; and that man stands in the same relative
condition with his Maker he ever did stand since man existed; and that it is
his greatest consolation to think so.

Let him believe this, and he will live more consistently and morally than by
any other system. It is by his being taught to contemplate himself as an
outlaw, as an outcast, as a beggar, as a mumper, as one thrown, as it were, on
a dunghill, at an immense distance from his Creator, and who must make his
approaches by creeping and cringing to intermediate beings, that he conceives
either a contemptuous disregard for every thing under the name of religion, or
becomes indifferent, or turns, what he calls, devout. In the latter case, he
consumes his life in grief, or the affectation of it. His prayers are
reproaches. His humility is ingratitude. He calls himself a worm, and the
fertile earth a dunghill; and all the blessings of life by the thankless name
of vanities. He despises the choicest gift of God to man, the GIFT OF REASON;
and having endeavored to force upon himself the belief of a system against
which reason revolts, he ungratefully calls it human reason, as if man could
give reason to himself.

Yet with all this strange appearance of humility, and this contempt for human
reason, he ventures into the boldest presumptions. He finds fault with every
thing. His selfishness is never satisfied; his ingratitude is never at an end.
He takes on himself to direct the Almighty what to do, even in the government
of the universe. He prays dictatorially. When it is sunshine, he prays for
rain, and when it is rain, he prays for sunshine. He follows the same idea in
every thing that he prays for; for what is the amount of all his prayers, but
an attempt to make the Almighty change his mind, and act otherwise than he
does. It is as if he were to say -- thou know not so well as I.

But some perhaps will say, Are we to have no word of God -- No revelation? I
answer yes. There is a word of God; there is a revelation.

THE WORD OF GOD IS THE CREATION WE BEHOLD: And it is in this word, which no
human invention can counterfeit or alter, that God speaks universally to man.

Human language is local and changeable, and is therefore incapable of being
used as the means of unchangeable and universal information. The idea that God
sent Jesus Christ to publish, as they say, the glad tidings to all nations,
from one end of the earth unto the other, is consistent only with the ignorance
of those who know nothing of the extent of the world, and who believed, as
those world-saviours believed, and continued to believe, for several centuries
(and that in contradiction to the discoveries of philosophers, and the
experience of navigators) that the earth was flat like a trencher; and that a
man might walk to the end of it.

But how was Jesus Christ to make any thing known to all nations? He could
speak but one language, which was Hebrew; and there are in the world several
hundred languages. Scarcely any two nations speak the same language, or
understand each other; and as to translations, every man who knows any thing of
languages, knows that it is impossible to translate from one language into
another not only without losing a great part of the original, but frequently of
mistaking the sense: and besides all this, the art of printing was wholly
unknown at the time Christ lived.

It is always necessary that the means that are to accomplish any end, be equal
to the accomplishment of that end, or the end cannot be accomplished. It is in
this, that the difference between finite and infinite power and wisdom
discovers itself. Man frequently fails in accomplishing his end, from a natural
inability of the power to the purpose; and frequently from the want of wisdom
to apply power properly. But it is impossible for infinite power and wisdom to
fail as man fails. The means it uses are always equal to the end: but human
language, more especially as there is not an universal language, is incapable
of being used as an universal means of unchangeable and uniform information;
and therefore it is not the means that God uses in manifesting himself
universally to man.

It is only in the CREATION that all our ideas and conceptions of a word of God
can unite. The creation speaks an universal language, independently of human
speech or human language, multiplied and various as they be. It is an ever
existing original, which every man can read. It cannot be forged; it cannot be
counterfeited; it cannot be lost; it cannot be altered; it cannot be
suppressed. It does not depend upon the will of man whether it shall be
published or not; it publishes itself from one end of the earth to the other.
It preaches to all nations and to all worlds; and this word of God reveals to
man all that is necessary for man to know of God.

Do we want to contemplate his power? We see it in the immensity of the
creation. Do we want to contemplate his wisdom? We see it in the unchangeable
order by which the incomprehensible Whole is governed. Do we want to
contemplate his munificence? We see it in the abundance with which he fills the
earth. Do we want to contemplate his mercy? We see it in his not withholding
that abundance even from the unthankful. In fine, do we want to know what God
is? Search not the book called the scripture, which any human hand might make,
but the scripture called the Creation.

The only idea man can affix to the name of God, is, that of a first cause, the
cause of all things. And incomprehensibly difficult as it is for man to
conceive what a first cause is, he arrives at the belief of it, from the
ten-fold greater difficulty of disbelieving it. It is difficult beyond
description to conceive that space can have no end; but it is more difficult to
conceive an end. It is difficult beyond the power of man to conceive an eternal
duration of what we call time; but it is more impossible to conceive a time
when there shall be no time. In like manner of reasoning, every thing we behold
carries in itself the internal evidence that it did not make itself. Every man
is an evidence to himself, that he did not make himself; neither could his
father make himself, nor his grandfather, nor any of his race; neither could
any tree, plant, or animal, make itself: and it is the conviction arising from
this evidence, that carries us on, as it were, by necessity, to the belief of a
first cause eternally existing, of a nature totally different to any material
existence we know of, and by the power of which all things exist, and this
first cause man calls God.

It is only by the exercise of reason, that man can discover God. Take away
that reason, and he would be incapable of understanding any thing; and, in this
case, it would be just as consistent to read even the book called the Bible, to
a horse as to a man. How then is it that those people pretend to reject reason?

Almost the only parts in the book, called the Bible, that convey to us any
idea of God, are some chapters in Job, and the 19th psalm. I recollect no
other. Those parts are true deistical compositions; for they treat of the Deity
through his works. They take the book of Creation as the word of God; they
refer to no other book; and all the inferences they make are drawn from that
volume.

I insert, in this place, the 19th psalm, as paraphrased into English verse, by
Addison. I recollect not the prose, and where I write this I have not the
opportunity of seeing it.

The spacious firmament on high,
With all the blue etherial sky,
And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
Their great original proclaim.
The unwearied sun, from day to day,
Does his Creator's power display,
And publishes to every land,
The work of an Almighty hand.
Soon as the evening shades prevail,
The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
And nightly to the listening earth
Repeats the story of her birth.
Whilst all the stars that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings as they roll,
And spread the truth from pole to pole.
What though in solemn silence, all
Move round this dark terrestrial ball,
What though no real voice, nor sound,
Amidst their radiant orbs be found,
In reason's ear they all rejoice,
And utter forth a glorious voice;
For ever singing as they shine,
THE HAND THAT MADE US IS DIVINE.
What more does man want to know than that the hand, or power, that made these
things is divine, is omnipotent. Let him believe this, with the force it is
impossible to repel if he permits his reason to act, and his rule of moral life
will follow of course.

The allusions in Job have all of them the same tendency with this psalm; that
of deducing or proving a truth, that would be otherwise unknown, from truths
already known.

I recollect not enough of the passages in Job to insert them correctly: but
there is one that occurs to me that is applicable to the subject I am speaking
upon. Can thou by searching find out God; can thou find out the Almighty to
perfection.

I know not how the printers have pointed this passage, for I keep no Bible:
but it contains two distinct questions that admits of distinct answers.

First, Can thou by searching find out God? Yes. Because, in the first place,
I know I did not make myself, and yet I have existence; and by searching into
the nature of other things, I find that no other thing could make itself; and
yet millions of other things exist; therefore it is, that I know, by positive
conclusion resulting from this search, that there is a power superior to all
those things, and that power is God.

Secondly, Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? No. Not only because
the power and wisdom he has manifested in the structure of the creation that I
behold, is to me incomprehensible; but because even this manifestation, great
as it is, is probably but a small display of that immensity of power and
wisdom, by which millions of other worlds, to me invisible by their distance,
were created and continue to exist.

It is evident that both these questions were put to the reason of the person
to whom they are supposed to have been addressed; and it is only by admitting
the first question to be answered affirmatively, that the second could follow.
It would have been unnecessary, and even absurd, to have put a second question
more difficult than the first, if the first question had been answered
negatively. The two questions have different objects, the first refers to the
existence of God, the second to his attributes. Reason can discover the one,
but it falls infinitely short in discovering the whole of the other.

I recollect not a single passage in all the writings ascribed to the men,
called apostles, that convey any idea of what God is. Those writings are
chiefly controversial; and the gloominess of the subject they dwell upon, that
of a man dying in agony on a cross, is better suited to the gloomy genius of a
monk in a cell, by whom it is not impossible they were written, than to any man
breathing the open air of the creation. The only passage that occurs to me,
that has any reference to the works of God, by which only his power and wisdom
can be known, is related to have been spoken by Jesus Christ, as a remedy
against distrustful care. "Behold the lilies of the field, they toil not,
neither do they spin." This, however, is far inferior to the allusions in Job,
and in the nineteenth psalm; but it is similar in idea, and the modesty of the
imagery is correspondent to the modesty of the man.

As to the christian system of faith, it appears to me as a species of atheism;
a sort of religious denial of God. It professes to believe in a man rather than
in God. It is a compound made up chiefly of manism with but little deism, and
is as near to atheism as twilight is to darkness. It introduces between man and
his Maker an opaque body which it calls a redeemer; as the moon introduces her
opaque self between the earth and the sun, and it produces by this means a
religious or an irreligious eclipse of light. It has put the whole orbit of
reason into shade.

The effect of this obscurity has been that of turning every thing upside down,
and representing it in reverse; and among the revolutions it has thus magically
produced, it has made a revolution in Theology.

That which is now called natural philosophy, embracing the whole circle of
science, of which astronomy occupies the chief place, is the study of the works
of God and of the power and wisdom of God in his works, and is the true
theology.

As to the theology that is now studied in its place, it is the study of human
opinions and of human fancies concerning God. It is not the study of God
himself in the works that he has made, but in the works or writings that man
has made; and it is not among the least of the mischiefs that the christian
system has done to the world, that it has abandoned the original and beautiful
system of theology, like a beautiful innocent to distress and reproach, to make
room for the hag of superstition.

The book of Job, and the 19th psalm, which even the church admits to be more
ancient than the chronological order in which they stand in the book called the
Bible, are theological orations conformable to the original system of theology.
The internal evidence of those orations proves to a demonstration, that the
study and contemplation of the works of creation, and of the power and wisdom
of God revealed and manifested in those works, made a great part of the
religious devotion of the times in which they were written; and it was this
devotional study and contemplation that led to the discovery of the principles
upon which, what are now called Sciences, are established; and it is to the
discovery of these principles that almost all the Arts that contribute to the
convenience of human life, owe their existence. Every principal art has some
science for its parent, though the person who mechanically performs the work
does not always, and but very seldom, perceive the connection.

It is a fraud of the christian system to call the sciences human inventions;
it is only the application of them that is human. Every science has for its
basis a system of principles as fixed and unalterable as those by which the
universe is regulated and governed. Man cannot make principles; he can only
discover them:

For example. Every person who looks at an almanac sees an account when an
eclipse will take place, and he sees also that it never fails to take place
according to the account there given. This shows that man is acquainted with
the laws by which the heavenly bodies move. But it would be something worse
than ignorance, were any church on earth to say, that those laws are an human
invention.

It would also be ignorance, or something worse, to say, that the scientific
principles, by the aid of which man is enabled to calculate and foreknow when
an eclipse will take place, are an human invention. Man cannot invent any thing
that is eternal and immutable; and the scientific principles he employs for
this purpose, must, and are, of necessity, as eternal and immutable as the laws
by which the heavenly bodies move, or they could not be used as they are, to
ascertain the time when, and the manner how, an eclipse will take place.

The scientific principles that man employs to obtain the foreknowledge of an
eclipse, or of any thing else relating to the motion of the heavenly bodies,
are contained chiefly in that part of science that is called trigonometry, or
the properties of a triangle, which, when applied to the study of the heavenly
bodies, is called astronomy; when applied to direct the course of a ship on the
ocean, it is called navigation; when applied to the construction of figures
drawn by a rule and compass, it is called geometry; when applied to the
construction of plans of edifices, it is called architecture; when applied to
the measurement of any portion of the surface of the earth, it is called
landsurveying. In fine, it is the soul of science. It is an eternal truth: it
contains the mathematical demonstration of which man speaks, and the extent of
its uses are unknown.

It may be said, that man can make or draw a triangle, and therefore a triangle
is an human invention.

But the triangle, when drawn, is no other than the image of the principle: it
is a delineation to the eye, and from thence to the mind, of a principle that
would otherwise be imperceptible. The triangle does not make the principle, any
more than a candle taken into a room that was dark, makes the chairs and tables
that before were invisible. All the properties of a triangle exist
independently of the figure, and existed before any triangle was drawn or
thought of by man. Man had no more to do in the formation of those properties,
or principles, than he had to do in making the laws by which the heavenly
bodies move; and therefore the one must have the same divine origin as the
other.

In the same manner as it may be said, that man can make a triangle, so also
may it be said, he can make the mechanical instrument, called a lever. But the
principle by which the lever acts, is a thing distinct from the instrument, and
would exist if the instrument did not: it attaches itself to the instrument
after it is made; the instrument therefore can act no otherwise than it does
act; neither can all the effort of human invention make it act otherwise. That
which, in all such cases, man calls the effect, is no other than the principle
itself rendered perceptible to the senses.

Since then man cannot make principles, from whence did he gain a knowledge of
them, so as to be able to apply them, not only to things on earth, but to
ascertain the motion of bodies so immensely distant from him as all the
heavenly bodies are? From whence, I ask, could he gain that knowledge, but from
the study of the true theology?

It is the structure of the universe that has taught this knowledge to man.
That structure is an ever existing exhibition of every principle upon which
every part of mathematical science is founded. The offspring of this science is
mechanics; for mechanics is no other than the principles of science applied
practically. The man who proportions the several parts of a mill, uses the same
scientific principles, as if he had the power of constructing an universe: but
as he cannot give to matter that invisible agency, by which all the component
parts of the immense machine of the universe have influence upon each other,
and act in motional unison together without any apparent contact, and to which
man has given the name of attraction, gravitation, and repulsion, he supplies
the place of that agency by the humble imitation of teeth and cogs. All the
parts of man's microcosm must visibly touch. But could he gain a knowledge of
that agency, so as to be able to apply it in practice, we might then say, that
another canonical book of the word of God had been discovered.

If man could alter the properties of the lever, so also could he alter the
properties of the triangle: for a lever (taking that sort of lever, which is
called a steel-yard for the sake of explanation) forms, when in motion, a
triangle. The line it descends from, (one point of that line being in the
fulcrum) the line it descends to, and the chord of the arc, which the end of
the lever describes in the air, are the three sides of a triangle. The other
arm of the lever describes also a triangle; and the corresponding sides of
those two triangles, calculated scientifically or measured geometrically; and
also the sines, tangents, and secants generated from the angles, and
geometrically measured, have the same proportions to each other, as the
different weights have that will balance each other on the lever, leaving the
weight of the lever out of the case.

It may also be said that man can make a wheel and axis, that he can put wheels
of different magnitudes together, and produce a mill. Still the case comes back
to the same point, which is, that he did not make the principle that gives the
wheels those powers. That principle is as unalterable as in the former cases,
or rather it is the same principle under a different appearance to the eye.

The power that two wheels, of different magnitudes, have upon each other, is
in the same proportion as if the semi-diameter of the two wheels were joined
together and made into that kind of lever I have described, suspended at the
part where the semi-diameters join; for the two wheels, scientifically
considered, are no other than the two circles generated by the motion of the
compound lever.

It is from the study of the true theology that all our knowledge of science is
derived, and it is from that knowledge that all the arts have originated.

The Almighty lecturer, by displaying the principles of science in the
structure of the universe, has invited man to study and to imitation. It is as
if he had said to the inhabitants of this globe that we call ours, I have made
an earth for man to dwell upon, and I have rendered the starry heavens visible,
to teach him science and the arts. He can now provide for his own comfort, AND
LEARN FROM MY MUNIFICENCE TO ALL, TO BE KIND TO EACH OTHER.

Of what use is it, unless it be to teach man something, that his eye is
endowed with the power of beholding, to an incomprehensible distance, an
immensity of worlds revolving in the ocean of space? Or of what use is it that
this immensity of worlds is visible to man? What has man to do with the
Pleiades, with Orion, with Sirius, with the star he calls the north star, with
the moving orbs he has named Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, if no
uses are to follow from their being visible? A less power of vision would have
been sufficient for man, if the immensity he now possesses were given only to
waste itself, as it were, on an immense desert of space glittering with shows.

It is only by contemplating what he calls the starry heavens, as the book and
school of science, that he discovers any use in their being visible to him, or
any advantage resulting from his immensity of vision. But when he contemplates
the subject in this light, he sees an additional motive for saying that nothing
was made in vain; for in vain would be this power of vision if it taught man
nothing.

As the christian system of faith has made a revolution in theology, so also
has it made a revolution in the state of learning. That which is now called
learning was not learning originally. Learning does not consist, as the schools
now make it consist, in the knowledge of languages, but in the knowledge of
things to which language gives names.

The Greeks were a learned people; but learning with them, did not consist in
speaking Greek, any more than in a Roman's speaking Latin, or a Frenchman's
speaking French, or an Englishman's speaking English. From what we know of the
Greeks, it does not appear that they knew or studied any language but their
own; and this was one cause of their becoming so learned; it afforded them more
time to apply themselves to better studies. The schools of the Greeks were
schools of science and philosophy, and not of languages: and it is in the
knowledge of the things that science and philosophy teach, that learning
consists.

Almost all the scientific learning that now exists, came to us from the
Greeks, or the people who spoke the Greek language. It therefore became
necessary to the people of other nations, who spoke a different language, that
some among them should learn the Greek language, in order that the learning the
Greeks had, might be made known in those nations, by translating the Greek
books of science and philosophy into the mother tongue of each nation.

The study therefore of the Greek language, (and in the same manner for the
Latin) was no other than the drudgery business of a linguist; and the language
thus obtained, was no other than the means, or as it were, the tools, employed
to obtain the learning the Greeks had. It made no part of the learning itself;
and was so distinct from it, as to make it exceeding probable, that the persons
who had studied Greek sufficiently to translate those works, such, for
instance, as Euclid's Elements, did not understand any of the learning the
works contained.

As there is now nothing new to be learned from the dead languages, all the
useful books being already translated, the languages are become useless, and
the time expended in teaching and in learning them is wasted. So far as the
study of languages may contribute to the progress and communication of
knowledge (for it has nothing to do with the creation of knowledge) it is only
in the living languages that new knowledge is to be found: and certain it is,
that, in general, a youth will learn more of a living language in one year,
than of a dead language in seven; and it is but seldem that the teacher knows
much of it himself. The difficulty of learning the dead languages does not
arise from any superior abstruseness in the languages themselves, but in their
being dead, and the pronunciation entirely lost. It would be the same thing
with any other language when it becomes dead. The best Greek linguist, that now
exists, does not understand Greek so well as a Grecian plowman did, or a
Grecian milkmaid; and the same for the Latin, compared with a plowman or a
milkmaid of the Romans; and with respect to pronunciation, and idiom, not so
well as the cows that she milked. It would therefore be advantageous to the
state of learning, to abolish the study of the dead languages, and to make
learning consist, as it originally did, in scientific knowledge.

The apology that is sometimes made for continuing to teach the dead languages
is, that they are taught at a time when a child is not capable of exerting any
other mental faculty than that of memory. But this is altogether erroneous. The
human mind has a natural disposition to scientific knowledge, and to the things
connected with it. The first and favorite amusement of a child, even before it
begins to play, is that of imitating the works of man. It builds houses with
cards or sticks; it navigates the little ocean of a bowl of water with a paper
boat; or dams the stream of a gutter, and contrives something which it calls a
mill; and it interests itself in the fate of its works with a care that
resembles affection. It afterward goes to school, where its genius is killed
by the barren study of a dead language, and the philosopher is lost in the
linguist.

But the apology that is now made for continuing to teach the dead languages,
could not be the cause at first of cutting down learning to the narrow and
humble sphere of linguistry; the cause, therefore, must be sought for
elsewhere. In all researches of this kind, the best evidence that can be
produced, is the internal evidence the thing carries with itself, and the
evidence of circumstances that unites with it, both of which, in this case, are
not difficult to be discovered.

Putting then aside, as matter of distinct consideration, the outrage offered
to the moral justice of God, by supposing him to make the innocent suffer for
the guilty, and also the loose morality and low contrivance of supposing him to
change himself into the shape of a man, in order to make an excuse to himself
for not executing his supposed sentence upon Adam; putting, I say, those things
aside, as matter of distinct consideration, it is certain, that what is called
the christian system of faith, including in it the whimsical account of the
creation; the strange story of Eve, the snake, and the apple; the amphibious
idea of a man-god; the corporeal idea of the death of a god; the mythological
idea of a family of gods; and the christian system of arithmetic, that three
are one, and one is three, are all irreconcilable, not only to the divine gift
of reason that God has given to man, but to the knowledge that man gains of the
power and wisdom of God, by the aid of the sciences, and by studying the
structure of the universe that God has made.

The setters up, therefore, and the advocates of the christian system of faith,
could not but foresee that the continually progressive knowledge that man would
gain by the aid of science, of the power and wisdom of God, manifested in the
structure of the universe, and in all the works of creation, would militate
against, and call into question, the truth of their system of faith; and
therefore it became necessary to their purpose to cut learning down to a size
less dangerous to their project, and this they effected by restricting the idea
of learning to the dead study of dead languages.

They not only rejected the study of science out of the christian schools, but
they persecuted it; and it is only within about the last two centuries that the
study has been revived. So late as 1610 Galileo, a Florentine, discovered and
introduced the use of telescopes, and by applying them to observe the motions
and appearances of the heavenly bodies, afforded additional means for
ascertaining the true structure of the universe. Instead of being esteemed for
these discoveries, he was sentenced to renounce them, or the opinions resulting
from them, as a damnable heresy. And prior to that time Vigilius was condemned
to be burned for asserting the antipodes, or in other words, that the earth was
a globe, and habitable in every part where there was land; yet the truth of
this is now too well known even to be told.

If the belief of errors not morally bad did no mischief, it would make no part
of the moral duty of man to oppose and remove them. There was no moral ill in
believing the earth was flat like a trencher, any more than there was moral
virtue in believing it was round like a globe; neither was there any moral ill
in believing that the Creator made no other world than this, any more than
there was moral virtue in believing that he made millions, and that the
infinity of space is filled with worlds. But when a system of religion is made
to grow out of a supposed system of creation that is not true, and to unite
itself therewith in a manner almost inseparable therefrom, the case assumes an
entirely different ground. It is then that errors, not morally bad, become
fraught with the same mischiefs as if they were. It is then that the truth,
though otherwise indifferent itself, becomes an essential, by becoming the
criterion, that either confirms by corresponding evidence, or denies by
contradictory evidence, the reality of the religion itself. In this view of the
case it is the moral duty of man to obtain every possible evidence, that the
structure of the heathens, or any other part of creation affords, with respect
to systems of religion. But this, the supporters or partisans of the christian
system, as if dreading the result, incessantly opposed, and not only rejected
the sciences, but persecuted the professors. Had Newton or Descartes lived
three or four hundred years ago, and pursued their studies as they did, it is
most probable they would not have lived to finish them; and had Franklin drawn
lightning from the clouds at the same time, it would have been at the hazard of
expiring for it in flames.

Latter times have laid all the blame upon the Goths and Vandals, but, however
unwilling the partisans of the Christian system may be to believe or to
acknowledge it, it is nevertheless true, that the age of ignorance commenced
with the Christian system. There was more knowledge in the world before that
period than for many centuries afterward; and as to religious knowledge, the
Christian system, as already said, was only another species of mythology; and
the mythology to which it succeeded, was a corruption of an ancient system of
theism. It is impossible for us now to know at what time the heathen mythology
began; but it is certain, from the internal evidence that it carries, that it
did not begin in the same state or condition in which it ended. All the gods of
that mythology, except Saturn, were of modern invention. The supposed reign of
Saturn was prior to that which is called the heathen mythology, and was so far
a species of theism that it admitted the belief of only one God. Saturn is
supposed to have abdicated the government in favor of his three sons and one
daughter, Jupiter, Pluto, Neptune and Juno: after this, thousands of other gods
and demigods were imaginarily created, and the calendar of gods increased as
fast as the calendar of saints, and the calendar of courts have increased since.

All the corruptions that have taken place in theology, and in religion, have
been produced by admitting of what man calls revealed religion. The
mythologists pretended to more revealed religion than the christians do. They
had their oracles and their priests, who were supposed to receive and deliver
the word of God verbally on almost all occasions.

Since then all corruptions, down from Moloch to modern predestinarianism, and
the human sacrifices of the heathens to the christian sacrifice of the Creator,
have been produced by admitting what is called revealed religion, the most
effectual means to prevent all such evils and impositions, and is not to admit
of any other revelation than that which is manifested in the book of Creation;
and to contemplate the Creation, as the only true and real word of God that
ever did or ever will exist, and that every thing else, called the word of God
is fable and imposition.




It is owing to this long interregnum of science, and to no other cause, that
we have now to look back through a vast chasm of many hundred years to the
respectable characters we call the ancients. Had the progression of knowledge
gone on proportionably with the stock that before existed, that chasm would
have been filled up with characters rising superior in knowledge to each other;
and those ancients, we now so much admire, would have appeared respectably in
the back ground of the scene. But the christian system laid all waste; and if
we take our stand about the beginning of the sixteenth century, we look back
through that long chasm, to the times of the ancients, as over a vast sandy
desert, in which not a shrub appears to intercept the vision to the fertile
hills beyond.

It is an inconsistency, scarcely possible to be credited, that any thing
should exist under the name of a religion, that held it to be irreligious to
study and contemplate the structure of the universe that God had made. But the
fact is too well established to be denied. The event that served more than any
other, to break the first link in this long chain of despotic ignorance, is
that known by the name of the reformation by Luther. From that time, though it
does not appear to have made any part of the intention of Luther, or of those
who are called reformers, the Sciences began to revive, and Liberality, their
natural associate, began to appear. This was the only public good the
reformation did; for with respect to religious good, it might as well not have
taken place. The mythology still continued the same; and a multiplicity of
national popes grew out of the downfall of the Pope of Christendom.

Having thus shown, from the internal evidence of things, the cause that
produced a change in the state of learning, and the motive for substituting the
study of the dead languages in the place of the Sciences, I proceed, in
addition to the several observations already made in the former part of this
work, to compare, or rather to confront, the evidence that the structure of the
universe affords, with the christian system of religion. But as I cannot begin
this part better than by referring to the ideas that occurred to me at an early
part of life, and which I doubt not have occurred in some degree to almost
every other person at one time or other, I shall state what those ideas were,
and add thereto such other matter as shall arise out of the subject, giving to
the whole, by way of preface, a short introduction.

My father being of the quaker profession, it was my good fortune to have an
exceedingly good moral education, and a tolerable stock of useful learning.
Though I went to the grammar school, The same school, Thetford in Norfolk, that
the present counselor Mingay went to, and under the same master.
I did not learn Latin, not only because I had no inclination to learn
languages, but because of the objection the quakers have against the books in
which the language is taught. But this did not prevent me from being acquainted
with the subjects of all the Latin books used in the school.

The natural bent of my mind was to science. I had some turn, and I believe
some talent for poetry; but this I rather repressed than encouraged, as leading
too much into the field of imagination. As soon as I was able I purchased a
pair of globes, and attended the philosophical lectures of Martin and Ferguson,
and became afterward acquainted with Dr. Bevis, of the society, called the
Royal Society, then living in the Temple, and an excellent astronomer.

I had no disposition for what was called politics. It presented to my mind no
other idea than is contained in the word Jockeyship. When, therefore, I turned
my thoughts toward matters of government, I had to form a system for myself,
that accorded with the moral and philosophic principles in which I had been
educated. I saw, or at least I thought I saw, a vast scene opening itself to
the world in the affairs of America; and it appeared to me, that unless the
Americans changed the plan they were then pursuing, with respect to the
government of England, and declare themselves independent, they would not only
involve themselves in a multiplicity of new difficulties, but shut out the
prospect that was then offering itself to mankind through their means. It was
from these motives that I published the work known by the name of Common Sense,
which is the first work I ever did publish: and so far as I can judge of
myself, I believe I never should have been known in the world as an author on
any subject whatever, had it not been for the affairs of America. I wrote
Common Sense the latter end of the year 1775, and published it the first of
January 1776. Independence was declared the fourth of July following.

Any person who has made observations on the state and progress of the human
mind, by observing his own, cannot but have observed, that there are two
distinct classes of what are called Thoughts: those that we produce in
ourselves by reflection and the act of thinking, and those that bolt into the
mind of their own accord. I have always made it a rule to treat those voluntary
visitors with civility, taking care to examine, as well as I was able, if they
were worth entertaining; and it is from them I have acquired almost all the
knowledge that I have. As to the learning that any person gains from school
education, it serves only, like a small capital, to put him in the way of
beginning learning for himself afterward. Every person of learning is finally
his own teacher; the reason of which is, that principles, being of a distinct
quality to circumstances, cannot be impressed upon the memory. Their place of
mental residence is the understanding, and they are never so lasting as when
they begin by conception. Thus much for the introductory part.

From the time I was capable of conceiving an idea, and acting upon it by
reflection, I either doubted the truth of the christian system, or thought it
to be a strange affair; I scarcely new which it was: but I well remember, when
about seven or eight years of age, hearing a sermon read by a relation of mine,
who was a great devotee of the church, upon the subject of what is called
Redemption by the death of the Son of God. After the sermon was ended I went
into the garden, and as I was going down the garden steps (for I perfectly
recollect the spot) I revolted at the recollection of what I had heard, and
thought to myself that it was making God Almighty act like a passionate man
that killed his son when he could not revenge himself any other way; and as I
was sure a man would be hanged that did such a thing, I could not see for what
purpose they preached such sermons. This was not one of those kind of thoughts
that had any thing in it of childish levity; it was to me a serious reflection
arising from the idea I had, that God was too good to do such an action, and
also too almighty to be under any necessity of doing it. I believe in the same
manner to this moment; and I moreover believe, that any system of religion that
has any thing in it that shocks the mind of a child, cannot be a true system.

It seems as if parents of the christian profession were ashamed to tell their
children any thing about the principles of their religion. They sometimes
instruct them in morals, and talk to them of the goodness of what they call
Providence; for the christian mythology has five deities: there is God the
Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, the God Providence, and the Goddess
Nature. But the christian story of God the Father putting his son to death, or
employing people to do it (for that is the plain language of the story) cannot
be told by a parent to a child; and to tell him that it was done to make
mankind happier and better is making the story still worse, as if mankind could
be improved by the example of murder; and to tell him that all this is a
mystery, is only making an excuse for the incredibility of it.

How different is this to the pure and simple profession of Deism! The true
deist has but one Deity; and his religion consists in contemplating the power,
wisdom, and benignity of the Deity in his works, and in endeavoring to imitate
him in every thing moral, scientifical, and mechanical.

The religion that approaches the nearest of all others to true deism, in the
moral and benign part thereof, is that professed by the quakers, but they have
contracted themselves too much by leaving the works of God out of their system.
Though I reverence their philanthropy, I cannot help smiling at the conceit,
that if the taste of a quaker could have been consulted at the creation, what a
silent and drab-coloured creation it would have been! Not a flower would have
blossomed its gaities, nor a bird been permitted to sing.

Quitting these reflections, I proceed to other matters. After I had made
myself master of the use of the globes and of the orrery, As this book may fall
into the hands of persons who do not know what an orrery is, it is for their
information I add this note, as the name gives no idea of the uses of the
thing. The orrery has its name from the person who invented it. It is a
machinery of clock-work representing the universe in miniature: and in which
the revolution of the earth round itself and round the sun, the revolution of
the moon round the earth, the revolution of the planets round the sun, their
relative distances from the sun, as the center of the whole system, their
relative distances from each other, and their different magnitudes, are
represented as they really exist in what we call the heavens.
and conceived an idea of the infinity of space, and of the eternal
divisibility of matter, and obtained, at least, a general knowledge of what is
called natural philosophy, I began to compare, or, as I have before said, to
confront, the internal evidence those things afford with the christian system
of faith.

Though it is not a direct article of the christian system that this world that
we inhabit is the whole of the habitable creation, yet it is so worked up
therewith, from what is called the Mosaic account of the creation, the story of
Eve and the apple, and the counterpart of that story, the death of the Son of
God, that to believe otherwise, that is, to believe that God created a
plurality of worlds, at least as numerous as what we call stars, renders the
christian system of faith at once little and ridiculous; and scatters it in the
mind like feathers in the air. The two beliefs cannot be held together in the
same mind; and he who thinks that he believes both, has thought but little of
either.

Though the belief of a plurality of worlds was familiar to the ancients, it is
only within the last three centuries that the extent and dimensions of this
globe that we inhabit, have been ascertained. Several vessels, following the
tract of the ocean, have sailed entirely round the world, as a man may march in
a circle, and come round by the contrary side of the circle to the spot he set
out from. The circular dimensions of our world in the widest part, as a man
would measure the widest round of an apple or a ball, is only twenty five
thousand and twenty English miles, reckoning sixty nine miles and an half to an
equatorial degree, and may be sailed round in the space of about three years.
Allowing a ship to sail, on an average, three miles in an hour, she would sail
entirely round the world in less than one year, if she could sail in a direct
circle; but she is obliged to follow the course of the ocean.


A world of this extent may, at first thought, appear to us to be great; but if
we compare it with the immensity of space in which it is suspended, like a
bubble or a balloon in the air, it is infinitely less in proportion than the
smallest grain of sand is to the size of the world, or the finest particle of
dew to the whole ocean; and is therefore but small; and, as will be hereafter
shown, is only one of a system of worlds, of which the universal creation is
composed.

It is not difficult to gain some faint idea of the immensity of space in which
this and all the other worlds are suspended, if we follow a progression of
ideas. When we think of the size or dimensions of a room, our ideas limit
themselves to the walls, and there they stop. But when our eye, or our
imagination, darts into space, that is, when it looks upward into what we call
the open air, we cannot conceive any walls or boundaries it can have; and if
for the sake of resting our ideas, we suppose a boundary, the question
immediately renews itself, and asks, what is beyond that boundary? and in the
same manner, what is beyond the next boundary? and so on, till the fatigued
imagination returns and says, there is no end. Certainly, then, the Creator was
not pent for room when he made this world no larger than it is; and we have to
seek the reason in something else.

If we take a survey of our own world, or rather of this, of which the Creator
has given us the use, as our portion in the immense system of creation, we find
every part of it, the earth, the waters, and the air that surround it, filled,
and, as it were, crowded with life, down from the largest animals that we know
of, to the smallest insects the naked eye can behold, and from thence to others
still smaller, and totally invisible without the assistance of the microscope.
Every tree, every plant, every leaf, serves not only as an habitation, but as a
world to some numerous race, till animal existence becomes so exceedingly
refined, that the effluvia of a blade of grass would be food for thousands.

Since then no part of our earth is left unoccupied, why is it to be supposed,
that the immensity of space is a naked void, lying in eternal waste. There is
room for millions of worlds as large or larger than ours, and each of them
millions of miles apart from each other.

Having now arrived at this point, if we carry our ideas only one thought
further, we shall see, perhaps, the true reason, at least a very good reason
for our happiness, why the Creator, instead of making one immense world,
extending over an immense quantity of space, has preferred dividing that
quantity of matter into several distinct and separate worlds, which we call
planets, of which our earth is one. But before I explain my ideas upon this
subject, it is necessary (not for the sake of those that already know, but for
those who do not) to show what the system of the universe is.

That part of the universe, that is called the solar system (meaning the system
of worlds to which our earth belongs, and of which Sol, or in English language
the Sun, is the center) consists, besides the Sun, or six distinct orbs, or
planets, or worlds, besides the secondary bodies, called the satellites, or
moons, of which our earth has one that attends her in her annual revolution
round the sun, in like manner as the other satellites, or moons, attend the
planets, or worlds, to which they severally belong, as may be seen by the
assistance of the telescope.

The Sun is the center, round which those six worlds, or planets, revolve at
different distances therefrom, and in circles concentric to each other. Each
world keeps constantly in nearly the same tract round the Sun, and continues,
at the same time, turning round itself, in nearly an upright position, as a top
turns round itself when it is spinning on the ground, and leans a little
sideways.

It is this leaning of the earth, (23 degrees) that occasions summer and
winter, and the different length of days and nights. If the earth turned round
itself in a position perpendicular to the plane or level of the circle it moves
in round the Sun, as a top turns round when it stands erect on the ground, the
days and nights would be always of the same length, twelve hours day, and
twelve hours night, and the season would be uniformly the same throughout the
year.

Every time that a planet (our earth for example) turns round itself, it makes
what we call day and night; and every time it goes entirely round the Sun, it
makes what we call a year, consequently our world turns three hundred and
sixty-five times round itself, in going once round the Sun. Those who supposed
that the Sun went round the earth every twenty-four hours, made the same
mistake in idea, that a cook would do in fact, that should make the fire go
round the meat, instead of the meat turning round itself toward the fire.


The names that the ancients gave to those six worlds, and which are still
called by the same names, are Mercury, Venus, this world that we call ours,
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. They appear larger to the eye than the stars, being
many million miles nearer to our earth than any of the stars are. The planet
Venus is that which is called the evening star, and sometimes the morning star,
as she happens to set after, or rise before the Sun, which, in either case, is
never more than three hours.

The Sun, as before said, being the center, the planet, or world, nearest the
Sun, is Mercury; his distance from the Sun is thirty-four million miles, and he
moves round in a circle always at that distance from the Sun, as a top may be
supposed to spin round in the tract in which a horse goes in a mill. The second
world is Venus; she is fifty-seven million miles distant from the Sun, and
consequently moves round in a circle much greater than that of Mercury. The
third world is this that we inhabit, and which is eighty-eight million miles
distant from the Sun, and consequently moves round in a circle greater than
that of Venus. The fourth world is Mars; he is distant from the Sun one hundred
and thirty-four million miles, and consequently moves round in a circle greater
than that of our earth. The fifth is Jupiter; he is distant from the Sun five
hundred and fifty-seven million miles, and consequently moves round in a circle
greater than that of Mars. The sixth world is Saturn; he is distant from the
Sun seven hundred and sixty-three million miles, and consequently moves round
in a circle that surrounds the circles or orbits of all the other worlds or
planets.

The space, therefore, in the air, or in the immensity of space, that our solar
system takes up for the several worlds to perform their revolutions in round
the sun, is of the extent in a strait line of the whole diameter of the orbit
or circle, in which Saturn moves round the Sun, which being double his distance
from the Sun, is fifteen hundred and twenty-six million miles; and its circular
extent is nearly five thousand million, and its globical content is almost
three thousand five hundred million times three thousand five hundred million
square miles. If it should be asked, how can man know these things? I have one
plain answer to give, which is, that man knows how to calculate an eclipse, and
also how to calculate, to a minute of time, when the planet Venus, in making
her revolutions round the Sun, will come in a strait line between our earth,
and the Sun, and will appear to us about the size of a large pea passing across
the face of the Sun. This happens but twice in about an hundred years, at the
distance of about eight years from each other, and has happened twice in our
time, both of which were foreknown by calculation. It can also be known when
they will happen again for a thousand years to come, or to any other portion of
time. As, therefore, man could not be able to do those things if he did not
understand the solar system, and the manner in which the revolutions of the
several planets or worlds are performed, the fact of calculating an eclipse or
a transit of Venus, is a proof in point that the knowledge exists; and as to a
few thousand, or even a few million miles more or less, it makes scarcely any
sensible difference in such immense distances.


But this, immense as it is, is only one system of worlds. Beyond this, at a
vast distance into space, far beyond all power of calculation, are the stars
called the fixed stars. They are called fixed, because they have no
revolutionary motion as the six worlds or planets have that I have been
describing. Those fixed stars continue always at the same distance from each
other, and always in the same place, as the Sun does in the center of our
system. The probability therefore is, that each of those fixed stars is also a
Sun, round which another system of worlds or planets, though too remote for us
to discover, performs its revolutions, as our system of worlds does round our
central Sun.

By this easy progression of ideas, the immensity of space will appear to us to
be filled with systems of worlds; and that no part of space lies at waste, any
more than any part of our globe of earth and water is left unoccupied.

Having thus endeavored to convey, in a familiar and easy manner, some idea of
the structure of the universe, I return to explain what I before alluded to,
namely, the great benefits arising to man in consequence of the Creator having
made a plurality of worlds, such as our system is, consisting of a central sun
and six worlds, besides satellites, in preference to that of creating one world
only of a vast extent.

It is an idea I have never lost sight of, that all our knowledge of science is
derived from the revolutions (exhibited to our eye, and from thence to our
understanding) which those several planets, or worlds, of which our system is
composed, make in their circuit round the Sun.

Had then the quantity of matter which these six worlds contain been blended
into one solitary globe, the consequence to us would have been, that either no
revolutionary motion would have existed, or not a sufficiency of it, to give us
the ideas and the knowledge of science we now have; and it is from the sciences
that all the mechanical arts that contribute so much to our earthly felicity
and comfort are derived.

As therefore the Creator made nothing in vain, so also must it be believed
that he organized the structure of the universe in the most advantageous manner
for the benefit of man; and as we see, and from experience feel, the benefits
we derive from the structure of the universe, formed as it is, which benefits
we should not have had the opportunity of enjoying, if the structure, so far as
relates to our system, had been a solitary globe, we can discover, at least,
one reason why a plurality of worlds has been made, and that reason calls forth
the devotional gratitude of man, as well as his admiration.

But it is not to us, the inhabitants of this globe, only, that the benefits
arising from a plurality of worlds are limited. The inhabitants of each of the
worlds, of which our system is composed, enjoy the same opportunities of
knowledge as we do. They behold the revolutionary motions of our earth, as we
behold theirs. All the planets revolve in sight of each other; and therefore
the same universal school of science presents itself to all.

Neither does the knowledge stop here. The system of worlds, next to us,
exhibits in its revolutions, the same principles and school of science, to the
inhabitants of their system, as our system does to us, and in like manner
throughout the immensity of space.

Our ideas, not only of the almightiness of the Creator, but of his wisdom and
his beneficence, become enlarged in proportion as we contemplate the extent and
the structure of the universe. The solitary idea of a solitary world rolling,
or at rest, in the immense ocean of space, gives place to the cheerful idea of
a society of worlds, so happily contrived, as to administer, even by their
motion, instruction to man. We see our own earth filled with abundance; but we
forget to consider how much of that abundance is owing to the scientific
knowledge the vast machinery of the universe has unfolded.

But, in the midst of those reflections, what are we to think of the christian
system of faith that forms itself upon the idea of only one world, and that of
no greater extent, as is before shown, than twenty five thousand miles. An
extent, which a man walking at the rate of three miles an hour, for twelve
hours in the day, could he keep on in a circular direction, would walk entirely
round in less than two years. Alas! what is this to the mighty ocean of space,
and the almighty power of the Creator!

From whence then could arise the solitary and strange conceit that the
Almighty, who had millions of worlds equally dependent on his protection,
should quit the care of all the rest, and come to die in our world, because,
they say, one man and one woman had eaten an apple. And, on the other hand, are
we to suppose that every world, in the boundless creation, had an Eve, an
apple, a serpent, and a redeemer. In this case, the person who is irreverently
called the Son of God, and sometimes God himself, would have nothing else to do
than to travel from world to world, in an endless succession of death, with
scarcely a momentary interval of life.

It has been, by rejecting the evidence, that the word, or works of God in the
creation, affords to our senses, and the action of our reason upon that
evidence, that so many wild and whimsical systems of faith, and of religion,
have been fabricated and set up. There may be many systems of religion, that so
far from being morally bad, are in many respects morally good: but there can be
but ONE that is true; and that one, necessarily must, as it ever will, be in
all things consistent with the ever existing word of God that we behold in his
works. But such is, the strange construction of the Christian system of faith,
that every evidence the heavens affords to man, either directly contradicts it,
or renders it absurd.

It is possible to believe, and I always feel pleasure in encouraging myself to
believe it, that there have been men in the world who persuaded themselves
that, what is called a pious fraud, might, at least under particular
circumstances, be productive of some good. But the fraud being once
established, could not afterward be explained; for it is with a pious fraud,
as with a bad action, it begets a calamitous necessity of going on.

The persons who first preached the christian system of faith, and in some
measure combined with it the morality preached by Jesus Christ, might persuade
themselves that it was better than the heathen mythology that then prevailed.
From the first preachers, the fraud went on to the second, and to the third,
till the idea of its being a pious fraud became lost in the belief of its being
true; and that belief came again encouraged by the interest of those who made a
livelihood by preaching it.

But though such a belief might, by such means, be rendered almost general
among the laity, it is next to impossible to account for the continual
persecution carried on by the church, for several hundred years, against the
sciences and against the professors of science, if the church had not some
record or some tradition, that it was originally no other than a pious fraud,
or did not foresee, that it could not be maintained against the evidence that
the structure of the universe afforded.

Having thus shown the irreconcilable inconsistencies between the real word of
God existing in the universe, and that which is called, the word of God, as
shown to us in a printed book, that any man might make, I proceed to speak of
the three principal means that have been employed in all ages, and perhaps in
all countries, to impose upon mankind.

Those three means are, Mystery, Miracle, and Prophecy. The two first are
incompatible with true religion, and the third ought always to be suspected.

With respect to mystery, every thing we behold is, in one sense a mystery, to
us. Our own existence is a mystery: the whole vegetable world is a mystery. We
cannot account how it is that an acorn, when put into the ground, is made to
develop itself, and become an oak. We know not how it is that the seed we sow
unfolds and multiplies itself, and returns to us such an abundant interest for
so small a capital.

The fact, however, as distinct from the operating cause, is not a mystery
because we see it; and we know also the means we are to use, which is no other
than putting the seed in the ground. We know therefore as much as is necessary
for us to know; and that part of the operation that we do not know, and which
if we did, we could not perform, the Creator takes upon himself and performs it
for us. We are therefore better off than if we had been let into the secret,
and left to do it for ourselves.

But though every created thing is in this sense a mystery, the word mystery
cannot be applied to moral truth, any more than obscurity can be applied to
light. The God in whom we believe is a God of moral truth, and not a God of
mystery or obscurity. Mystery is the antagonist of truth. It is a fog of human
invention, that obscures truth and represents it in distortion. Truth never
invelops itself in mystery; and the mystery in which it is at any time
enveloped, is the work of its antagonist, and never of itself.

Religion, therefore, being the belief of a God, and the practice of moral
truth, cannot have connection with mystery. The belief of a God, so far from
having any thing of mystery in it, is of all beliefs the most easy, because it
arises to us, as is before observed, out of necessity. And the practice of
moral truth, or in other words, a practical imitation of the moral goodness of
God, is no other than our acting toward each other, as he acts benignly
toward all. We cannot serve God in the manner we serve those who cannot do
without such service; and, therefore, the only idea we can have of serving God,
is that of contributing to the happiness of the living creation that God has
made. This cannot be done by retiring ourselves from the society of the world,
and spending a recluse life in selfish devotion.

The very nature and design of religion, if I may so express it, prove even to
demonstration, that it must be free from every thing of mystery, and
unincumbered with every thing that is mysterious. Religion, considered as a
duty, is incumbent upon every living soul alike, and therefore must be on a
level to the understanding and comprehension of all. Man does not learn
religion as he learns the secrets and mysteries of a trade. He learns the
theory of religion by reflection. It arises out of the action of his own mind
upon the things which he sees, or upon what he may happen to hear or to read,
and the practice joins itself thereto.

When men, whether from policy or pious fraud, set up systems of religion
incompatible with the word or works of God in the creation, and not only above
but repugnant to human comprehension, they were under the necessity of
inventing, or adopting, a word that should serve as a bar to all questions,
inquiries, and speculations. The word mystery answered this purpose; and thus
it has happened, that religion, which, in itself, is without mystery, has been
corrupted into a fog of mysteries.

As mystery answered all general purposes, miracle followed as an occasional
auxiliary. The former served to bewilder the mind, the latter to puzzle the
senses. The one was the lingo; the other the legerdemain.

But before going further into this subject, it will be proper to inquire what
is to be understood by a miracle.

In the same sense that every thing may be said to be a mystery, so also may it
be said, that every thing is a miracle, and that no one thing is a greater
miracle than another. The elephant, though larger, is not a greater miracle
than a mite; nor a mountain a greater miracle than an atom. To an almighty
power, it is no more difficult to make the one than the other, and no more
difficult to make a million of worlds than to make one. Every thing therefore
is a miracle in one sense; whilst, in the other sense, there is no such thing
as a miracle. It is a miracle when compared to our power, and to our
comprehension. It is not a miracle compared to the power that performs it. But
as nothing in this description conveys the idea that is affixed to the word
miracle, it is necessary to carry the inquiry further.

Mankind have conceived to themselves certain laws by which, what they call,
nature, is supposed to act; and that a miracle is something contrary to the
operation and effect of those laws. But unless we know the whole extent of
those laws, and of what are commonly called, the powers of nature, we are not
able to judge whether any thing that may appear to us wonderful, or miraculous,
be within, or be beyond, or be contrary to, her natural power of acting.

The ascension of a man several miles high into the air, would have every thing
in it that constitutes the idea of a miracle, if it were not known that a
species of air can be generated several times lighter than the common
atmospheric air, and yet possess elasticity enough to prevent the balloon, in
which that light air is enclosed, from being compressed into as many times less
bulk, by the common air that surrounds it. In like manner, extracting flashes
or sparks of fire from the human body as visibly as from a steel struck with a
flint, and causing iron or steel to move without any visible agent, would also
give the idea of a miracle, if we were not acquainted with electricity and
magnetism: so also would many other experiments in natural philosophy, to those
who are not acquainted with the subject. The restoring persons to life, who are
to appearance dead, as is practiced upon drowned persons, would also be a
miracle, if it were not known that animation is capable of being suspended
without being extinct.

Besides these, there are performances by slight of hand, and by persons acting
in concert, that have a miraculous appearance, which, when known, are thought
nothing of. And besides these, there are mechanical and optical deceptions.
There is now an exhibition in Paris of ghosts or specter, which, though it is
not imposed upon the spectators as a fact, has an astonishing appearance. As
therefore we know not the extent to which either nature or art can go, there is
no positive criterion to determine what a miracle is; and mankind, in giving
credit to appearances, under the idea of their being miracles, are subject to
be continually imposed upon.

Since then appearances are so capable of deceiving, and things not real have a
strong resemblance to things that are, nothing can be more inconsistent, than
to suppose, that the Almighty would make use of means, such as are called
miracles, that would subject the person who performed them to the suspicion of
being an impostor, and the person who related them to be suspected of lying,
and the doctrine intended to be supported thereby, to be suspected as a
fabulous invention.

Of all the modes of evidence that ever were invented to obtain belief to any
system or opinion, to which the name of religion has been given, that of
miracle, however successful the imposition may have been, is the most
inconsistent. For, in the first place, whenever recourse is had to show, for
the purpose of procuring that belief (for a miracle, under any idea of the
word, is a show) it implies a lameness or weakness in the doctrine that is
preached. And, in the second place, it is degrading the Almighty into the
character of a show-man, playing tricks to amuse and make the people stare and
wonder. It is also the most equivocal sort of evidence that can be set up; for
the belief is not to depend upon the thing called a miracle, but upon the
credit of the reporter, who says that he saw it; and therefore the thing, were
it true, would have no better chance of being believed than if it were a lie.

Suppose, I were to say, that when I sat down to write this book, a hand
presented itself in the air, took up the pen, and wrote every word that is
herein written; would any body believe me? certainly they would not. Would they
believe me a whit the more if the thing had been a fact? certainly they would
not. Since then, a real miracle, were it to happen, would be subject to the
same fate as the falsehood, the inconsistency becomes the greater, of supposing
the Almighty would make use of means that would not answer the purpose for
which they were intended, even if they were real.

If we are to suppose a miracle to be something so entirely out of the course
of what is called nature, that she must go out of that course to accomplish it;
and we see an account given of such miracle by the person who said he saw it,
it raises a question in the mind very easily decided, which is, Is it more
probable that nature should go out of her course, or that a man should tell a
lie? We have never seen, in our time, nature go out of her course, but we have
good reason to believe that millions of lies have been told in the same time;
it is therefore at least millions to one, that the reporter of a miracle tells
a lie.

The story of the whale swallowing Jonah, though a whale is large enough to do
it, borders greatly on the mavelous; but it would have approached nearer to
the idea of a miracle, if Jonah had swallowed the whale. In this, which may
serve for all cases of miracles, the matter would decide itself as before
stated, namely, Is it more probable that a man should have swallowed a whale,
or told a lie?

But supposing that Jonah had really swallowed the whale, and gone with it in
his belly to Nineveh, and to convince the people that it was true, have cast it
up in their sight of the full length and size of a whale, would they not have
believed him to have been the devil instead of a prophet? or, if the whale had
carried Jonah to Nineveh, and cast him up in the same public manner, would they
not have believed the whale to have been the devil, and Jonah one of his imps?

The most extraordinary of all the things called miracles, related in the New
Testament, is that of the devil flying away with Jesus Christ, and carrying him
to the top of a high mountain; and to the top of the highest pinnacle of the
temple, and showing him, and promising to him all the kingdoms of the world.
How happened it that he did not discover America? or is it only with kingdoms
that his sooty highness has any interest?

I have too much respect for the moral character of Christ, to believe that he
told this whale of a miracle himself; neither is it easy to account for what
purpose it could have been fabricated, unless it were to impose upon the
connoisseurs of miracles, as is sometimes practiced upon the connoisseurs of
Queen Anne's farthings, and collectors of relics and antiquities; or to render
the belief of miracles ridiculous, by outdoing miracle, as Don Quixote outdid
chivalry; or to embarrass the belief of miracles by making it doubtful by what
power, whether of God, or of the devil, any thing called a miracle was
performed. It requires, however, a great deal of faith in the devil to believe
this miracle.

In every point of view, in which those things called miracles can be placed
and considered, the reality of them is improbable, and their existence
unnecessary. They would not, as before observed, answer any useful purpose,
even if they were true; for it is more difficult to obtain belief to a miracle,
than to a principle evidently moral, without any miracle. Moral principle
speaks universally for itself. Miracle could be but a thing of the moment, and
seen but by a few; after this, it requires a transfer of faith, from God to
man, to believe a miracle upon man's report. Instead therefore of admitting the
recitals of miracles, as evidence of any system of religion being true, they
ought to be considered as symptoms of its being fabulous. It is necessary to
the full and upright character of truth, that it rejects the crutch; and it is
consistent with the character of fable, to seek the aid that truth rejects.
Thus much for mystery and miracle.

As mystery and miracle took charge of the past and the present, prophecy took
charge of the future, and rounded the tenses of faith. It was not sufficient to
know what had been done, but what would be done. The supposed prophet was the
supposed historian of times to come; and if he happened, in shooting with a
long bow of a thousand years, to strike within a thousand miles of a mark, the
ingenuity of posterity could make it point blank; and if he happened to be
directly wrong, it was only to suppose, as in the case of Jonah and Nineveh,
that God had repented himself, and changed his mind. What a fool do fabulous
systems make of man!

It has been shown in a former part of this work, that the original meaning of
the words prophet and prophesying has been changed, and that a prophet, in the
sense the word is now used, is a creature of modern invention; and it is owing
to this change in the meaning of the words, that the flights and metaphors of
the Jewish poets, and phrases and expressions now rendered obscure by our not
being acquainted with the local circumstances to which they applied at the time
they were used, have been erected into prophecies, and made to bend to
explanations at the will and whimsical conceits of sectaries, expounders, and
commentators. Every thing unintelligible was prophetical, and every thing
insignificant was typical. A blunder would have served for a prophecy; and a
dish-clout for a type.

If by a prophet we are to suppose a man, to whom the Almighty communicated
some event that would take place in future, either there were such men, or
there were not. If there were, it is consistent to believe that the event, so
communicated, would be told in terms that could be understood; and not related
in such a loose and obscure manner as to be out of the comprehension of those
that heard it, and so equivocal as to fit almost any circumstance that might
happen afterward. It is conceiving very irreverently of the Almighty to
suppose he would deal in this jesting manner with mankind: yet all the things
called prophecies, in the book called the Bible, come under this description.

But it is with prophecy, as it is with miracle. It could not answer the
purpose even if it were real. Those to whom a prophecy should be told, could
not tell whether the man prophesied or lied, or whether it had been revealed to
him, or whether he conceited it: and if the thing that he prophesied, or
pretended to prophesy, should happen, or something like it among the multitude
of things that are daily happening, nobody could again know whether he foreknew
it, or guessed at it, or whether it was accidental. A prophet, therefore, is a
character useless and unnecessary; and the safe side of the case is, to guard
against being imposed upon by not giving credit to such relations.

Upon the whole, mystery, miracle, and prophecy, are appendages that belong to
fabulous and not to true religion. They are the means by which so many Lo
here is! and Lo there is! have been spread about the world, and religion been made
into a trade. The success of one impostor gave encouragement to another, and
the quieting salvo of doing some good by keeping up a pious fraud, protected
them from remorse.

Having now extended the subject to a greater length than I first intended, I
shall bring it to a close by abstracting a summary from the whole.

First, That the idea or belief of a word of God existing in print, or in
writing, or in speech, is inconsistent in itself for the reasons already
assigned. These reasons, among many others, are the want of an universal
language; the mutability of language; the errors to which translations are
subject; the possibility of totally suppressing such a word; the probability of
altering it, or of fabricating the whole, and imposing it upon the world.

Secondly, That the creation we behold is the real and ever existing word of
God, in which we cannot be deceived. It proclaims his power, it demonstrates
his wisdom, it manifests his goodness and beneficence.

Thirdly, That the moral duty of man consists in imitating the moral goodness
and beneficence of God manifested in the creation toward all his creatures.
That seeing, as we daily do, the goodness of God to all men, it is an example
calling upon all men to practice the same toward each other, and consequently
that every thing of persecution and revenge between man and man, and every
thing of cruelty to animals is a violation of moral duty.

I trouble not myself about the manner of future existence. I content myself
with believing, even to positive conviction, that the power that gave me
existence is able to continue it, in any form and manner he pleases, either
with or without this body; and it appears more probable to me that I shall
continue to exist hereafter, than that I should have had existence, as I now
have, before that existence began.

It is certain that, in one point, all nations of the earth, and all religions
agree. All believe in a God. The things in which they disagree, are the
redundancies annexed to that belief; and therefore, if ever an universal
religion should prevail, it will not be believing any thing new, but in getting
rid of redundancies, and believing as man believed at first. Adam, if ever
there was such a man, was created a Deist; but in the mean time let every man
follow, as he has a right to do, the religion and the worship he prefers.

THE END.

