HISTORY OF SOME OF THE EFFECTS OF HARD DRINKING.

THE SIXTH EDITION.

By J. C. LETTSOM, M.D. F.R.S. AND F.S.A.

LONDON: PRINTED BY W. DARTON AND CO. NO. 55, GRACECHURCH-STREET; AND SOLD BY
C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY.

M.DCC.XCL.

PREFACE.
IN the first volume of the "Memoirs of the Medical Society of London," I
described some of the unhappy effects of the too free indulgence of strong
liquors. My opinions have been disseminated by insertion into many public
prints, both at home and abroad; and I have reason to conclude, have been
productive of essential benefit to the community. To render this benefit still
more extensive, I have reprinted that part of the original essay, more
immediately applicable to the pernicious use of these liquors, to which I have
added some farther cautions; and likewise a moral and physical Thermometer, the
hint of which was suggested by a friend abroad. It is formed to convey, by a
glance of the eye, the sentiments I wish to impress upon the reader.

LONDON, April 1789.

JOHN COAKLEY LETTSOM.

This little Performance was originally printed to give away; but the Demands
becoming very numerous, I have applied it to the Benefit of the PHILANTHROPIC
SOCIETY, institued "for the Prevention of Crimes, and for a Reform in the
Manners of the rising Poor."

The general Outlines of the Plan adopted by the Society, are to take miserable
and destitute Children from poor depraved Parents, and from the resorts of
wicked People, to cloth, feed, and educate them as Orphans; and thus by a
total separation from their abominable connections, and a redemption from the
lowest depths of distress, to restore them to civil community, to which they
were either lost, or known only as its burdens, nuisances, and plunderers.

ALTHOUGH this Society has been but a few months established, there are already
placed under the care of proper persons, in hired houses, conveniently situated
at HACKNEY, several Children of both sexes, who a few weeks since were
inhabitants of the most miserable abodes of vice and want; but are now enjoying
the blessings of a new life, heightened by the prospects of acquiring an
honorable support by their own industry.

HISTORY OF SOME OF THE EFFECTS OF HARD DRINKING.
AFTER introducing the want of appetite for food arising from the indulgence of
drinking strong liquors, I cannot well dismiss the subject, without adverting
more fully to its painful influence upon the constitution, which I have
observed with more anxiety, as the sufferers are often those of the more
delicate part of the female sex, whose habits of intemperance are not
unfrequently introduced by those who should have been the guardians of their
health.

THE miseries entailed by these indulgences, differ much as to their progress
and violence, and even the symptoms vary so much, as to admit of obvious
distinctions.

THE first I shall notice, as being generally less painful, though equally
permanent, are the symptoms more especially attendant on persons who have,
early in life, habituated themselves to drink freely of wine of various kinds,
and from their situations in life, undergone a change of climate, as from
Europe to the Indies, etc. Punch-drinkers, likewise, have been liable to
similar complaints. The first appearance of disease is loss of appetite, which
at length is so weakened and vitiated,, that after taking food, before the
return of the next meal, a kind of heavy pain of the stomach, with a
constriction of the muscles of the abdomen, come on, and with a slight effort,
a sweetish, brackish, or acid fluid, is thrown up, and the pain and
constriction for a short time subside. For several years in this unhappy state,
the patient drags on a life, rendered now and then more supportable, either by
renewed potations, or exputations, till at length the bodily and mental powers
become impaired: the object grows emaciated, the whole body shrinks; neither
swelling nor dropsy appear, though the countenance looks sallow; the region of
the liver is not enlarged, and the liver itself seems less than natural: the
urine is not very high colored; the faeces are hard and dark-colored; the
stomach will take and retain food, but after receiving it, it is oppressed, and
feels tightened or contracted in its dimensions; the patient expresses it, as
if it were tied by a straight bandage; the same sensation affects the
intestines, and the abdomen suffers such irregular constrictions, as become
evident to the external touch, the muscles being drawn into irregular action,
the surface of the belly is diversified with protuberances and cavities:
sometimes the spasmodic strictures run transversely, and raise this surface
like waves of the sea. The pain continues increasing to such excess, that the
miserable sufferer is obliged to press against a table or some hard body, to
mitigate his distress, till vomiting brings a respite; or he hastens this
operation, by thrusting his finger into the throat; and thus relieves himself
till the next reception of nourishment, when the same tragedy is repeated. The
matter discharged is thin, acrid, sour, sweet, or brackish. Sometimes, instead
of constipation, an occasional purging ensues, and mitigates the pain, whilst
it subdues the constitution; and after years of misery, the victim slides into
a fatal decay; but long before this, the powers of the mind have been
debilitated, and its recollection and actions impaired.

THE second train of distressful symptoms which I shall relate, more generally
succeed the free use of spirits, or of wines with the admixture of spirits, as
Madeira; and especially where late hours and illicit amors have been
superadded.

THE early symptoms of complaint are, a pain and oppression about the pit of
the stomach after eating, or distension from fluids; this pain extends to the
breast and shoulders; there are frequent eructations of wind, which seem to
burn the throat as they ascend; these symptoms, which are usual in affections
of the liver, and particularly in bilious effusions, are at first so trivial,
as seldom to alarm the fears of the patient, or he slightly mentions them as
symptoms of the gout, whilst he attempts to avert the present suffering, by
indulging more freely in the very cause of the mischief, till repeated fillips
of raw spirits, or a dilution of the poison, render existence miserable.

THE appetite now totally fails, but an insatiable thirst continues, and if it
be not supplied with an exhilarating cordial, the vital spirits instantly flag,
and such horrors take place as are dreadful even to a bye-stander; the poor
victim is so depressed, as to fancy a thousand imaginary evils; he expects
momentarily to expire, and starts up suddenly from his seat; walks wildly about
the room; breathes short, and seems to struggle for breath; if these horrors
seize him in bed, when waking from slumber, he springs up like an elastic body,
with a sense of suffocation, and the horrors of frightful objects around him;
at the same time the pain of the stomach continues and augments; the fight of
wholesome plain food gives disgust, instead of appetite; drink is his cry; or
if hunger is excited, it is after high-seasoned, salt, or acrid nourishment.

AT this time, if a dropsy, or fatal jaundice, do not terminate existence, the
legs shrink, are swarthy-coloured like the rest of the body, and sometimes
purple spots appear and disappear for many months; the extremities feel sore to
the touch, and upon scratching them, exude blood: the thighs likewise shrink;
but the body, and particularly about the region of the liver, enlarges, and the
hardness of the liver may be frequently traced: the face is nearly
copper-coloured, is emaciated, sometimes with little suppurations, which dry
and turn scaly; the breath smells like rotten apples, and the morbus niger, or
vomitings of a fluid like that of coffee-grounds, snatch the patient from
complicated misery. Sometimes a purging, or bloody discharges, hasten the
catastrophe.

THE third train of symptoms to be described, is not consined to age or sex,
but is in general more frequently the attendant of the female sex.

THE persons liable to the symptoms, have been those of delicate habits, who
have endeavored to overcome the nervous debility, by the aid of spirits: many
of these have begun the use of these poisons from persuasion of their utility,
rather than from the love of them: the relief, however, being temporary, to
keep up their effects, frequent access is had to the same delusion, till at
length what was taken by compulsion, gains attachment, and a little drop of
brandy, or gin and water, becomes as necessary as food; the female sex, from
natural delicacy, acquire this custom by slow degrees, and the poison being
admitted in small doses, is slow in its operations, but not less painful in its
effects.

THE soberer class of tradesmen, also, who occasionally indulge in their
sixpenny-worth of brandy and water, gradually slide into the same unhappy
habits, and entail upon their constitutions the same misery, which I shall now
introduce.

THE first appearance of indisposition very much resembles what has been last
described; and under the deception of the gout, the fuel is heaped upon the
fire, till the delusion has been too long maintained to admit of retreat: in
general, at least, the attachment to the use of spirituous drinks, becomes so
predominant, that neither threats nor persuasions are powerful enough to
overcome it. The miserable sufferer is so infatuated, as, in spite of locks and
keys, to bribe by high rewards the dependent nurse, privately to procure it.

BUT the concluding symptoms are very different from either of the foregoing
histories: frequently, indeed, the appetite for food vanishes, but sometimes
continues voracious; and, at the same time, whilst the body is costive, and no
vomiting ensues, the lower extremities grow more and more emaciated; the legs
become as smooth as polished ivory, and the soles of the feet even glassy and
shining, and at the same time so tender, that the weight of the finger excites
shrieks and moaning; and yet I have known, that in a moment's time, heavy
pressure has given no uneasiness. The legs, and the whole lower extremities,
lose all power of action; wherever they are placed, there they remain till
moved again by the attendant; the arms and hands acquire the same palsied
state, and the patients are rendered incapable of feeding themselves. Thus for
years they exist, with no material alteration in the size of the body, or
aspect of the countenance.

WHETHER they really undergo the agonies they appear to suffer, I much doubt,
as at this period their minds appear idiotish: they often shriek out with a
vehemence that may be heard at a considerable distance, but upon enquiring
about the seat of pain, they have been vague and indecisive in their answers.
When a cramp comes on the lower extremities, involuntary motions draw up the
legs, and produce the most piercing shrieks: and the features of the face,
altered by convulsive twitchings, excite pain in a spectator. For some months
before they die, these shrieks are more incessant, and as violent as the
strength will admit.

THEY talk freely in the intervals of mitigation, but of things that do not
exist; they describe the presence of their friends, as if they saw realities,
and reason tolerably clear upon false premises.

MOSTLY before they die, they take less food; sometimes a purging succeeds, of
a thin substance, and of a dark green color; sometimes a vomiting of black
matter; but most generally they gradually sink from the accumulation of pain
and debility. There is rarely any fever. They do not, as in the preceding
state, fall into dropsies, but usually become paralytic: the breath is not
offensive, nor is there the same difficulty of breathing, or horror of
suffocation: whether the imperceptible and gradual augmentation in the use of
spirits, is the cause of this difference, I am not certain; but the difference
is considerable, as must appear from their histories, which I have drawn from
actual observation.

I WOULD not, however, infer, that every spirit-drinker acquires the symptoms
of disease above related, or that other diseases do not more frequently succeed
this dangerous habit: liver diseases, of various kinds, it is well known,
usually result from intemperance, and dropsies often succeed; but from some
circumstances in the constitution, or from the mode of indulgence in liquors,
the symptoms I have described have severally occurred where no dropsical
affections have supervened. There is something in sprituous liquors, so
injurious to the human frame, that too much attention cannot be paid in
discouraging the use of them. Many of the unhappy victims I have attended,
ascribe their sufferings to the unguarded advice of some medical practitioner,
who has, under the idea of wine turning sour on the stomach, permitted a little
drop of brandy and water to be substituted; seldom, indeed, a day passes
without introducing me to the sick bed of some deluded object of misery; and it
is from the most decided conviction of the injury, that I would guard every
person from beginning with even a little drop of this fascinating poison, which
once admitted, is seldom, if ever, afterward overcome. Whenever I hear the
patient plead for some substitute for beer or wine, under the supposition of
their turning sour, my fears are alarmed, and my endeavors excited, to pluck
the unsuspicious patient from the brink of destruction; this plea is never
made, till the exhilarating influence of spirit has been experienced; and not a
moment should be lost, in warning such objects of their danger.

SOME, who avoid brandy, have been induced to take rum, from a vulgar opinion,
that it is more oily and balsamic; the argument is erroneous, for what balsamic
qualities can empyreumatic oil contain? Others, who condemn both brandy and
rum, make no objection to gin, because they think it diuretic; but so far from
it, that half the dropsies among the lower classes of the people originate, or,
at least, are confirmed by the use of this spirit; they are all poisons, and
are nearly alike deleterious.

WHEN the effects of spirits on the constitution, have not greatly contaminated
it, beyond the frequent recurrence of sickness and vomiting; after interdicting
spirits altogether, the patient should be allowed to fix upon some one species
of nutriment; and, whatever it is, should be confined to it alone, and that in
the smallest quantities possible, and at regular stated distances, that the
preceding portion may be properly digested, before any addition be allowed:
when the stomach has thus acquired more tone, either some new, or an increase
of the former nutriment, may be admitted.

I ONCE attended a lady, who could not retain any food on the stomach above an
hour or two. I requested her to fix upon some light nourishment that she could
palate, and she mentioned milk: I then restrained her to four table-spoonfuls
of it every six hours, and afterward increased the quantity as the stomach
could bear it. From this she went to broth, and thus gradually acquired such a
state of the stomach, as to bear the usual food of the family; and for four
years past she has enjoyed good health, with the moderate use of a glass of
wine, or beer, but not one drop of spirits.

BUT in some cases, where the habit of drams has been long continued, the total
and sudden omission of them, has sunk the person into irretrievable debility.
Here this pernicious custom must be left off gradually. A man who usually drank
twelve drams a day, being convinced of his approaching misery, took the
resolution to wean himself from this poison; he always drank out of one glass,
into this he daily dropped a drop of sealing-wax; by this means he had twelve
drops less of spirit every day, till, at length, his glass being filled with
wax, his habit was cured.

THE same advantage has been obtained, by taking the dram, or glass of cordial,
out of a quart bottle, which is to be replenished each time with as much water,
and by this means gradually diluting the remaining liquor, till its strength
becomes wholly subdued, and little more than the substituted water remains.

PAINFUL indeed is this truth, that when the indulgence in spirituous liquors
is rendered habitual, it is extremely difficult to overcome. Although the
miserable object is persuaded, that it clouds his reason, debilitates his
mental as well as corporeal faculties, debars him of all the cheerful
gratifications annexed to health and virtue; yet so excessive are the debility
and tremors of the body -- and so horrid is the despondency of the mind after
the exhilarating effects of these liquors have subsided, that without a
perseverance in determined efforts to vanquish this habit, a repetition of the
delusive poison will be indulged, till resolution is too transient and weak to
enable the victim to stop at the precipice, which terminates his painful
existence.

MAY such, however, as have strength of resolution to reflect upon their
danger, be encouraged, by an assurance, that however great the debility may
feel, and strong the idea of dissolution may appear, yet from mere debility
alone, life is not in danger; and this is a certain fact, that the longer and
more frequently the evil habit is resisted, that habit becomes less powerful,
whilst the strength of the constitution proportionally augments, and thereby
renders the victory less difficult than might at first appear; and what
exertions are more interesting and worthy of a rational being, than those which
substitute vigor and health of body, for agitation, tremor, and pain; and
serenity and cheerfulness of mind, for horror, despondency, and suicide?

A MORAL AND PHYSICAL THERMOMETER; OR, A SCALE of the Progress of TEMPERANCE
and INTEMPERANCE.
LIQUORS, with their EFFECTS, in their usual Order.
scale of the effects of temperance and intemperance depicted as a thermometer

TEMPERANCE 70 WATER; Health, Wealth, Serenity of Mind, Reputation, long Life,
and Happiness.
60 Milk and Water; 50 Small Beer; 40 Cider and Perry; Cheerfulness, Strength
and, Nourishment, when taken only at meals, and in moderate Quantities.
30 Wine; 20 Porter; 10 Strong Beer: INTEMPERANCE 0 VICES. DISEASES.
PUNISHMENTS. 10 Punch Idleness; Peevishness; Quarrelling; Fighting; Lying;
Swearing Obscenity; Swindling; Perjury; Burglary; Murder; Suicide.
Sickness; Puking, and Tremors of the Hands in the Morning; Bloatedness;
Inflamed Eyes; Red Nose and Face; Sore and swelled Legs; Jaundice; Pains in the
Limbs, and burning in the Palms of the Hands, and Soles of the Feet; Dropsy;
Epilepsy; Melancholy; Madness; Palsy; Apoplexy; DEATH.
Debt; Black-Eyes; Rags; Hunger; Hospital; Poor-house; Jail; Whipping; The
Hulks; Botany Bay; GALLOWS.
20 Toddy and Crank; 30 Grog, and Brandy and Water;
40 Flip and Shrub; 50 Bitters infused in Spirits; Usquebaugh; Hysteric Water;
60 Gin, Anniseed, Brandy, Rum, and Whisky in the Morning.
70 Do. during the Day and Night.


