THE HISTORY OF Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.

IN A SERIES of LETTERS Published from the ORIGINALS, By the Editor of PAMELA
and CLARISSA.

In SEVEN VOLUMES.

VOL. VI.

LONDON: Printed by S. RICHARDSON, AND DUBLIN, Reprinted, and sold by the
Booksellers. M, DCC, LIII.

THE HISTORY OF Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, Bart.
LETTER I. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Dr. BARTLETT.
Mansfield-house, Thursday, Sept. 14.
YOU will be so good, my dear friend, as to let my neighbors, particularly the
gentlemen you mention, know, that the only reason I forbear paying my
compliments to them, now I am so near, is, because I cannot as yet enjoy their
company with that freedom and ease which I hope in a little while to do. Tell
them, that I purpose, after some particular affairs are determined (which will
for a little while longer engross me) to devote the greatest part of my time to
my native place; and that then I will endeavor to make myself as good a
neighbor, and as social a friend, as they can wish me to be.

On Sunday I had a visit from the two Hartleys.

They gave me very satisfactory proofs of what they were able to do, as well as
willing, in support of the right of the Mansfields to the estate of which they
have been despoiled; and showed me a paper, which nobody thought was in being,
of the utmost consequence in the cause.

On Monday, by appointment, I attended Sir John Lambton. Two lawyers of the
Keelings were with him. They produced their demands. I had mine ready; but
theirs were so extravagant, that I would not produce them: But, taking Sir John
aside, I love not, said I, to affront men of a profession; but I am convinced,
that we never shall come to an understanding, if we consider ourselves as
Lawyers and Clients. I am no lawyer; but I know the strength of my friends
cause, and will risque half my estate upon the justice of it. The Mansfields
will commission me, if the Keelings will you; and we perhaps may do something:
If not, let the Law take its course. I am now come to reside in England. I will
do nothing for myself, till I have done what can be done to make all my friends
easy.

Sir John owned, that he thought the Mansfields had hardships done them. Mr.
Keeling senior, he said, had heard of the paper in the Hartley's hands; and,
praising his honesty, told me in confidence, that he had declared, that if such
a paper could have been produced in time, he would not have prosecuted the
suit, which he had carried. But Sir John said, that the younger Keeling was a
furious young man, and would oppose a compromise on the terms he supposed the
Mansfields would expect to be complied with. But what are your proposals, Sir?

These, Sir John: The Law is expensive; delays may be meditated; appeals may be
brought, if we gain our point. -- What I think it may cost us to establish the
right of the injured, which cannot be a small sum, that will I prevail upon the
Mansfields to give up to the Keelings. I will trust you, if you give me your
honor, with our proofs; and if you and your friends are satisfied with them,
and will consent to establish our right by the form only of a new trial; then
may we be agreed: Otherwise, not. And I leave you and them to consider of it. I
shall hear from you within two or three days. Sir John promised I should; but
hoped to have some talk first with the Hartleys, with whom, as well as with me,
he declared he would be upon honor.

Wednesday Evening.
I HAD a message from Sir John last night, requesting me to dine with him and
the elder Mr. Keeling this day; and to bring with me the two Mr. Hartleys, and
the proofs I had hinted at.

Those gentlemen were so obliging, as to go with me; and took the important
paper with them, which had been deposited with their grandfather, as a common
friend, and contained a recognition of the Mansfields right to the estates in
question, upon an amicable reference to persons long since departed: An
attested copy of which was once in the Mansfields possession, as by a
memorandum that came to hand, but which never could be found. The younger
Keeling was not intended to be there; but he forced himself upon us. He behaved
very rudely. I had once like to have forgot myself. This meeting produced
nothing: But as the father is a reasonable man; as we have obtained a
re-hearing of the cause; as he is much influenced by Sir John Lambton, who
seems convinced; and to whose honor I have submitted an abstract of our
proofs; I am in hopes that we shall be able to accommodate.

I have Bolton's proposals before me. The first child is dead; the second
cannot live many months. He trembles at the proofs he knows we have of his
villainy. He offers, on the death of this second child, to give us possession
of the estate, and a large sum of money (but thought not to be half of what the
superannuated Calvert left) if we will give him general releases. The wretch is
not, we believe, married to the relict of Calvert.

I am loath, methinks, to let him escape the justice which his crimes call for:
But such are the delays and chicaneries of the law, when practisers are found
who know how to perplex an honest pursuer; and as we must have recourse to low
and dirty people to establish our proofs; the vile fellow shall take with him
the proposed spoils: They may not be much more than would be the lawyers part
of the estate, were we to push the litigation.

As to our poor Everard, nothing, I fear, can be done for him, with the men who
are revelling on his spoils. I have seen one of them. The unhappy man has
signed and sealed to his own ruin. He regrets, that a part of the estate which
has been so long in the family and name, should go out of it. What an empty
pride is that of name! The general tenor of his life was not a credit to it;
though he felt not that, till he felt distress. The disgrace is actually
incurred. Does not all the world know his loss, and the winner's triumph? And
if the world did not, can he conceal from himself those vices, the consequences
of which have reduced him to what he is? But perhaps the unhappy man puts a
value upon the name, in compliment to me.

Mention not to him what I write. The poor man is sensible enough of his folly,
to engage pity: Whether from a right sense, or not, must be left to his own
heart.

As to the woman's claim: What in honor can I do, against a promise that he
owns may be proved upon him? He did not condition with her, that she was to be
a spotless woman. If he thought she was so when he solicited her to yield to
his desires, he is the less to be excused: Vile as she comes out to be, he had
proposed to make her as vile, if he had found her not so. He promised her
marriage: Meant he only a promise? She is punished in being what she is: His
punishment cannot be condign, but by his being obliged to perform his promise.
Yet I cannot bear to think that my cousin Grandison should be made, for life,
the dupe of a successful and premeditated villainy; and the less, as, in all
likelihood, the profligate Lord B. would continue to himself, from the merit
with her of having vindicated her claim, an interest in the bad woman's favor,
were she to be the wife of our poor Everard.

But certainly this claim must be prosecuted with a view only to extort money
from my cousin; and they know him to be of a family jealous of its honor. I
think she must be treated with for releases. I could not bear to appear in such
a cause as this, in open court, in support of my cousin, against a promise made
by him. He is of age, and thought to be no novice in the ways of the town. I am
mistaken in Mr. Grandison's spirit, if it did not lead him to think himself
very severely punished, were he to have no other punishment, for those vices,
which were to be expensive to me.

But if I should be able to extricate the unhappy man from this difficulty,
what can next be done for him? The poor remains of his fortune will not support
one who has always lived more than genteelly. Will he be able, think you, to
endure the thoughts of living in a constant state of dependence, however easy
and genteel I should endeavor to make it to him? There may be many ways (in
the public offices, for example) of providing for a broken tradesman: But for a
man who calls himself, and is, a gentleman; who will expect as such to rank
with his employer, who knows nothing of figures, or business of any kind; who
has been brought up in idleness, and hardly knows the meaning of the word
diligence; and never could bear confinement; what can be done for such a one in
the public offices, or by any other employment that requires punctual
attendance?

But to quit this subject, for a more agreeable one.

I have for some time had it in my thoughts to ask you, my dear friend, Whether
your nephew is provided for to your liking and his own? If not, and he would
put it in my power to serve him, by serving myself, I should be obliged to you
for permitting him so to do, and to him, for his consent. I would not affront
him, by the offer of a salary: My presents to him shall be such as befit the
services done: -- Sometimes as my amanuensis; sometimes as a transcriber and
methodizer of Papers and Letters; sometimes in adjusting servants accounts, and
fitting them for my inspection. You need not fear my regard to myself in my
acknowlegements to be made to him (that, I know, will be all your fear); for I
have always considered profusion and parsimony as two extremes, equally to be
avoided. You, my dear Dr. Bartlett, have often enforced this lesson on my mind.
Can it then ever be forgotten by

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, CHARLES GRANDISON?

LETTER II. Signor JERONYMO della PORRETTA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Bologna, Monday, Sept. 15. N. S.
YOUR kind Letters from Lions, my dearest friend, rejoiced us extremely.
Clementina languished to hear from you. How was it possible for you to write
with so much warmth of affection to her, yet with so much delicacy, that a
rival could not take exceptions at it?

She writes to you. It is not for me, it is not for any of us, I think, to say
one word to the principal subject of her Letter. She showed it to me, and to
her mother, only.

Dear creature! Could she be prevailed upon! -- But how can you be asked to
support the family-wishes? Yet if you think them just, I know you will. You
know not Self, when justice and the service of your friend stand in opposition
to it. All that I am afraid of is, that we shall be too precipitate for the
dear creature's head.

Would to God, you could have been my Brother! That was the first desire of my
heart! -- But you will see by her Letter (the least flighty that she has
written of a long time) that she has no thought of that: And she declares to
us, that she wishes you happily married to an Englishwoman. Would to Heaven, we
might plead your example to her!

I will certainly attend you in your England! -- If one thing, that we all
wish, could happen, you would have the whole family, as far as I know. We
think, we talk, of nobody but you. We look out for Englishmen, to do them
honor for your sake.

Mrs, Beaumont is with us. Surely she is your near relation! She advises
caution; but thinks that our present measures are not wrong ones, as we never
can give into my sister's wishes to quit the world. Dear Grandison! love not
Mrs. Beaumont the less for her opinion in our favor.

Mr. Lowther writes to you: I say nothing, therefore, of that worthy man.

I am wished to write more enforcingly to you, on a certain important subject:
But I say, I cannot, dare not, will not.

Dear Grandison, love still your Jeronymo! Your friendship makes life worthy of
my wish. It has been a consolation to me, when every other failed, and all
around me was darkness, and the shadow of death. You will often be troubled
with Letters from me. My beloved, my dearest friend, my Grandison, adieu!

JERONYMO della PORRETTA.

LETTER III. Lady CLEMENTINA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Bologna, Monday, Sept. 15. N. S.
HOW welcome to me was your Letter from Lions! My good Chevalier Grandison, my
heart thanks you for it: Yet it was possible that heart could have been still
more thankful, had I not observed in your Letter an air of pensiveness, though it
is endeavored to be concealed. What pain would it give me to know, that you
suffer on my account! -- But no more in this strain: A complaining one must
take place.

O Chevalier, I am persecuted! And by whom? By my dearest, my nearest friends.
I was afraid it would be so. Why, why, would you deny me your influence, when I
importuned you for it? Why would you not stay among us, till you saw me
professed? Then had I been happy -- In time, I should have been happy! -- Now
am I beset with entreaties, with supplications, from those who ought to
command; -- yet unlawfully, if they did: I presume to think so: Since parents,
though they ought to be consulted in the change of condition, as to the person;
yet surely should not oblige the child to marry, who chooses to be single all
her life. A more cogent reason may be pleaded, and I do plead it to my
relations, as Catholics, as I wish for nothing so much as to assume the veil.
-- But you are a Protestant: You favor not a Divine dedication, and would not
plead for me. On the contrary, you have strengthened their hands! -- O
Chevalier! how could you do so, and ever love me! Did you not know, there was
but one way to escape the grievous consequences of the importunities of those
who justly lay claim to my obedience? -- And they do claim it.

And in what forcible manner, claim it! -- Shall I tell you? Thus, then: My
father, with tears in his eyes, beseeches me! My mother gently reminds me of
what she has suffered for me in my illness; and declares, that it is in my
power to make the rest of her days happy: Nor shall she think my own
tranquillity of mind secured, *till I oblige her! -- O Chevalier! what pleas are
these from a father, whose eyes plead more strongly than words: and from a
mother, on whose bright days I cast a cloud! -- The Bishop pleads: How can a
Catholic Bishop plead, and not for me? The General declares, that he never
wooed his beloved wife for her consent with more fervor than he does me for
mine, to oblige them all. Nay, Jeronymo! Blush, sisterly love! to say it --
Jeronymo, your friend Jeronymo, is solicitous on the same side -- Even Father
Marescotti is carried away by the example of the Bishop. -- Mrs. Beaumont
argues with me in their favor. -- And Camilla, who was ever full of your
praises, teazes me continually.

They name not the man: They pretend to leave me free to choose through the
world. They plead, that, zealous as they are in the Catholic faith, they were
so earnest for me to enter into the state, that they were desirous to see me
the wife even of a Protestant, rather than I should remain single: And they
remind me, that it was owing to my scruple only, that this was not effected. --
But why, why will they weaken rather than strengthen my scruple? Could I have
got over three points -- The sense of my own unworthiness, after my mind had
been disturbed; The insuperable apprehension, that, drawn aside by your Love, I
should probably have ensnared my own Soul: and that I should be perpetually
lamenting the certainty of the loss of his whom it would be my duty to love as
my own; their importunity would hardly have been wanted.

Tell me advise me, my good Chevalier, my fourth brother (You are not Now
interested in the debate) if I may not lawfully stand out? Tell me, as I know
that I cannot answer their views, except I marry, and yet cannot consent to
marry, whether I may not as well sequester myself from the world, and insist
upon so doing?

What, what can I do? -- I am distressed -- O thou, my Brother, my Friend, whom
my heart ever must hold dear, advise me! To you I have told them I will appeal.
They are so good as to promise to suspend their solicitations, if I will hold
suspended my thoughts of the veil till I have your advice. -- But give it not
against me -- If you ever valued Clementina,

Give it not against her!

LETTER IV. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Lady CLEMENTINA.
London, Monday, Sept. 18 -- 29.
WHAT can I say, most excellent of women, to the contents of the Lerter you
have honored me with? What a task have you imposed upon me! You take great,
and, respecting your intentions, I will call it, kind care, to let me know that
I can have no interest in the decision of the case you refer to me. I repeat my
humble acquiescence; but must again declare, that it would have been next to
impossible to do so, had you not made a point of conscience of your scruples.

But what weight is my advice likely to have with a young Lady, who repeatedly,
in the close of her Letter, desires me not to give it for her parents?

I, madam, am far from being unprejudiced in this case. For can the man who
once himself hoped for the honor of your hand, advise you against Marriage? --
Are not your parents generously indulgent, when they name not any particular
person to you? I applaud both their wisdom and their goodness, on this
occasion. Possibly, you guess the man whom they would recommend to your choice:
And I am sure, Lady Clementina would not refuse their recommendation merely
because it was theirs. Nor indeed upon any less reason than an unconquerable
aversion, or a preference to some other Catholic. A Protestant, it seems, it
cannot be.

But let me ask my Sister, my Friend, What answer can I return to the Lady who
had shown, in one instance, that she had not an insuperable aversion to
Matrimony; yet on conscientious reasons refusing one man, and not particularly
favoring any, can scruple to oblige (obey is not the word they use) 'a Father,
who with tears in his eyes beseeches her; a Mother who gently reminds her of
what she has suffered for her; who declares, that it is in her power to make
the rest of her days happy; and who urges a still stronger plea respecting them
both, and the whole family, to engage the attention of the beloved daughter?"
-- O madam, what pleas are those (Let me still make use of your own pathetic
words) from a Father whose eyes plead more strongly than words! and from a
Mother, over whose bright days you had (though involuntarily) cast a cloud! --
Your Brother the Bishop, a man of piety; your Confssor, a man of equal piety;
your two other Brothers, your disinterested Friend Mrs. Beaumont; your faithful
Camilla; all wholly disinterested.' -- What an enumeration against yourself. --
Forbidden, as I am. to give the cause against you, what can I say? Dearest Lady
Clementina, can I, on your own representation, give it for you?

You know, madam, the sacrifice I have made to the plea of your conscience, not
my own. I make no doubt, but parents so indulgent as yours, will yield to your
reasons, if you can plead conscience against the performance of the filial
duty; the more a duty, as it is so gently urged: Nay, hardly urged; but by
tears, and wishes, which the eyes, not the lips, express; and which if you will
perform, your parents will think themselves under an obligation to their child.

Lady Clementina is one of the most generous of women: But consider, madam, in
this instance of prefering your own will to that of the most indulgent of
parents, whether there is not an apparent selfishness, inconsistent with your
general character, even were you to be as happy in a convent, as you propose.
Would you not, in that case, live to yourself, and renounce your parents and
family, as parts of that world which you would vow to despise? -- Dear Lady! I
asked you once before, Is there any thing sinful in a Sacrament? Such all good
Catholics deem Matrimony. And shall I ask you, Whether, as self-denial is held
to be meritorious in your church, there is not a merit in denying yourself in
the case before us, when you can, by performing the filial duty, oblige your
whole family?

Permit me to say, that though a Protestant, I am not an enemy to such
foundations in general. I could wish, under proper regulations, that we had
Nunneneries among us. I would not, indeed, have the obligation upon Nuns be
perpetual: Let them have liberty, at the end of every two or three years, to
renew their vows, or otherwise, by the consent of friends. Celibacy in the
Clergy is an indispensable law of your church: Yet a Cardinal has been allowed
to lay down the purple, and marry. You know, madam, I must mean Ferdinand of
Medicis. Family-reasons, in that case, preponderated, as well at Rome, as at
Florence.

Of all the women I know, Lady Clementina della Porretta should be the last who
should be earnest to take the veil. There can be but two persons in the world,
besides herself, who will not be grieved at her choice. We know their reasons.
The will of her grandfathers, now with God, is against her; and her living
parents, and every other person of her family, those two excepted, would be
made unhappy, if she sequestered herself from the world, and them. Clementina
has charity: She wishes, she once said, to take a great revenge upon Laurana.
Laurana has something to repent of: Let her take the veil. The fondness she has
for the world, a fondness which could make her break through all the ties of
relation, and humanity, requires a check: But are any of those in convents more
pious, more exemplary pious, than Clementina is, out of them?

Much more could I urge on the same side of the question; but what I have urged
has been a task upon me; a task which I could not have performed, had I not
preferred to my own, the happiness of you and your family.

May both earthly and heavenly blessings attend your determination, whatever it
be, prays, dearest madam.

Your ever-faithful Friend, Affectionate Brother, and Humble Servant, CHAPTER
GRANDISON.

LETTER V. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Signor JERONYMO della PORRETTA
London, Sat. Sept. 18-29.
I Have written, my beloved friend, to Lady Clementina; and shall enclose a
copy of my Letter.

I own, that, till I received hers, I thought there was a possibility, though not
a probability, that she might change her mind in my favor. I foresaw that you
would all join, for family-reasons, to press her to marry: And when, thought I,
she finds herself very earnestly urged, it is possible, that she will forego
her scruples, and, proposing some conditions for herself, will honor with her
hand the man whom she has avowedly honored with a place in her heart, rather
than any other. The malady she has been afflicted with, often leaves, for some
time, an unsteadiness in the mind: My absence, as I proposed to settle in my
native country, never more, perhaps, to return to Italy; the high notions she
has of obligation and gratitude; her declared confidence in my honor and
affection; all cooperating, she may, thought I, change her mind; and if she
does, I cannot doubt the favor of her friends. It was not, my Jeronymo,
presumptuous to hope. It was justice to Clementina to attend the event, and to
wait for the promised Letter: But now, that I see you are all of one mind, and
that the dear Lady, though vehemently urged by all her friends to marry some
other man, can appeal to me, only as to her fourth Brother, and a man not
interested in the event -- I give up all my hopes.

I have written accordingly to your dear Clementina; but it could not be
expected, that I should give the argument all the weight that might be given
it: Yet, being of opinion that she was in duty obliged to yield to the
entreaties of all her friends, I have been honest. But surely no man ever was
involved in so many difficult situations as your Grandison; who yet never, by
enterprise or rashness, was led out of the plain path into difficulties so
uncommon.

You wish, my dear friend, that I would set an example to your excellent
sister. I will unbosom my heart to you.

There is a Lady, an English Lady, beautiful as an Angel, but whose beauty is
her least perfection, either in my eyes, or her own: Had I never known
Clementina, I could not have loved her, and only her, of all the women I ever
beheld. It would not be doing her justice, if I could not say, I do love her;
but with a flame as pure as the heart of Clementina, or as her own heart, can
boast. Clementina's distressed mind affected me: I imputed her sufferings to
her esteem for me. The farewell interview denied her, she demonstrated, I
thought, so firm an affection for me, at the same time that she was to me, what
I may truly call, a first Love; that, tho* the difficulties in my way seemed
insuperable. I thought it became me, in honor, in gratitude, to hold myself in
suspense, and not offer to make my addresses to any other woman, till the
destiny of the dear Clementina was determined.

It would look like vanity in me to tell my Jeronymo how many proposals, from
the partial friends of women of rank and merit superior to my own, I thought
myself obliged, in honor to the Ladies themselves, to decline: But my heart
never suffered uneasiness from the uncertainty I was in of ever succeeding with
your beloved sister, but on this Lady's account, I presume not, however, to
say, I could have succeeded, had I thought myself at liberty to make my
addresses to her: Yet, when I suffered myself to balance, because of my
uncertainty with your Clementina, I had hopes, from the interest my two sisters
had with her (her affections disengaged), that, had I been at liberty to make
my addresses to her, I might.

Shall I, my dear Jeronymo, own the truth? -- The two noblest-minded women in
the world, when I went over to Italy, on the invitation of my Lord the Bishop,
held almost an equal interest in my heart; and I was thereby enabled justly,
and with the greater command of myself, to declare to the Marchioness, and the
General, at my last going over, that I held myself bound to you; but that your
sister, and you all, were free. But when the dear Clementina began to show
signs of recovery, and seemed to confirm the hopes I had of her partiality to
me; and my gratitude and attachment seemed of importance to her complete
restoration; then, my Jeronymo, did I content myself with wishing another
husband to the English Lady, more worthy of her than my embarassed situation
could have made me. And when I farther experienced the condescending goodness
of your whole family, all united in my favor; I had not a wish but for your
Clementina.

What a disappointment, my Jeronymo, was her rejection of me! obliged, as I
was, to admire the noble Lady the more for her motives of rejecting me.

And now, my dear friend, what is your wish? -- That I shall set your sister an
example? How can I? Is marriage in my power? There is but one woman in the
world, now your dear Clementina has refused me, that I can think worthy of
succeeding her in my affections, though there are thousands of whom I am not
worthy. And ought that Lady to accept of a man whose heart had been another's,
and that other living, and single, and still honoring him with so much of her
regard, as may be thought sufficient to attach a grateful heart, and occasion a
divided Love? Clementina herself is not more truly delicate than this Lady.
Indeed, Jeronymo, I am ready, when I contemplate my situation, on a supposition
of making my addresses to her, to give up myself, as the unworthiest of her
favor of all the men I know; and she has for an admirer almost every man who
sees her -- Even Olivia admires her! Can I do justice to the merits of both,
and yet not appear to be divided by a double Love? -- For I will own to all the
world, my affection for Clementina; and, as once it was encouraged by her whole
family, glory in it.

You see, my Jeronymo, how I am circumstanced. The example, I fear, must come
from Italy; not from England. Yet say I not this for punctilio-sake: It is not
in my power to set it, as it is in your Clementina's: It would be presumption
to suppose it is, Clementina has not an aversion to the state: She cannot to
the man you have in view, since prepossession in favor of another is over --
This is a hard push upon me. I presume not to say what Clementina will, what
she can do: But she is naturally the most dutiful of children, and has a high
sense of the more than common obligations she owes to parents, to brothers, to
whom she has as unhappily as involuntarily given great distress: Difference in
Religion, the motive of her rejecting me, is not in the question: Filial duty
is an article of Religion.

I do myself the honor of writing to the Marchioness, to the General, to
Father Marescotti, and to Mr. Lowther. May the Almighty perfect your recovery,
my Jeronymo; and preserve in health and spirits the dear Clementina! -- and may
every other laudable wish of the hearts of a family so truly-excellent, be
granted to them! -- prays, my dearest Jeronymo, the friend who expects to see
you in England; the friend who loves you, as he loves his own heart; and
equally honors all of your name; and will, so long as he is

CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER VI. Mrs. REEVES, To Miss BYRON.
Tuesday, Sept. 5.
O My dear cousin! I am now sure you will be the happiest of women! Sir Charles
Grandison made us a visit this very day. -- How Mr. Reeves and I rejoiced to
see him! We had but just before been called upon by a line from Lady G. to
rejoice with her on her brother's happy arrival. He said, he was under
obligation to go to Windsor and Hampshire, upon extraordinary occasions; but he
could not go, till he had paid his respects to us, as well for our own sakes,
as to enquire after your health. He had received, he said, some disagreeable
inimitations in relation to it. We told him, you were not well; but we hoped
not dangerously ill. He said so many kind, tender, yet respectful things of you
-- O my Harriet! I am sure, and so is Mr. Reeves, he loves you dearly. Yet we
both wondered that he did not talk of paying you a visit. But he may have great
matters in hand. -- But what matters can be so great as not to be postponed, if
he loves you? -- and that he certainly does. I should not have known how to
contain my joy before him, had he declared himself your Lover.

He condescendingly asked to see my little boy -- Was not that very good of
him? He would have won my heart by this condescension, had he not had a great
share of it before -- For your sake, my cousin. You know I cannot mean
otherwise: And you know, that, except Mr. Reeves and my little boy, I love my
Harriet better than anybody in the world. Nobody in Northamptonshire, I am
sure, will take exceptions at this.

I thought I would write to you of this kind visit. Be well, now, my dear: All
things, I am sure, will come abou for good: God grant they may! -- I dare say,
he will visit you in Northamptonshire: And if he does, what can be his motive?
Not mere friendship: Sir Charles Grandison is no trisler!

I know you will be sorry to hear that Lady Betty Williams is in great
affliction. Miss Williams has run away with ensign who is not worth a shilling:
He is, on the contrary, over head and cars, as the saying is, in debt. Such a
mere girl! But what shall we say?

Miss Cantillon has made as foolish a step. Lord bless me! I think girls, in
these days, are bewitched. A nominal captain too: Her mother vows, they shall
both starve for her: And they have no other dependence. She cannot live without
her pleasures: Neither can he without his. A Ranelagh sop. Poor wretches! What
will become of them? For everything is in her mother's power, as to fortune.
-- She has been met by Miss Allestree: and looked so shy! so silly! so
slatternly! Unhappy coquettish thing!

Well, but God bless you, my dear! -- My nursery calls upon me: The dear little
soul is so fond of me! Adieu. Compliments to everybody I have so much reason
to love: Mr. Reeves's too. Once more, Adieu.

ELIZA REEVES.

LETTER VII. Miss BYRON, To Mrs. REEVES.
Selby-house, Friday, Sept. 8.
YOUR kind Letter, my dear cousin, has, at the same time, delighted and pained
me. I rejoice in the declared esteem of one of the best of men; and I honor
him for his friendly love expressed to you and my cousin, in the visit he made
you: But I am pained at your calling upon me (in pity to my weakness, shall I
call it? a weakness so ill concealed) to rejoice, that the excellent man, when
he has dispatched all his affairs of consequence, and has nothing elso to do,
may possibly, for you cannot be certain, make me a visit in Northamptonshire.
-- O my cousin! And were his absence, and the apprehension of his being the
husband of another woman, think you, the occasion of my indisposition; that I
must now, that the other affair seems determined in a manner so unexpected, be
bid at once to be well?

Sir Charles Grandison, my dear cousin, may honor us with the prognosticated
visit, or not, as he pleases: But were he to declare himself my Lover, my heart
would not be so joyful as you seem to expect, if Lady Clementina is to be
unhappy. What though the refusal of marriage was hers; was not that refusal the
greatest sacrifice that ever woman made to her superior duty? Does she not
still avow her Love to him? And must he not, ought he not, ever to love her?
And here my pride puts in it is claim to attention -- Shall your Harriet sit
down and think herself happy in a second-place Love? Yet let me own to you, my
cousin, that Sir Charles Grandison is dearer to me than all else that I hold
most dear in this world: And if Clementina could be not un -happy [Happy I have
no notion she can be without him] and he were to declare himself my Lover;
Affectation, be gone! I would say; I will trust to my own heart, and to my
future conduct, to make for myself an interest in his affections, that should
enrich my content; in other words, that should make me more than contented.

But time will soon determine my destiny: I will have patience to wait its
determination. I make no doubt but he has sufficient reasons for all he does.

I am as much delighted, as you could be, at the notice he took of your dear
infant. The brave must be humane: And what greater instance of humanity can be
shown, than for grown persons to look back upon the state they were once
themselves in, with tenderness and compassion?

I am very sorry for the cause of Lady Betty's affliction. Pity! the good Lady
took not -- But I will not be severe, after I have said, that children's faults
are not always originally their own.

Poor Miss Cantillon! -- But she was not under age; and as her punishment was
of her own choosing -- I am sorry, however, for both. I hope, after they have
smarted, something will be done for the poor wretches. Good parents will be
placable; bad ones, or such as have not given good examples, ought to be so.

God continue to you, my dear cousins both, your present comforts, and increase
your pleasures! for all your pleasures are innocent ones; prays

Your ever obliged and affectionate* HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER VIII. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Selby-house, Wedn. Sept, 20. My dearest Lady. G.
DO you know what is become of your brother? My grandmamma Shirely has seen his
Ghost; and talked with it near an hour; and then it vanished. Be not surprised,
my dear creature. I am still in amaze at the account my grandmamma gives us of
its appearance, discourse, and vanishing! Nor was the dear parent in a
resverie. It happened in the middle of the afternoon, all in broad day. Thus
she tells it:

'I was sitting, said she, in my own drawingroom, yesterday, by myself; when,
in came James, to whom it first appeared, and told me that a gentleman desired
to be introduced to me. I was reading Sherlock upon Death, with that
cheerfulness with which I always meditate the subject. I gave orders for his
admittance; and in came, to appearance, one of the handsomest men I ever saw in
my life, in a riding-dress. It was a courteous Ghost: It saluted me; or at
least I thought it did: For it answering to the description that you, my
Harriet, had given me of that amiable man, I was surprised. But, contrary to
the manner of ghosts, it spoke first -- Venerable Lady, it called me; and said,
its name was Grandison, in a voice -- so like what I had heard you spoke of it,
that I had no doubt but it was Sir Charles Grandison himself; and was ready to
fall down to welcome him.

'It took its place by me: You, madam, said it, will forgive this intrusion:
And it made several fine speeches, with an air so modest, so manly -- It had
almost all the talk to itself. I could only bow, and be pleased; for still I
thought it was corporally, and indeed, Sir Charles Grandison. It said, that it
had but a very little while to stay: It must reach, I don't know what place,
that night -- What, said I, will you not go to Selby-house? Will you not see my
daughter Byron? Will you not see her aunt Selby? No, it desired to be excused.
It talked of leaving a packet behind it; and seemed to pull out of its pocket
a parcel of Letters sealed up. It broke the seal, and laid the parcel on the
table before me. It refused refreshment. It desired in a courtly manner, an
answer to what it had discoursed upon -- Made a profound reverence -- and --
vanished.' And now, my dear Lady G. let me repeat my question; What is become
of your brother?

Forgive me, this light, this amusing manner. My grandmamma speaks of this
visit as an appearance, so sudden, and so short, and nobody seeing him but she;
that it gave a kind of amusing levity to my pen, and I could not resist the
temptation I was under to surprise you, as he has done us all. How could he
take such a journey, see nobody but my grandmamma, and fly the country? Did he
do it to spare us, or to spare himself?

The direct truth is this: My grandmamma was sitting by herself, as above:
James told her, as above, that a gentleman desired to be introduced to her. He
was introduced. He called himself by his own name; took her hand; saluted her
-- Your character, madam, and mine, said he, are so well known to each other,
that though I never before had the honor of approaching you, I may presume upon
your pardon for this intrusion.

He then launched out in the praises of your happy friend. With what delight
did the dear, the indulgent parent repeat them from his mouth! I hope she
mingled not her own partialities with them, whether I deserved them, or not;
for sweet is praise, from those we wish to love us. And then he said, You see
before you, madam, a man glorying in his affection to one of the most excellent
of your Sex; an Italian Lady; the pride of Italy! And who, from motives which
cannot be withstood, has rejected him, at the very time that all her friends
consenting, and innumerable difficulties overcome, he expected that she would
yield her hand to his wishes -- And they were his wishes. My friendship for the
dear Miss Byron (You and she must authorize me to call it by a still dearer
name, before I dare to it) is well known: That also has been my pride. I know
too well what belongs to female delicacy in general, and particularly to that
of Miss Byron, to address myself first to her, on the subject which occasions
you this trouble. I am not accustomed to make professions, not even to Ladies
-- Is it consistent with your notions of delicacy, madam; Will it be with Mr.
and Mrs. Selby's; to give your interest in favor of a man who is thus
situated? A rejected man! A man who dares, to own, that the rejection was a
disappointment to him; and that he tenderly loved the fair rejecter. If it
will, and Miss Byron can accept the tender of a heart that has been divided,
unaccountably so (the circumstances, I presume, you know) then will you, then
will she, lay me under an obligation that I can only endeavor to repay by the
utmost gratitude and affection. -- But if not, I shall admire the delicacy of
the second refuser, as I do the piety of the first, and, at least, suspend all
thoughts of a change of condition.

Noblest of men -- And my grandmamma was proceeding in high strains, but very
sincere ones; when, interrupting her, and pulling out of his pocket the packet
I mentioned above; I presume, madam, said he, that I see favor and goodness to
me in your benign countenance: But I will not even be favored, but upon your
full knowledge of all the facts I am master of myself. I will be the guardian
of the delicacy of Miss Byron and all her friends in this important case,
rather than the discourager, though I were to suffer by it. You will be so good
as to read these Letters to your daughter Byron, to her Lucy, to Mr. and Mrs.
Selby, and to whom else you will think fit to call to the consultation: They
will be those, I presume, who already know something of the history of the
excellent Clementina. If, on the perusal of them, I may be admitted to pay my
respects to Miss Byron, consistently, as I hinted, with her notions and yours
of that delicacy by which she was always directed, and at the same time be
received with that noble frankness which has distinguished her in my eye above
all women but one (Excuse me, madam, I must always put these sister-souls upon
an equal foot of excellence); then shall I be a happier man than the happiest.
Your answer, madam, by pen and ink, will greatly oblige me; and the more, the
sooner I can be favored with it; because, being requested by my friends abroad
to set an example to their beloved Clementina, as you will see in more than one
of these Letters; I would avoid all punctilio, and let them know, that I had
offered myself to Miss Byron, and have not been mortified with absolute denial;
if I may be so happy as to be allowed to write so.

Thus did this most generous of men prevent, by this reference to the Letters,
my grandmamma's heart overflowing to her lips. He should directly, he said,
proceed on his journey to London; and was in such haste to be gone, when he had
said what he had to say, that it precipitated a little my grandmamma's spirits:
But the joy she was filled with, on the occasion, was so great, that she only
had a concern upon her, when he was gone, as if something was left by her
undone or unsaid, which she thought should have been said and done to oblige
him.

The Letters he left on the table, were copies of what he wrote from Lions to
the Marquis and Marchioness, the Bishop, the General, and Father Marescotti; as
also to Lady Ciementina, and her brother, the good Jeronymo These Letters are
omitted in this collection.
. That to the Lady cannot be enough admired, for the tenderness, yet for the
acquiescence with her will expressed in it. Surely they were born for each
other, however it happens, that they are not likely to come together.

A Letter from Signor Jeronymo, in answer to his from Lions, I will mention
next. In this -- Sir Charles is wished to use his supposed influence upon Lady
Clementina (What a hard task upon him! (to dissuade her from the thoughts of
going into a nunnery and to resolve upon marriage See Letter ii.
.

Next is a Letter of Lady Clementina to Sir Charles, complaining tenderly of
persecution from her friends, who press her to marry; while she contends to be
allowed to take the veil, and applies to Sir Charles for his interest in her
behalf.

The next is Sir Charles's reply to Lady Clementina.

Then follows a Letter from Sir Charles to Signor Jeronymo. I have copied these
three last, and enclose them in confidence See Letters iii iv. v.
.

By these you will see, my dear, that the affair between this excellent man and
woman is entirely given up by both; and also in his reply to Signor Jeronymo,
that your Harriet is referred to as his next choice. And how can I ever enough
value him, for the dignity he has given me, in putting it, as it should seem,
in my power to lay an obligation upon him; in making for me my own scruples;
and now, lastly, in the method he has taken in the application to my
grandmamma, instead of to me; and leaving all to our determination. But thus
should the men give dignity, even for their own saken to the women whom they
wish to be theirs. Were there more Sir Charles Grandisons, would not even the
Female world (much better, as I hope it is, than the Male) be amended?

My grandmamma, the moment Sir Charles was gone, sent to us, that she had some
very agreeable news to surprise us with; and therefore desired the whole family
of us, her Byron particularly to attend her at Breakfast, the next morning. We
looked upon one another, at the message, and wondered. I was not well, and
would have excused myself; but my aunt insisted upon my going. Little did I or
anybody else think of your brother having visited my grandmamma in person.
When she acquainted us that he had, my weakened spirits wanted support: I was
obliged to withdraw with Lucy.

I thought I could not bear, when I recovered myself, that he should be so
near, and not once call in, and enquire after the health of the creature for
whom he professed so high an esteem, and even affection: But when, on my return
to company, my grandmamma related what passed between them, and the Letters
were read; then again were my failing spirits unable to support me. They all
gazed upon me, as the Letters were reading, as well as while my grandmamma was
giving the relation of what he said, and of the noble, the manly air with which
he delivered himself. -- With joy and silent congratulation they gazed upon me;
while I felt such a variety of sensibilities in my heart, as I never felt
before, sensibilities mixed with wonder; and I was sometimes ready to doubt
whether I were not in a resverie; whether indeed I was in this world, or
another; whether I was Harriet Byron -- I know not how to describe what I felt
in my now fluttering, now rejoicing, now dejected heart --

Dejected? -- Yes, my dear Lady G. Dejection was a strong ingredient in my
sensibilities. I know not why. Yet may there not be a fullness in joy, that will
mingle dissatisfaction with it? If there may, shall I be excused for my
solemnity, if I deduce from thence an argument, that the human soul is not to
be fully satisfied by worldly enjoyments; and that therefore the completion of
its happiness must be in another, a more perfect state? You Lady G. are a very
good woman, though a lively one; and I will not excuse you, if on an occasion
that bids me look forward to a very solemn event, you will not forgive my
seriousnes -- That bids me look forward, I repeat; for Sir Charles Grandison
cannot alter his mind: The world has not wherewith to tempt him to alter it,
after he has made such advances, except I misbehave.

Well, my dear, and what was the result of our conference? -- My grandmamma, my
aunt, and Lucy, were of opinion, that I ought no more to revolve the notions of
a divided or second-placed Love: That every point of female delicacy was
answered: That he ought not only still to be allowed to love Lady Clementina,
but that I and all her Sex should revere her: That my grandmamma, being the
person applied to, should answer for me, for us all, in words of her own
choosing.

I was silent. What think you, my dear, said my aunt? with her accustomed
tenderness.

Think! said my uncle, with his usual facetiousness; Do you think, if Harriet
had one objection, she would have been silent? I am for sending up for Sir
Charles out of hand. Let him come the first day of next week, and let them be
married before the end of it.

Not quite so hasty, neither, Mr. Selby, said my grandmamma, smiling: Let us
send to Mr. Deane. His love for my child, and regard for deserve the most
grateful returns.

What a duce, and defer an answer to Sir Charles, who gives a generous reason,
for the sake of the Lady abroad, and her family (and I hope he thinks a little
of his own sake) for wishing a speedy answer? --

No, Mr. Selby: Not deser writing, neither. We know enough of Mr. Deane's mind
already. But, for my part, I don't know what terms, what conditions, what
additions to my child's fortune, to propose --

Additions! madam -- Why, ay; there must be some, to be sure -- And we are
able, and as willing as able, let me tell you, to make them --

I beseech you, Sir, said I -- Pray, madam -- No more of this -- Surely it is
time enough to talk of these subjects.

So it is, niece. Mr. Deane is a lawyer. God help me! I never was brought up to
anything but to live on the fat of the land, as the saying is. Mr. Deane and
Sir Charles shall talk this matter over by themselves. Let us, as you say, send
for Mr. Deane. But I will myself be the messenger of these joyful tidings.

My uncle then tuned out, in his gay manner, a line of an old song; and then
said, I Will go to Mr. Deane: I will set out this very day -- Pull down the wall,
as one of our kings said; the door is too far about. -- I Will bring Mr. Deane
with me tomorrow, or it shall cost me a fall.

You know my uncle, my dear. In this manner did he express his joy.

My grandmother retired to her closet; and this that follows is what she wrote
to Sir Charles. Everybody is pleased whenever she takes up the pen. No one made
objection to a single word in it.

Dear Sir,
REserve would be unpardonable on our side, though the woman's, to a man who is
above reserve, and whose offers are the result of deliberation, and an
affection, that, being founded in the merit of our dearest child, cannot be
doubted. We all receive as an honor the offer you make us of an alliance which
would do credit to families of the first rank. It will perhaps be one day owned
to you, that it was the height of Mr. Selby's wishes and mine, that the man who
had rescued the dear createre from insult and distress, might be at liberty to
entitle himself to her grateful Love.

The noble manner in which you have explained yourself on a subject which has
greatly embarrassed you, has abundantly satisfied Mrs. Selby, Lucy, and myself:
We can have no scruples of delicacy. Nor am I afraid of suffering from yours by
my frankness. But, as to our Harriet -- You may perhaps meet with some (not
affectation; she is a ove it) difficulty with her, if you expect her whole
heart to be yours. She, Sir, experimentally knows how to allow for a double, a
divided Love -- Dr. Bartlett, perhaps should not have favored her with the
character of a Lady whom she prefers to herself; and Mrs. Selby and I have
sometimes, as we read her melancholy story, thought, not unjustly. If she can
be induced to love, to honor, the man of her choice, as much as she loves,
honors, and admires Lady Clementina; the happy Man will have reason to be
satisfied. You see, Sir, that we, who were able to give a preference to the
same Lady against ourselves (Harriet Byron is ourself) can have no scruples on
your giving it to the same incomparable woman. May that Lady be happy! If she
were not to be so, and her unhappiness were to be owing to our happiness; that,
dear Sir, would be all that could pain the hearts of any of us, on an occasion
so very agreeable to

Your sincere Friend and Servant, HENRIETTA SHIRLEY.


But, my dear Lady G. does your brother tell you and Lady L. nothing of his
intentions? Why, if he does, do not you -- But I can have no doubt. Is not the
man Sir Charles Grandison? And yet, methinks, I want to know what the contents
of his next Letters from Italy will be.

You will have no scruple, my dear Lady G. to show my whole Letter to Lady L.
and, if you please, to my Emily -- But only mention the contents, in your own
way, to the gentlemen. I beg you will yourself show it to Mrs. Reeves: She will
rejoice in her prognostigations. Use that word to her: She will understand you.
Your brother must now, less than ever, see what I write. I depend upon your
discretion, my dear Lady G.

HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER IX. Lady G. To Miss BYRON.
Wedn. Sept. 23.
EXcellent Mrs. Shirley! Incomparable woman! How I love her! If I were such an
excellent ancient, I would no more wish to be young, than she has so often told
us, she does. What my brother once said, and you once wrote to your Lucy, is
true (in her case, at least); that the matronly and advanced time of life, in a
woman, is far from being the least elegible part of it; especially, I may add,
when health and a good conscience accompany it. What a spirit does she, at her
time of Life, write with! -- But her heart is in her subject -- I hope I may
say that, Harriet, without offending you.

Not a word did my brother speak of his intention, till he received that
Letter; and then he invited Lady L. and me, and our two honest men, to
afternoon tea with him -- [O but I have not reckoned with you for your saucy
rebukes in your last of the 7th; I owe you a spite for it; and, Harriet, depend
on payment -- What was I writing? -- I have it -- ] And when tea was over, he,
without a blush, without looking down, as a girl would do in this situation --
[But why so, Harriet? Is a woman, on these occasions, to act a part as if she
supposed herself to be the greatest gainer by matrimony; and therefore was
ashamed of consenting to accept of an honorable offer? As if, in other words,
she was to be the self-denying receiver rather than conferrer of an obligation?
-- Lord, how we rambling-headed creatures break in upon ourselves!] with a good
grace he told us of his intention to marry; of his apparition to Mrs. Shirley;
of his sudden vanishing; and all that -- And then he produced Mrs. Shirley's
Letter, but just received.

And do you think we were not overjoyed? -- Indeed we were. We congratulated
him: We congratulated each other: Lord L. looked as he did when Caroline gave
him his happy day: Lord G. could not keep his seat: He was tipsy, poor man,
with his joy: Aunt Nell prank'd herself, stroked her ribbands of pink and
yellow, and chuckled and mumped for joy, that her nephew at last would not go
out of Old England for a wife. She was mightily pleased too with Mrs. Shirley's
Letter. It was just such a one as she herself would have written upon the
occasion.

I posted afterward to Mrs Reeves, to show her, as you requested, your Letter:
And when we had read it, there was, Dear Madam, and, Dear Sir; and now this,
and now that; and Thank God -- three times in a breath; and we were cousins,
and cousins, and cousins: And, O blessed! And, O be joyful! And -- Hail the
day! -- And, God grant it to be a short one! -- And, How will Harriet answer to
the question? Will not her frankness be tried? He despises affectation: So he
thinks does she! -- Good Sirs! and, O dears -- How things are brought about! --
O my Harriet! you never heard or saw such congratulations between three
gossips, as were between our two cousin Reeves's and me: And not a little did
the good woman pride herself in her prognostics; for she explained that matter
to me.

Dr. Bartlett is at Grandison-hall, with our unhappy cousin. How will the good
man rejoice!

Now you will ask, What became of Emily? --

By the way, do you know that Mrs. O-Hara is turned Methodist? True as you are
alive. And she labors hard to convert her husband. Thank God she is anything
that is serious! Those People have really great merit with me, in her
conversion. -- I am sorry that our own Clergy are not as zealously in earnest
as they, They have really, my dear, if we may believe aunt Eleanor, given a
face of religion to subterranean colliers, tinners, and the most profligate of
men, who hardly ever before heard either of the word, or thing. But I am not
turning Methodist, Harriet. No! you will not suspect me.

Now Emily, who is at present my visiter, had asked leave before my brother's
invitation (and was gone, my Jenny attending her) to visit her mother, who is
not well. My brother was engaged to sup abroad with some of the Danby's, I
believe: I therefore made Lord and Lady L. cousin Reeves and cousin Reeves, and
my aunt Grandison, sup with me.

Emily was at home before me -- Ah the poor Emily! -- I Will tell you how it was
between us --

My lovely girl, my dear Emily, said I, I have good news to tell you, about
Miss Byron.

O thank God -- And is she well? Pray, madam, tell me, tell me; I long to hear
good news of my dear Miss Byron.

Why, she will shortly be married, Emily! --

Married, madam! --

Yes, my love! -- And to your guardian, child! --

To my guardian, madam! -- Well, but I hope so --

I then gave her a few particulars.

The dear girl tried to be joyful, and burst into tears!

Why weeps my girl -- O fie! Are you sorry that Miss Byron will have your
guardian? I thought you loved Miss Byron.

So I do, madam, as my own self, and more than myself, if possible -- But the
surprise, madam -- Indeed I am glad! What makes me such a fool? -- Indeed I am
glad! -- What ails me, to cry, I wonder! It is what I wished, what I prayed
for, night and day. Dear madam, don't tell anybody. I am ashamed of myself,

The sweet April-faced girl then smiled through her tears.

I was charmed with her innocent sensibility; and if you are not, I shall think
less of you than ever I did yet.

Dear madam, said she, permit me to withdraw for a few minutes: I must have my
cry out -- And I shall then be all joy and gladness.

She tript away; and in half an hour came down to me with quite another face.

Lady L. was then with me. I had told her of the girl's emotion. We are equally
lovers of you, my dear, said I: you need not be afraid of Lady L.

And have you told, madam? -- Well, but I am not a hypocrite. What a strange
thing! I who have always been so much afraid of another Lady, for Miss Byron's
sake, to be so oddly affected, as if I were sorry! -- Indeed I rejoice. -- But
if you tell Miss Byron, she will not love me: She will not let me live with her and
my guardian, when she is happy, and has made him so. And what shall I do then?
for I have set my heart upon it.

Miss Byron, my dear, loves you so well, that she will not be able to deny you
anything your heart is set upon, that is in her power to grant.

God bless Miss Byron as I love her, and she will be the happiest of women! --
But what was the matter with me? -- Yet I believe I know! -- My poor mother had
been crying sadly to me, for her past unhappy life. She kissed me, as she said,
for my Father's sake: She had been the worst of wives to the best of husbands.

Again the good girl wept at her mother's remembered remorse -- My guar -- my
guardian's goodness, my mother said, had awakened her to a sense of her
wickedness. My poor mother did not spare herself: And I was all sorrow; for
what could I say to her on such a subject? -- And all the way that I came home
in the coach, I did nothing but cry. I had but just dried my eyes, and tried to
look cheerful, when you came in. And then, when you told me the good news,
something struck me all at once, struck my very heart; I cannot account for it:
I know not what to liken it to -- And had I not burst into tears. I believe it
would have been worse for me. But now I am myself; and if my poor mother could
pacify her conscience, I should be a happy creature -- because of Miss Byron's
happiness. You look at each other, Ladies: But if you think I should not, bid
me be gone from your presence for a false girl, and never see you more.

Now, Harriet, this emotion of Emily appears to me as a sort of phenomenon. Do
you account for it as you will; but I am sure Emily is no hypocrite: She has no
art: She believes what she says, that her sudden burst of tears was owing to
her heart being affected by her mother's contrition: And I am also sure that
she loves you above all the women in the world. Yet it is possible, that the
subtle thief, ycleped Love, had got very near her heart; and just at the moment
threw a dart into one angle of it, which was the something that struck her, all
at once, as she phrased it, and made her find tears a relief. This I know, my
dear, that we may be very differently affected by the same event, when judged
of at a distance, and near. If you don't already, or if you soon will not,
experience the truth of this observation in the great event before you, I am
much mistaken.

But you see, Harriet, what joy this happy declaration of my brother, and the
kind reception it has met with from Northamptonshire, has given us all. We will
keep your secret, never fear, till all is over; and, when it is, you shall let
my brother know, from the Letters we have had the favor of seeing, as much as
we do. Till he does, excellent as he thinks you, he will not know one half of
your excellencies, nor the merit which your Love and your Suspenses have made
you with him.

But, with you, I long for the arrival of the next Letters from Italy. God
grant that Lady Clementina hold her resolution, now that she sees it is almost
impossible for her to avoid marrying. If she should relent, what would be the
consequence, to my brother, to herself, to you! And how shall all we, his
friends and yours, be affected! You think the Lady is obliged, in duty to her
parents, to marry. Lady L. and I are determined to be wise, and not give our
opinions till the events which are yet in the bosom of Fate, disclosing
themselves, shall not leave us a possibility of being much mistaken. And yet,
as to what the filial duty requires of her, we think she ought to marry. Mean
time, I repeat, 'God grant that Lady Clementina now hold her mind!'

LADY L. sends up her name. Formality in her, surely. I will chide her. But
here she comes. -- I love, Harriet, to write to the moment; that is a knack I
had from you and my brother: And be sure continue it, on every occasion: No
pathetic without it!

Your servant, Lady L.

And your servant, Lady G. -- Writing? To whom?

To our Harriet --

I will read your Letter -- Shall I?

Take it; but read it out, that I may know what I have written.

Now give it me again. I Will write down what you say to it, Lady L.

Lady. L. I say you are a whimsical creature. But I don't like what you have
last written.

Charlotte. Last written -- It Is down. -- But why so, Lady L.?

Lady L. How can you thus teaze our beloved Byron, with your conjectural evils?

Chapter Have I supposed an impossibility? -- But it is down -- Conjectural evils.

Lady L. If you are so whimsical, write -- 'My dear Miss Byron -- '

Chapter My dear Miss Byron -- It Is down.

Lady L. (Looking over me) 'Do not let what this strange Charlotte has written,
grieve you: -- '

Chapter Very well, Caroline! -- grieve you. --

Lady L. Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof.'

Chapter Well observed. -- Words of Scripture, I believe. -- Well -- evil thereof.
--

Lady L. Never, surely, was there such a creature as you, Charlotte --

Chapter That Is down, too. --

Lady L. I, that down? laughing -- That should not have been down -- Yet it is
true.

Chapter Yet it is true -- What Is next?

Lady L. Pish --

Chapter Pish --

Lady L. Well, now to Harriet -- 'Clementina cannot alter her resolution; her
objection still subsisting. Her Love for my brother' --

Chapter Hold, Lady L. Too much, at one time -- Her Love for my brother --

Lady L. 'On which her apprehensions that she shall not be able, if she be his
wife' --

Chapter Not so much at once, I tell you: It is too much for my giddy head to
remember -- if she be his wife --

Lady L. -- 'to adhere to her own religion, are founded' --

Chapter -- founded.

Lady L. 'Is a security for her adherence to a resolution so glorious to
herself.'

Chapter Well said, Lady L. -- May it be so, say, and pray, I. -- Any more, Lady L.?

Lady L. 'Therefore' --

Chapter Therefore --

Lady L. 'Regard not the perplexing Charlotte' --

Chapter I thank you* Caroline -- perplexing Charlotte --

Lady L. 'Is the advice of your ever-affectionate Sister, Friend, and Servant.'
--

Chapter So! -- Friend and Servant --

Lady L. Give me the pen. --

Chapter Take another. -- She did -- and subscribed her name, 'C. L.'

With all my heart. Harriet. And here, after I have repeated my hearty wishes,
that nothing of this that I have so sagely apprehended may happen (for I desire
not to be dubbed a witch so much at my own, as well as at your, expense), I
will also subscribe that of

Your no less affectionate Sister, Friend, and Servant, CHARLOTTE G.
My brother says, he has sent you a Letter, and your grandmamma another -- Full
of grateful sensibilities, both, I make no question. -- But no Flight, or
Goddess-making absurdity, I dare say. You will give us copies, if you are as
obliging as you used to be.



LETTER X. Miss BYRON. To Lady G.
Monday, Sept. 25.
WHAT have I done to my Charlotte? Is there not something cold and particular
in your style, especially in that part of your Letter preceding the entrance of
my good Lady L.? And in your Postscript -- You will give us copies, if you are
as obliging as you used to be. -- Why should I, when likely to be more obliged
to you than ever, be less obliging than before? I cannot bear this from Lady G.
Are you giving me a proof of the truth of your own observation? 'That we may be
very differently affected by the same event, when judged of at a distance, and
near.' -- I could not support my spirits, if the sister of Sir Charles
Grandison loved me the less for the distinction her brother pays me.

And what, my dear, if Lady Clementina should RELENT, as you phrase it? My
friends might be now grieved -- Well, and I might be affected too, more than if
the visit to my grandmamma had not been made: I own it. -- But the high
veneration I truly profess to have for Lady Clementina, would be parade and
pretension, if, whatever became of your Harriet, I did not resolve, in that
case, to try, at least, to make myself easy, and give up to her prior and
worthier claim: And I should consider her effort, though unsuccessful, as having
entitled her to my highest esteem. To what we know to be right, we ought to
submit; the more difficult, the more meritorious: And, in this case, your
Harriet would conquer, or die. If she conquered, she would then, in that
instance, be greater than even Clementina. O my dear, we know not, till we have
the trial, what emulation will enable a warm and honest mind to do.

I will send you enclosed, copies of the two Letters transcribed by Lucy These
Letters do not appear. The contents may be gathered from what she here says of
them.
. I am very proud of them both; perhaps too proud; and it may be necessary that
I should be pulled down; though I expected it not from my Charlotte. 'To be
complimented in so noble and sincere a manner as you will see I am, with the
power of laying an obligation on him,' (instead of owing it to his
compassionate consideration for a creature so long laboring in suspense, and
then despairing that her hopes could be answered) is enough at the same time to
flatter her vanity, and gratify the most delicate sensibility.

You will see 'how gratefully he takes my grandmamma's hint, that I knew how by
experience to account for a double, a divided Love, as she is pleased to call
it -- and the preference my aunt, and herself, and I, have given to the claim
of Lady Clementina.' You, my dear, know our sincerity in this particular. There
is some merit in owning a truth when it makes against us. To do justice in
another's case against one's self, is, methinks, making at least a second merit
for one's self. 'He asks my leave to attend me at Selby-house.' -- I should
rejoice to see him -- But I could wish, methinks, that he had first received
Letters from abroad. But how can I hint my wishes to him without implying
either doubt or reserve? -- Reserve in the delay of his visit implied by such
hint; doubt, of his being at liberty to pursue his intentions: That would not
become me to show; as it might make him think that I wanted protestations and
assurances from him, in order to bind him to me; when, if the situation be such
as obliges him to balance but in thought, and I could know it; I would die
before I would accept of his hand. He has confirmed and established, as I may
say, my pride (I had always some) by the distinction he has given me: Yet I
should despise myself, if I found it gave me either arrogance, or affectation.
'He is so considerate as to despense with my answering his Letters;' for he is
pleased to say, 'That if I do not forbid him to come down, by my aunt Selby, or
my grandmamma, he will presume upon my leave.'

My uncle set out for Peterborough, in order to bring Mr. Deane with him to
Selby-house. Poor Mr. Deane had kept his chamber for a week before; yet had not
let us know he was ill. He was forbid to go abroad for two days more; but was
so overjoyed at what my uncle communicated to him, that he said, he was not
sensible of alling anything; and he would have come with my uncle next day,
but neither he nor the doctor would permit it: But on Tuesday he came. -- Such
joy! -- Dear good man! -- Such congratulation! -- How considerable, to their
happiness, do they all make that of their too-too much obliged Harriet!

They have been in consultation often; but they have excluded me from some
particular ones. I guess the subject; and beg of them, that I may not be too
much obliged. What critical situations have I been in! When will they be at an
end.

Mr. Deane has written to Sir Charles. I am not to know the contents of his
Letter. The hearts of us women, when we are urged to give way to a clandestine
and unequal address, or when inclined to favor such a one, are apt, and are
pleaded with, to rise against the notions of bargain and sale. Smithfield
bargains, you Londoners call them: But unjust is the odium, if preliminaries
are necessary in all treaties of this nature. And surely previous stipulations
are indispensably so among us changeable mortals, however promising the
sunshine may be at our setting out on the journey of life; a journey too that
will not be ended but with the life of one of the travelers.

If I ever were to be tempted to wish for great wealth, it would be for the
sake of Sir Charles Grandison; that I might be a means of enlarging his power:
Since I am convinced, that the necessities of every worthy person within the
large circle of his acquaintance, would be relieved, according to his ability.

My dear Emily! -- Ah Lady G.! Was it possible for you to think, that my pity
for the amiable Innocent should not increase my love of her! I will give you
leave indeed to despise me, if you ever find anything in my behavior to
Emily, let me be circumstanced as I will, that shall show an abatement of that
tender affection which ever must warm my heart in her favor. Whenever I can
promise anything for myself, then shall Emily be a partaker of my felicity, in
the way her own heart shall direct. I hope, for her own sake, that the dear
girl puts the matter right, when she attributes her sudden burst of tears to
the weakness of her spirits occasioned by her mother's remorse: But let me say
one thing; It would grieve me as much as it did Sir Charles, in the Count of
Belvedere's case, to stand in the way of any-body's happiness. It is not, you
see, your brother's fault, that he is not the husband of Lady Clementina: She
wishes him to marry an Englishwoman. -- Nor is even the hope of Lady Olivia
frustrated by me. You know I always pitied her; and that before I knew, from
Sir Charles's Letter to Signor Jeronymo, that she thought kindly of me. -- Lady
Anne S.; Do you think, my dear, that worthy Lady could have hopes, were it not
for me? -- And could my Emily have any, were I out of the world? -- No, surely:
The very wardship, which he executes with so much indulgent goodness to her,
would exclude all such hopes, considerable enough as his estate is, to answer a
larger fortune than even Emily's. Were hers not half so much as it is, it would
perhaps be more likely than now, that his generous mind might be disposed in
her favor, some years hence.

Let me, however, tell you, that true sisterly pity overwhelmed my heart, when
I first read that part of your Letter which so pathetically describes her
tender woe. Be the occasion her Duty, or her Love, or owing to a mixture of
both, I am charmed with her beautiful simplicity: I wept over that part of your
Letter for half an hour (for I was by myself); and more than once I looked
round and round me, wishing for the dear creature to be near me, and wanting to
clasp her to my bosom.

Love me still, and that as well as ever, my dear Lady G. or I shall want a
great ingredient of happiness, in whatever situation I may be. I have written
to thank my dear Lady L. for her goodness to me, in dictating to your pen; and
I thank you, my dear, for being dictated to. I cannot be well. Send me but one
line; ease my overburdened heart of one of its anxieties, by telling me that
there has nothing passed of littleness in me, that has abated your love to

Your ever-grateful, ever-affectionate, HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XI. Lady G. To Miss BYRON.
Grosvenor-Square, Wedn. Sept. 27.
FLY, Script, of one line; on the wings of the wind, fly, to acquaint my
Harriet that I love her above all women -- and all men too; my brother
excepted. Tell her, that I now love her with an increased love; because I love
her for his sake, as well as her own.

Forgive, my dear, all the carelessness, as you always did the flippancies, of
my pen. The happy prospect that all our wishes would be succeeded to us, had
given a levity, a wantonness, to it. Wicked pen! -- But I have burnt the whole
parcel from which I took it! -- Yet I should correct myself; for I don't know
whether I did not intend to teaze a little: I don't know whether my compassion
for Emily did not make me more silly. If that were so (for really I suffered my
pen to take its course at the time; therefore burnt it) I know you will the
more readily forgive me.

Littleness, Harriet! You are all that is great and good in woman. The
littleness of others adds to your greatness. Have not my foibles always proved
this? -- No, my dear! you are as great, as -- Clementina herself: And I love
you better, if possible, than I love myself.

A few lines more on other subjects; for I cannot write a short Letter to my
Harriet. --

The Countess of D. has made my brother a visit. I happened to be at his house.
They were alone together near an hour. At going away, he attending her to her
chair, she took my hand; All, all my hopes are over, said she; but I will love
Miss Byron, for all that. Nor shall you, Sir Charles, in the day of your power,
deny me my correspondent: Nor must you, madam, and Lady L. a friendship with
Sir Charles Grandison's two sisters.

Lady W. and my sister and I correspond. I want you to know her, that you may
love her as well as we do. Love-matches, my dear, are foolish things. I know
not how you will find it some time hence: No general rule, however, without
exceptions, you know. Violent Love on one side, is enough in conscience, if the
other be not a fool, or ungrateful: The Lover and Lovee make generally the
happiest couple. Mild, sedate convenience, is better than a stark staring-mad
passion. The wall-climbers, the hedge and ditchleapers, the river-forders, the
window-droppers, always find reason to think so. Who ever hears of darts,
flames, Cupids, Venus's, Adonis's, and suchlike nonsense, in matrimony? --
Passion is transitory; but discretion, which never bois over, gives durable
happiness. See Lord and Lady W. Lord G. and his good woman, for instances

O my mad head! And wh^^ think you, did I mention my corresponding with Lady
W.? -- Only to tell you, and I had like to have forgot it, that she felicitates
me in her last, on the like^ihood of a happy acquisition to our family, from
what my brother communicated of his intention to make his addresses to Somebody
-- I warrant you guess to whom.

Lady Anne S. -- Poor Lady Anne S.! -- I dare not tell my brothet how much she
loves him: I am sure it would make him uneasy.

Beauchamp desires his compliments to you. He is in great affliction. Poor Sir
Harry is thought irrecoverable. Different physicians have gone their rounds
with him: But the new ones only ask what the old ones did, that they may guess
at something else to make trial of. When a patient has money, it is hard, I
believe, for a physician to be honest, and to say, till the last extremity,
That the Parson and Sexton may take him.

Adieu, my love! -- Adieu, all my grandmammas, aunts, cousins, and kin's kin of
Northamptonshire -- Adieu!

CHARLOTTE G.

LETTER XII. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Tuesday, Oct. 3.
A Thousand thanks to you, my dear Lady G. for the favor of your last: You
have re-assured me in it. I think I could not have been happy even in the
affection of Sir Charles Grandison, were I to have found an abatement in the
Love of his two sisters. Who, that knows you both, and that had been favored
with your friendship, could have been satisfied with the least diminution of it?

I have a Letter from the Countess of D This Letter does not appear.
. She is a most generous woman. 'She even congratulates me, on your brother's
account, from the conversation that passed between him and her. She gives me
the particulars of that conversation. Exceedingly flattering are they to my
vanity.' I must, my dear, be happy, if you continue to love me; and if I can
know that Lady Clementina is not unhappy. This latter is a piece of
Intelligence, necessary, I was going to say, for my tranquillity: For can your
brother be happy, if that Lady be otherwise, whose grievous malady could hold
in suspense his generous heart, when he had no prospects at the time, of ever
calling her his?

I pity from my heart Lady Anne S. What a dreadful thing is hopeless Love; the
object so worthy, that every mouth is full of his praises! How many women will
your brother's preference of one, be she who she will, disappoint in their
first Loves! Yet out of a hundred women, how few are there, who, for one
reason, or other, have the man of their choice!

I remember, you once said, It was well that Love is not a passion absolutely
invincible: But, however, I do not, my dear, agree with you in your notions of
all Love-matches. Love merely personal, that sort of Love which commences
between the year of fifteen and twenty; and when the extraordinary merit of the
object is not the foundation of it; may, I believe, and perhaps generally ought
to, be subdued. But Love that is founded on a merit that everybody acknowleges
-- I don't know what to say to the vincibility of such a Love: For myself, I
think it impossible that I ever could have been the wife of any man on earth,
and given him my affection in so entire a manner, as should, on reflection, have
acquitted my own heart -- Though I hope I should not have been wanting in my
general duties -- And why impossible? Because I must have been conscious, that
there was another man whom I would have preferred to him. Let me add, that when
prospects were darkest with regard to my wishes, I promised my grandmamma and
aunt, to make myself easy, at least to endeavor to do so, if they never would
propose to me the Earl of D. or any other man. They did promise me.

Lady D. in her Letter to me, 'is so good as to claim the continuance of my
correspondence.' Most ungrateful, and equally self-denying, must I be, if I
were to decline my part of it.

I have a Letter from Sir Rowland Meredith This Letter appears not.
You, who have seen his former Letters to me, need not be shown this. The same
honest heart appears in them all; the same kind professions of paternal love.
You love Sir Rowland; and will be pleased to hear that his worthy nephew is
likely to recover his health: I cannot, however, be joyful that they are
resolved to make me soon one more visit. But you will see that Mr. Fowler
thinks, if he could be allowed to visit me once more, he should, though hoping
nothing from the visit, be easier for the rest of his life. A strange way of
thinking! supposing Love to be his distemper: Is it not?

I have a Letter from Mr. Fenwick. He is arrived at his seat near Daventry. He
has made a very short excursion abroad. He tells me in it, that he designs me a
visit on a particular subject. If it be, as I suspect, to engage my interest
with my Lucy, he shall not have her: He is not worthy of her.

The friendship and favor of Lady W. is one of the great felicities which seem
to offer to bless my future lot.

Mr. Greville is the most persevering, as well as most audacious of men. As
other men endeavor to gain a woman's affections by politeness; he makes pride,
ill nature, and impetuosity, the proofs of his Love; and thinks himself ill
used, especially since his large acquisition of fortune, that they are not
accepted as such. He has obliged Mr. Deane to hear his pleas; and presumed to
hope for his favor. Mr. Deane frankly told him, that his interest lay quite
another way. He then insolently threatened with destruction, the man, be he who
he will, that shall stand in his way. He doubts not, he says, but Sir Charles
Grandison is the man designed: But if so cool a Lover is to be encouraged
against so servent a one as himself, he is mistaken in all his notions of
women's conduct and judgments in Love-matters. A discrect Lover, he says, is an
unnatural character: Women, the odious wretch says, love to be devoured (Is he
not an odious wretch?) and if Miss Byron can content herself with another
woman's leavings, for that, he says, he is well informed is the case, he knows
what he shall think of her spirit. And then he threw out, as usual, reflections
on our Sex, which had malice in them.

This man's threats disturb me. God grant that your brother may not meet with
any more embarrasments from insolent men, on my account!

If these men, this Greville in particular, would let me be at peace, I should
be better, I believe, in my health: But Lady Frampton is his advocate, by
Letter. He watches my footsteps, and, in every visit I make, throws himself in
the way: And on Sundays he is always ready with his officious hand, as I alight
to enter the church, and to lead me back to my uncle's coach. My uncle cannot
affront him, because he will not be affronted by him. He rallies off, with an
intrepidity that never was exceeded, all that my aunt says to him. I repulse
him with anger everywhere but in a place so public, and so sacred. He disturbs
my devotion, with his staring eyes, always fixed on our pew; which draw every
one's after them. He has the assurance, when he intrudes himself into my
company, to laugh off my anger; telling me, that it is what he has long wished
for; and that now he is so much used to it, that he can live on my frowns, and
cannot support life without them. He plainly tells me, that Mr. Fenwick's
arrival from abroad, and another certain person's also, are the occasion of his
resumed sedulity.

Everybody about us, in short, is interested for or against him. He makes me
appear coy and ridiculous. He -- But no more of this bold man. Would to Heaven
that some one of those who like such, would relieve me from him!

Visiters, and the post, oblige me, sooner than I otherwise should, to conclude
myself, my dear Lady G.

Ever Yours, HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XIII. Mr. DEANE, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Selby-house, Tuesday, Oct. 3.
AN alliance more acceptable, were it with a prince, could not be proposed,
than that which Sir Charles Grandison, in a manner so worthy of himself, has
proposed with a family who have thought themselves under obligation to him,
ever since he delivered the darling of it from the lawless attempts of a savage
Libertine. I know to whom I write; and will own, that it has been my wish, in a
most particular manner.

As to the surviving part of the family, exclusive of Miss Byron (for I will
mention her parents by-and-by) it is, in all its branches, worthy. Indeed, Sir,
your wish of a relation to them, is not a discredit to your high character. As
to the young Lady -- I say nothing of her -- Yet how shall I forbear -- O Sir,
believe me! she will dignify your choice. Her duty and her inclination through
every relation of life, were never divided.

Excuse me, Sir -- No parent was ever more fond of his child than I have been,
from her infancy, of this my daughter by adoption. Hence, Sir, being consulted
on this occasion, as my affection I will say for the whole family deserves, I
take upon me to acquaint you, before any further steps are taken, what our dear
child's fortune will be: For it has been always my notion, that a young
gentleman, in such a case, should, the moment he offers himself, if his own
proposals are acceptable, be spared the indelicacy of asking questions as to
fortune. We know, Sir, yours is great: But as your spirit is princely, you
ought to have something worthy of your own fortune with a wife. But here, alas!
we must fail, I doubt; at least, in hand.

Mr. Byron was one of the best of men; his Lady a most excellent woman: There
never was a happier pair. Both had reason to boast of their ancestry, His
estate was upwards of Four thousand pounds a year; but it was entailed, and, in
failure of male heirs, was to descend to a second branch of the family which
had made itself the more unworthy of it, by settling in a foreign country,
renouncing, as I may say, its own Mr. Byron died a young man, and left his Lady
ensient; but grief for losing him, occasioned first her miscarriage, and then
her death; and the estate followed the name. Hence, be pleased to know, that
Miss Byron's fortune, in her own right is no more than between Thirteen and
Fourteen thousand pounds. It is chiefly in the funds. It has been called 15,000
l. but it is not much more than thirteen. Her grandmother's jointure is between
4 and 500 l. a year. We none of us wish to see my god-daughter in possession of
it: She herself least of all. Mrs. Shirley is called, by every one that knows
her, or speaks of her, The ornament of old age. Her husband, an excellent man,
desired her to live always in the mansion house, and in the hospitable way he
had ever kept up, if what he left her would support her in it. She has been
longer spared to the prayers of her friends, and to those of the poor, than was
apprehended; for she is but infirm in health. She therefore can do but little
toward the increase of her child's fortune. But Shirley-manor is a fine old
seat, Sir! -- And there is timber upon the estate, which wants but ten years
growth, and will be felled to good account. Mr. Selby is well in the world. He
proposes, as a token of his love, to add 3000 l, in hand to his niece's
fortune; and by his will, something very considerable, farther expectant on his
Lady's death; who being Miss Byron's aunt, by the father's side, intends by her
will to do very handsomely for her. -- By the way, my dear Sir, be assured,
that what I write is absolutely unknown to Miss Byron.

There is a man who loves her as he loves himself. This man has laid by a sum
of money every year for the advancing her in marriage, beginning with the fifth
year of her life, when it was seen what a hopeful child she was: This has been
putout at accumulated interest; and it amounts, in sixteen years, or
thereabouts, to very near 8000 l, This man, Sir will make up the eight
thousand, ten, to be paid on the day of marriage: And I hope, without promising
for what this man will do further at his death, that you will accept of this
Five or Six-and-twenty thousand Pounds, as the chearfullest given and
best-bestowed money that ever was laid out.

Let not these particulars pain you, Sir: They should not; The subject is a
necessary one. You, who ought to give way to the increase of that power which
you so nobly use, must not be pained at this mention, once for all. Princes,
Sir, are not above asking money of their people as free-gifts, on the marriage
of their children. He that would be greater than a prince may, before he is
aware, be less than a gentleman. Of this ten thousand pounds, Eight is Miss
Byron's due, as she is likely to be so happy with all our consents; else it
would not: For that was the man's reserved condition; and the sum, or the
designation of it, was till this day only known to himself.

As to settlements in return, I would have acted the lawyer, but the honest
lawyer, with you, Sir, and made demands of you; but Mr. and Mrs Selby, and Mrs.
Shirley, unanimously declare, that you shall not be prescribed to in this case.
Were you not Sir Charles Grandison? was the question. I was against leaving it
to you, for that very reason. It will be, said I, to provoke such a man as Sir
Charles to do too much. Most other men ought to be spurred; but this must be
held in. But, however, I acquiesced; and the more easily, because I expect that
the deeds shall pass through my hands; and I will take care that you shall not,
in order to give a proof of Love where it is not wanted, exert an inadequate
generosity.

These matters I thought it was absolutely necessary to apprize you of: You
will have the goodness to excuse any imperfections in my manner of writing.
There are none in my heart, when I assure you, that no man breathing can more
respect you, than, Sir.

Your most faithful and obedient Servant, THOMAS DEANE.

LETTER XIV. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To THO. DEANE, E To THO. DEANE, Esquire
Thursday, Oct. 5.
YOU know not, my dear Mr. Deane upon what an unthankful man you would bestow
your favors. I pretend not to be above complying with the laudable customs of
the world. Princes are examples to themselves. I have always, in things
indifferent, been willing to take the world as I find it; and conform to it.

To say Miss Byron is a treasure in herself, is what every man would say, who
has the honor to know her: Yet I would not, in a vain ostentation, as the
interest of a man and his wife is one, make a compliment to my affection by
resigning or giving from her her natural right; especially as there is no one
of her family that wants to be benefited by such gifts or resignations. But
then I will not allow, that any of her friends shall part with what is theirs,
to supply -- What? A supposed deficiency in her fortune. And by whom, as
implied by you, supposed a deficiency? -- By me; and it is left to me to
confirm the imputation by my acceptance of the addition so generously, as to
the intention, offered. Had I encumbrances on my estate, which, undischarged,
would involve in difficulties the woman I love; I know not what, for her sake,
I might be tempted to do. But avarice only can induce a man who wants it not to
accept of the bounty of a Lady's friends, in their lifetime especially -- When
those friends are not either father or mother; one of them not a relation by
blood, though he is by a nearer tie, that of Love: And it is not the fortune
which the Lady possesses, in her own right, an ample one?

I am as rich as I wish to be, my dear Mr. Deane. Were my income less, I would
live within it; were it more, it would increase my duties. Permit me, my good
Sir to ask, Has the MAN, as you call him (and a MAN indeed he appears to me to
be) who intends to make so noble a present to a stranger, no relations, no
friends, who would have reason to think themselves unkindly treated, if he gave
from them such a large portion of his fortune?

I would not be thought romantic; neither aim I at ostentation. I would be as
glad to follow, as to set, a good example. Can I have a nobler, if Miss Byron
honors me with her hand, than she, in that case, will give in preferring me to
the Earl of D. a worthy man, with a much more splendid fortune than mine?
Believe me, my dear Mr. Deane, it would, on an event so happy, be a restraint
to my own joy before friends so kindly contributing to the increase of her
fortune, lest they should imagine that their generosity on the occasion, was
one of the motives of my gratitude to her for her goodness to me,

You tell me, that Miss Byron knows nothing of your proposals: I beseech you,
let her not know anything of them: Abase not so much, in her eye, the man who
presumes on her favor for the happiness of the rest of his life, by supposing
(Your supposition, Sir, may have weight with her) he could value her the more
for such an addition to her fortune. No, Sir: Let Miss Byron (satisfied with
the consciousness of a worth which all the world acknowleges) in one of the
most solemn events of her life look round among her congratulating friends with
that modest confidence which the sense of laying a high obligation on a
favored object gives to diffident merit; and which the receiving of favors
from all her friends, as if to supply a supposed defective worth, must either
abate; or, if it do not, make her think less of the interested man, who could
submit to owe such obligations.

If these friendly expostulations conclude against the offer of your generous
friend, they equally do so against that of Mr. Selby. Were that Gentleman and
his Lady the parents of Miss Byron, the case would be different: But Miss
Byron's fortune is an ascertained one; and Mr. Selby has relations who stand in
an equal degree of consanguinity to him, and who are all entitled, by their
worthiness, to his favor. My best respects and thanks are however due; and I
beg you will make my acknowledgments accordingly, as well to your worthy
friend, as to Mr. Selby.

I take the liberty to send you down the rent-roll of my English estate.
Determine for me as you please, my dearest Mr. Deane. Only take this caution --
Affront me not a second time; but let the settlements be such, as may be fully
answerable to my fortune; although, in the common methods of calculation, it may
exceed that of the dear Lady That you may be the better judge of this, you will
find a brief particular of my Irish Estate, subjoined to the other.

I was intending, when I received yours, to do myself the honor of a visit to
Selby-house. I am impatient to throw myself at the feet of my dear Miss Byron,
and to commend myself to the favor of Mr. and Mrs. Selby, and every one of a
family I am prepared by their characters, as well as by their relation to Miss
Byron, to revere and love. But as you seem to choose that the requisite
preliminaries should be first adjusted by pen and ink, I submit, though with
reluctance, to that course; but with the less, as I may, in the interim,
receive Letters from abroad, which, though they can now make no alteration with
regard to the treaty so happily begun, may give me an opportunity of laying the
whole state of my affairs before Miss Byron; by which means she will be enabled
to form a judgment of them, and of the heart of, dear Sir,

Her and your most affectionate, obliged, and faithful humble Servant, CHAPTER
GRANDISON.

LETTER XV. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
[With the two preceding Letters.]

Selby-house, Sat. Oct. 7.
WELL did you observe, my dear that we may be very differently affected by the
same event, when judged of at a distance, and near. May I, in the present
situation, presume to say near? Mr. Deane has entered into the particulars of
my fortune with Sir Charles. The Letter was not shown me before it went; and I
was not permitted to see the copy of it till your brother's answer came; and
then they showed me both.

O my dear Mr. Deane! my ever-kind uncle and aunt Selby! Was not your Harriet
Byron too much obliged to you before? -- As to your brother, What, my love,
shall I do with my pride? I did not know I had so much of that bad quality. My
poverty, my dear, has added to my pride. Were my fortune superior to that of
your brother, I am sure I should not be so proud as I now, on this occasion,
find I am. How generously does he decline accepting the goodness that was
offered to give me more consideration with him (as kindly intended by them)!
What can I say to him, but that his heart, still prouder than my own, and more
generous than that of any other person breathing, will not permit me to owe
uncommon obligations to any but himself?

He desires that I may not know anything of this transaction: But they thought
the communication would give me pleasure. However, they wish me not to take
notice to him, when he visits Selby-house, that they have communicated it to
me. If I did, I should think myself obliged to manifest a gratitude that would
embarrass me, in my present situation, and seem to fetter the freedom of my
will. Millions of obligations should not bribe me to give up even a corner of
my heart, to a man to whom I could not give the whole. Your brother, my dear,
is in possession of the whole.

You know that I hate affectation: But must I not have great abatements in my
prospects of happiness, because of Lady Clementina? And must they not be still
greater, should she be unhappy, should she repent of the resolution she so
nobly took, for his saying, that whatever be the contents of his next Letters
from Italy, they can make no alteration with regard to the treaty begun with
us? -- Dear, dear Clementina! most excellent of women! Can I bear to stand in
the way of your happiness? -- I cannot -- My life, any more than yours, may not
be a long one; and I will not fully the whiteness of it (Pardon my vanity; I
presume to call it so, on retrospecting it, regarding my intentions only) by
giving way to an act of injustice, though it were to obtain for me the whole
heart of the man I love.

Yet think you, my dear, that I am not mortified? 'How can I look round upon my
congratulating friends, in one of the most solemn events of my life, with that
modest confidence which the sense of laying an obligation on a favored object'
(You know in whose generous words I express myself) 'gives to diffident merit?'
O my Charlotte! I am afraid of your brother! How shall I look up to him, when I
next see him? -- But I will give way to this new guest, my pride. What other
way have I? -- Will you forgive me, if I try to look upon your brother's
generosity to me and my friends, in declining so greatly their offers, as a
bribe to make me sit down satisfied with half, nay, not half, a heart? -- And
now will you not say, that I am proud indeed? But his is the most delicate of
human minds; And shall not the woman pretend to some delicacy who has looked up
to him?

I thought of writing but a few lines in the cover of the two Letters. I hope I
should not incur displeasure from anybody here, were they to know I send them
to you for your perusal. But let only Lord G. your other Self, and Lord and
Lady L. read them, and return them by the next post. I know you four will pity
the poor and proud girl, who is so inexpressibly obliged almost to every one
she knows; but who, believe her, proud as she is, never will be ashamed to own
her obligations to you, and to Lady L.

Witness, HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XVI. Lady G. To Miss BYRON.
Grosvenor-Square, Tuesday, Oct. 10.
I Return your two Letters: Very good ones, both. I like them. Lord L. and Lord
G. thank you for allowing them to peruse them. We will know nothing of the
matter. My brother will soon be with you, I believe. I wish Dr. Bartlet were in
town: One should then know something of the motions of my brother -- Not that
he is reserved, neither. But he is so much engaged, that I go four times to St.
James's-Square, and perhaps do not see him once. My Lord had the assurance to
say, but yesterday, that I was there more than at home. He is very impertinent:
I believe he has taken up my sauciness. I laid it down, and thought to resume
it occasionally; but when I came to look for it, behold! it was gone! -- But I
hope, if he has it not, it is only mislaid. I intend, if it come not soon to
hand, to set the parish-crier to proclaim the loss, with a reward for the
finder. It might be the ruin of some indiscreet woman, should such a one meet
with it, and try to use it. Aunt Eleanor [There I remember myself: No more aunt
Nell!] is as joyful, to think her nephew will soon be married, and to an
English woman, as if she were going to be married herself. Were there to be a
wedding in the family, or among her acquaintance, once a year! what with
preparation, what with solemnization, good old soul! she would live for ever.
Chide again, Harriet; I value it not. Yet in your last chiding you were
excessively grave: But I forgive you. Be good, and write me everything how and
about it; and write to the moment: You cannot be too minute.

I want you to see Lady Olivia's presents: They are princely. I want to see a
Letter she wrote to my brother: He mentioned it as something extraordinary.
When you are his, you must show me all he writes, that you are permitted to
have in your power long enough to transcribe. He and she correspond. Do you
like that, Harriet? -- Lady L. writes: Emily writes. So I have only to say, I am

Your humble Servant, and so-forth, CHAPTER G.

LETTER XVII. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Selby-house, Thursday, Oct. 12. My dear Lady G.
I Expect your brother every hour. I hope he comes in pursuance of Letters from
Italy! -- May it be so! and such as will not abate his welcome!

We heard by accident of his approach, by a farmer, tenant to my uncle; who saw
a fine gentleman, very handsomely attended, alight, as he left Statford, at the
very inn where we baited on our return from London. As a dinner was preparing
for him, perhaps, my dear, he will dine in the very room he dined in at that
time. The farmer had the curiosity to ask who he was; and was answered by the
most courteous gentleman's servants he ever spoke to, that they had the honor
to serve Sir Charles Grandison. And the farmer having said he was of
Northampton; one of them asked him, How far Selby-house was from that town? The
farmer was obliged to hurry home on his own affairs; and meeting my uncle with
Mr. Deane, and my cousin James Selby, taking an airing on horseback, told him
the visiter he was likely to have. My uncle instantly dispatched his servant to
us with the tidings, and that he was gone to meet him, in hopes of conducting
him hither.

This news gave me so much emotion, being not well before, that my aunt advised
me to retire to my closet, and endeavor to quiet my Spirits.

Here then I am, my dear Lady G. and the writing-implements being alway^ at
hand in this place, I took up my pen. It is not possible for me to write at
this time, but to you, and on this subject. It is good for a busy mind to have
something to be employed in; and I think, now I am amusing myself on paper, my
heart is a little more governable than it was.

I am glad we heard of his coming before we saw him. But surely Sir Charles
Grandison should not have attempted to surprise us: Should he, my dear? Does it
not look like the pride of a man assured of a joyful welcome? I have read of
princes, who, acquianted with their Ladies by picture only, and having been
married by proxy, have set out to their frontiers in^ognito, and in disguise
have affected to surprise the poor apprehensive bride. -- But here, not only
circumstances differ, since there has been no betrothment; but were he of
princely rank, I should have expected a more delicate treatment from him. --

How will the consciousness of inferiority and obligation set a proud and
punctilious mind upon hunting for occasions to justify its caprices! -- A
servant of Sir Charles is just arrived with a billet directed for my uncle
Selby. My aunt opened it. It is dated from Stratford. The contents are, after
compliments of enquiry of our healths, to acquaint my uncle, that he shall put
up at the George at Northampton, this night; and hopes to be allowed to pay his
compliments to us tomorrow morning, at breakfast: So he did not intend to give
himself the consequence, of which my capricious heart was so apprehensive. Yet
then, as if resolved to find fault, Is not this a little too parading for his
natural freedom? thought I: Or does he think we should not be able to outlive
our joyful surprise, if he gave us not notice of his arrival in these parts
before he saw us? -- O Clementina! -- Goodness! Angel! What a meremortal, what
a woman, do thou make the poor Harriet Byron appear in her own eyes! How
apprehensive of coming after thee! The sense I have of my own littleness, will
make me little, indeed!

Well, but I presume, that if my uncle and Mr. Deane meet him, they will
prevail on him to come hither this night: Yet I suppose he must be allowed to
go to the proposed inn afterward. -- But here, he is come! -- Come, indeed! --
My uncle in the chariot with him! My cousin and Mr. Deane, Sally tells me, just
alighted. Sally adores Sir Charles Grandison -- Begone, Sally. Thy emotions,
foolish wench, add to those of thy mistress! --

THAT I might avoid the appearance of affectation, I was going down to welcome
him when I met my uncle on the stairs. Niece Byron, said he, you have not done
justice to Sir Charles Grandison. I thought your Lovesick heart (What words
were these, my dear! and at that moment too!) must have been partial to him. He
prevailed on me to go into his chariot. You may think yourself very happy. For
fifteen miles together did he talk of nobody but you. Let me go down with you:
Let me present you to him.

I had before besought my spirits to befriend me, but for one half-hour. Surely
there is nothing so unwelcome as an unseasonable jest. Present me to him!
Lovesick heart! O my uncle! thought I. I was unable to proceed. I hastened
back to my closet, as much disconcerted as a child could be, who, having taken
pains to get its lesson by heart, dashed by a chiding countenance, forgot every
syllable of it when it came to say it. You know, my dear, that I had not of
some time been well. My spirits were weak, and joy was almost as painful to me
as grief could have been.

My aunt came up -- My love, why don't you come down? -- What now! Why in
tears? -- You will appear, to the finest man I ever saw in my life, very
particular! -- Mr. Deane is in love with him: Your cousin James --

Dear madam, I am already, when I make comparisons between him and myself,
humbled enough with his excellencies. I did intend to avoid particularity; but
my uncle has quite disconcerted me -- Yet he always means well: I ought not to
complain. I attend you, madam.

Can you, Lady G. forgive my pride, my petulance?

My aunt went down before me. Sir Charles hastened to me, the moment I
appeared, with an air of respectful love.

He took my hand, and bowing upon it, I rejoice to see my dear Miss Byron; and
to see her so well. How many sufferers must there be, when you suffer!

I bid him welcome to England: I hope he heard me: I could not help speaking
low: He must observe my discomposure. He led me to a seat, and sat down by me,
still holding my hand. I withdrew it not presently, left he should think me
precise: But, as there were so many persons present, I thought it was free in
Sir Grandison. Yet perhaps he could not well quit it, as I did not withdraw it;
so that the fault might be rather in my passiveness, than in his forwardness.

However, I asked my aunt afterward, If his looks were not those of a man
assured of success; as indeed he might be from my grandmother's Letter, and my
silence to his. She said, there was a manly freedom in his address to me; but
that it had such a mixture of tenderness in it, that never, in her eyes, was
freedom so becoming. While he was restrained by his situation, added she, no
wonder that he treated you with respect only, as a Friend; but now he finds
himself at liberty to address you, his behavior ought, as a Lover, to have
just been what it was.

Sir Charles led me into talk, by mentioning you and Lady L. your two Lords,
and my Emily.

My uncle and aunt withdrew, and had some little canvassings, it seems, (All
their canvassings are those of assured Lovers) about the propriety of my
uncle's invitation to Sir Charles to take up his residence, while he was in
these parts, at Selby-house. My uncle, at coming in, had directed Sir Charles's
servants to put up their horses: But they, not having their master's orders to
do so, held themselves in readiness to attend him; as they knew that Sir
Charles had given directions to his gentleman, Richard Saunders, who brought
the billet to my uncle, to go back to Northhampton, and provide apartments for
him at the George inn there.

My aunt, who you know is a perfect judge of points of decorum, pleaded to my
uncle, that it was too well known among our select friends, by Mr. Greville's
means, that Sir Charles had never before made his addresses to me; and that
therefore, though he was to be treated as a man whose alliance is considered as
an honor to us; yet that some measures were to be kept, as to the look of the
thing; and that the world might not conclude that I was to be won at his very
first appearance; and the rather, as Mr. Greville's violence, as well as
virulence, was so well known.

My uncle was petulant. I, said he, am always in the wrong: You women, never.
He ran into all those peculiarities of words, for which you have so often
raillied him -- His adsheart, his female scrupulosities, his What a pize, his
hatred of shilly-shally's and fiddle-faddles, and the rest of our female
nonsenses, as he calls them. He hoped to salute his niece, as Lady Grandison,
in a fortnight: What a duce was the matter it could not be so, both sides now
of a mind? -- He warned my aunt, and bid her warn me, against affectation, now
the crisis was at hand. Sir Charles, he said, would think meanly of us, if we
were silly: And then came in another of his odd words: Sir Charles, he said,
had been so much already bamboozled, that he would not have patience with us:
and therefore, and for all these reasons, as he called them, he desired that
Sir Charles might not be suffered to go out of the house, and to an inn; and
this as well for the propriety of the thing, as for the credit of his own
invitation to him.

My aunt replied, that Sir Charles himself would expect delicacy from us. It
was evident, that he expected not (no doubt for the sake of the world's eye) to
reside in the house with me on his first visit, by his having ordered his
servant who brought the billet, to take apartments for him at Northampton, even
not designing to visit us overnight, had he not been met by Mr. Deane and
himself, and persuaded to come. In short, my dear, said my aunt, I am as much
concerned about Sir Charles's own opinion of our conduct, as for that of the
world: Yet you know, that every genteel family around us expected examples from
us, and Harriet. If Sir Charles is not with us, the oftener he visits us, the
more respectful it will be construed. I hope he will live with us all day, and
every day: But indeed it must be as a visiter, not as an inmate.

Why then bring me off some-how, that I may not seem the blunderer you are
always making me by your documents -- Will you do that?

When my uncle and aunt came in, they found Sir Charles, and Dr. Deane, and me,
talking. Our subject was, the happiness of Lord and Lady W. and the whole
Mansfield family, with whom Mr. Deane, who began the discourse, is well
acquainted. Sir Charles arose, at their entrance. The night draws on, said he
-- I will do myself the honor of attending you, madam, and this happy family,
at tea in the morning. -- My good Mr. Selby, I had a design upon you, and Mr.
Deane, and upon you, young gentleman (to my cousin James) as I told you on the
road; but it is now too late. Adieu, till tomorrow. -- He bowed to each, to me
profoundly, kissing my hand, and went to his chariot.

My uncle whispered my aunt, as we all attended him to that door of the hall
which leads into the courtyard, to invite him to stay. Hang punctilio! he said.

My aunt wanted to speak to Sir Charles; yet, she owned, she knew not what to
say: Such a conscious aukwardness had indeed possession of us both, as made us
uneasy: We thought all was not right; yet knew not that we were wrong. But when
Sir Charles's chariot drove away with him, and we took our seats, and supper
was talked of, we all of us showed dissatisfaction; and my uncle was quite out
of humor. He would give a thousand pounds, he said, with all his heart and
soul, to find in the morning, Sir Charles, instead of coming hither to
breakfast, had set out on his return to London.

For my part, Lady G. I could not bear these recriminations. I begged to be
excused sitting down to supper. I was not well; and this odd situation added
uneasiness to my indisposition: A dissatisfaction, that I find will mingle with
our highest enjoyments: Nor were the beloved company I left, happier. They
canvassed the matter, with so much good-natured earnestness, that the supper
was taken away, as it was brought, at a late hour.

What, my dear Lady G. in your opinion, should we have done? Were we right, or
were we wrong? Over-delicacy, as I have heard observed, is underdelicacy. You,
my dear, your Lord, our Emily, and Dr. Bartlett, all standing in so well-known
a degree of relation to Sir Charles Grandison, were our most welcome guests:
And was not the brother to be received with equal warmth of respect? -- O no!
Custom, it seems, tyrant custom, and the apprehended opinion of the world
obliged us (especially as so much bustle had been made about me, by men so
bold, so impetuous) to show him -- Show him what? -- In effect, that we had
expectations upon him, which we could not have upon the brother and sister; and
therefore, because we hoped he would be more near, we were to keep him at the
greater distance! -- What an indirect acknowledgment was this in his favor,
were there room for him to doubt! Which, however, there could not be. What
would I give, said my aunt to me, this moment, to know his thoughts of the
matter!

Lucy and Nancy will be here at dinner: so will my grandmamma. She has, with
her usual enquiries after my health, congratulated me by this line, sealed up.

'I long, my best love, to embrace you, on the joyful occasion. I need say no
more, than that I think myself at this instant, one of the happiest of women. I
shall dine with you today. Adieu, till then, joy of my heart, my own Harriet!'


Lucy, in a Billet just now brought, written for herself and Nancy, on the
intelligence sent her of Sir Charles's arrival, expresses herself thus:

'Our joy is extreme! Blessings on the man! Blessings attend our Harriet! They
must: Sir Charles Grandison brings them with himself. Health now will return to
our lovely cousin. We long to see the man of whom we have heard so much. We
will dine with you. Tell Sir Charles, before we come, that you love us dearly:
It shall make us redouble our endeavors to deserve your love. Your declared
friendship, and love of us, will give consequence to

'LUCY SELBY.
'NANCY SELBY.


We are now in expectation -- My aunt and I, though early risers, hurried
ourselves to get everything, that however is never out of order, in higher
order. Both of us have a kind of consciousness of defect, where yet we cannot
find reason for it: If we did, we should supply it. Yet we are careful that
everything has a natural, not an extraordinary appearance -- Ease, with
propriety, shall be our aim. My aunt says, that were the King to make us a
visit, she is sure she could not have a greater desire to please. -- I will go
down, that I may avoid the appearance of parade and reserve, when he comes.

Here, in her closet, again, is your poor Harriet. Surely the determined single
state is the happiest of lives, to young women, who have the greatness of mind
to be above valuing the admiration and flatteries of the other Sex. What
tumults, what a contrariety of passions, break the tranquillity of the woman who
yields up her heart to Love? -- No Sir Charles Grandison, my dear! -- Yet ten
o'clock! -- He is a very prudent man! -- No expectations hurry or discompose
him! Charming steadiness of Soul! A fine thing for himself, but far otherwise
for the woman, when a man is secure! He will possibly ask me, and hold again my
passive hand, in presence of half a score of my friends, Whether I was greatly
uneasy because of his absence?

But let me try to excuse him. May he not have forfot his engagement? May he
not have over slept himself? -- Some agreeable dream of the Bologna family -- I
am offended at him -- Did he learn this tranquillity in Italy? -- O no, no, Lady
G.!

I now cannot help looking back for other faults in him, with regard to me. My
memory is not, however, so malicious, as I would have it. But do you think
every man, in the like situation, would have stopped at Stratford to dine by
himself? -- Not but your brother can be very happy in his own company. If he
cannot, who can? But, as to that, his horses might require rest, as well as
baiting: One knows not in how short a time he might have prosecuted his journey
so far. He who will not suffer the noblest of all animals to be deprived of an
ornament, would be merciful to them in greater instances. He says, that he
cannot bear indignity from superiors. Neither can we. In that light he appears
to us. But why so? -- My heart, Lady G. begins to swell I assure you; and it it
twice as big as it was last night.

My uncle before I came up, sat with his watch in his hand, from half an hour
after nine, till near ten, telling the minutes as they crept. Mr. Deane often
looked at me, and at my aunt, as if to see how we bore it. I blushed; looked
silly, as if your brother's faults were mine. -- Over in a fortnight! cried my
uncle; ads-heart, I believe it will be half a year before we shall come to the
question. But Sir Charles, to be sure, is offended. Your confounded female
niceties!

My heart rose -- Let him, if he dare, thought the proud Harriet.

God grant, added my uncle, that he may be gone up to town again*

Perhaps, said Mr. Deane, he is gone, by mistake, to Mrs. Shirley's.

We then endeavored to recollect the words of his self-invitation hither. My
cousin James proposed to take horse, and go to Northampton, to inform himself
of the occasion of his not coming: Some misfortune, perhaps.

Had he not servants, my aunt asked, one of whom he might have sent? -- Shall
my cousin Jemmy go, however, Harriet, said she?

No, indeed, answered I, with an air of anger -- My teazing uncle broke out
into a loud laugh, which however had more of a vexedness than mirth in it. --
He is certainly gone to London, Harriet! Just as I said, dame Selby! --
Certainly tearing up the road; his very horses resenting, for their master,
your scrupulosities. You Will hear from him next, at London, my life for yours,
niece -- Hah, hah, hah! What will your grandmamma say, by-and-by? Lucy, Nancy,
how will they stare! Last night's supper, and this day's dinner, will be alike
served in, and taken away.

I could not stand all this: I arose from my seat. Are you not unkind, Sir?
said I to my uncle, courtesying to him however; and, desiring his and Mr.
Deane's excuse, quitted the breakfasting parlour. Teazing man! said my aunt.
Mr. Deane also blamed him; gently, however; for everybody acknowledges his
good heart, and natural good temper.

My aunt followed me to the door; and taking my hand, Harriet, said she,
speaking low, Not Sir Charles Grandison himself shall call you his, if he is
capable of treating you with the least indifference. I understand not this,
added she: He cannot surely be offended. -- I hope all will be cleared up
before your grandmamma comes: She will be very jealous of the honor of her
girl.

I answered not: I could not answer: But hastened up to my place of refuge;
and, after wiping from my cheeks a few tears of real vexation, took up my pen.
You love to know my thoughts, as occasions arise. You bid me continue to write
to the moment. -- Here comes my aunt.

My aunt came in, with a Billet in her hand -- Come down to breakfast, my dear:
Sir Charles comes not till dinnertime. Read this: It was brought by one of his
servants. He left it with Andrew. The dunce let him go. I wanted to have asked
him a hundred questions.

To Mrs. SELBY.
Dear Madam,
I Am broke in upon by a most impertinent visiter. Such, at this time, must
have been the dearest friend I have in the world. You will be so good as to
excuse my attendance till dinnertime. For the past two hours I thought every
moment of disengaging myself, or I should have sent sooner.

Ever Yours, etc.


What visiter, said I, can make a man stay, against his mind? -- Who can get
rid politely of an impertinent visiter, if Sir Charles Grandison cannot, on a
previous engagement? -- But come, madam, I attend you. -- Down we went.

My uncle was out of patience. I was sorry for it. I tried to make the best of
it; yet, but to pacify him, should, perhaps, have had petulance enough myself
to make the worst of it. -- Oy, oy, with all my heart, said he, in answer to my
excuses, let us hear what Sir Charles has to say for himself. But, old as I am,
were my dame Selby to give me another chance, no man on earth, I can tell you,
should keep me from a previous engagement with my mistress. It is kind of you,
Harriet, to excuse him, however: Love hides a multitude of saults.

My aunt said not one syllable in behalf of Sir Charles. She is vexed, and
disappointed.

We made a very short breakfasting; and looked upon one another as people who
would have helped themselves, if they could. Mr. Deane, however, would engage,
he said, that we should be fatisfied with Sir Charles's excuses, when we came
to hear them.

But, my dear, this man, this visiter, whoever he is, must be of prodigious
importance, to detain him, from an engagement that I had hoped might have been
thought a first engagement; -- yet owned to be impertinent. And must not the
accident be very uncommon, that should bring such a one, a stranger as Sir
Charles is, in his way? Yet this might very well happen, my uncle observes, at
an inn, whither we thought fit to send him.

Now I think of it, I was strangely disturbed last night in my imperfect
slumbers: Something, I thought, was to happen to prevent me ever being his. But
hence, Recollection! I chase thee from me. Yet when realities disturb, shadows
will officiously obtrude on the busy imagination as realities.

Friday, 12 o'Clock.
My grandmamma is come -- Lucy, Nancy, are come -- O how vexed at our
disappointment and chagrin are my two cousins! But my grandmamma joins with Mr.
Deane, to think the best. I have stolen up. But here, he is come! How shall I
do to keep my anger? He shall find me below. I will see how he looks, at
entrance among us -- If he is careless -- If he makes slight excuses --

LETTER XVIII. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Friday, Two o'Clock.
I Am stolen up again, to tell you how it is. I never will be petulant again --
Dear Sir, forgive me! How wicked in us all, but my grandmamma and Mr. Deane, to
blame a man who cannot be guilty of a wilful fault! The fault is all my aunt's
and mine -- Was my aunt ever in fault before?

We were all together when he entered. He addressed himself to us, in that
noble manner, which engages everybody in his favor, at first sight. How, said
he, bowing to every one, have I suffered, in being hindered, by an unhappy man,
from doing myself the honor of attending you sooner!

You see, my dear, he made not apologies to me, as if he supposed me
disappointed by his absence. I was afraid he would. I know I looked very grave.

He then particularly addressed himself to each; to me first; next to my
grandmamma; and taking one of her hands between both his, and bowing upon it, I
rejoice to see you, madam, said he -- Your last favors will ever be remembered
by me, with gratitude. I see you well, I hope. Your Miss Byron will be well, if
you are; and our joy, looking round him, will then be complete.

She bowed her head, pleased with his compliment; so were my aunt, and Lucy,
and Nancy. I was still a little sullen; otherwise I should have been pleased
too, that he made my health depend on that of my grandmamma.

Madam, said he, turning to my aunt, I am afraid I made you wait for me at
breakfast. A most impertinent visiter! He put me out of humor. I dared not to
let you and yours (looking at me) see, how much I could be out of humor. I am
naturally passionate: But passion is so ugly, so deforming a thing, that, if I
can help it, I will never, by those I love, be seen in it.

I am sorry, Sir, said my aunt, you meet with anything to disturb you.

My uncle's spirit had not come down: He, too, was sullen in behalf of the
punctilio of the girl whom he honors with his jealous Love. How, how, is that,
Sir Charles? said he.

My aunt presented Lucy and Nancy to him: But before she could name either --
Miss Selby, said he, Miss Byron's own Lucy, I am sure. Miss Nancy Selby! -- I
know your characters, Ladies, saluting each, and I know the interest you have
in Miss Byron. -- Honor me with your approbation, and that will be to give me
hope of hers.

He then turning to my uncle and Mr. Deane, and taking a hand of each -- My
dear Mr. Deane, smiles upon me, said he -- But Mr. Selby looks grave. --

At- ten -tive only Sir Charles, to the cause of your being put out of humor,
that is all --

The cause, Mr. Selby! -- Know, then, I met with a man at my inn, who would
force himself upon me: Do you know I am a qurrelsome man? He was so hardy as to
declare, that he had pretensions to a Lady in this company, which he was
determined to assert.

O that Greville! said my aunt --

I was ready to sink. Wretched Harriet! thought I, at the instant: Am I to be
for ever the occasion of embroiling this excellent man!

My grandmamma, Mr. Deane, my uncle, my cousin James, all spoke at once --
Dear, dear Sir Charles, said one, said another -- How, how, was it?

Both safe! Both unhurt! No more of the rash man, at this time. He is to be
pitied. He loves Miss Byron to distraction.

This comes of nicety! whispered my uncle, to my aunt: foolish nicety! -- To
let such a man as this go to an inn! -- Inhospitable, vile punctilio! Then
turning to Sir Charles -- Dear Sir, forgive me! I was a little serious, that I
must own [I pulled my uncle by the sleeve, fearing he would say too much by way
of atonement for his seriousness]: -- I, I, I, was a little serious, I must own
[I, I, I, was afraid something was the matter -- turned he off, what he was
going to say -- too freely, shall I say? -- Hardly so! had he said what he
would; though habitual punctilio made me almost involuntarily twitch my uncle by
the sleeve: for my heart would have directed my lips to utter the kindest
things; but my concern was too great to allow them to obey it.

I must go down, Lady G. -- I am enquired after; it is just dinnertime -- Let
me only add, that Sir Charles waved further talk of the affair between him and
that wretch, while I staid -- perhaps they have got it out of him since I came
up.

I SHALL be so proud, my dear! -- a thousand fine things he has said of your
Harriet, in her little absence! -- Lucy, Nancy, call him THE man: And every one
looks upon him as if there were not one soul in company but he and themselves.
My grandmamma's eyes are complained of as weak, to color her joyful emotion:
But, thank God, her eyes are not weak. And he is so respectfully tender to her,
that had he not my heart before, he would have won it now.

He had again waved the relation of the insult he met with: Mr. Greville
himself, he supposed, would give it. He had a mind to see if the gentleman, by
his report of it, was a gentleman. Thank God, said he, I have not hurt a man
who boasts of his passion for Miss Byron; and of his neighborhood to this
family!

OUR places were chosen for us at table: Sir Charles's next me. Cannot I be too
minute, do you say? -- So easy, so free, so polite; something so happily
addressed occasionally to each person at table -- O my dear! I am abundantly
kept in countenance; for every one loves him, as well as I. You have been
pleased to take very favorable notice of our servants -- They are good, and
sensible. What reverence for him, and joy for their young mistress's sake,
shone in their countenances as they attended!

My cousin James, who has never been out of England, was very curious to be
informed of the manners, customs, diversions, of the people in different
countries -- Italy, in particular -- Ah the dear Clementina! What abatement
from recollection! 'The sighing heart,' I remember he says, in one of his
Letters to Dr. Bartlett, 'will remind us of imperfection, in the highest of our
enjoyments.' And he adds, 'It is fit it should be so.' And on what occasion did
he write this? -- O my Charlotte, I was the occasion! It was in kind
remembrance of me! He could not, at that time, have so written, had he been
indifferent, even then, to your Harriet.

I am so apprehensive of my uncle's after remarks, that I am half-afraid to
look at Sir Charles: And he must by-and-by return to this wicked inn -- They
wonder at my frequent absences. It is to oblige you, Lady G. and indeed myself:
There is vast pleasure in communicating one's pleasures to a friend who
interests herself, as you do, in one's dearest concerns.

YOU know and admire my grandmamma's cheerful compliances with the innocent
diversions of youth: She made Lucy give us a lesson on the harpsichord, on
purpose, I saw, to draw me in. We both obeyed.

I was once a little out in an Italian song. In what a sweet manner did he put
me in* touching the keys himself, for a minute or two. Every one wished him to
proceed; but he gave up to me, in so polite a manner, that we all were
satisfied with his excuses.

My poor cousin Jemmy is on a sudden very earnest to go abroad; as if, silly
youth, traveling would make him a Sir Charles Grandison!

I have just asked your brother, If all is over between Mr. Greville and him?
He says, He hopes and believes so. God send it may; or I shall hate that
Greville!

MY uncle, Mr. Deane, and my cousin James, were too much taken with Sir
Charles, to think of withdrawing, as it might have been expected they would;
and after some general conversation, that succeeded our playing, Sir Charles
drew his chair between my grandmamma and aunt, and taking my grandmamma's hand,
May I not be allowed a quarter of an hour's conversation with Miss Byron in
your presence, Ladies? said he, speaking low. We have indeed only friends and
relations present: But it will be most agreeable, I believe, to the dear Lady,
that what I have to say to her, and to you, may be rather reported to the
gentlemen, than heard by them.

By all means, Sir Charles, said my grandmamma. Then whispering to my aunt, No
man in this company thinks, but Sir Charles. Excuse me my dear.

The moment Sir Charles applied himself in this particular manner to them, my
heart, without hearing what he said, was at my mouth. I arose, and withdrew to
the cedar-parlour, followed by Lucy and Nancy. The gentlemen, seeming to
recollect themselves, withdrew likewise, to another apartment. My aunt came to
me -- Love! -- But ah! my dear, how you tremble! -- You must come with me, And
then she told me what he had said to my grandmamma and her.

I have no courage -- None at all, said I, If apprehension, if timidy, be signs
of Love, I have them all. Sir Charles Grandison has not one.

Nay, my dear, said Lucy, impute not to him want of respect, I beseech you. --
Respect, my Lucy! What a poor word! -- Had I only respect for him, we should be
nearer an equality. -- Has he said anything of Lady Clementina?

Don't be silly, Harriet, said my aunt. You used to be --

Used to be! -- Ah, madam I Sir Charles's heart, at best, a divided heart! I
never had a trial till now.

I tell you all my foibles, Lady G.

My aunt led me in to Sir Charles and my grandmamma. He met me at my entrance
into the room, and in the most engaging manner, my aunt having taken her seat,
conducted me to a chair which happened to be vacant between her and my
grandmother. He took no notice of my emotion, and I the sooner recovered
myself, and still the sooner, as he himself seemed to be in some little
confusion. However, he sat down, and with a manly, yet respectful air, his
voice gaining strength as he proceeded, thus delivered himself.

Never, Ladies, was man more particularly circumstanced than he before you. You
know my story: You know what once were the difficulties of my situation with a
family that I must ever respect; with a Lady of it whom I must ever revere: And
you, madam (to my grandmamma) have had the goodness to signify to me, in a most
engaging manner, that Miss Byron has added to the innumerable instances which
she has given me of her true greatness of mind, a kind, and even a friendly
concern for a Lady who is the Miss Byron of Italy. I ask not excuse for the
comparison. The heart of the man before you, madam (to me) in sincerity and
frankness emulates your own. --

You want not excuse, Sir, said my grandmamma -- We all reverence Lady
Clementina: We admire her.

He bowed to each of us; as my aunt and I looked I believe, assentingly to what
my grandmamma said. He proceeded:

Yet in so particular a situation, although what I have to say, may, I presume,
be collected from what you know of my story; and though my humble application to
Miss Byron for her favor, and to you, Ladies, for your interest with her, have
not been discouraged; something, however, may be necessary to be said, in this
audience, of the state of my own heart, for the sake of this dear Lady's
delicacy, and yours. And I will deliver myself with all the truth and plainness
which I think are required in treaties of this nature, equally with those set
on foot between nation and nation.

I am not insensible to Beauty: But the beauty of person only, never yet had
power over more than my eye; to which it gave a pleasure like that which it
receives from the flowers of a gay parterre. Had not my heart been out of the
reach of personal attractions, if I may so express myself; and had I been my
own master; Miss Byron, in the first hour that I saw her (for her beauty
suffered not by her distress) would have left me no other choice: But when I
had the honor of conversing with her, I observed in her mind and behavior
that true dignity, delicacy, and noble frankness, which I ever thought
characteristic in the Sex, but never met with, in equal degree, but in one
Lady. I soon found, that my admiration of her fine qualities was likely to lead
me into a gentler, yet a more irresistible passion: For of the Lady abroad I
then could have no reasonable, at least, no probable hope: Yet were there
circumstances between her and me, which I thought, in strict justice, obliged
me to attend the issue of certain events.

I called myself therefore to account, and was alarmed when I found that Miss
Byron's graces had stolen so imperceptibly on my heart, as already to have made
an impression on it too deep for my tranquillity. I determined therefore, in
honor, in justice, to both Ladies, to endeavor to restrain a passion so new,
yet likely to be so servent.

I had avocations in town, while Miss Byron was with my sisters in the country.
Almost afraid of trusting myself in her presence, I pursued the more will-ingly
those avocations in person, when I could have managed some of them, perhaps,
near as well by other hands. Compassion for the one Lady, because of her
calamity, might, at that time, I found, have been made to give way, could those
calamities have been overcome, to Love for the other. Nor was it difficult for
me to observe, that my sisters and Lord L. who knew nothing of my situation,
would have chosen for a sister the young Lady present, before every other woman.

Sometimes, I will own to you, I was ready, from that self-partiality and
vanity which is too natural to men of vivacity and strong hopes, to flatter
myself, that I might, by my sisters interest, have made myself, not
unacceptable to a Lady, who seemed to be wholly disengaged in her affections:
But I would not permit myself to dwell on such hopes: Every look of
complaisance, every smile, which used to beam over that lovely countenance, I
attributed to her natural goodness, and frankness of heart, and to that
grateful spirit which made her over-rate a common service that I had been so
happy as to render her. Had I even been free, I should have been careful not to
deprive myself of that animating sunshine, by a too early declaration. For well
did I know, by other men's experience, that Miss Byron, at the same time that
her natural politeness, and sweetness of manners, engaged every heart, was not,
however, easily to be won.

But, notwithstanding all my efforts to prevent a competition which had grown
so fast upon me, I still found my uneasiness increase with my affection for
Miss Byron. I had then but one way left -- It was, to strengthen my heart, in
Clementina's cause, by Miss Byron's assistance: In short, to acquaint Miss
Byron with my situation; to engage her generosity for Clementina, and thereby
deprive myself of the encouragement my fond heart might have hoped for, had I
indulged my wishes of obtaining her favor. My end was answered, as to the
latter. Miss Byron's generosity was engaged for the Lady; but was it possible
that my obligations to her for that generosity should not add to my admiration
of her?

At the time I laid before her my situation (it was in Lord L's Study at
Colnebrooke) she saw my emotion. I could not conceal it. My abrupt departure
from her, must convince her, that my heart was too much engaged for that
situation See Vol. III. p. 193,
. I desired Dr. Bartlett to take an airing with me, in hopes, by his counsels,
to compose my disordered spirits Ibid. p. 194,
. He knew the state of my heart: He knew, with regard to the proposals I had
formerly made to the family at Bologna, relating to Religion and Residence (as
I had also declared to the brothers of the Lady) that no worldly grandeur
should ever have induced me to allow, in a beginning address, the terms, I was
willing, as a compromise, to allow to that Lady; for thoroughly had I weighed
the inconveniences which must attend such an alliance: The Lady zealous in her
Religion; the Confelsor who was to be allowed her, equally zealous; the spirit
of making proselytes so strong, and held by Roman Catholics to be so
meritorious; and myself no less in earnest in my Religion; I had no doubt to
pronounce, I told the good Doctor, in confidence, 'that I should be much more
happy in marriage with the Lady of Selby-house, were she to be induced to
honor me with her hand, than it was possible I could be with Lady Clementina,
even were they to comply with the conditions I had proposed; as I doubted not
but that Lady would also be, were her health restored, with a man of her own
nation and Religion:' And I owned to him, besides, 'that I could have no hope
of conquering the opposition given me by the friends of Clementina; and that I
could not at times but think hardly of the indignities cast upon me by some of
them.'

The doctor, I knew, at the same time that he lamented the evil treatment
Clementina met with from her mistaken friends, and her unhappy malady; and
admired her for her manifold excellencies; next to adored Miss Byron: And he
gave his voice accordingly. 'But here, doctor, is the case, said I --
Clementina is a woman with whom I had the honor of being acquainted before I
knew Miss Byron: Clementina has infinite merits: She herself refused me not:
She consented to accept of the terms I offered: She even besought her friends
to comply with them. She has an opinion of my honor, and of my tenderness for
her. Till I had the happiness of knowing Miss Byron, I was determined to await
either her recovery or release; and will Miss Byron herself, if she knows that,
forgive me (the circumstances not changed) for the change of a resolution of
which Clementina was so worthy? The treatment the poor Lady has met with, for
my sake, as once she wrote, though virgin modesty induced her to cross out those
words, has heightened her disorder. She still to this moment, wishes to see me:
While there is a possibility, though not a probability, of my being made the
humble instrument of restoring an excellent woman, who in herself deserves from
me every consideration of tenderness, ought I to wish to engage the heart (were
I able to succeed in my wishes) of the equally -excellent Miss Byron? -- Could
I be happy in my own mind, were I to try, and to succeed? And if not, must I
not be as ungrateful to her, as ungenerous to the other? -- Miss Byron's
happiness cannot depend on me. She must be happy in the happiness she will give
to the man of her choice, whoever shall be the man!'

We were all silent. My grandmamma and aunt seemed determined to be so; and I
could not speak. He proceeded:

You know not, dear Miss Byron, I wished you not to know, the conflicts my mind
labored with, when I parted with you on my going abroad. My destiny was wrapped
up in doubt, and uncertainty. I was invited over: Signor Jeronymo was deemed
irrecoverable: He wished to see me, and desired but to live to see me. My
presence was requested as a last effort to recover his noble sister. You
yourself, madam, applauded my resolution to go: But, that I might not be
thought to wish to engage you in my favor (so circumstanced as I was, that to
have done so, would have been to have acted unworthily to both Ladies,) I
insinuated my hopelessness of ever being nearer to you than I was.

I was not able to take a formal leave of you. I went over. Success attended
the kind, the soothing treatment which Clementina met with from her friends.
Success also attended the means used for the recovery of the noble Jeronymo.
Conditions were again proposed. Clementina, on her restoration, shone upon us
all even with a brighter luster than she did before her disorder. All her
friends consented to reward with the hand of their beloved daughter, the man to
whom they attributed secondarily the good they rejoiced in. I own to you,
Ladies, that what was before honor and compassion, now became admiration; and
I should have been unjust to the merits of so excellent a woman, if I could not
say, Love. I concluded myself already the husband of Clementina; yet it would
have been strange, if the welfare and happiness of Miss Byron were not the next
wish of my heart. I rejoiced that (despairing as I did of such an event before
I went over, because of the articles of Religion and Residence) I had not
sought to engage more than her friendship; and I devoted myself wholly to
Clementina -- I own it, Ladies -- And had I thought, Angel as she came out,
upon proof, that I could not have given her my heart, I had been equally
unjust, and ungrateful. For, dear Ladies, if you know all her story, you must
know, that occasion called her out to act gloriously; and that gloriously she
answered the call.

He paused. We were still silent. My grandmamma and aunt looked at each other
by turns. But their eyes, as well as mine, at different parts of his speech
showed their sensibility. He proceeded, gracefully looking down, and at first
with some little hesitation.

I am sensible, it was with a very ill grace, that, refused, as I must in
justice call it, though on the noblest motives, by Clementina, I come to offer
myself, and so soon after her refusal, to a Lady of Miss Byron's delicacy. I
should certainly have acted more laudably, respecting my own character only,
had I taken at least the usual time of a Widower-Love. But great minds, such as
Miss Byron's, and yours, Ladies, are above common forms, where decorum is not
too much neglected. As to myself, what do I, but declare a passion, that would
have been, but for one obstacle, which is now removed, as servent as man ever
knew? Dr. Bartlett has told me, madam [to me], that you and my sisters have
seen the Letters I wrote to him from Italy: By the contents of some of those,
and of the Letters I left with you, madam [to my grandmamma], you have seen
Clementina's constant adherence to the step she so greatly took. In this
Letter, received but last Wednesday [taking one out of his bosom], you will see
(my last Letters to them unreceived, as they must be) that I am urged by all
her family, for the sake of setting her an example, to address myself to a Lady
of my own country. This impels me, as I may say, to accelerate the humble
tender of my vows to you, madam. However hasty the step may be thought, in my
situation; Would not an inexcusable neglect, or seeming indifference, as if I
were balancing as to the person, have been attributable to me, had I, for dull
and cold form's sake, been capable of postponing the declaration of my
affection to Miss Byron? And if, madam, you can so far get over observances,
which perhaps, on consideration, will be found to be punctilious only, as to
give your heart, with your hand, to a man who himself has been perplexed by
what some would call (particular as it sounds) a double Love (an embarrasment,
however, not of his own seeking, or which he could possibly avoid) you will lay
him under obligation to your goodness (to your magnanimity, I will call it)
which all the affectionate tenderness of my life to come will never enable me
to discharge.

He then put the Letter (a translation of it enclosed) into my hand. I have
already answered it, madam, said he, and acquainted my friend, that I have
actually tendered myself to the acceptance of a Lady worthy of a sisterly
relation to their Clementina; and have not been rejected. Your goodness must
enable me (I humbly hope it will) to give them still stronger assurances of
your favor: On my happiness they have the generosity to build a part of their
own.

Not well before, I was more than once apprehensive of fainting, as he talked,
agreeable as was his talk, and engaging as was his manner. My grandmamma and
aunt saw my complexion change at his particular address to me, in the last part
of his speech. Each put her kind hand on one of mine, and held it on it, as my
other hand held my handkerchief now to my eyes, and now as a cover to my
self-felt varying cheek.

At the same moment that he ceased speaking, he took our triply-united hands in
both his; and in the most respectful, yet graceful manner, his Letter laid in
my lap, pressed each of the three with his lips; mine twice. I could not speak.
My grandmamma and aunt, delighted, yet tears standing in their eyes, looked
upon each other, and upon me; each as expecting the other to speak. I have
perhaps, said he, with some emotion, taken up too much of Miss Byron's
attention on this my first personal declaration: I will now return to the
company below. Tomorrow I will do myself the honor to dine with you. We will
for this evening postpone the important subject. Miss Byron, I presume, will be
best pleased to have it so. I shall tomorrow be favored with the result of
your deliberations. Mean time may I meet with an interceding friend in every
one I have had the pleasure to see this day! I must flatter myself with the
honor of Miss Byron's whole heart, as well as with the approbation of all her
friends. I cannot be thought at present, to deserve it; but it shall be the
endeavor of my life so to do.

He withdrew, with a grace which was all his own.

The moment he was gone from us, my grandmamma threw her arms about her
Harriet, then about my aunt; and they congratulated me, and each other.

We were all pained at heart, when we read the Letter. It is from Signor
Jeronymo, urging your brother to set the example to his sister, which they so
much want her to follow. I send you the translation. Pray return it. Poor Lady
Clementina! Without seeing the last Letters he wrote to them, she seems to be
tired into compliance. I will not say one half that is upon my mind on this
occasion, as you will have the Letter before you. His last-written Letters will
not favor her wishes. Poor Lady! Can I forbear to pity her? And still the more
is she to be pitied, as your brother's excellencies rise upon us.

I besought my aunt to excuse me to the company.

Sir Charles joined his friends (HIS friends indeed they are all!) with a
vivacity in his air and manner, which charmed everybody; while the silly heart
of your Harriet would not allow her to enter into company the whole night.
Indeed it wanted the inducement of his presence; for, to every one's regret, he
declined staying supper; yet my uncle put it to him -- What, Sir, do you choose
to sup at your inn? My uncle will have it, that Sir Charles looked an answer of
displeasure for suffering him to go to it atall. My uncle is a good-natured
man. He will sometimes concede, when he is not convinced; and on every
appearance which makes for his opinion, we are sure to hear of it.

I shall have an opportunity tomorrow morning early (This morning I might say)
to send this long Letter by a neighbor, who is obliged to ride post to town on
his own affairs.

Had I not had this agreeable employment, rest, I am sure, would not have come
near me. Your brother, I hope, has found it. Remember, I always mean to include
my dear Lady L. in this correspondence: Anybody else, but discretionally. My
dear Ladies both, Adieu.

HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XIX. Signor JERONYMO della PORRETTA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Bologna, Sunday, Sept. 24. Oct. 5.
WE have at last, my Grandison, some hopes given us, that our dear Clementina
will yield to our wishes.

The General, with his Lady, made us a visit from Naples, on purpose to make a
decisive effort, as he called it; and vowed that he would not return till he
left her in a disposition to oblige us. The Bishop at one time brought the
Patriarch to reason with her; who told her, that she ought not to think of the
veil, unless her father and mother consented to her assuming it.

Mrs. Beaumont was prevailed upon to favor us with her company. She declared
for us: And on Thursday last Clementina was still harder set. Her Father,
Mother, the General and his Lady, the Bishop, all came into my chamber, and
sent for her. She came. Then did we all supplicate her to oblige us. The
General was at first tenderly urgent: The Bishop besought her: The young
Marchioness pressed her: Her Mother took her hand between both hers, and in
silent tears could only sigh over it: And, lastly, my Father dropped down on one
knee to her. My daughter, my child, said he, oblige me. Your Jeronymo could not
refrain from tears.

She fell on her knee -- O my Father, said she, rise, or I shall die at your
feet! Rise, my Father!

Not, my dear, till you consent to oblige me.

Grant me but a little time, my Father, my dear, my indulgent Father!

The General thought he saw a flexibility which we had never before seen in her
on this subject, and called upon her for her instant determination. Shall a
Father kneel in vain? said he. Shall a Mother in weeping silence in vain
entreat? -- Now, my sister, comply -- or -- He sternly stopped.

Have patience with me, said she, but till the Chevalier's next Letters come:
You expect them soon. Let me receive his next Letter. And putting her hand to
her forehead -- Rise, my Father, or I die at your feet!

I thought the General pushed too hard. I begged that the next Letters might be
waited for.

Be it so, said my father, rising, and raising her: But whatever be the
contents, remember, my dearest child, that I am your Father, your indulgent
Father; and oblige me.

My dear Clementina, said the General, will not this paternal goodness prevail
upon you? Your Father, Mother, Brothers, are all ready to kneel to you; Yet are
we all to be slighted? And is a foreigner, an Englishman, a Heretic (great and
noble as is the man; a man, too, whom you have so gloriously refused) to be
preferred to us all? Who can bear the thoughts of such a preference!

And remember, my Sister, said the Bishop, that you already know his opinion.
You have already had his advice, in the Letters he wrote to you in the month's
correspondence which passed between you, before he left Italy. Think you, that
the Chevalier Grandison can recede from an opinion solemnly given, the
circumstances not having varied?

I have not been well. It is wicked to oppose my Father, my Mother: I cannot
argue with my Brothers. I have not been well. Spare me, spare me, my Lords, to
the General and the Bishop. My Father gives me time: Don't you deny it me.

My mother, afraid of renewing her disorder, said; Withdraw, my dear, if you
choose to do so, and compose yourself: The intention is not to compel, but to
persuade you.

O madam! said she, persuasion so strongly urged by my parents, is more than
compulsion. -- I take the liberty you give me.

She hurried to Mrs. Beaumont, and, throwing her arms about her, O madam, I
have been oppressed! Oppressed by persuasion! By a kneeling Father! By a
weeping Mother! By entreating Brothers! -- And this is but persuasion! -- Cruel
persuasion!

Mrs. Beaumont then entered into argument with her. She represented to her the
General's inflexibility: Her Father's and Mother's indulgence: The wishes of
her two other Brothers: She pleaded your opinion given as an impartial man, not
merely as a Protestant: She told her of an admirable young Lady of your own
country, who was qualified to make you happy: of whom she had heard several of
your countrymen speak with great distinction. This last plea, as the intimate
friendship between you and Mrs. Beaumont is so well known, took her attention.
She would not for the world stand in the way of the Chevalier Grandison. She
wished you to be happy, she said, whatever became of her. Father Marescotti
strongly enforced this point; and advised her to come to some resolution,
before your next Letters arrived, as it was not to be doubted, but the contents
of them would support your former opinion. The Patriarch's arguments were
re-urged with additional force. A day was named when she was again to be
brought before her assembled friends. Mrs. Beaumont applauded her for the
magnanimity she had already shown, in the discharge of her first duty; and
called upon her to distinguish herself equally in the filial.

Clementina took time to consider of these and other arguments; and after three
hours passed in her closet, she gave the following written paper to Mrs.
Beaumont; which, she said, she hoped, when read in full assembly, would excuse
her from attending her friends in the proposed congress.

'I Am tired out, my dear Mrs. Beaumont, with your kindly-meant importunities:

'With the importunities, prayers, and entreaties of my brothers.

'O my mamma, how well do you deserve even implicit obedience, from a daughter
who has overclouded your happy days! You never knew discomfort till your
hapless Clementina gave it you! The sacrifice of my life would be a poor
atonement for what I have made you suffer.

'But who can withstand a kneeling Father? Indeed my pappa, ever good, ever
indulgent, I dread to see you! Let me not again behold you as on Thursday last.

'I have denied to my self, and such the motive, that I must not, I do not
repent it, the man I esteemed. I never can be his.

'Father Marescotti, though he now loves the man, suggests, that my late disorder
might be a judgment upon me for suffering my heart to be engaged by the
Heretic.

'I am absolutely forbidden to think of atoning for my fault by the only
measure that, in my opinion, could have done it.

'You tell me, Mrs. Beamount, and all my friends, join with you, that honor,
generosity, and the esteem which I avow for the Chevalier Grandison, as my
friend, as my fourth brother, all join to oblige me to promote the happiness of
a man I myself have disappointed. And you are of opinion, that there is one
particular woman of his own country, who is capable of making him happy -- But
do you say, that I ought to give the example? -- Impossible. Honor, and the
punctilio of woman, will not permit me to do that! --

'But thus pressed; thus dreading again to see a kneeling Father; a weeping
Mother; and having reason to think I may not live long; that a relapse into my
former malady, with the apprehensions of which Father Marescotti terrifies me,
may be the punishment of my disobedience [Cruel Father Marescotti, to terrify
me with an affliction I so much dread!]; and that it will be a consolation to
me, in my departing hour, to reflect that I have obeyed my parents, in an
article on which their hearts are immoveably fixed; and still further being
assured, that they will look upon my resignation as a compensation for all the
troubles I have given them, for many many months passed -- God enable me, I
pray, to resign to their will. But if I cannot, shall I be still entreated,
still persuaded? -- I hope not. -- I will do my endeavor to prevail on myself
to obey -- But whatever be the event of my Self-contendings, Grandison must
give the example.'

How did we congratulate ourselves, when we read this paper, faint as are the
hopes it gives us!

Our whole endeavor is now, to treat her with tender observance, that she may
not think of receding. Nor will we ask her to see the person she knows we
favor, till we can assure her, that you will set her the example. And if there
be a Lady with whom you think you could be happy, may not this, my dear
Grandison, pleaded by you, be a motive with her?

The Count of Belvedere has made overtures to us, which are too great for our
acceptance, were this alliance to take place. We have been told, but not by
himself, the danger to which his despair had subjected him, in more than one
visit to you at Bologna, had you not borne with his rashness. You know him to
be a man of probity, of piety. He is a zealous Catholic; and you must allow,
that a religious zeal is a strengthener, a confirmer, of all the social
sanctions. He is learned; and, being a domestic man, he, contrary to the
Italian custom, admires in a wife those intellectual improvements which make a
woman a fit companion for her husband. You know how much the Marchioness
excells almost all the women of quality in Italy, in a taste for polite
literature: You know she has encouraged the same taste in her daughter; and the
Count considers her as the only woman in Italy with whom he can be happy.

As you, my Grandison, cannot now be my brother by marriage, the Count of
Belvedere is the only man in the world I can wish to be so. He is of Italy. My
sister, always so dear to us, and he, will be ever with us, or we with them. He
knows the unhappy way she has been in; and was so far from making that an
objection, that when her malady was at the height (being ecouraged by
physicians to hope that her recovery would be the probable consequence) he
would have thought himself the happiest of men, could he have been honored
with her hand. He knows her Love of you. He adores her for her motive of
refusing you. He loves you; and is confident of the inviolable honor of both:
Whose alliance, on all these considerations, can be so desirable to us as that
with the Count of Belvedere?

Surely, my dear friend, it must be in your power to set the example: In yours,
who could subdue a whole family of zealous Catholics, and keep your own
religion; and who could engage the virgin heart of one of the most delicate
women in the world. What woman, who has a heart to bestow; what family, that
has a daughter or sister to give, can withstand you? Religion and Country of
both the same?

Give us hope, therefore, my dear Grandison, that you will make the effort.
Assure us, that you will not scruple, if you can succeed, to set the example:
and on this assurance we will claim from Clementina the effects of the hope she
has given us: And if we can prevail. will in England return you thanks for the
numberless favors you have conferred upon us.

Thus earnestly, as well from inclination, as in compliance with the pressing
entreaties of every one of a family which I hope are still, and ever, will be,
dear to you, do I, your Jeronymo, your Brother, your Friend, solicit you. Mrs.
Beaumont joins with us. She scruples not, she bids me tell you, to pronounce,
that you and Clementina will both be more happy; she, with the Count of
Belvidere (your respective Countries so distant, your Religion so different);
you, with an Englishwoman; than you could have been with each other. Mrs.
Beaumont has owned to me in private, that you often in conversation with her,
even while you had hope of calling Clementina yours, lamented, for her sake, as
well as your own, the unhappy situation, with respect to Religion, you were
both in; and that you had declared more than once to her, as indeed you did
once to us, that in a beginning address you would not have compromised thus
with a Princess. May we not expect everything, my Grandison, from your
magnanimity? We hope it is in your power, and we doubt not your will, to
contribute to our happiness. But whatever be the event, I beseech you, my dear
friend, continue to love

Your JERONYMO.

LETTER XX. Lady G. To Miss BYRON.
Grosvenor-Square, Sunday, Oct. 15.
CAN I forgive your pride, your petulance? -- No, Harriet; positively no! I
write to scold you; and having ordered my Lord to sup abroad, I shall perhaps
oblige you with a long Letter. We honest folks, who have not abundance of
Love-fooling upon our hands, find ourselves happy in a good deal of quiet
leisure; and I love to chide and correct you wise ones. -- Thus then I begin --

Ridiculous parade among you! I blame you all. Could he not have been Mrs.
Shirley's guest, if he was not to be permitted to repose under the same roof
with his sovereign Lady and Mistress? But must you let him go to an inn? --
What for? Why to show the world he was but on a foot, at present, with your
other humble servants; and be thought no more, by the insolent Greville, and
affronted as an invader of his rights. Our Sex is a foolish Sex: Too little or
too much parade. Lord help us! Were it not that we must be afraid to appear
over-forward to the man himself, the world is a contemptible thing, and we
should treat it as such.

And yet, after all, what with Lady Clementina, what with the world, and what
with our own punctilio, and palpitating hearts, and-so-forth, and all that, and
more than all that; I own you are pretty nicely circumstanced. But, my life for
yours, you will behave like a simpleton, on occasion of his next address to
you: And why? Did you ever know that people did not, who are full of
apprehensions, who aimed at being very delicate, who were solicitous to take
their measures from the judgment of those without them; pragmatical souls,
perhaps, who from their notions either on what they have read, or by the
addresses to them of their own silly fellows, awkward and unmeaning, and by no
means to be compared, for integrity, understanding, politeness, to my brother?
Consider, child, that he having seen, in different countries, perhaps a hundred
women, equally specious with the present mistress of his destiny, were form and
outward grace to be the attractives, is there -- fore sitter to give than take
the example.

But, Harriet, I write to charge you not to increase your own difficulties by
too much parade: Your frankness of heart is a prime consideration with him. He
expects not to meet with the girl, but the sensible woman, in his address to
you. He is pursuing a laudable end -- Don't teaze him with pug's tricks --
'What, signifies asking me now?' Did you not lay your heads together? And the
wisest which ever were set on women's shoulders? But indeed I never knew
consultations of any kind turn to account. It is only a parcel of people
getting together, proposing doubts, and puzzling one another, and ending as
they began, if not worse. Doctors differ. So many persons, so many minds.

And O how our petulant heart throbbed with indignation, because he came not to
breakfast with you! What benefit has a polite man over an unpolite one, where
the latter shall have his rusticity allowed for (O that is his way!) and when
the other has expectations drawn upon him, which, if not critically answered,
he is not to be forgiven! -- He is a prudent man! He may have overslept himself
-- Might dream of Clementina. Then it was a fault in him, that he stayed to
dine on the road -- His horses might want rest, truly* -- Upon my word,
Harriet, a woman in Love, is -- a woman in Love. Wise or foolish before, we are
all equally foolish then: The same froward, petulant, captious, babies! -- I
protest, we are very silly creatures, all of us, in these circumstances; and
did not Love make men as great fools as ourselves, they would hardly think us
worthy of their pursuit. Yet I am so true to the Free-masonry myself, that I
would think the man who should dare to say half I have written, of our
Dollships, ought not to go away with his life.

My sister and I are troubled about this Greville. Inform us, the moment you
can, of the particulars of what passed between my brother and him; pray do. We
long also to see the Letter he has put into your hands, from Bologna. It is on
the road, we hope.

Caroline and I are as much concerned for your honor, your punctilio, as you,
or any of you, can be. But by the account you give me of my brother's address
to you in presence of your grandmother and aunt, as well as from our knowledge
of his politeness, neither you nor we need to trouble our heads about it: It
may be all left to him. He knows so well what becomes the character of the
woman whom he hopes to call his wife, that you will be sure of your dignity
being preserved, if you place a confidence in him. And yet no man is so much
above mere formal regards as he is. Let me enumerate instances, from your
Letter before me.

His own intention, in the first place, not to surprise you by his visits, as
you apprehended he would, which would have made him look like a man of
selfimagined consequence to you -- His providing himself with accommodations at
an inn; and not giving way to the invitation, even of your sagacious uncle
Selby [I must raily him. Does he spare me?] -- His singling you out on Friday
from your men-friends, yet giving you the opportunity of your aunt's and
grandmother's company, to make his personal application to you for your favor
-- His requesting the interest of your other friends with you, as if he
presumed not on your former acquaintance, and this after an application, not
discouraged, made to your friends and you.

As to his equanimity in his first address to you; his retaining your hand,
forsooth, before all your friends, and so-forth; never find fault with that,
Hariet. [Indeed you do make an excuse for the very freedom you blame -- So
Lover-like! -- ] He is the very man, that a conscious young woman, as you are,
should wish to be addressed by: So much courage, yet so much true modesty --
What, I warrant, you would have had a man chalked out for you* who should have
stood at distance, bowed, scraped, trembled; while you had nothing to do, but
bridle, and make stiff courtesies to him, with your hands before you -- Plagued
with his doubts, and with your can dissidences; afraid he would now, and now,
and now, pop out the question; which he had not the courage to put; and so
running on, simpering, fretting, fearing, two parrallel lines, side by side,
and never meeting; till some interposing friends, in pity to you both, put
one's head pointing to the other's head, and stroking and clapping the shoulder
of each, set you at each other, as men do by other dunghil-bred creatures.

You own, he took no notice of your emotion, when he first addressed himself to
you; so gave you an opportunity to look up, which otherwise you would have
wanted. Now don't you think you know a man creature or two, who would on such
an occasion, have grinned you quite out of countenance, and insulted you with
their pity for being modest? -- But you own, that he had emotion too, when he
first opened his mind to you -- What a duce would the girl have? -- Orme and
Fowler in your head, no doubt! The tremblings of rejected men, and the
fantasies of romantic women, were to be a rule to my brother, I suppose with
your mock-majesty! -- Ah, Harriet! Did I not say that we women are very silly
creatures? -- But my brother is a good man -- So we must have something to find
fault with him for. -- Hah, hah, hah, hah, What do you laugh at, Charlotte? --
What do I laugh at, Harriet? -- Why, at the idea of a couple of Loveyers, taken
each with a violent ague-fit, at their first approach to each other -- Hands
shaking -- Knees trembling -- Lips quivering -- Tongue faultering -- Teeth
chattering -- I had a good mind to present you with an ague-dialogue between
such a trembling couple. -- I, I, I, I, says the Lover -- You, you, you, you,
says the girl, if able to speak at all. But, Harriet, you shall have the whole,
on demand. Rave at me, if you will: But Love, as it is called by boys and
girls, shall ever be the subject of my ridicule. Does it not lead us girls into
all manner of absurdities, inconveniences, undutifulness, disgrace? --
Villainous Cupidity! -- It does.

To be serious -- Neither does my brother address you in a style that impeaches
either his own understanding, or yours. -- Another fault, Harriet, is it not?
-- But sure you are not so very a girl!

The justice he does to Lady Clementina and her family [Let me be very serious,
when I speak of Clementina] is a glorious instance as well of his greatness of
mind, as of his sincerity. He has no need to depreciate one Lady, to help him
to exalt (or do justice, I should rather say, to) another. By praising her, he
makes noble court to you, in supposing you, as you are, one of the most
generous of women. How great is his compliment to both Ladies, when he calls
Clementina the Miss Byron of Italy! Who, my dear, ever courted woman as my
brother courts you? Indeed there can be but very few men who have such a woman
to court.

He suffers you not to ask for an account of the state of his heart from the
time he knew you first, till now. He gives it to you, unasked. And how glorious
is that account, both to you, and himself!

Let us look back upon his conduct when last in Italy, and when every step
seemed to lead to his being husband of another woman.

The recovery of Clementina, and of her noble brother, seem to be the
consequence of his friendly goodness. The grateful family all join to reward
him with their darling's hand; her heart supposed to be already his. He, like
the man of honor he is, concludes himself bound by his former offers. They
accept him upon those terms. The Lady's merits thine out with transcendent
luster in the eyes of every one, even of us his sisters, and of you, Harriet,
and your best friends: Must they not in his, to whom Merit was ever the first,
Beauty but the second attractive? He had no tie to any other woman on earth: He
had only the tenderness of his own heart, with regard to Miss Byron, to contend
with. Ought he not to have contended with it? He did; and so far conquered, as
to enable himself to be just to the Lady, whose great qualities, and the
concurrence of her friends in his favor, had converted Compassion for her into
Love. And who, that hear her story, can forbear to Love her? But with what
tenderness, with what politeness, does he, in his Letter to his chosen
correspondent, express himself of Miss Byron! He declares, that if she were not
to be happy, it would be a great abatement of his own felicity. You, however,
remember how politely he recals his apprehensions that you may not, on his
account, be altogether so happy as he wishes, as the suggestions of his own
presumption; and censures himself for barely supposing, that he had been of
consequence enough with you to give you pain.

How much to your honor before he went over, does he account for your smiles,
for yourfrankness of heart, in his company! He would not build upon them: Nor
indeed could he know the state of your heart, as we did: He had not the
opportunity. How silly was your punctilio, that made you sometimes fansy it was
out of mere compassion that he revealed to you the state of his engagement
abroad! You see he tells you, that such was his opinion of your greatness of
mind, that he thought he had no other way but to put it in your power to check
him, if his Love for you should stimulate him to an act of neglect to the Lady
to whom (she having never refused him, and not being then in a condition either
to claim him or set him free) he thought himself under obligation. Don't you
revere him for his honor to her, the nature of her malady considered? What
must he have suffered, in this conflict!

Well, and now by a strange turn in the Lady, but glorious to herself, as he
observes, the obstacle removed, he applies to Miss Byron for her favor. How
sensible is he of what delicacy requires from her! How justly (respecting his
Love for you) does he account for not postponing, for the sake of cold and dull
form, as he justly expresses it, his address to you! How greatly does the
Letter he delivered to you, favor his argument! Ah the poor Clementina! Cruel
persuades her relations! I hate and pity them, in a breath. Never, before, did
hatred and pity meet in the same bosom, as they do in mine, on this occasion.
His difficulties, my dear, and the uncommon situation he is in, as if he were
offering you but a divided Love, enhance your glory. You are reinstated on the
Female throne, to the lowermost footstep of which you once was afraid you had
descended. You are offered a man, whose perplexities have not proceeded from
the entanglements of intrigue, inconstancy, perfidy; but from his own
compassionate nature: And could you, by any other way in the world than by this
supposed divided Love, have had it in your power, by accepting his
humbly-offered hand, to lay him under obligation to you, which he thinks he
never shall be able to discharge? Lay him -- Who? -- Sir CHARLES GRANDISON --
For whom so many virgin hearts have sighed in vain! -- And what a triumph to
our Sex is this, as well as to my Harriet!

And now, Harriet, let me tell you, that my sister and I are both in great
expectations of your next Letter. It is, it must be, written before you will
have this. My brother is more than man: You have only to show yourself to be
superior to the forms of woman. If you play the fool with him, now, that you
have the power you and we have so long wished you; if you give pain to his
noble, because sincere heart, by any the least shadow of Female affectation;
you, who have hitherto been distinguished for so amiable a frankness of heart;
you, who cannot doubt his honor -- the honor of a man who solicits your
favor in even a great manner, a manner in which no man before him ever courted
a woman, because few men before him have ever been so particularly
circumstanced; a manner that gives you an opportunity to outshine, in your
acceptance of him, even the noble Clementina in her refusal; as bigotry must
have been, in part, her motive; if, I say, you act foolishly, weakly, now --
Look to it -- You will depreciate, if not cast away your own glory. Remember,
you have a man to deal with, who, from our behavior to Mrs. Oldham, at his
first return to England, took measure of our minds, and, without loving us the
less for it, looked down upon us with pity; and made us, ever since, look upon
ourselves in a diminishing light, and as sisters who have greater reason to
glory in their brother, than he has in them. Would you not rather, you who are
to stand in a still nearer relation to him, invite his admiration, than his
pity? Till Friday night last you had it: What Saturday has produced, we shall
soon guess.

Not either Lord L. or Lord G. not Emily, not aunt Eleanor, now, either see or
hear read what you write, except here-and-there a passage, which you yourself
would not scruple to hear read to them. Are you not our third sister? To each
of us our next Self: And, what gives you still more dignity, the elected wife
of our brother!

Adieu, my love! In longing expectation of your next, we subscribe

Your affectionate CAROLINE L. CHARLOTTE G.


LETTER XXI. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Saturday, Oct. 14.
MR Fenwick has just now been telling us, from the account given him by that
Greville, vile man, how the affair was between him and Sir Charles Grandison.
Take it briefly, as follows:

About Eight yesterday morning, that audacious wretch went to the George at
Northampton; and, after making his enquiries, demanded an audience of Sir
Charles Grandison. Sir Charles was near dressed, and had ordered his chariot to
be ready, with intent to visit us early.

He admitted of Mr. Greville's visit. Mr. Greville confesses, that his own
behavior was peremptory (his word for insolent. I suppose). I hear, Sir, said
he, that y^u are come down into this country in order to carry off from u the
richest jewel in it -- I need not say whom. My name is Greville: I have long
made my addresses to her, and have bound myself under a vow, that, were a
Prince to be my competitor, I would dispute his title to her.

You seem to be a princely man, Sir, said Sir Charles, offended with his air
and words, no doubt. You need not, Mr. Greville, have told me your name: I have
heard of you. What your pretensions are, I know not; your vow is nothing to me:
I am master of my own actions; and shall not account to you, or any man living,
for them.

I presume, Sir, you came down with the intention I have hinted at? I beg only
your answer as to that. I beg it a favor, gentleman to gentleman?

The manner of your address to me, Sir, is not such as will entitle you to an
answer for your own sake. I will tell you, however, that I am come down to pay
my devoirs to Miss Byron. I hope for acceptance; and know not that I am to make
allowance for the claim of any man on earth.

Sir Charles Grandison, I know your character: I know your bravery. It is from
that knowledge that I consider you as a sit man for me to talk to. I am not a
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, Sir.

I make no account of who or what you are, Mr. Greville. Your visit is not, at
this time, a welcome one: I am going to breakfast with Miss Byron. I shall be
here in the evening, and at leisure, then, to attend to anything you shall
think yourself authorized to say to me, on this or any other subject.

We may be overheard, Sir -- Shall I beg you to walk with me into the garden
below? You are going to breakfast, you say, with Miss Byron. Dear Sir Charles
Grandison, oblige me with an audience, of five minutes only, in the back-yard,
or garden.

In the evening, Mr. Greville, command me anywhere: But I will not be broken in
upon now.

I will not leave you at liberty, Sir Charles, to make your visit where you are
going, till I am gratified with one five minutes conference with you below.

Excuse me then, M. Greville, that I give orders, as if you were not here. Sir
Charles ran. Up came one of his servants -- Is the chariot ready? -- Almost
ready, was the answer. -- Make haste. Saunders may see his friends in this
neighborhood: He may stay with them till Monday. Frederick and you attend me.

He took out a Letter, and read in it, as he walked about the room, with great
composure, not regarding Mr. Greville, who stood swelling, as he owned, at one
of the windows, till the servant withdrew; and then he addressed himself to Sir
Charles in language of reproach on this contemptuous treatment. -- Mr.
Greville, said Sir Charles, you may be thankful, perhaps, that you are in my
own apartment: This intrusion is a very ungentlemanly one.

Sir Charles was angry, and expressed impatience to be gone. Mr. Greville
owned, that he knew not how to contain himself, to see his rival, with so many
advantages in his person and air, dressed avowedly to attend the woman he had
so long -- Shall I say been troublesome to? For I am sure he had never the
shadow of countenance from me.

I repeat my demand, Sir Charles, of a conference of five minutes below.

You have no right to make any demand upon me, Mr. Greville: If you think you
have, the evening will be time enough. But, even then, you must behave more
like a gentleman, than you have done hitherto, to entitle youself to be
considered as on a foot with me.

Not on a foot with you, Sir! -- And he put his hand upon his sword. A
gentleman is on a foot with a Prince, Sir, in a point of honor --

Go, then, and find out your prince, Mr. Greville: I am no Prince. And you have
as much reason to address yourself to the man you never saw, as to me.

His servant just then showing himself, and withdrawing; Mr. Greville, added
he, I leave you in possession of this apartment. Your servant, Sir. In the
evening I shall be at your command.

One word with you, Sir Charles -- One word --

What would Mr. Greville? turning back.

Have you made proposals? Are your proposals accepted?

I repeat, that you ought to have behaved differently, Mr. Greville, to be
entitled to an answer to these questions.

Answer me, however, Sir: I beg it as a favor.

Sir Charles took out his watch. -- After Nine: I shall make them wait. But
thus I answer you: I have made proposals; and, as I told you before, I hope I
shall he accepted.

Were you any other man in the world, Sir, the man before you might question
your success with a woman whose difficulties are augmented by the
obsequiousness of her admirers. But such a man as you, would not have come down
on a fool's errand. I love Miss Byron to distraction. I could not show my face
in the county, and suffer any man out of it to carry away such a prize.

Out of the county, Mr. Greville! What narrowness is this! But I pity you for
your Love of Miss Byron: And --

You pity me, Sir! interrupted he. -- I bear not such haughty tokens of
superiority. Either give up your pretensions to Miss Byron, or make me sensible
of it, in the way of a gentleman.

Mr. Greville, your servant: And he went down.

The wretch followed him; and when they came to the yard, and Sir Charles was
stepping into the chariot, he took his hand, several persons present -- We are
observed, Sir Charles, whispered he. Withdraw with me, for a few moments. By
the great God of Heaven, you must not refuse me. I cannot bear that you should
go thus triumphantly on the business you are going upon.

Sir Charles suffered himself to be led hy the wretch: And when they were come
to a private spot, Mr. Greville drew, and demanded Sir Charles to do the like,
putting himself in a posture of defense.

Sir Charles put his hand on his sword, but drew it not. Mr. Greville, said he,
know your own safety; and was turning from him, when the wretch swore he would
admit of no alternative, but his giving up his pretensions to Miss Byron.

His rage, as Mr. Fenwick describes it from himself, making him dangerous, Sir
Charles drew. -- I only defend myself, said he -- Greville, you keep no guard
-- He put by his pass with his sword; and, without making a push, closed in
with him, twisted his sword out of his hand; and, pointing his own to his
breast, You see my power, Sir -- Take your life, and your sword. -- But if you
are either wise, or would be thought a man of honor, tempt not again your fate.

And am I again master of my sword, and unhurt? It Is generous -- The evening,
you say?

Still I say, I will be yours in the evening, either at your own house, or at
my inn; but not as a Duellist, Sir: You know my principles.

How can this be? and he swore -- How was it done? Expose me not at
Selby-house. How the devil could this be? -- I expect you in the evening here.

And he went off a back-way. Sir Charles, instead of going directly into his
chariot, went up to his apartment; wrote his Billet to my aunt to excuse
himself, finding it full late to get hither in time, and being somewhat
discomposed in his temper, as he owned to us: And then he took an airing in his
chariot, till he came hither to dine.

But how should we have been alarmed, had we known that Sir Charles declined
supping here, in order to meet the violent man again at his inn! And how did we
again blame ourselves for taking amiss his not supping with us!

Mr. Fenwick says, that Mr. Greville got him to accompany him to the George.

Sir Charles apologized, with great civility, to Mr. Greville, for making him
wait for him. Mr. Greville, had he been disposed for mischief, had no use of
his right-arm. It was sprained by the twisting of his sword from it, and in a
sling.

Sir Charles behaved to them both with great politeness; and Mr. Greville
owned, that he had acted nobly by him, in returning his sword, even before his
passion was calmed, and in not using his own. But it was some time, it seems,
before he was brought into this temper. And what a good deal contributed to it,
was, Sir Charles's acquainting him, that he had not given particulars at
Selby-house, or to anybody, of the fray between them; but referred it to
himself to give them, as he should think proper. This forbearance he highly
applauded, and was even thankful for it. Fenwick shall, in confidence, said he,
report this matter to your honor, and my own mortification, as the truth
requires, at Selby-house. Let me not be hated by Miss Byron, on this account.
My passion gave me disadvantage. I will try to honor you, Sir Charles: But I
must hate you, if you succeed. One condition, however, I make: That you
reconcile me to the Selbys, and Miss Byron; and if you are likely to be
successful, let me have the credit of reporting, that it is by my consent.

They parted with civility; but not, it seems, till a late hour. Sir Charles,
as Mr. Beauchamp and Dr. Bartlett have told us, was always happy in making, by
his equanimity, generosity, and forgiveingness, fast friends of inveterate
enemies. Thank God, the issue was not unhappy!

Mr. Fenwick says, that the rencounter is very little guessed at, or talked of
[Thank God for that too!]; and to those few, who have enquired of Mr. Greville
or Mr. Fenwick about it, it has been denied; and now Greville, as Mr. Fenwick
had done before, declares he will give out, that he yields up all his hopes of
Miss Byron; but says, that Sir Charles Grandison, of whose address everybody
already talks, is the only man in England to whom he could resign his
pretensions.

He insists upon Sir Charles's dining with him tomorrow; Mr. Fenwick's also.
Sir Charles is so desirous that the neighborhood should conclude, that he and
these gentlemen are on a foot of good understanding, that he made the less
scruple, for every-one's sake, to accept of his invitation.

I am very, very thankful, my dearest Lady G. that the constant blusterings of
this violent man, for so many months past, are so happily overblown.

Mr. Fenwick, as I guessed he would, made proposals to my aunt and me for my
Lucy. Lucy has a fine fortune: But if she had not, he shall not have her!
Indeed he is not worthy of Lucy's mind. He must be related to me, he said: But
I answered, No man must call Lucy Selby his, who can have any other motive for
his wishes but her merit.

We hourly expect your brother. The new danger he has been in, on my account,
endears him still more to us all. How, how will you forbear, said my uncle,
throwing yourself in his arms at once, when he demands the result of our
deliberations? If I follow Mr. Deane's advice. I am to give him my hand at the
first word: If Lucy's and Nancy's, he is not to ask me twice: If my
grandmamma's and aunt's (They are always good) I am to act as occasion
requires, and as my own confided-in prudence will suggest at the time; but to
be sure not to be guilty of affectation. But still, my dear Ladies, something
sticks with me (and ought it not?) in relation to the noble Clementina!

LETTER XXII. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Saturday Night, Oct. 14.
NOW, my dear Ladies L. and G. let me lay before you, just as it happened, for
your approbation, or censure, all that has passed between the best of men and
your Harriet. Happy shall I be, If I can be acquitted by his sisters.

My grandmamma went home last night, but was here before Sir Charles; yet he
came a little after Eleven. We were all in the great parlour when he came. He
addressed us severally with his usual politeness, and my grandmother,
particularly, with such an air of reverence, as did himself credit, because of
her years and wisdom.

We all congratulated him on what we had heard from Mr. Fenwick.

Mr. Greville and I, said he, are on every good terms. When I have the
presumption to think myself a welcome guest, I am to introduce him as my
friend. Mr. Greville, though so long your neighbor, modestly doubts his own
welcome.

Well he may, said my aunt Selby, after -- No afters, dear madam, if you mean
anything that has passed between him and me.

He again addressed himself to me. I rejoice, Sir, said I, that you have
quieted so happily a spirit always thought uncontrollable.

You must tell me, madam, replied he, when I can be allowed to introduce Mr.
Greville to you?

Shall I answer for my cousin, said Lucy? -- I did not, Sir Charles, think you
such a designer. -- You were not, you know, to introduce Mr. Greville, till you
were assured of being yourself a very welcome guest to my cousin.

I own my plot, replied he: I had an intent to surprise Miss Byron into an
implied favor to myself.

You need not, Sir Charles, thought I, take such a method.

On his taking very kind notice of my cousin James; Do you know, Sir Charles,
said my uncle (whose joy, when it overflows, seldom suffers the dear man to
consult seasonableness) that that boy is already in Love with your Emily? --
The youth blushed --

I am obliged to everybody who loves my Emily. She is a favorite of Miss
Byron -- Must she not then be a good girl?

She is indeed a favorite, said I; and so great a one, that I know not who can
deserve her.

I said this, lest Sir Charles should think (on a supposition that my uncle
meant something) that my cousin had my countenance.

Sir Charles then addressed himself to my grandmamma and aunt, speaking low --
I hope, Ladies, I may be allowed in your presence to resume the conversation of
yesterday with Miss Byron?

No, Sir Charles, answered my grandmamma, affecting to look serious, that must
not be.

Must not be, madam! and he seemed surprised, and affected too. My aunt was a
little startled; but not so much as she would have been, had she not known the
lively turns which that excellent parent sometimes gives to subjects of
conversation.

Must not be, I repent, Sir Charles: But I will not suffer you to be long in
suspense. We have always, when proposals of this kind have been made, referred
ourselves to our Harriet. She has prudence: She has gratitude. We will leave
her and you together, when she is inclined to hear you on the interesting
subject. I know I am right. Harriet is above disguises. She will be obliged to
speak for herself, when she has not either her aunt or me to refer to. She and
you are not acquaintance of yesterday. You, Sir, I dare say, will not he
displeased with the opportunity --

Neither Miss Byron nor I, madam, could wish for the absence of two such
parental relations. But this reference I will presume to construe as a hopeful
prognostic. May I now, through your mediation, madam (to my aunt) hope for the
opportunity of addressing myself to Miss Byron?

My aunt, taking me to the window, told me what had passed. I was a little
surprised at my grandmamma's reference to myself only. I expostulated with my
aunt: It is plain* madam, that Sir Charles expected not this compliment.

Your grandmamma's motion surprised me a little my dear: It proceeded from the
fullness of her joy: She meant a compliment to you both: There is now no
receding. Let us withdraw together.

What, madam, at his proposal? As if expecting to be followed? -- See how my
uncle looks at me! Every one's eyes are upon me! -- In the afternoon, if it
must be -- as by accident. But I had rather you and my grandmamma were to be
present. I mean not to be guilty of affeciation to him:. I know my own heart,
and will not disguise it. I shall want to refer to you. I shall be silly: I
dare not trust myself.

I wish the compliment had not been made, replied my aunt. But, my dear, come
along with me.

She went out. I followed her; a little reluctantly, however; and Lucy tells
me, that I looked so silly, as was enough, of itself to inform everybody of
the intent of my withdrawing, and that I expected Sir Charles would follow me.

She was very cruel, I told her; and in my case would have looked as silly as
I; while I should have pitied her.

I led to my closet. My aunt seating me there, was going from me. Well. madam,
and so I am to stay here quietly, I suppose, till Sir Charles vouchsafes to
come? Would Clementina have done so?

No hint to him of Clementina in this way, I charge you: It would look
ungrateful, and girlish. I will introduce him to you --

And stay with me, I hope, madam, when he is introduced. I tell you, Lady G.
all my foibles. Away went my aunt; but soon returned, and with her the man of
men.

She but turned herself round, and saw him take my hand, which he did with a
compliment that would have made me proud at another time, and left us together.

I was resolved then to assume all my courage, and, if possible, to be present
to myself. He was to himself; yet had a modesty and politeness in his manner,
which softened the dignity of his address.

Some men, I fancy, would have begun with admiring, or pretending to admire,
the pieces of my own workmanship, which you have seen hang here: But not he.
After another compliment made (as I presume, to re-assure me) on my restored
complexion (I did indeed feel my face glow); he spoke directly to his subject.

I need not, I am sure, said he, repeat to my dear Miss Byron what I said
yesterday, as to the delicacy of my situation, with regard to what some would
deem a divided or double Love. I need not repeat to you the very great regard I
have, and ever shall have, for the Lady abroad. Her merit, and your greatness
of mind, render any apology for so just a regard needless. But it may be
necessary to say, what I can with truth say, that I love not my own Soul better
than I love Miss Byron. You see, madam, I am wholly free, with regard to that
Lady -- free by her own choice, by her own will. -- You see, that the whole
family build a part of their happiness on the success of my address to a Lady
of my own country. Clementina's wish always was, that I would marry; and only
be careful, that my choice should not disgrace the regard she vouchsafed to own
for me. Clementina, when she has the pleasure of knowing the dear Lady before
me, if that may be, by the name of Grandison, will confess, that my choice has
done the highest credit to the favor she honored me with.

And will you not, my dear Lady G. be ready to ask, Could Sir Charles Grandison
be really in earnest in this humble court (as if he doubted her favor) to a
creature, every wish of whose heart was devoted to him? Did he not rather for
his own sake, in order to give her the consequence which a wife of his ought to
have, resolve to dignify the poor girl, who had so long been mortified by cruel
suspense, and who had so often despaired of ever being happy with the Lord of
her heart? O no, my dear, your brother looked the humble, the modest Lover; yet
the man of sense, of dignity, in Love. I could not but be assured of his
affection, notwithstanding all that had passed. And what had passed, that he
could possibly have helped? -- His pleas of the day before, the contents of
Signor Jeronymo's Letter, were all in my mind.

He seemed to expect my answer. He only, whose generously- doubting eye kept
down mine, can tell how I looked, how I behaved -- But hesitatingly,
tremblingly, both voice, and knees, as I sat; thus brokenly, as near as I
remember, I answered, not withdrawing my hand, though, as I spoke, he more than
once pressed it with his lips: -- The honor of Sir Charles Grandison -- Sir
Charles Grandison's honor -- no one ever did, or ever can, doubt. -- I must
own -- I must confess -- There I paused.

What does my dear Miss Byron own? -- What confess? -- Assure yourself, madam,
of my honor, of my gratitude. -- Should you have doubts, speak them. I desire
your favor but as I clear up your doubts. I would speak them for you -- I have
spoken them for you. I own to you, madam, that there may be force in your
doubts, which nothing but your generosity, and affiance in the honor of the
man before you, can induce you to get over. And thus far I will own against
myself, that were the Lady, in whose heart I should hope an interest, to have
been circumstanced as I was, my own delicacy would have been hurt; owing,
indeed, to the high notion I have of the true Female delicacy. -- Now say, now
own, now confess, my dear Miss Byron -- what you were going to confess.

This, Sir, is my confession -- and it is the confession of a heart which I
hope is as sincere as your own -- That I am dazzled, confounded, shall I say? at
the superior merits of the Lady you so nobly, so like yourself, glory still in
esteeming as she well deserves to be esteemed.

Joy seemed to flash from his eyes -- He bowed on my hand, and pressed it with
his lips; but was either silent by choice, or could not speak.

I proceeded, though with a hesitating voice, a glowing cheek, and downcast eyes
-- I fear not, Sir, any more than she did, your honor, your Justice, no nor
your indulgent tenderness -- Your character, your principles, Sir, are full
security to the woman who shall endeavor to deserve from you that indulgence
-- But so justly high do I think of Lady Clementina, and her conduct, that I
fear -- ah, Sir, I fear -- that it is impossible --

I stopped -- I am sure I was in earnest, and must look to be so, or my
countenance and my heart were not allied.

What impossible! -- What fears my dear Miss Byron is impossible?

Why (thus kindly urged, and by a man of unquestionable honor) shall I not
speak all that is in my mind? The poor Harrier Byron fears, she justly fears,
when she contemplates the magnanimity of that exalted Lady, that with all her
care, with all her endeavors, she never shall be able to make the figure to
HERSELF, which is necessary for her own tranquillity (however you might
generously endeavor to assure her doubting mind). This, Sir, is my doubt --
And -- all my doubt.

Generous, kind, noble Miss Byron! in a rapturous accent -- And is this all
your doubt? Then must yet the man before you be a happy man; for he questions
not, if life be lent him, to make you one of the happiest of women. Clementina
has acted gloriously in preferring to all other considerations her Religion and
her Country: I can allow this in her favor, against myself: And shall I not be
doubly bound in gratitude to her sister-excellence, who, having not those
trials, yet the most delicate of human minds, shows in my favor a frankness of
heart which sets her above little forms and affectation, and at the same time a
generosity with regard to the merits of another Lady which has few examples?

He then on one knee, taking my passive hand between both his, and kissing it,
once, twice, thrice -- Repeat, dear, and ever-dear, Miss Byron, that this is
all your doubt [I bowed assentingly: I could not speak] -- A happy, an easy
task, is mine! Be assured, dearest madam, that I will disavow every action of
my life, every thought of my heart, every word of my mouth, which tends not to
dissipate that doubt.

I took out my handkerchief --

My dear Miss Byron, proceeded he, with an ardour that bespoke his heart, you
are goodness itself. I approached you with diffidence, with more than
diffidence, with apprehension, because of your known delicacy; which I was
afraid, on this occasion, would descend into punctiliousness. -- My blessings
attend my future life, as my grateful heart shall acknowledge this goodness! --

Again he kissed my hand, rising with dignity. I could have received his vows
on my knees; but I was motionless, yet I had joy to be enabled to give him joy.
-- Joy to your brother! to Sir Charles Grandison!

He saw me greatly affected, and indeed my emotion increased on reflection. He
considerately said, I will leave you, my dear Miss Byron, to entitle myself to
the congratulations of all our friends below. From this moment, after a
thousand suspences and strange events, which, unsought for, have chequered my
past life, I date my happiness.

He most respectfully left me.

I was glad he did: Yet my eyes followed him. His very shadow was grateful to
me, as he went downstairs. And there, it seems, he congratulated himself, and
called for the congratulations of every one present, in so noble a manner, that
every eye run over with joy.

Was I not right, said my grandmamma to my aunt (You half-blamed me, my dear)
in leaving Sir Charles and my Harriet together? Harriet ever was above disguise
Sir Charles might have guessed at her heart; but he would not have known it
from her own lips, had she had you and me to refer to.

Whatever you do, madam, answered my aunt, must be right.

My aunt came up to me. She found me in a very thoughtful mood. I had sometimes
been accusing myself of forwardness, and at others was acquitting myself or
endeavoring to do so -- yet mingling, though thus early, a hundred delightful
circumstances with my accusations and acquittals, which were likely to bless my
future lot. Such as, his relations and friends being mine, mine his; and I run
them over all by name. But my Emily, my dear Emily! I considered as my ward, as
well as his. In this way my aunt found me. She embraced me, applauded me, and
cleared up all my self-doubtings, as to forwardness; and told me of their
mutual congratulations below, and how happy I had made them all. What
selfconfidence did her approbation give me! -- And as she assured me that my
uncle would not railly, but extol me, I went down, with spirits much higher
than I went up with.

Sir Charles and my grandmamma were talking together, sitting side by side,
when I entered the room. All the company stood up at my entrance. -- O my dear!
what a Princess in every one's eye will the declared Love of such a man make
me! How will all the consequence I had before, among my partial friends and
favorers, be augmented!

My uncle said, sideling by me (kindly intending not to dash me) My sweet
sparkler! [That was the name he used to call me, before Sir Charles Grandison
taught me a lesson that made me thoughtful] You are now again my delight, and
my joy. I thank you for not being -- a fool -- that is all. Egad, I was afraid
of your Femality, when you came face to face.

Sir Charles came to me, and, with an air of the most respectful love, taking
my hand, led me to a seat between himself and my grandmamma.

My ever-dear Harriet, said she, and condescended to lift up my hand to her
lips, I will not abash you; but must just say, that you have acquitted yourself
as I wished you to do. I knew I could trust to a heart that ever was above
affectation or disguise.

Sir Charles Grandison, madam, said I, has the generosity to distinguish and
encourage a doubting mind.

Infinitely obliging Miss Byron, replied he, pressing one hand between both
his, as my grandmamma held the other, your condescension attracts both my Love
and Reverence. Permit me to say, That had not Heaven given a Miss Byron for the
object of my hope, I had hardly, after what had befallen me abroad, ever looked
forward to a wedded Love.

One favor I have to beg of you, Sir, resumed my grandmamma: It is, that you
will never use the word abroad or express persons by their countries; in fine,
that you will never speak with reserve, when the admirable Clementina is in
your thoughts. Mention her name with freedom, my dear Sir, to my child, to me,
and to my daughter Selby -- you may -- We always loved and reverenced her:
Still we do so. She has given an example to all her Sex, of a passion properly
subdued -- Of temporal considerations yielding to eternal!

Sir, said I, bowing as I sat, I join in this request.

His eyes glistened with grateful joy. He bowed low to each, but spoke not.

My aunt came to us, and sat down by Sir Charles, refusing his seat, because it
was next me. Let me, said she, enjoy your conversation: I have heard part of
your subject, and subscribe to it, with all my heart. Lady G. can testify for
us all three, that we cannot be so mean, as to intend you a compliment, Sir, by
what has been said.

Nor can I, madam, as to imagine it. You exalt yourselves even more than you do
Clementina. I will let my Jeronymo know some of the particulars which have
given joy to my heart. They will make him happy; and the excellent Clementina
(I will not forbear her name) will rejoice in the happy prospects before me.
She wanted but to be assured that the friend she so greatly honored with her
regard, was not likely (either in the qualities of the Lady's mind, or in her
family-connections) to be a sufferer by her declining his address.

May nothing now happen, my dear Lady G. to overcloud -- But I will not be
apprehensive. I will thankfully enjoy the present moment, and leave the future
to the All-wise Diposer of events. If Sir Charles Grandison be mine, and reward
by his kindness my Love, what can befal^ me, that I ought not to bear with
resignation?

But, my dear Ladies, let me here ask you a question, or two.

Tell me, Did I ever, as you remember, suffer by suspenses, by any -thing? --
Was there ever really such a man as Sir Hargrave Pollexfen? -- Did I not tell
you my dreams, when I told you of what I believed I had undergone from his
persecuting insults? It is well, for the sake of preserving to me the grace of
humility, and for the sake of warning (for all my days preceding that insult
had been happy) that I wrote down at the time an account of those sufferings,
those sufferings, or I should have been apt to forget now, that I ever was
unhappy.

And, pray, let me ask, Ladies, Can you guess what is become of my illness? I
was very ill, you know, when you, Lady G. did us the honor of a visit; so ill,
that I could not hide it from you, and my other dear friends, as fain I would
have done. I did not think it was an illness of such a nature, as that its cure
depended on an easy heart. I wa so much convinced of the merits of Lady
Clementina, and that no other woman in the world ought to be Lady Grandison,
that I thought I had pretty tolerably quieted my heart in that expectation. I
hope I brag not too soon. But, my dear, I now see! so easy, so light, so happy
-- that I hardly know what is the matter with me -- But I hope nobody will find
the malady I have lost. May no disappointed heart be invaded by it! Let it not
travel to Italy! The dear Lady there has suffered enough from a worse malady!
Nor, if it stay in the island, let it come near the sighing heart of my Emily!
That dear girl shall be happy, if it be in my power to make her so. Pray,
Ladies, tell her she shall. -- No, but don't: I will tell her so myself by the
next post. Nor let it, I pray God, attack Lady Anne S. or any of the half-score
Ladies, of whom once I was so unwilling to hear.

Our discourse at table was on various subjects. My cousin James was again very
inquisitive after the principal courts, and places of note, in Italy.

What pleasure do I hope one day to receive from the perusal (if I shall be
favored with it) of Sir Charles's LITERARY JOURNAL, mentioned to Dr. Bartlett,
in some of his Letters from Italy: For it includes, I presume, a description of
palaces, cities, cabinets of the curious, diversions, amusements, customs, of
different nations. How attentive were we all, to the answers he made to my
cousin James's questions! My memory serves but for a few generals; and those I
will not trouble you with. Sir Charles told my cousin that if he were
determined on an excursion abroad, he would furnish him with recommendatory
Letters.

Mr. Greville and his insult were one of our subjects after dinner, when the
servants were withdrawn. Lucy expressed her wonder, that he was so soon
reconciled to Sir Charles, after the menaces he had for years past thrown out
against any man who should be likely to succeed with me.

My uncle observed, that Mr. Greville had not for a long time had any hopes;
that he always was apprehensive, that if Sir Charles Grandison were to make his
addresses, he would succeed: That it had been his and Fenwick's custom, to
endeavor to bluster away their competitors See Vol. 1. Letter ii. p. 5. 6.
. He possibly, my uncle added, might hope to intimidate Sir Charles; or at
least, knowing his principles, might suppose he ran no risque in the attempt.

Mr. Deane said, Mr. Greville had told him, that the moment he knew Miss Byron
had chosen her man, he would give up his pretensions; but that, as long as she
remained single, he was determined to persecute her, as he himself called it.
Perseverance he had known do everything, after an admired woman had run
through her circle of humble servants, and perhaps found herself disappointed
in her own choice; and for his part, but with her, he had no fondness for the
married life; he cared not who knew it.

Sir Charles spoke of Mr. Greville with candor. He thought him a man of rough
manners, but not ill-natured. He affected to be a joker, and often therefore
might be taken for a worse man than he really was. He believed him to be
careless of his reputation, and one who seemed to think there were wit and
bravery in advancing free and uncommon things; and gloried in bold surprises.
For my part, continued he, I should hardly have consented to cultivate his
acquaintance, much less to dine with him tomorrow, but as he insisted upon it,
as a token of my for giving in him a behavior that wa^ really what a gentleman
should not have pardoned himself for. I considered him, proceed Sir Charles, as
a neighbor to this family, with whom you had lived, and perhaps chose to live,
upon good terms. Bad neighbors are nuisances, especially if they are people of
fortune: It is in the power of such to be very troublesome in their own
persons; and they will often let loose their servants to defy, provoke, insult,
and do mischief to those they love not. Mr. Greville I thought, added he,
deserved to be the more indulged, for the sake of his Love to Miss Byron. He is
a proud man, and must be mortified enough in having it generally known that she
had constantly rejected his suit.

Why that is true, said my uncle. Sir Charles, you consider everybody. But I
hope all is over between you.

I have no doubt but it is, Mr. Selby. Mr. Greville's whole aim now, seems to
be, to come off with as little abatement of his pride, as possible. He thinks,
if he can pass to the world as one who having no hope himself, is desirous to
pronounce the cause of his friend, as he will acknowledge me to be, it will
give him consequence in the eye of the world, and be a gentle method of letting
his pride down easy.

Very well, said my uncle; and a very good contrivance for a proud man, I think.

It is an expedient of his friend Fenwick, replied Sir Charles; and Mr.
Greville is not a little fond of it. And what, Ladies and Gentlemen, will you
say, if you should see me come to church tomorrow with him, sit with him in
the same pew, and go with him to dinner in his coach? It is his request that I
will. He thinks this will put an end to the whispers which have passed, in
spite of all his precaution, of a rencounter between him and me: For he has
given out, that he strained his wrist and arm by a fall from his horse. Tell
me, dear Ladies, shall I, or shall I not, oblige him in this request? He is to
be with me tonight, for an answer.

My grandmamma said, that Mr. Greville was always a very odd, a very particular
man. She thought Sir Charles very kind to us in being so willing to conciliate
with him. My uncle declared, that he was very desirous to live on good terms
with all his neighbors, particularly with Mr. Greville, a part of whose estate
being intermixed with his, it might be in his power to be vexations, at least
to his tenants. Mr. Deane thought the compromise was a happy one; and he
supposed entirely agreeable to Sir Charles's generous wishes to promote the
good understanding of neighbors; and to the compassion it was in his nature to
show, to an unsuccessful rival.

Sir Charles then turning to Lucy; May I, Miss Selby, said he, do you think,
without being too deep a designer, ask leave of Miss Byron, on the presumption
of her goodness to me, to bring Mr. Greville to drink tea with her tomorrow in
the afternoon?

Your servant, Sir Charles, answered Lucy, smiling. But what say you, cousin
Byron, to this question?

This house is not mine, replied I; but I dare say. I may be allowed the
liberty, in the names of my uncle and aunt, to answer, that any person will be
welcome to Selby-house, whom Sir Charles Grandison shall think proper to bring
with him.

Mr Greville, said Sir Charles, professes himself unable to see any of you
(Miss Byron, in particular) without an introductor. He makes a high compliment
to me, when he supposes me to be a proper one. If you give me leave, bowing to
my uncle and aunt, I will answer him to his wishes; and hope, when he comes,
everything will be passed by in silence that happened between him and me.

Two or three lively things passed between Lucy and Sir Charles, on his
repetition of her word designer. She began with advantage, but did not hold it;
yet he gave her consequence in the little debate, at his own expense.

My grandmamma will go to her own church; but will be here at dinner, and the
rest of the day. I have a thousand things more to say, all agreeable; but it is
now late, and a drowsy fit has come upon me. I will welcome it. Adieu, adieu,
my dear Ladies! Felicitate, I am sure you will,

Your ever-obliged, ever-devoted, HARRIETT BYRON.

LETTER XXIII. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Sunday Noon, Oct. 15.
WE were told, there would be a crowded church this morning, in expectation of
seeing the new humble servant of Miss Byron attending her thither: For it is
everywhere known, that Sir Charles Grandison is come down to make his
addresses to the young creature who is happy in every one's love and good
wishes, and all is now said to have been settled between him and us, by his
noble sister, and Lord G. and Dr. Bartlett, when they were with us. -- And we
are to be married -- O my dear Lady G! you cannot imagine how soon. You see
what credit you did us by your kind visit, my dear.

Many of the neighborhood seemed disappointed, when they saw me led in by my
uncle, as Mr. Deane led my aunt, and Nancy and Lucy only attended by their
brother. But it was not long before Mr. Greville, Mr. Fenwick, and Sir Charles,
entered and went into the pew of the former, which is over against ours. Mr.
Greville and Mr. Fenwick bowed low to us, severally, the moment they went into
the pew, and to several others of the gentry.

Sir Charles had first other devoirs to pay: To false shame, you have said, he
was always superior. I was delighted to see the example he set. He paid us his
second compliments with a grace peculiar to himself. I felt my face glow, on
the whispering that went round. I thought I read in every eye, admiration of
him, even through the sticks of some of the Ladies fans.

What a difference was there between the two men and him, in their behavior,
throughout both the service, and sermon! Yet who ever beheld two of the three
so decent, so atttentive, so reverent, I may say, before? Were all who call
themselves gentlemen (thought I, more than once) like this, the world would yet
be a good world.

Mr. Greville had his arm in a sling. He seemed highly delighted with his
guest; so did Mr. Fenwick. When the sermon was ended, Mr. Greville held the
pew-door ready opened, to attend our movements; and when we were in motion to
go, he, taking officiously Sir Charles's hand, bent toward us Sir Charles met
us at our pew-door: He approached us with that easy grace peculiar to himself,
and offered, with a profound respect his hand to me.

This was equal to a public declaration. It took every-body's attention. He is
not ashamed to avow in public, what he thinks fit to own in private.

I was humbled more than exalted by the general notice. Mr. Greville (bold, yet
low man! made a motion, as if he gave the hand that Sir Charles took. Mr.
Fenwick offered his hand to Lucy. Mr. Greville led my aunt; and not speaking
low (subtle as a serpent!) My plaguey horse, said he, looking at his sling, knew
not his master. I invite myself to tea with you, madam, in the afternoon. You
will supply my lame arm, I hope, yourself.

There is no such thing as keeping private one's movements in a country-town,
if one would. One of our servants reported the general approbation. It is a
pleasure, surely, my dear Ladies, to be addressed to by a man of whom every one
approves. What a poor figure must she make, who gives way to a courtship from a
man whom everybody blames her for encouraging! Such women indeed generally
confess indirectly the solly, by carrying on the affair clandestinely.

Sunday Evening.
O MY dear! I have been strangely disconcerted by means of Mr. Greville. He is
a strange man. But I will lead to it in course.

We all went to church again in the afternoon. Everybody who knew Mr.
Greville, took it for a high pie^e of politeness in him to his guest, that he
came twice the same day to church. Sir Charles edified everybody by his
cheerful piety. Are you not of opinion, my dear Lady G. that wickedness may be
always put out of countenance by a person who has an established character for
goodness, and who is not ashamed of doing his duty in the public eye? Methinks
I could wish that all the prosligates in the parish had their seats around that
of a man who has fortitude enough to dare to be good. The text was a happy one
to this purpose: The words of our Savior: 'Whosoever shall be ashamed of me
and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall
the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the
holy Angels.'

Sir Charles conducted my aunt to her coach, as Mr. Greville officiously, but
properly for hi views, did me. We found Mr. Fenwick at Selby-house talking to
my grandmamma on the new subject. She dined with us; but, not being very well,
chose to retire to her devotions in my closet, while we went to church, she
having been at her own in the morning.

We all received Mr. Greville with civility. He affects to be thought a wit,
you know, and a great joker. Some men cannot appear to advantage without making
their friend a butt to shoot at. Fenwick and he tried to play upon each other,
as usual. Sir Charles lent each his smile; and, whatever he thought of them,
showed not a contempt of their great-boy snip-snap. But, at last, my grandmamma
and aunt engaged Sir Charles in a conversation, which made the gentlemen so
silent, and so attentive, that had they not flashed a good deal at each other
before, one might have thought them a little discreet.

Nobody took the least notice of what had passed between Mr. Greville and Sir
Charles, till Mr. Greville touched upon the subject to me. He desired an
audience of ten minutes, as he said; and, upon his declaration, that it was the
last he would ever ask of me on the subject; and, upon my grandmamma's saying,
Oblige Mr. Greville, my dear; I permitted him to draw me to the window.

His address was nearly in the following words; not speaking so low, but every
one might hear him, though he said aloud, Nobody must but me:

I must account myself very unhappy, madam, in having never been able to
incline you to show me favor. You may think me vain: I believe I am so: But I
may take to myself the advantages and qualities which everybody allows me. I
have an estate that will warrant my addresses to a woman of the first rank; and
it it is free, and unincumbered. I am not an ill-natured man. I love my jest,
it is true; but I love my friend. You good women generally do not like a man the
less for having something to mend in him. I could say a great deal more in my
own behalf, but that Sir Charles Grandison (looking at him) quite eclipses me.
Devil fetch me, if I can tell how to think myself any -thing before him. I was
always afraid of him. But when I heard he was gone abroad, in pursuit of a
former Love, I thought I had another chance for it.

Yet I was half-afraid of Lord D. His mother would manage a Machiavel. He has a
great estate; a title; he has good qualities for a nobleman. But when I found
that you could so steadily refuse him, as well as me; There must be some man,
thought I, who is lord of her heart. Fenwick is as sad a dog as I; it cannot be
he. Orme, poor soul! she will not have such a milk-sop as that, neither --

Mr. Orme, Sir, interrupted I, and was going to praise him -- But he said, I
will be heard out now: This is my dying speech; I will not be interrupted.

Well then, Sir, smiling, come to your last words, as soon as you can.

I have told you, before now, Miss Byron, that I will not bear your smiles. But
now smiles or frowns, I care not. I have no hopes left; and I am resolved to
abuse you before I have done.

Abuse me! I hope not, Sir.

'Hope not!' What signify your hopes, who never gave me any? But hear me out. I
shall say some thing that will displease you; but more of another nature. I
went on guessing who could be the happy man. That second Orme, Fowler, cannot
be he, thought I. Is it the newly-arrived Beauchamp? He is a pretty fellow
enough [I had all your footsteps watched, as I told you I would.] No, answered
I myself, she refused Lord D. and a whole tribe of us, before Beauchamp came to
England -- Who the devil can he be? -- But when I heard that the dangerous man,
whom I hadt hought gone abroad to his matrimonial destiny, was returned,
unmarried; when I heard that he was actually coming northward; I began to be
again afraid of him.

Last Thursday night I had intelligence, that he was seen at Dunstable in the
morning, in his way toward us. Then did my heart fail me. I had my spies about
Selby-house: I own it. What will not Love and Jealousy make a man do? I
understood, that your uncle and Mr. Deane, and a tribe of servants for
train-sake, were set out to meet him. How I raved! How I cursed! How I swore!
-- They will not surely, thought I, allow my rival, at his first visit, to take
up his residence under the same roof with this charming Witch!

Witch! Mr. Greville --

Witch! Yes, Witch! I called you ten thousand names, in my rage, all as bad as
that. Here, Jack, Will, Tom, George, get ready instantly each a dozen
firebrands! I will light up Selby-house for a bonfire, to welcome the arrival
of the invader of my freehold! And prongs and pitchforks shall be got ready to
push every soul of the family back into the flames, that not one of it may
escape my vengeance --

Horrid man! I will hear no more.

You must! You shall! It is my dying speech, I tell you. --

A dying man should be penitent.

To what purpose? -- I can have no hope. What is to be expected for or from a
despairing man? -- But then I had intelligence brought me, that my rival was
not admitted to take up his abode with you. This saved Selby-house. All my
malice then was against the George at Northampton. The keeper of it owes, said
I to myself, a hundred thousand obligations to me; yet to afford a retirement
to my deadliest foe! -- But it is more manly, thought I, m person, to call this
invader to account* if he pretends an interest at Selby-house; and to force him
to relinquish his pretensions to the Queen of it; as I had made more than one
gallant fellow do before, by dint of bluster.

I slept not all that night. In the morning I made my visit at the inn. I
pretend to know, as well as any man, what belongs to civility and good manners:
but I knew the character of the man I had to deal with: I knew he was cool, yet
resolute. My rage would not let me be civil; and if it would, I knew I must be
rude to provoke him. I was rude. I was peremptory.

Never was there such cold, such phlegmatlc contempts passed upon man, as he
passed upon me. I came to a point with him. I heard he would not fight: I was
resolved he should. I followed him to his chariot. I got him to a private
place; but I had the devil, and no man, to deal with. He cautioned me, by way
of insult, as I took it, to keep a guard. I took his hint. I had better not;
for he knew all the tricks of the weapon. He was in with me in a moment, I had
no sword left me, and my life was at the mercy of his. He gave me up my own
sword -- Cautioned me to regard my safety -- Put up his; withdrew. -- I found
myself sensible of a damnable strain. I had no right-arm. I slunk away like a
thief. He mounted his triumphal car; and pursued his course to to the Lady of
Selby-house. I went home, cursed, swore, fell down, and bit the earth.

My uncle looked impatient: Sir Charles seemed in suspense, but attentive. Mr.
Greville proceeded:

I got Fenwick to go with me, to attend him at night, by appointment. Cripple
as I was, I would have provoked him: He would not be provoked: And when I found
that he had not exposed me at Selby-house; when I remembered that I owed my
sword and my life to his moderation; when I recollected his character; what he
had done by Sir Hargrave Pollexfen; what Bagenhall had told me of him: Why the
plague, thought I, should I (hopeless as I am of succeeding with my charming
Byron, whether he lives or dies) set my face against such a man? He is
incapable either of insult or arrogance: Let me (Fenwick advised a scheme) let
me make him my friend to save my pride, and the devil take the rest, Harriet
Byron, and all --

Wicked man! -- You was dying a thousand words ago -- I am sick of you! --

You have not, madam, heard half my dying words yet -- But I would not terrify
you -- Are you terrified? --

Indeed I am.

Sir Charles motioned as if he would approach us; but kept his place, on my
grandmamma's saying, Let us hear his humor out: Mr. Greville was always
particular.

Terrified, madam! What is your being terrified to the sleepless nights, to the
tormenting days, you have given me? Cursing darkness, cursing light, and most
myself! -- O madam! with shut teeth, What a torment of torments have you been
to me! -- Well, but now I will hasten to a conclusion, in mercy to you, who,
however, never showed me any --

I never was cruel, Mr. Greville --

But you was; and most cruel, when most sweettempered. It was to that smiling
obligingness that I owed my ruin! That gave me hope: that radiance of
countenance; and that frozen heart! -- O you are a dear deceiver! -- But I
hasten to conclude my dying speech -- Give me your hand! -- I will have it -- I
will not eat it, as once I had like to have done. -- 'And now madam, hear my
parting words -- You will have the glory of giving to the best of men, the best
of wives. Let it not be long before you do; for the sake of many, who will hope
on till then. As your Lover, I must hate him: As your Husband, I will love him.
He will, he must, be kind, affectionate, grateful, to you; and you will deserve
all his tenderness. May you live (the ornaments of human nature as you are) to
see your children's children; all promising to be as good, as worthy, as happy,
as yourselves! And, full of years, full of honor, in one hour may you be
translated to that Heaven where only you can be more happy, than you will be,
if you are both as happy as I wish and expect you to be!'

Tears dropped on my cheek, at this unexpected blessing; so like that of the
wicked prophet of old, blessing where he was expected to curse Balaam, Numb.
xxii. and seq.
.

He still held my hand -- I will not, without your leave, madam -- May I,
before I part with it? -- He looked at me as if for leave to kiss my hand,
bowing his head upon it.

My heart was opened. God bless you, Mr. Greville! as you have blessed me -- Be
a good man, and he will. -- I withdrew not my hand.

He kneeled on one knee; eagerly kissed my hand, more than once. Tears were in
his own eyes. He arose, hurried me to Sir Charles, and holding to him my then,
through surprise, half-withdrawn hand -- Let me have the pride, the glory, Sir
Charles Grandison, to quit this dear hand to yours. It is only to yours that I
would quit it -- Happy, happy, happy, pair! -- None but the brave deserves the
fair. --

Sir Charles took my hand -- Let this precious present be mine, said he
(kissing it), mine, with the declared assent of every one here; and presented
me to my grandmamma and aunt. I was frighted by the hurry the strange man had
put me into --

May I but live to see her yours, Sir! said my grandmamma, in a kind of rapture!

The moment he had put my hand into Sir Charles's, he ran out of the room, with
the utmost precipitation. He was gone, quite gone, when he came to be enquired
after; and everybody was uneasy for him, till we were told, by one of the
servants, that he took from the window of the outward parlour his hat and
sword; and by anotehr, that he met him, his servant after him, hurrying away,
and even sobbing as he flew. -- Was there ever so strange a man?

Don't you pity Mr. Greville, my dear?

Sir Charles was generously uneasy for him.

Mr. Greville, said Lucy (who had always charity for him) has frequently
surprised us with his particularities; but I hope, from the last part of his
behavior, that he is not the free-thinking man he sometimes affects to be
thought. I flatter myself, that Sir Charles had a righter notion of him than
we, in what he said of him yesterday.

Sir Charles waited on my grandmamma home; so we had him not to supper. We are
all to dine with her tomorrow. Your brother, you may suppose, will be a
principal guest.

Monday Morning, Oct. 16.
I HAVE a Letter from my Emily; by which I find, she is with you; though she has
not dated it. You was very kind in showing the dear girl the overflowings of my
heart in her favor. She is all grateful love, and goodness. I will soon write
to her, to repeat my assurances, that my whole power shall always be exerted to
do her pleasure. But you must tell her, as from yourself, that she must have
patience. I cannot ask her guardian such a question as she puts, as to her
living with me, till I am likely to succeed. Would the sweet girl have me make
a request to him, that shall show him I am supposing myself to be his, before I
am so? We are not come so far on our journey by several stages. And yet, from
what he intimated last night, as he waited on my grandmamma to Shirley-manor, I
find, that his expectations are forwarder than it will be possible for me to
answer: And I must, without intending the least affectation, for common
decorum-sake, take the management of this point upon myself. For, my dear, we
are every one of us here so much in Love with him, that the moment he should
declare his wishes, they would be as ready to urge me t oblige him, were he
even to limit me but to two or three days; as if they were afraid he would not
repeat his request.

I have a Letter from Mr. Beauchamp. He writes, that there are no hopes of Sir
Harry's recovery. I am very sorry for it. He does me great honor to write to
me to give him consolation. His is a charming Letter -- So full of silial
piety! -- Excellent young man! He breathes in it the true spirit of his friend.

Sir Charles and his Beauchamp, and Dr. Bartlett, correspond, I presume, as
usual. What would I give to see all Sir Charles writes that relates to us!

Mr. Fenwick just now tells us, that Mr. Greville is not well, and keeps his
chamber. He has my cordial wishes for his health. His last behavior to me
appears, the more I think of it, more strange, from such a man. I expected not
that he would conclude with such generous wishes. Nancy, who does not love him,
says, that it was such an overstrain of generosity from him, that it might well
over-set him. Did you think that our meek Nancy could have said so severe a
thing? But meekness offended (as she once was by him) has an excellent memory,
and can be bitter.

We are preparing now to go to Shirley-manor. Our cousins Patty and Kitty
Holles will be there at dinner. They have been for a few weeks past at their
aunt's, near Daventry. They are impatient to see Sir Charles. Adieu, my dearest
Ladies! Continue to love

Your HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XXIV. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Monday Night, October 16.
WE have been very happy this day at my grandmamma's. Your brother makes
himself more and more beloved by all my friends; who yet declare, that they
thought they could not have loved him better than they did before. My cousin
Holles's say, they could sooner lay open their hearts to him, than to any man
they ever saw; yet their freedom would never make them lose sight of their
respect.

He told me, that he had breakfasted with Mr. Greville. How does he conciliate
the mind of every one to him! He said kind and compassionate things of Mr.
Greville; and so unaffectedly! -- I was delighted with him. For, regardful as
he would be, and is, of his own honor; no low, narrow jealousy, I dare say,
will ever have entrance into his heart. Charity thinks no evil! Of what a
charming text is that a part 1 Cor. xiii. 5.
! -- What is there equal to it, in any of the writings of the philosophers?

My dear Miss Byron, said he to me, Mr. Greville loves you more than you can
possibly imagine. Despairing of success with you, he has assumed airs of
bravery; but your name is written in large letters in his heart. He gave me
continued he, the importance of asking my leave to love you still. -- What
ought I to have answered? --

What did you answer, Sir?

That so far as I might presume to give it, I gave it. Had I the honor, added
I, of calling Miss Byron mine, I would not barely allow your love of her; I
would demand it. -- Have I not assured you, Mr. Greville, that I look upon you
as my friend?

You will quite subdue Mr. Greville, Sir, said I. You will, by the generosity
of your treatment of him, do more than anybody else ever could -- You will
make him a good man.

Mr. Greville, madam, deserves pity, on more accounts than one. A wife, such a
one as his good Angel led him to wish for, would have settled his principles.
He wants steadiness: But he is not, I hope, a bad man. I was not concerned for
his cavalier treatment of you yesterday, but on your own account; lest his
roughness should give you pain. But his concluding wishes, and his preference
of a rival to himself, together with the manner of his departure, unable as he
was to withstand his own emotions, and the effect it had upon his spirits, so
as to confine him to his chamber, had something great in it -- And I shall
value him for it, as long as he will permit me.

Sir Charles and my grandmamma had a good deal of talk together. Dearly does
she love to single him out. What a pretty picture would they make, could they
be both drawn so as not to cause a profane jester to fall into mistakes; as if
it were an old Lady making Love to a handsome young man.

Let me sketch it out -- See, then, the dear Lady, with a countenance full of
benignity, years written by venerableness, rather than by wrinkles, in her
face; dignity and familiarity in her manner; one hand on his, talking to him:
His sine countenance shining with modesty and reverence, looking down,
delighted, as admiring her wisdom, and not a little regardful of her
half-pointing finger (Let that be, for fear of mistakes) to a creature young
enough to be her granddaughter; who, to avoid showing too much sensibility,
shall seem to be talking to two other young Ladies (Nancy and Lucy, suppose);
but, in order to distinguish the young creature, let her, with a blushing
cheek, cast a fly eye on the grandmamma and young gentleman, while the other
two shall not be afraid to look more free and unconcerned.

See, my dear, how fanciful I am: But I had a mind to tell you, in a new
manner, how my grandmamma and Sir Charles seem to admire each other.

Mr. Deane and he had also some talk together; my uncle joined them: And I
blushed in earnest at the subject I only guessed at from the following words of
Mr. Deane, at Sir Charles's rising to come from them to my aunt and me, who
both of us sat in the bow-window. My dear Sir Charles Grandison, said Mr.
Deane, you love to give pleasure: I never was so happy in my life, as I am in
view of this longwished-for event. You must oblige me: I insist upon it.

My aunt took it, as I did. -- A generous contention* said she. O my dear! we
shall all be too happy. God grant that nothing may fall out to disconcert us!
If there should, how many broken hearts --

The first broken one, madam, interrupted I, would be the happiest: I, in that
case, should have the advantage of everybody.

Dear love! you are too serious (Tears were in my eyes): Sir Charles's
unquestionable honor is our security! -- If Clementina be steadfast; if life
and health be spared you and him -- If --

Dear, dear madam, no more Ifs! Let there be but one If, and that on Lady
Clementina's resumption. In that case, I will submit; and God only [as indeed
He always ought] shall be my reliance for the rest of my life.

Lucy, Nancy, and my two cousin Holles's came and spread, two and two, the
other seats of the bowwindow [there are but three] with their vast hoops:
undoubtedly, because they saw Sir Charles coming to us. It is difficult,
whispered I to my aunt [petulantly enough], to get him one moment to one's
self. My cousin James (Silly youth! thought I) stopped him in his way to me: but
Sir Charles would not long be stopped: He led the interrupter toward us; and a
seat not being at hand, while the young Ladies were making a bustle to give him
a place between them [tossing their hoops above their shoulders on one side]
and my cousin James was hastening to bring him a chair; he threw himself at the
seet of my aunt and me, making the floor his feat.

I don't know how it was; but I thought I never saw him look to more advantage.
His attitude and behavior had such a Lover-like appearance -- Don't you see
him, my dear? -- His amiable countenance, so artless, yet so obliging, cast up
to my aunt and me: His fine eyes meeting ours; mine, particularly, in their own
way; for I could not help looking down, with a kind of proud bashfulness, as
Lucy told me afterward. How affected must I have appeared, had I either turned
my head aside, or looked stiffly up, to avoid his!

I believe, my dear, we women in courtshp don't love, that men, if ever so
wise, should keep up to us the dignity of wisdom; much less that they should be
solemn, formal, grave -- Yet are we fond of respect and observance too. -- How
is it? -- Sir Charles Grandison can tell. -- Did you think of your brother,
Lady G. when you once said, that the man who would commend himself to the
general favor of us young women, should be a Rake in his address, and a Saint
in his heart? Yet might you not have chosen a better word than Rake? Are there
not more clumsy and foolish Rakes, than polite ones; except we can be so
mistaken, as to give to impudence the name of agreeable freedom?

Sir Charles sell immediately into the easiest (shall I say the gallantest?)
the most agreeable conversation, as if he must be all of a piece with the
freedom of his attitude; and mingled in his talk, two or three very pretty
humourous stories; so that nobody thought of helping him again to a chair, or
wishing him in one.

How did this little incident familiarize the amiable man, as a still more
amiable man than before, to my heart! In one of the little tales, which was of
a gentleman in Spain serenading his mistress; we asked him, if he could not
remember a sonnet he spoke of, as a pretty one? He, without answering, sung it
in a most agreeable manner; and, at Lucy's request, gave us the English of it.

It is a very pretty sonnet, I will ask him for a copy, and send it to you, who
understand the language.

My grandmamma, on Sir Charles's singing, beckoned to my cousin James who going
to her, she whispered him. He stepped out, and presently returned with a violin,
and struck up, as he entered, a minuet-tune Harriet, my love* called out my
grandmama. Without any other intimation, the most agreeable of men, in an
instant, was on his feet, reached his hat, and took me out.

How were we applauded! How was my grandmamma delighted! The words charming
couple, were whispered round, but loud enough to be heard. And when we had
done, he led me to my seat with an air that had all the real fine gentleman in
it. But then he sat not down as before. --

I wonder if Lady Clementina ever danced with him.

My aunt, at Lucy's whispered request, proposed a dance between Sir Charles and
her. You, Lady G. observed, more than once, that Lucy dances finely. Insulter!
(...) her, when she had done, you know (...) me! -- Harriet, replied she,
(...), when they speak against (...)

My (...) called upon me for on^ (...) on (...) they made me sing.

An admirable conversation followed at tea, in which my grandmother, aunt, my
Lucy, and Sir Charles, bore the chief parts; every other person delighting to
be silent.

Had we not, Lady G. a charming day?

In my next I shall have an opportunity, perhaps, to tell you what kind of a
traveling companion Sir Charles is. For, be pleased to know, that for some
time past a change of air, and a little excursion from place to place, have
been prescribed for the establishment of my health, by one of the honestest
physicians in England. The day before Sir Charles came into these parts, it was
fixed, that tomorrow we should set out upon this tour. On his arrival, we had
thoughts of postponing it; but, having understood our intention, he insisted
upon its being prosecuted; and, offering his company, there was no declining
the favor, you know, early days as they, however, are: And although every body
abroad talks of the occasion of his visit to us; he has been so far from
directing his servants to make a secret of it, that he has ordered his Saunders
to answer to every curious questioner, that Sir Charles and I were of longer
acquaintance than yesterday. But, is not this, my dear, a cogent intimation
that Sir Charles thinks some parade, some delay, necessary? Yet don't he and we
know how little a while ago it is, that he made his first declaration? What, my
dear (should he be solicitous for an early day) is the inference? My uncle,
too, so forward, that I am afraid of him.

We are to set out tomorrow morning. Peterborough is to be our furthest stage,
one way. Mr. Deane insists, that we shall pass two or three days with him. All
of us, but my grandmamma, are to be of his party.

O MY dear Lady G. what a Letter is just brought me, by the hand that carried
up mine on Saturday! Bless me! what an answer! -- This wicked wish! -- But I
have not time to enter into so large a field. Let me only say, That for some
parts I most heartily thank you and dear Lady L.; for others, I do not; and
imagine Lady L. would not have subscribed her beloved name, had she read the
whole. What charming spirits have you, my dear, dear Lady G.! -- But, Adieu, my
ever-amiable Ladies, both!

HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XXV. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Thrapston, Tuesday Even. October 17.
WE passed several hours at Boughton The seat of the late Duke of Montagu.
, and arrived here in the afternoon. Mr. Deane had insisted that we should put
up at a nephew's of his, in the neighborhood of this town. The young gentleman
met us at Oundle, and conducted us to the house. I have got such a habit of
scribbling, that I cannot forbear applying to my pen at every opportunity. The
less wonder, when I have your brother for my subject; and the two beloved
sisters of that brother to write to.

It would be almost impertinent to praise a man for his horsemanship, who in
his early youth was so noted for the performance of all his exercises, that his
Father and General W. thought of the military life for him. Ease and unaffected
dignity distinguish him in all his accomplishments. Bless me, madam! said Lucy
to my aunt, on more occasions than one, this man is everything!

Shall I own, that I am retired to my pen, just now, from a very bad motive?
Anger. I am, in my heart, even peevish with all my friends, for clustering so
about Sir Charles, that he can hardly obtain a moment (which he seems to seek
for too) to talk with me alone. My uncle [He does dote upon him] always
inconsiderately stands in his way; and can I say to a man so very inclinable to
raillery, that he should allow me more, and himself less, of Sir Charles's
conversation? I wonder my aunt does not give my uncle a hint. But she loves Sir
Charles's company as well as my uncle.

This, however, is nothing to the distress my uncle gave me at dinner this day.
Sir Charles was observing, upon the disposition of one part of the gardens at
Boughton, That Art was to be but the handmaid of Nature -- I have heard, Sir
Charle, said my uncle, that you have made that a rule with you at
Grandisonhall. With what pleasure should I make a visit there to you and my
niece --

He stopped. He needed not: He might have said anything after this. Sir Charles
looked as if concerned for me; yet said, that would be a joyful visit to him.
My aunt was vexed for my sake. Lucy gave my uncle such a look! --

My uncle afterward indeed apologized to me -- Ads-heart, I was a little
blunt, I believe. But what a duce need there be these niceties observed when
you are sure? -- I am sorry, however -- But it would out -- Yet you, Harriet,
made it worse by looking so silly.

WHAT, Lady G. can I do with this dear man? My uncle, I mean. He has been just
making a proposal to me, as he calls it, and with such honest looks of forecast
and wisdom -- Look-ye, Harriet -- I shall be always blundering about your
scrupulosities. I am come to propose something to you that will put it out of
my power to make mistake -- I beg of you and your aunt to allow me to enter
with Sir Charles into a certain subject; and this not for your sake -- I know
you will not allow of that -- But for the ease of Sir Charles's own heart.
Gratitude is my motive, and ought to be yours. I am sure he loves the very
ground you tread upon.

I besought him for every sake dear to himself, not to interfere in the matter;
but to leave these subjects to my aunt and me. -- Consider, Sir, said I,
consider, how very lately the first personal declaration was made.

I do, I will consider everything -- But there is danger between the cup and
the lip.

Dear Sir (my hands and eyes lifted up) was all the answer I could make. He
went from me hastily, muttering good-naturedly against Femalities.

Deane's Grove, Wedn. 27.
MR. DEANE'S pretty box you have seen. Sir Charles is pleased with it. We
looked in at Fotheringay-castle The prison of Mary Queen of Scots.
, Milton The seat of Earl Fitzwilliams.
, etc. Mr. Charles Deane, a very obliging and sensible young gentleman,
attended his uncle all the way.

What charming descriptions of fine houses and curiosities abroad did Sir
Charles give us when we stopped to bait, or to view the pictures, furniture,
gardens, of the houses we saw!

In every place, on every occasion, on the road, or when we alighted, or put
up, he showed himself so considerate, so gallant, so courteous, to allow who
approached him, and so charitable! -- Yet not indiscriminately to everybody
that asked him: But he was bountiful indeed, on representation of the misery of
two honest families. Beggars born, or those who make begging a trade, if in
health, and not lame or blind, have seldom, it seems, any share in his
munisicence: But persons fallen from competence, and such as struggle with some
instant distress, or have large families, which they have not ability to
maintain; these, and such as these, are the objects of his bounty. Richard
Saunders, who is sometimes his almoner, told my Sally, that he never goes out
but somebody is the better for him: and that his manner of bestowing his
charity is such, as, together with the poor peoples blessings and prayers for
him, often draws tears from his eyes.

I HAVE overheard a dialogue that has just now passed between my uncle and
aunt. There is but a thin partition between the room they were in, and mine;
and he spoke loud; my aunt now low; yet earnest only, not angry. He had been
proposing to her, as he had done to me, to enter into a certain subject, in
pity to Sir Charles: None had he for his poor niece. No doubt, but he thought
he was obliging me; and that my objection was only owing to Femality, as he
calls it; a word I don't like. I never heard it from Sir Charles.

My aunt was not at all pleased with his motion. She wished, as I had done,
that he would not interfere in these nice matters. He took offense at the
exclusion because of the word nice. She said, He was too precipitating, a great
deal: She did not doubt but Sir Charles would be full early in letting me know
his expectations.

She spoke more decisively than she is used to do. He cannot bear her chidings,
though ever so gentle. I need not tell you, that he both loves and reveres her;
but, as one of the lords of the creation, is apt to be jealous of his
prerogatives. You used to be diverted with his honest particularities.

What an ignoramus you women and girls make of me, Dame Selby! said he. I know
nothing of the world, nor of men and women, that is certain. I am always to be
documented by you and your minxes! But the duce take your niceties: You don't,
you cannot, poor souls, as you are, distinguish men. You must all of you go on
in one rig-my-roll way; in one beaten track. Who the duce would have thought it
needful, when a girl, and we all were wishing till our very hearts were
bursting, for this man, when he was not in his own power, would think you must
now come with your hums, and your haws, and the whole circum-roundabouts of
female nonsense, to stave off the point your hearts and souls are set upon? I
remember, Dame Selby, though so long ago, how you treated your future Lord and
Master when you prank'd it, as Lady and Mistress. You vexed my very Soul, I can
tell you that! And often, and often, when I left you, I swore bitterly, that I
never would come again as a Lover -- though I was a poor forsworn wretch -- God
forgive me!

My dear Mr. Selby, you should not remember past things. You had very odd ways
-- I was afraid, for a good while, of venturing with you at all --

Now, Dame Selby, I have you at a why-not, or I never had; though, by the way,
your un -evenness increased my oddness. -- But what oddness is in Sir Charles
Grandison? If he is not even, neither you nor I were ever odd. What reason is
there for him to run the Female gauntlope? I pity the excellent man;
remembering how I was formerly vexed myself -- I hate this shilly-shally
fooling; the know your-mind and not know-your-mind nonsense. As I hope to live
and breathe, I Will, I Will, I Will blow you all up, without gunpowder or oatmeal, if
an honest gentleman is thus to be fooled with; and after such a Letter too from
his friend Jeronymo, in the names of the whole family, Lady G. for my money!
[Ah, thought I, Lady G. gives better advice than she even wishes to know how to
take*] I like her notion of parallel lines! -- Sir Charles Grandison is none of
your gew-gaw-whip-jacks, that you know not where to have. But I tell you, Dame
Selby, that neither you nor your niece know how, with your fine souls, and fine
sense, to go out of the common semality-path, when you get a man into your gin,
however superior he is to common infanglements, and low chicanery, and dull and
cold forms, as Sir Charles properly called them, in his address to the little
pug's-face. [I do love her, with all her pretty ape's tricks: For what are you
all, but, right or wrong, apes of one another?] And do you think, with all your
wisdom, he sees not through you? He does; and, as a wise man, must despise you
all, with your femalities and forsooths --

No femality, Mr. Selby, is designed -- No --

I am impatient, Dame Selby, light of my eye, and dear to my heart and soul, as
you are; I will take my own way, in this. I have no mind that the two dearest
creatures in the world, to me, should render themselves despisable in the eyes
of a man they want to think highly of them. And here if I put in, and say but a
wry word, as you think it -- I am to be called to account. --

My dear, did you not begin the subject? said my aunt.

I am to be closetted, and to be documentized, proceeded he -- Not another word
of your documentations, Dame Selby! I am not in a humor to bear them: I will
take my own way -- And that is enough.

And then, I suppose, he stuck his hands in his sides, as he does when he is
good-humouredly angry; and my aunt, at such times, gives up, till a more
convenient opportunity, and then she always carries her point (And why? Because
she is always reasonable); for which he calls her a Parthian woman.

I heard her say, as he stalked out royally, repeating, that he would take his
own way; I say no more, Mr. Selby -- Only consider --

Oy, and let Harriet consider, and do you consider, Dame Selby: Sir Charles
Grandison is not a common man.

I did not let my aunt know that I heard this speech of my uncle: She only said
to me, when she saw me, I have had a little debate with your uncle: We must do
as well as we can with him, my dear. He means well.

Thursday Morning, October 19.
AFTER breakfast, first one, then another, dropped away, and left only Sir
Charles and me together. Lucy was the last that went; and the moment she was
withdrawn, while I was thinking to retire to dress, he placed himself by me:
Think me not abrupt, my dear Miss Byron, said he, that I take almost the only
opportunity which has offered of entering upon a subject that is next my heart.

I found my face glow. I was silent.

You have given me hope, madam: All your friends encourage that hope. I love, I
revere, your friends. What I have now to petition for, is, A confirmation of
the hope I have presumed upon. CAN you, madam (the Female delicacy is more
delicate than that of man can be) unequally as you may think yourself
circumstanced with a man who owns that once he could have devoted himself to
another Lady; CAN you say, that the man before you is the man whom you CAN,
whom you DO, prefer to any other?

He stopped; expecting my answer.

After some hesitations, I have been accustomed* Sir, said I, by those friends
whom you so deservedly value, to speak nothing but the simplest truth. In an
article of this moment, I should be inexcusable, if --

I stopped. His eyes were fixed upon my face. For my life I could not speak; yet
wished to be able to speak --

If, If what, madam? and he snatched my hand, bowed his face upon it, held it
there, not looking up to mine. I could then speak -- If thus urged, and by SIR
CHARLES GRANDISON -- I did not speak my heart -- I answer -- Sir -- I CAN -- I
DO. I wanted, I thought, just then, to shrink into myself.

He kissed my hand with fervor; dropped down on one knee; again kissed it -- You
have laid me, madam, under everlasting obligation: And will you permit me,
before I rise -- loveliest of women, will you permit me, to beg an early day?
-- I have many affairs on my hands; many more in design, now I am come, as I
hope, to settle in my native country for the rest of my life. My chief glory
will be, to behave commendably in the private life. I wish not to be a public
man; and it must be a very particular call, for the Service of my King and
Country united, that shall draw me out into public notice. Make me, madam,
soon, the happy husband I hope to be. I prescribe not to you the time: But you
are above empty forms. May I presume to hope, it will be before the end of a
month to come?

He had forgot himself. He said, he would not prescribe to me.

After some involuntary hesitations -- I am afraid of nothing so much, just
now, Sir, said I, as appearing, to a man of your honor and penetration,
affected. Rise, Sir, I beseech you! I cannot bear --

I will, madam, and rise as well as kneel, to thank you, when you have answered
a question so very important to my happiness.

Before I could resume, Only believe me, madam, said he, that my urgency is not
the insolent urgency of one who imagines a Lady will receive as a compliment
his impatience. And if you have no scruple that you think of high importance,
add, I beseech you, to the obligation you have laid him under to your
condescending goodness (and add with that frankness of heart which has
distinguished you in my eyes above all women) the very high one, of an early
day.

I looked down -- I could not look up -- I was afraid of being thought affected
-- Yet how could I so soon think of obliging him?

He proceeded -- You are silent, madam! -- Propitious be your silence! Allow me
to enquire of your aunt, for your kind, your condescending acquiescence. I will
not now urge you further: I will be all hope.

Let me say, Sir, that I must not be precipitated. These are very early days.

Much more was in my mind to say; but I hesitated -- I could not speak. Surely,
my dear Ladies, it was too-too eary an urgency. And can a woman be wholly
unobservant of custom, and the laws of her Sex? -- Something is due to fashion
in dress, however absurd that dress might have appeared in the last age (as
theirs do to us) or may in the next: And shall not those customs which have
their foundation in modesty, and are characteristic of the gentler Sex, be
entitled to excuse, and more than excuse?

He saw my confusion. Let me not, my dearest life, distress you, said he.
Beautiful as your emotion is, I cannot enjoy it, if it give you pain. Yet is
the question so important to me; so much is my heart concerned in the
favorable answer I hope for from your goodness; that I must not let this
opportunity slip, except it be your pleasure that I attend your determination
from Mrs. Selby's mouth. -- Yet that I choose not, neither; because I presume
for more favor from your own, than you will, on cold deliberation, allow your
aunt to show me. Love will plead for its faithful votary in a single breast,
when consultation on the supposed fit and unfit, the object absent, will
produce delay. But I will retire, for two moments. You shall be my prisoner
mean time. Not a soul shall come in to interrupt us, unless it be at your call.
I will return, and receive your determination; and if that be the fixing of my
happy day, how will you rejoice me!

While I was debating within myself, whether I should be angry or pleased, he
returned, and found me walking about the room. -- Soul of my hope, said he,
taking with reverence my hand; I now presume that you can, that you will,
oblige me.

You have given me no time, Sir: But let me request, that you will not expect
an answer, in relation to the early day you so early ask for, till after the
receipt of your next Letters from Italy. You see how the admirable Lady is
urged; how reluctantly she has given them but distant hopes of complying with
their wishes. I should be glad to wait for the next Letters; for those, at
least, which will be an answer to yours, acquainting them, that there is a
woman with whom you think you could be happy. I am earnest in this request,
Sir. Think it not owing to affectation.

I acquiesce, madam. The answer to those Letters will soon be here. It will
indeed be some time before I can receive a reply to that I wrote in answer to
Jeronymo's last Letter. I impute not affectation to my dearest Miss Byron. I
can easily comprehend your motive: It is a generous one. But it besits me to
say, that the next Letters from Italy, whatever may be their contents, can now
make no alteration on my part. Have I not declared myself to your friends, to
you, and to the world?

Indeed, Sir, they may make an alteration on mine, highly as I think of the
honor Sir Charles Grandison does me by his good opinion. For, pardon me,
should the most excellent of women think of resuming a place in your heart --

Let me interrupt you, madam. -- It cannot be, that Lady Clementina,
proceeding, as she has done, on motives of piety, zealous in her religion, and
all her relations now earnest in another man's favor, can alter her mind. I
should not have acted with justice, with gratitude, to her, had I not tried her
stedfastness by every way I could devise: Nor, in justice to both Ladies, would
I allow myself to apply for your favor till I had her resolution confirmed to
me under her own hand after my arrival in England. But were it now possible
that she should vary, and were you, madam, to hold your determination in my
favor suspended; the consequence would be this; I should never, while that
suspense lasted, be the husband of any woman on earth.

I hope, Sir, you will not be displeased. I did not think you would so soon be
so very earnest. But this, Sir, I say, Let me have reason to think, that my
happiness will not be the misfortune of a more excellent woman, and it shall be
my endeavor to make the man happy who only can make me so.

He clasped me in his arms with an ardor -- that displeased me not -- on
reflection -- But at the time startled me. He then thanked me again on one knee.
I held out the hand he held not in his, with intent to raise him; for I could
not speak. He received it as a token of favor; kissed it with ardor; arose;
again pressed my cheek with his lips. I was too much surprised to repulse him
with anger: But was he not too free? Am I a prude, my dear? In the odious sense
of the abused word, I am sure, I am not: But in the best sense, as derived from
prudence, and used in opposition to a word that denotes a worse character, I
own myself one of those who would wish to restore it to its natural respectable
signification, for the sake of virtue; which, as Sir Charles himself once
hinted Vol. IV. p. 139.
, is in danger of suffering by the abuse of it; as Religion once did, by that
of the word Puritan.

Sir Charles, on my making toward the door that led to the stairs, withdrew
with such a grace, as showed he was capable of recollection.

Again I ask, was he not too free? I will tell you how I judge that he was:
When I came to conclude my narrative to my aunt and Lucy, of all that passed
between him and me, I blushed, and could not tell them how free he was. Yet you
see, Ladies, that I can write it to you two.

Sir Charles, my uncle, and Mr. Deane, took a little walk, and returned just as
dinner was ready. My uncle took me aside, and whispered to me; I am glad at my
heart and soul the ice is broken. This is the man of true spirit -- Ads-heart,
Harriet, you will be Lady Grandison in a fortnight, at furthest, I hope. You
have had a charming confabulation, I doubt not. I can guess you have, by Sir
Charles's declaring himself more and more delighted with you. And he owns, that
he put the question to you. -- Hay, Harriet! -- Smiling in my face.

Every one's eyes were upon me. Sir Charles, I believe, saw me look as if I
were apprehensive of my uncle's raillery. He came up to us: My dear Miss Byron,
said he, in my uncle's hearing, I have owned to Mr. Selby, the request I
presumed to make you. I am afraid that he, as well as you, think me too bold
and forward. If you do, madam, I ask your pardon: My hopes shall always be
controuled by your pleasure.

This made my uncle complaisant to me. I was re-assured. I was pleased to be so
seasonably relieved.

Friday Morning, October 20.
YOU must not, my dear Ladies, expect me to be so very minute: if I am, must I
not lose a hundred charming conversations? One, however, I will give you a
little particularly.

Your brother desired leave to attend me in my dressing room -- But how can I
attempt to describe his air, his manner, or repeat the thousand agreeable
things he said? Insensibly he fell into talking of future schemes, in a way
that punctillo itself could not be displeased with.

He had been telling me, that our dear Mr. Deane, having been affected by his
last indisposition had desired my uncle, my aunt, and him, to permit him to lay
before them the state of this affairs, and the kind things he intended to do by
his own relations; who however, were all in happy circumstances. After which,
he insisted upon Sir Charles's being his sole executor, which he scrupled,
unless some other person were joined with him in the trust: But Mr. Deane,
being very earnest on this head, Sir Charles said, I hope I know my own heart.
My dear Mr. Deane, you must do as you please.

After some other discourse, I suppose, said I, the good man will not part with
us till the beginning of next week.

Whenever you leave him, answered he, it will be to his regret; it may
therefore as well be soon: But I am sorry, methinks, that he, who has qualities
which endear him to every one, should be so much alone as he is here. I have a
great desire, when I can be so happy as to find myself a settled man, to draw
into my neighborhood friends who will dignify it. Mr. Deane will, I hope, be
often our visiter at the Hall. The love he bears to his dear god-daughter will
be his inducement; and the air and soil being more dry and wholesome than this
so near the fens, may be a means to prolong his valuable life.

Dr. Bartlett, continued he, has already carried into execution some schemes
which relate to my indigent neighbors, and the lower class of my tenants. How
does that excellent man revere Miss Byron! -- My Beauchamp, with our two
sisters and their Lords, will be often with us. Your worthy cousin Reeves's,
Lord W. and his deserving Lady, will also be our visiters, and we theirs, in
turn. The Mansfield family are already within a few miles of me: And our
Northamptonshire friends! -- Visiters and visited -- What happiness do I
propose to myself, and the beloved of my heart! -- And if (as you have
generously wished) the dear Clementina may be happy, at least not unhappy, and
her brother Jeronymo recover? what, in this world, can be wanting to crown our
felicity?

Tears of joy strayed down my cheek, unperceived by me, till they fell upon his
hand, as it had mine in it. He kissed them away. I was abashed. If my dear Miss
Byron permit me to go on, I have her advice to ask. -- I bowed my assent. My
heart throbbed with painful joy: I could not speak.

Will it not be too early, madam, to ask you about some matters of domestic
concern? The lease of the house in St. James's Square is expired. Some
difficulties are made to renew it, unless on terms which I think unreasonable.
I do not easily submit to imposition. Is there anything that you particularly
like in the situation of that house?

Houses, Sir, nay, Countries, will be alike to me, in the company of those I
value.

You are all goodness, madam. I will leave it to my sisters, to enquire after
another house. I hope you will allow them to consult you, as any one may offer.
I will write to the owner of my present house (who is solicitous to know my
determination, and says he has a tenant ready, if I relinquish it) that it will
be at his command in three months time. When my dear Miss Byron shall bless me
with her hand, and our Northamptonshire friends will part with her, if she
pleases, we will go directly to the Hall.

I bowed, and intended to look as one who thought herself obliged.

Restrain, check me, madam, whenever I seem to trespass on your goodness. Yet
how shall I forbear to wish you to hasten the day that shall make you wholly
mine? -- You will the rather allow me to wish it, as you will then be more than
ever your own mistress; though you have always been generously left to a
discretion that never was more deservedly trusted to. Your will, madam, will
ever comprehend mine.

You leave me, Sir, only room to say, that if gratiude can make me a merit with
you, that began with the first knowledge I had of you; and it has been
increasing ever since -- I hope I never shall be ungrateful Tears again
strayed down my check. Why did I weep?

Delicate sensibility! said he. He clasped his arms about me -- But instantly
withdrew them, as if recollecting himself -- Pardon me, madam! Admiration will
sometimes mingle with reverence. I must express my gratitude as a man -- May my
happy day be not far distant, that I may have no bound to my joy! -- He took my
hand, and again pressed it with his lips. My heart, madam, said he, is in your
hand: You cannot but treat it graciously.

Just then came in my Nancy [Why came she in?] with the general expectation of
us to breakfast! -- Breakfast! -- What, thought I, is breakfast! -- The world,
my Charlotte -- But hush! -- Withdraw, fond heart, from my pen! Can the dearest
friend allow for the acknowlegement of impulses so fervent, and which, writing
to the moment, as I may say, the moment only can justify revealing?

He led me down-stairs, and to my very seat, with an air so noble, yet so
tender -- My aunt, my Lucy, everybody -- looked at me. My eyes betrayed my
hardly-conquered emotion.

Sir Charles's looks and behavior were so respectful, that every one addressed
me as a person of increased consequence. Do you think, Lady G. that Lord G's
and Lord L's respectful behavior to their wives do not as much credit to their
own hearts, as to their Ladies? How happy are you, that you have recollected
yourself, and now encourage not others, by your example, to make a jest of a
husband's Love! -- Will you forgive me the recollection, for the sake of the
joy I have in the reformation? --

I HAVE read this Letter, just now, to my aunt and Lucy, all except this last
saucy hint to you. They clasped me each in their arms, and said, They admired
him, and were pleased with me. Instruct me, my dear Ladies, how to behave in
such a manner, as may show my gratitude (I had almost said my Love); yet not go
so very far, as to leave the day, the hour everything, to his determination!

But, on reading to my aunt and Lucy what I had written, I was ashamed to find,
that when he was enumerating the friends he hoped to have near him, or about
him, I had forgot to remind him of my Emily. Ungrateful Harriet! -- But don't
tell her that I was so absorbed in Self, and that the conversation was so
interesting, that my heart was more of a passive than an active machine at the
time. I will soon find, or make, an occasion to be her solicitress. You once
thought that Emily, for her own sake, should not live with us; but her heart is
set upon it. Dear creature! I love her! I will sooth her! I will take her to my
bosom! -- I will, by my sisterly compassion, entitle myself to all her
confidence! She shall have all mine. Nor shall her guardian suspect her. -- I
will be as faithful to her secret, as you and Lady L. were (thankfully I
remember it!) to mine. Don't you think, my dear, that if Lady Clementina [I how
to her merit whenever I name her to myself] had had such a true, such a
soothing friend, to whom she could have revealed the secret that oppressed her
noble heart, while her passion was young, it would have been attended with such
a deprivation of her reason, as made unhappy all who had the honor of being
related to her?

O MY dear Lady G! I am undone! Emily is undone! We are all undone! -- I am
afraid so! -- My intolerable carelessness! -- I will run away from him! I
cannot look him in the face! -- But I am most, most of all, concerned for my
Emily!

Walking in the garden with Lucy, I dropped the last sheet, marked 6, this Letter
Beginning, Why did I weep? p. 152.


I missed it not till my aunt this minute told me, that Sir Charles, crossing
the walk which I had just before quitted, stooped, and took up a paper.
Immediately my heart misgave me. I took out my Letter: I thought I had it all
-- But the fatal, fatal sixth sheet, is wanting: That must be what he stooped
for, and took up. What shall I do! -- Sweet Emily! now will he never suffer you
to live with him. All my own heart laid open too! -- Such prattling also! -- I
cannot look him in the face! -- How shall I do, to get away to Shirley-manor,
and hide myself in the indulgent bosom of my grandmamma? -- What affectation,
after this, will it be, to refuse him his day! -- But he demands audience of
me. Could anything (O the dear Emily!) have happened more mortifying to

Your HARRIET BYRON?


LETTER XXVI. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Friday afternoon, October 20.
I WAS all confusion when he, looking as unconscious as he used to do, entered
my dressing room. I turned my face from him. He seemed surprised at my concern.
Miss Byron, I hope, is well. Has anything disturbed you, madam?

My paper, my paper! You took it up -- For the world I would not -- The poor
Emily! -- Give it me; Give it me; and I burst into tears. --

Was there ever such a fool? What business had I to name Emily;

He took it out of his pocket. I came to give it to you; putting it into my
hand. I saw it was your writing, madam: I folded it up immediately: It has not
been unfolded since: Not a single sentence did I permit myself to read.

Are you sure, Sir, you have not read it? nor any

Part of it! --

Upon my honor, I have not.

I cleared up at once. A blessed reward, thought I, for denying my own
curiosity, when pressed by my Charlotte, to read a Letter clandestinely
obtained!

A thousand, thousand thanks to you, Sir, for not giving way to your curiosity.
I should have been miserable, perhaps, for months, had you read that paper.

You now indeed raise my curiosity, madam. Perhaps your generosity will permit
you to gratify it; though I should not have forgiven myself, had I taken
advantage of such an accident.

I will tell you the contents of some parts of it, Sir.

Those which relate to my Emily, if you please, madam. The poor Emily, you
said. -- You have ^^amed me. Perhaps I am not to be quite happy! -- What of
poor Emily! Has the girl been imprudent? -- Has she already -- What of the poor
Emily?

And his face glowed, with impatience.

No harm, Sir, of Emily! -- Only a request of the dear girl! [What letter use
could I have made of my fright, Lady G?] But the manner of my mentioning it, I
would not for the world you should have seen.

No harm, you say! -- I was afraid, by your concern for her -- But can you love
her, as well as ever? If you can, Emily must still be good.

I can: I do.

What then, dear madam, of poor Emily? Why poor Emily? --

I will tell you. The dear girl makes it her request, that I will procure of
you one favor for her: Her heart is set upon it.

If Emily continue good, she shall only signify her wish, and I will comply. If
I am not a Father to her, is she not fatherless?

Allow me, Sir, to call you kind! good! humane!

What I want of those qualities, Miss Byron will teach me, by her example. --
But what would my Emily? --

She would live with her guardian, Sir --

With me, madam? -- And with you, madam -- Tell me, own to me, madam, And with
you?

That is her wish --

And does my beloved Miss Byron think it a right wish to be granted; Will she
be the instructing friend, the examplary sister, now in that time of the dear
girl's life, when the eye, rather than the judgment, is usually the director of
a young woman's affections?

I love the sweet Innocent: I could wish her to be always with me.

Obliging goodness! Then is one of my cares over. A young woman, from Fourteen
to Twenty, is often a troublesome charge upon a Friendly heart. I could not
have asked this favor of you. You rejoice me by mentioning it. Shall I write a
Letter, in your name, to Emily?

There, Sir, is pen, ink, and paper.

In your name, madam?

I bowed assent; mistrusting nothing.

He wrote; and doubling down, showed me only these words -- 'My dear Miss
Jervois, I have obtained for you the desired favor -- Will you not continue to
be as good as you have hitherto been? -- That is all which is required of my
Emily, by her ever affectionate' --

I instantly wrote, 'Harriet Byron.' -- But, Sir, what have you doubled down?

Charming confidence! -- What must he be, who could attempt to abuse it? --
Read, madam, what you have signed. --

I did. How my heart throbbed. -- And could Sir Charles Grandison, said I, thus
intend to deceive? Could Sir Charles Grandison be such a plotter? Thank God you
are not a bad man.

After the words, I have obtained for you the desired favor, followed these:

'You must be very good. You must resolve to give me nothing but joy; joy equal
to the love I have for you, and to the sacrifice I have made to oblige you. Go
down, my love, as soon as you can, to Grandison-hall: I shall then have one of
the sisters of my heart there to receive me. If you are there in less than a
fortnight, I will endeavor to be with you in a fortnight after. I sacrifice,
at least, another fortnight's punctilio to oblige you. And will you not
continue to be as good as you have hitherto been? That is all which is required
of my Emily, by, etc.'

Give me the paper, Sir; holding out my hand for it.

Have I forfeited my character with you, madam? -- holding it back, with an air
of respectful gaiety.

I must consider, Sir, before I give you an answer.

If I have, why should I not send it away; and, as Miss Byron cannot deny her
handwriting, hope to receive the benefit of the supposed deceit? Especially as
it will answer so many good ends: For instance, your own wishes in Emily's
favor; as it will increase your own power of obliging; and be a means of
accelerating the happiness of a man whose principal joy will be in making you
happy.

Was it not a pretty piece of deceit, Lady G? Shall I own, that my heart was
more inclined to reward than punish him for it? And really, for a moment, I
thought of the impracticableness of complying with the request, as if I was
seriously pondering upon it, and was sorry it was not practicable. To get away
from my dear Mr. Deane, thought I, who will not be in haste to part with us;
some female bustlings to be got over on our return to Selby-house; proposal
renewed, and a little paraded with [Why, Lady G. did you tell me that our Sex
is a foolish Sex?]; the preparation; the ceremony; the awful ceremony! the
parting with the dearest and most indulgent friends that ever young creaure was
blessed with; and to be at Grandison-hall, all within one month! -- Was there
ever so precipitating a man?

I believe verily, that I appeared to him as if I were considering of it; for
he took advantage of my silence, and urged me to permit him to send away to
Emily what he had written; and offered to give reasons for his urgency: Written
as it is, said he, by me, and signed by you, how will the dear girl rejoice at
the consent of both, under our hands! And will she not take the caution given
her in it from me, as kindly as she will your mediation in her favor?

Sure, Sir, said I, you expect not a serious answer! -- Upon his honor, he did
-- How, Sir! Ought you not rather to be thankful, if I forgive you, for letting
me see that Sir Charles Grandison was capable of such an artifice, though but in
jest; and for his reflection upon me, and perhaps meant on our Sex, as if
decorum were but punctilio? I beg my Lucy's pardon, added I, for being
half-angry with her when she called you a designer.

My dearest creature, said he, I am a designer. Who, to accelerate a happiness
on which that of his whole life depends, would not be innocently so? I am, in
this instance, selfish: But I glory in my selfishness; because I am determined,
if power be lent me, that every one, within the circle of our acquaintance,
shall have reason to congratulate you as one of the happiest of women.

Till this artifice, Sir, showed me what you could do, were you not a man of
the strictest honor, I had nothing but affiance in you. Give me the paper,
Sir; and, for your own sake, I will destroy it, that it may not furnish me with
an argument, that there is not one man in the world who is to be implicitly
confided in by a woman.

Take it, madam (presenting it to me, with his usual gracefulness); destroy it
not, however, till you have exposed me as such a breach of confidence deserves,
to your aunt, your Lucy -- To your uncle Selby; and Mr. Deane, if you please.

Ah, Sir! you know your advantages! I will not, in this case, refer to them: I
could sooner rely, dearly as they love their Harriet, on Sir Charles
Grandison's justice, than on their favor, in any debate that should happen
between him and me.

There never, madam, except in the case before us, can be room for a reference:
Your prudence, and my gratitude, must secure us both. Even now, impatient as I
am to call you mine, which makes me willing to lay hold of every opportunity to
urge you for an early day, I will endeavor to subdue that impatience, and
submit to your will. Yet let me say, that if I did not think your heart one of
the most laudably unreserved, yet truly delicate, that woman ever boasted, and
your prudence equal, you would not have found me so acquiescent a Lover, early
as you suppose my urgency for the happy day.

And is it not early, Sir? Can Sir Charles Grandison think me punctilious? --
But you will permit me to write to Miss Jervois myself, and acquaint her with
her granted wish, if --

If! No if, madam -- Whatever you think right to be done, in this case, that
do. Emily will be more particularly your ward than mine, if you condescend to
take the trust upon you.

You will be pleased, dear Lady G. to acquaint Emily with the grant of her
wish: She will rejoice. God give the dear creature reason for joy; and then I
shall have double pleasure in having contributed to her obtaining of it. But,
on second thoughts, I will write to her myself; for I allow not that she shall
see or hear read everything I write to you. [Shall I own to you, that my
grandmamma, and aunt, and Lucy, are of your mind? They all three wish] -- But
who can deny the dear Innocent the grant of a request on which she has so long
set her heart? And would it not be pity, methinks I hear the world say, some
time hence, especially if any mishap [God forbid it!] should befall her, that
Sir Charles Grandison, the most honorable of men, should so marry, as that a
young Lady of innocence and merit, and mistress of a fortune, which, it might
be foreseen, would encourage the attempts of designing men, could not have
lived with his wife? -- Poor child! -- Then would the world have shaken its
wise head (allow the expression); and well for me if it had judged so mildly of
me.

Our dear Mr. Deane, though reluctantly, has consented that we shall leave him on
Monday next. We shall set out directly for Selby-house, where we propose to be
the same night. My aunt and I have been urgent with him to go back with us; but
he is cross, and will be excused.

Just now Lucy tells me, that Mr. Deane declared to my uncle, aunt, and her,
that he will not visit us at Selby-house till we send for him and the
settlements together, which he will have ready in a week -- Strange expedition!
Sure they are afraid your brother will change his mind, and are willing to put
it out of the poor man's power to recede! Lucy smiles at me, and is sure, she
says, that she may in confidence reveal all these matters to me, without
endangering my life. My next Letter will be from Selby-house.

While that life continues, my dear Ladies, look upon me as assuredly

Yours, HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XXVII. Lady G. To Miss BYRON,
Monday, Oct. 23.
GO on, go on, with your narratives, my dear. Hitherto Caroline and I know not
how either much to blame you, or totally to acquit you of parade the man and
his situation considered; and the state of your heart for so many months past;
every one of your friends -- consenting, shall I say? -- more than consenting
-- ardent, to be related to him. Hark ye, Harriet, let me whisper you -- My
brother, whether he come honestly, or not, by his knowledge, I dare say, thinks
not so highly of the Free-masonry part of marriage as you do -- You start. O
Charlotte! you cry -- And, O Harriet! too -- But, my dear girl, let my brother
see, that you think (and no woman in the world does, if you don't) that the
true modesty, after hearts are united, is to think little of parade, and much
of the social happiness that awaits two worthy minds united by Love, and
conformity of sentiment -- After all, we are silly creatures, Harriet: We are
afraid of wise men. No wonder that we seldom choose them, when a fool offers. I
wish I knew the man, however, who dare to say this in my hearing.

Your grandmother Shirley is more than woman: My brother prodigiously admires
her. I think you may trust to her judgment, if you suppose him too
precipitating. Your aunt is an excellent woman! But I never knew a woman or
man, who valued themselves on delicacy, and found themselves consulted upon it,
but was apt to over-do the matter. Is not this a little, a very little, Mrs.
Selby's case? Let her know, that I bid you ask this question of herself: She
must be assured that I equally love and honor her; so will not be angry.

Your uncle is an odd, but a very honest Dunstable soul! Tell him, I say so;
but withal, that he should leave women to act as women, in these matters. What
a duce, what a pize, would he expect perfection from them? He, whose arguments
always run in the depreciating strain? If he would, ask him, Where should they
have it, conversing, as they are obliged to do, with men? Men for their
fathers, for their brothers, for their uncles -- They must be a little silly,
had they not a fund of silliness in themselves. -- But I would not have them be
most out in matters where they should be most in.

I think, however, so does Lady L. that so far as you have proceeded, you are
tolerable; though not, half so clever as he, considering situations. Upon my
word, Harriet, allowing for everything, neither of Sir Charles Grandison's
sisters expected that their brother would have made so ardent, so polite, a
Lover. He is so prudent a man, and that once had like to have been one of your,
even your objections. -- Yet so nobly sincere -- so manly. O that my ape -- But
come, Harriet, as men go in this age of monkeys and Sir Foplings, Lord G. (for
all you) is not to be despised. I, as a good wise ought, will take his part,
whoever runs him down. Where much is not given, much, and-so-forth --

I have told Emily the good news: I could not help it, though you promise to
write to her.

Poor thing! she is all ecstasy! she is not the only one who seeks, as her
greatest good, what may possibly prove her greatest misfortune. But, for her
sake for your sake, and my brother's, I hope, under your directing eye, and by
prudent management (the flame so young) a little cold water will do; and that
if it will blaze, it may be directed toward Beauchamp's house.

Let me whisper you again, Harriet -- Young girls finding themselves vested
with new powers, and a set of new inclinations, turn their staring eyes out of
themselves; and the first man they see, they imagine, if he be a single man,
and but simpers at them, they must receive him as a Lover: Then they return
downcast for ogle, that he may ogle on without interruption. They are soon
brought to write answers to Letters which confess flames the writer's heart
never felt. The girl doubts not her own gifts, her own consequence; she wonders
that her father, mother, and other friends, never told her of these newfound
excellencies: She is more and more beautiful in her own eyes, as he more and
more flatters her. If her parents are a -verse, the girl is per -verse; and the
more, the less discretion there is in her passion. She adopts the word
constancy; she declaims against persecution; she calls her idle flame, LOVE;
which only was a Something she knew not what to make of -- and, like a
wandering be, had it not settled on this flower, would on the next, were it
either bitter or sweet.

And this generally, with the thoughtless, is the beginning and progress of
that formidable invader, miscalled Love; a word very happily at hand, to help
giddy creatures to talk with, and look without confusion of face on, a man
telling them a thousand lies, and hoping, perhaps by illaudable means, to
attain an end not in itself illaudable, when duty and discretion are, the one
the guide, the other the gentle restraint.

But as to Emily -- I depend on her principles, as well as on your affectionate
discretion (when you will be pleased, among ye, to permit my brother to be
actually yours) for restraining her imagination. There never beat in Female
bosom an honester heart. Poor thing! she is but a girl! And who is the woman,
or child, that looks on my brother without love and reverence?

For Emily's sake, you see, you must not have too many of your honest uncle's
circum-roundabouts. He makes us laugh. I love to have him angry with his Dame
Selby. Dear Harriet! when your heart's quite at case, give us the courtship of
the odd soul to the light of his eyes; his oddness, and her delicay! A charming
contrast! You did help us to a little of it once See p. 141, and seq.
, you know. Theirs, on the woman's side, could not be a match of Love at first:
But who so happy as they? I am convinced, Harriet, that Love on one side, and
discretion on the other, is enough in conscience; and, in short, much better
than Love on both: For what room can there be for discretion, in the latter
case? The man is guilty of an heterodoxy in Love, you know, who is prudent, or
but suspected of being so! -- Ah! Harriet, Harriet! once more I say, we women
are foolish creatures in our Love-affairs; and know not what is best for
ourselves. -- In your style -- 'Don't you think so, Lucy?' -- Yet I admire Lucy
-- She got over an improperly-placed Love; and now, her mad fit over [We have
all little or much of it; begun, as I told you how] she is so cool, so quiet,
so sedate -- Yet once I make no doubt, looking forward to her present happy
quiescence, would have thought it a state of insipidity. Dearly do we love
racketing; and, another whisper, some of us to be racketed -- But not you! you
are an exception. Yes, to be sure! -- But I believe you will think me mad.

We like my brother's little trick upon you in the Billet he wrote, and which
you signed, as if to Emily. You see how earnest he is, my dear. I long for his
next Letters from Italy. I think that is a lucky plea enough for you, if you
suppose parade necessary.

We have got Everard among us again. The sorry fellow -- O Harriet! had you
seen him, with his hat upon his two thumbs, bowing, cringing, blushing,
confounded, when first he came into my royal presence -- But I, from my throne,
extended the golden scepter to him, as I knew I should please my brother by it.
He sat down when I bid him, twisted his lips, curdled his chin, hemmed, stole a
look of reverence at me, looked down when his eyes met mine; mine bold as
innocence, his conscious as guilt; hemmed again, turned his hat about; then
with one of his not quite-forgotten airs of pertness, putting it under his arm,
shook his ears, tried to look up, then his eye sunk again under my broader eye.
-- O my dear! -- What a paltry creature is a man vice-bitten! and sensible of
detected folly, and obligation!

Sir Charles has made a man of him, once more. His dress is as gay as ever;
and, I dare say, he struts as much in it as ever, in company that knows not how
he came by it. He reformed! -- Bad habits are of the Jerusalem artichoke-kind;
once planted, there is no getting them out of the ground.

Our good Dr Bartlett is also with us, at present: He is in hopes of seeing my
brother in town -- 'In town,' Harriet! -- and the great affair un-solemnized!
-- Woe be to you, if -- But let us see how you act when left to yourself.
Prudent people, in other's matters are not always prudent in their own;
especially in their Love-affairs. A little over-nicety at setting out, will
carry them into a road they never intended to amble in; and then they are
sometimes obliged to the less prudent to put them in the path they set out
from. Remember, my dear, I am at hand, if you bewilder yourself.

Dr. Bartlett tells us, that my brother has extricated this poor creature from
his entanglements with his woman, by his interposition only by Letter: Some
money, I suppose. The Doctor desires to be silent, on the means; but hints,
however, that Everard will soon be in circumstances not unhappy.

I HAVE got the Doctor to explain himself. Every day produces some new
instances of women's follies. What would poor battered rakes and younger
brothers do, when on their last legs, were it not for good-natured widows? --
Ay, and sometimes for forward maids? This wretch, it seems, has acquitted
himself so handsomely in the discharge of the 100 l. which he owed to his
wine-merchant's relict, and the Lady was so full of acknowlegements, and
obligations, and all that, for being paid but her due, that he has ventured to
make addresses to her (Love, as it is called): and is well received. He behaves
with more spirit before her, I suppose, than he does before me.

The widow had a plain, diligent, honest man, before. She has what is called
taste, forsooth, or believes she has. She thinks Mr. Grandison a finer
gentleman than him who left her in a condition to be thougbt worthy of the
address of a gayer man. She prides herself, it seems, in the relation that her
marriage will give her to a man of Sir Charles Grandison's character. Much
worse reasons will have weight, when a woman finds herself inclined to change
her condition. But Everard is very earnest that my brother should know nothing
of the matter till all is over: So you (as I) have this piece of news in
confidence. Lady L. has not been told it. His cousin, he says, who refused him
his interest with Miss Mansfield, Lady W's sister, because he thought a further
time of probation, with regard to his avowed good resolutions, necessary, would
perhaps, for the widow's sake, if applied to, put a spoke in his wheel.

Everard, I can hardly allow myself to call him Grandison, avows a vehement
passion for the widow. She is rich. -- When they are set out together in taste,
as she calls it, trade, or business, her first rise, quite forgot, what a gay,
what a frolic dance will she and her new husband, in a little while, lead up,
on the grave of her poor, plain, despised one!

It Is well, it is well, my dear Harriet, that I have a multitude of faults
myself [Witness, to go no further back, this Letter] or I should despise nine
parts of the world out of ten.

I find that Sir Charles, and Beauchamp, and Dr. Bartlett, correspond. Light is
hardly more active than my brother, nor lightning more quick, when he has
anything to execute that must or ought to be done. I believe I told you early,
that was a part of his character. You must not then wonder, or be offended
[Shall I use the word offended, my dear?] that you, in your turn, now he has
found himself at liberty to address you, should be affected by his adroitness
and vivacity in your Femalities, as uncle Selby calls them: Aptly enough, I
think; though I do not love that men should be so impudent, as either to find us
out, or abuse us. You cannot always, were you to think him too precipitating,
separate bad qualities from good in the same person; since, perhaps, the one is
the constitutional occasion of the other. Could he, for example, be half so
useful a friend as he is, if he were to dream over a Love-affair, as you would
seem to have him; in other words, gape over his ripened fruit till it dropped
into his yaw-yaw-yawning mouth? He Will certainly get you, Harriet, within, or
near, his proposed time. Look about you: He Will have you, before you know where
you are. By book, as the saying is, will he pull you to him, struggle as you
will (he has already got hold of you) or by crook; inviting, nay compelling
you, by his generosity, gentle shepherdlike, to nymph as gentle. What you do,
therefore, do with such a grace as may preserve to you the appearance of having
it in your power to lay an obligation upon him. It is the opinion of both his
sisters, that he values you more for your noble expansion of heart, and not
ignorant, but generous frankness of manners, yet mingled with dignity; than for
-- even -- your Beauty, Harriet -- Whether you, who are in such full possession
of every grace of person, care, as a woman, to hear of that, or not. His gay
parterre similitude you remember, my dear. It is my firm belief, that those are
the greatest admirers of fine flowers, who love to see them in their borders,
and seldomest pluck the fading fragrance. The other wretches crop, put them in
their bosoms, and in an hour or two, rose, carnation, or whatever, after one
parting smell, throw them away.

He is very busy, wherever he is. At his inn, I suppose, most. But he boasts
not to you, or anybody, of what he does.

He writes now-and-then a Letter to aunt Nell, and she is so proud of the
favor -- Look you here, niece; Look you here! -- But I sha'n't show you all he
writes. -- On go the spectacles -- for she will not for the world part with the
Letter out of her hands. -- She reads one paragraph, one sentence, then another
-- On and off go the spectacles, while she conjectures, explains, animadverts,
applauds; and so goes on till she leaves not a line unread: Then folding it up
carefully in its cover, puts it in her Letter or Ribband-case, which shall I
call it? For having but few Letters to put in it, the case is filled with bits
and ends of ribbands, patterns, and-so-forth, of all manner of colors, faded
and fresh; with intermingledoms of gold-beaters skin, plasters for a cut
finger, for a chopped lip, a kibe, perhaps for corns; which she dispenses
occasionally very bountifully, and values herself, as we see at such times by a
double chin made triple, for being not unuseful in her generation. Chide me, if
you will; the humour's upon me; hang me, if I care: You are only Harriet Byron,
as yet. Change your name, and increase your consequence.

I have written a long Letter already; and to what end? Only to expose myself,
say you? True enough. But now, Harriet, to bribe you into passing a milder
censure, let me tell you all I can pick up from the Doctor, relating to my
brother's matters. Bribe shall I call this, or gratitude, for your free
communications.

Matters between the Mansfields and the Keelings are brought very forward. Hang
particulars: Nobody's affairs lie near my heart, but yours. The two families
have already begun to visit. When my brother returns, all the gentry in the
neighborhood are to be invited, to rejoice with the parties on the occasion.

Be so kind, my dear, as to dismiss the good man, as soon as your punctilio
will admit. We are contented, that while he lays himself out so much in the
service of others, he should do something for himself. You, my dear, we look
upon as a high reward for his many great and good actions. But as he is a man
who has a deep sense of favors granted, and values not the blessing the more,
when it ought to be within his reach, because it is dear (as is the case of the
sorry fellows in general) I would have you consider of it -- that is all.

The Doctor tells me, also, that the wicked Bolton's ward is dead; and that
everything is included, to Sir Charles's satisfaction, with him; and the
Mansfields (reinstated in all their rights) are once more a happy family.

Sir Hargrave is in a lamentable way; Dr. Bartlett has great compassion for
him. Would you have me pity him, Harriet? -- You would, you say -- Well, then,
I Will try for it: As it was by his means you and we, and my brother, came
acquainted, I think I may. He is to be brought to town.

Poor Sir Harry Beauchamp! He is past recovery. Had the physicians given him
over when they first undertook him, he might, they say, have had a chance for
it.

I told you, that Emily's mother was turned Methodist. She has converted her
husband. A strange alteration! But it is natural for such sort of people to
pass from one extreme to another. Emily every now-and-then visits them. They
are ready to worship her for her duty and goodness. She is a lovely girl: She
every day improves in her person, as well as in her mind. She is sometimes with
me; sometimes with Lady L; sometimes with aunt Eleanor; sometimes with your
Mrs. Reeves -- We are ready to fight for her: But you will soon rob all of us.
She is preparing for her journey to you. Poor girl! I pity her. Such a conflict
in her mind, between her love of you, and tenderness for her guardian! Her Anne
has confessed to me, that she weeps one half of the night; yet forces herself
to be lively in company -- After the example of Miss Byron, she says, when she
visited you at Selby house. I hope, my dear, all will be right. But to go to
live with a beloved object -- I don't understand it. You, Harriet, may. I never
was in Love, God help me!

I am afraid the dear girl does too much for her mother. As they have so
handsome an annuity, 400 l. a year, so much beyond their expectation; I think
she should not give, nor should they receive, anything considerable of her,
without her guardian's knowledge. She is laying out a great deal of money in new
clothes, to do you and her guardian credit -- on your nuptials, poor thing! she
says, with tears in her eyes -- but whether of joy, or sensibility, it is hard
to decide; but I believe of both.

What makes me imagine she does more than she should, is, that a week ago she
borrowed fifty guineas of me; and but yesterday came to me -- I should do a
very wrong thing, said she, blushing up to the ears, should I ask Lady L. to
lend me a sum of money till my next quarter comes due, after I made myself your
debtor so lately: But if you could lend me thirty or forty guineas more, you
would do me a great favor.

My dear! said I; and stared at her!

Don't question, don't chide me, this one time. I never will run in debt again:
I hate to be in debt. But you have bid me tell you all my wants.

I will not, my love, say another word. I will fetch you fifty guineas more.

More, my dear Lady G! that is a pretty rub: But I will always, for the future,
be within bounds: And don't let my guardian know it -- He would kill me, by his
generosity; yet perhaps, in his own heart, wonder what I did with my money. If
he thought ill of me, or that I was extravagant, it would break my heart.

Only, my dear, said I, remember that 400 l. a year -- Mrs. O-Hara cannot want
anything to be done for her now.

Don't call her Mrs. O-Hara! She is very good: Call her my mother.

I kissed the sweet girl, and fetched her the other fifty guineas.

I thought it not amiss to give you this hint, my dear, against she goes down
to you. But do you think it right, after all, to have her with my brother and
you?

Lady L. keeps close -- She fasts, cries, prays, is vastly apprehensive: She
makes me uneasy for her and myself. These vile men! I believe I shall hate them
all. Did they partake -- But not half so grateful as the blackbirds: They
rather look big with insolence, than perch near, and sing a song to confort the
poor souls they have so dreadfully mortified. Other birds, as I have observed
(sparrows, in particular) sit hour and hour, he is and she is, in turn; and I
have seen the hen, when her rogue has staid too long, rattle at him, while he
circles about her with sweeping wings, and displayed plumage, his head and
breast of various dies, ardently shining, peep, peep, peep; as much as to say,
I beg your pardon, love -- I was forced to go a great way off for my dinner. --
Sirrah! I have thought she has said, in an unforgiving accent -- Do your duty
now -- Sit close -- Peep, peep, peep -- I will, I will, I will -- Away has she
skimmed, and returned to relieve him -- when she thought fit.

Don't Laugh at us, Harriet, in our mortified state [Begone, wretch -- What
have I done, madam? stareing! What have you done! -- My sorry fellow came in,
wheedling, courting, just as I was pitying two meek sisters: Was it not enough
to vex one?] Don't laugh at us, I say -- If you do! -- May my brother, all in
good time, avenge us on you, prays, in malice,

CHARLOTTE G.

LETTER XXVIII. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Wedn. Evening, Oct. 25.
FIE upon you, Lady G! What a Letter have you written! There is no separating
the good from the bad in it. With what dangerous talents are you entrusted! and
what use do you make of them! I have written two long Letters, continuing my
narrative of our proceedings; but I must take you to severe task for this
before me; and this and they shall go together.

Wicked wit! What a foe art thou to decent cheerfulness! -- In a woman's hand
such a weapon! What might we not expect from it, were it in a man's? How you
justify the very creatures of that Sex, whom you would be thought to despise!

But you say, you would not allow in a man, the liberties you yourself take
with your own Sex. How can you, my dear, be so partial to your faults, yet own
them to be such? Would you rank with the worst of sinners? They do just so.

I may be a fool: I may be inconsistent: I may not know how with a grace to
give effect to my own wishes: I may be able to advise better than act -- Most
pragmatical creatures think they can be counselors in another's case, while
their own affairs, as my uncle would say, lie at sixes and sevens. But how does
this excuse your freedoms with your whole Sex -- With the Innocents of it, more
particularly?

Let me say, my dear, that you take odious, yes, odious, liberties; I will not
recall the word: Liberties which I cannot, though to shame you, repeat. Fie upon
you, Charlotte!

And yet you say, that neither you nor Lady L. know how to blame me much, though,
the man considered, you will not totally acquit me of parade; and in another
place, that so far as we have proceeded, we have behaved tolerably. Why, then,
all this riot? -- yes, riot, Charlotte! against us, and against our Sex? What,
but for riot's sake?

'The humor upon you!' -- The humor is upon you, with a witness! 'Hang you,
if you care!' -- But, my dear, it would be more to your credit if you did care;
and if you checked the wicked humor. -- Do you think nobody but you has such
talents? Fain would I lower you, since, as it is evident, you take pride in
your license -- Forgive me, my dear -- Yet I will not say all I think of your
wicked wit. Think you, that there are not many who could be as smart, as
surprising, as you, were they to indulge a vein of what you call humor? Do you
think your brother is not one? Would not he be too hard for you at your own
weapons? Has he not convinced you that he could? But he, a man, can check the
overflowing freedom.

But if I have set out wrong with your brother, I will do my endeavor to
recover my path. You greatly oblige me with your conducting hand: But what
necessity was there for you to lead me through briars and thorns, and to plunge
me into two or three dirty puddles, in order to put me into the right path,
when it lay before you in a direct line, without going a bow-shot about?

Be pleased, however, to consider situation, on my side, as well as on your
brother's: I might be a little excusable for my aukwardness, perhaps, were it
considered, that the notion of a double or divided Love, on the man's part,
came often into my head; indeed could not be long out; the Lady so
superlatively excellent! his affection for her, so allowably, as well as
avowedly, strong! Was it possible to avoid little jealousies, little
petulancies, when slights were imaginable? The more, for the excellency of the
man; the more for my past weakness of so many months? I pretend not, my dearest
Charlotte, to be got above nature: I know I am a weak silly girl: I am humbled
in the sense I have of his and Clementina's superior merits. True Love will
ever make a person think manly of himself, in proportion as she thinks highly
of the object. Pride will be up, sometimes; but in the pull two ways, between
that and mortification, a torn coat will be the consequence: And must not the
tatterdemallion (What a new language will my uncle teach me!) then look simply?

You bid me ask my aunt -- You bid me tell my uncle -- Naughty Charlotte! I
will ask, I will tell, them, nothing. Pray write me a Letter next, that I can
read to them. I skipt this passage -- Read that -- 'um -- 'um -- 'um -- Then
skipt again -- Hey-day! What Is come to the girl, cried my uncle? Can Lady G.
write what Harriet cannot read? [There was a rebuke for you, Charlotte!] For
the love of God, let me read it! -- He bustled, laughed, shook his shoulders,
rubbed his hands, at the imagination -- Some pretty roguery, I warrant: Dearly
do I love Lady G. If you love me, Harriet, let me read; and once he snatched
one of the sheets. I boldly struggled with him for it -- For shame, Mr. Selby,
said my aunt. My dear, said my grandmother, if your uncle is so impetuous, you
must show him no more of your Letters.

He then gave it up -- Consider, Charlotte, what a fine piece of work we should
have had with my uncle, had he read it through!

But, let me see, -- What are the parts of this wicked Letter, for which I can
sincerely thank you? -- O my dear, I cannot, cannot, without soiling my
fingers, pick them out -- Your intelligences, however, are among those which I
hold for favors.

Poor Emily! that is a subject which delights, yet saddens, me -- We are
laudably fond of distinguishing merit. But your brother's is so dazzling --
Every woman is one's rival. But no more of my Emily! Dear creature! the subject
pains me! -- Yet I cannot quit it. -- You ask, If, after all, I think it right
that she should live with me? -- What can I say? For her sake, perhaps, it will
not: Yet how is her heart set upon it! For my own sake, as there is no perfect
happiness to be expected in this life, I could be content to bear a little
pain, were that dear girl to be either benefited or pleasured by it. Indeed I
love her, at my heart -- And, what is more -- I love myself for so sincerely
loving her.

In the wicked part of your Letter, what you write of your aunt Eleanor -- But
I have no patience with you, sinner as you are against light, and better
knowledge! and derider of the infirmities, not of old maids, but of old age! --
Don't you hope to live long, yourself? That worthy Lady wears not spectacles,
Charlette, because she never was so happy as to be married. Wicked Charlotte!
to owe such obligation to the generosity of good Lord G. for taking pity of you
in time [Were you Four or Five-and-twenty when he honored you with his hand at
St. George's church?] and yet to treat him as you do, in more places than one,
in this very Letter!

But I will tell you what I will do with this same strange Letter -- I will
transcribe all the good things in it. There are many which both delight and
instruct; and some morning, before I dress for the day, I will [Sad task,
Charlotte! But it shall be by way of penance for some of my faults and
sollies!] transcribe the intolerable passages; so make two Letters of it. One I
will keep to show my friends here, in order to increase, if it be possible,
their admiration of my Charlotte; the bad one I will present to you. I know I
shall transcribe it in a violent hurry -- Not much matter whether it be
legible, or not -- The hobbling it will cause in the reading, will make it
appear worse to you, than if you could read it as glibly as you write. If half
of it be illegible, enough will be lest to make you blush for the whole, and
wonder what sort of a pen it was that somebody, unknown to you, put into your
standish.

After all, spare me not, my ever-dear, my evercharming friend! spare only your
self: Don't let Charlotte run away from both G's. You will then be always
equally sure of my admiration and love. For dearly do I love you, with all your
faults; so dearly, that when I consider your faults by themselves, I am ready
to arraign my heart, and to think there is more of the roguery of my Charlotte
in it than I will allow of.

One punishment to you, I intend, my dear -- In all my future Letters, I will
write as if I had never seen this your naughty one. Indeed I am in a kind of
way, faulty or not, that I cannot get out of, all at once; but as soon as I
can, I will, that I may better justify my displeasure at some parts of your
Letter, by the observance I will pay to others. That is a sweet sentence of my
Charlotte's: 'Change your name, and increase your consequence.' Reflect, my
dear -- How naughty must you have been, that such a charming instance of
goodness could not bribe to spare you

Your ever-affectionate and grateful HARRIET BYRON?

LETTER XXIX. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Selby-house, Tuesday Morning, Oct. 24.
MR. Deane would not go back with us. He laid a strict charge upon me, at
parting, not to be punctilious.

I am not, my dear Lady G. Do you think I am? The men are their own enemies, if
they wish us to be open-hearted and sincere, and are not so themselves. Let
them enable us to depend on their candor, as much as we may on that of Sir
Charles Grandison, and the women will be inexcusable, who shall play either the
prude or coquet with them. You will say, I am very cunning, perhaps, to form at
the same time a rule from, and an excuse for, my own conduct to this excellent
man: But be that as it will, it is truth.

We sent our duty last night to Shirley-manor; and expect every moment the dear
parent there with us.

She is come. I will go down; and if I get her by myself, or only with my aunt
and Lucy, I will tell her a thousand thousand agreeable things, which have
passed since last I had her tender blessing.

WE have had this Greville and this Fenwick here. I could very well have spared
them. Miss Orme came hither also, uninvited, to breakfast; a favor she often
does us. I knew not at first how to behave to Sir Charles before her: She
looked so jealous of him! so cold! Under her bent brow she looked at him: Yes,
and No, were all her answers, with an air so stiff! -- But this reserve lasted
not above a quarter of an hour. Sir Charles addressed himself to me, with so
much respect; to her, with so polite a freedom; that she could not hold her
shyness.

Her brow cleared up; her eyes looked larger, and more free: Her buttoned-up
pretty mouth opened to a smile: She answered, she asked, questions; gave her
required opinion on more topics than one, and was again all Miss Orme.

Everybody took great notice of Sir Charles's fine address to her, and were
charmed with him; for we all esteem Mr. Orme, and love his sister. How pleasant
it was to see the sunshine break out in her amiable countenance, and the gloom
vanishing, by degrees!

She took me out into the lesser parlour -- What a strange variable creature am
I! said she: How I hated this Sir Charles Grandison, before I saw him! I was
vexed to find him, at first sight, answer what I had heard of him; for I was
resolved to dislike him, though he had been an angel! But, ah, my poor brother!
-- I am afraid, I myself shall be ready to give up his interest! -- No wonder,
my dear Miss Byron, that nobody else would do, when you had seen this man! --
But still, let me bespeak your pity for my brother! -- Would to Heaven you had
not gone to London! -- What went you thither for?

Sir Charles kindly enquired of her after Mr. Orme's health; praised him for
his character; wished his recovery; and to be allowed to cultivate the
friendship of so worthy a man: And all this with an air so sincere; -- But good
men must love one another.

SIR Charles has just now declared to my aunt, that he thinks of going up to
town, or to Grandison-hall, I forget if they told me which, tomorrow or next
day: Perhaps he knows not to which himself. I was surprised. Perhaps he is
tired with us. Let me recollect -- Thursday was Se'nnight; Why indeed he has
been down with us twelve days! -- No less!

But he has no doubts, no suspences frum us, to keep Love awake: His path is
plain and smooth before him. He has demanded his day: We think we cannot
immediately, and after so short a time past since his declaring himself, give
it him -- And why should he lose his precious time among us? I suppose he will
be so good as to hold himself in readiness to obey our summons -- He expects a
summons from us, perhaps! --

O my dear Lady G! am I not perverse? I believe I am. Yet where there is room,
from past circumstances, to dread a slight, though none may be intended, and
truly as I honor and revere Lady Clementina, my mind is not always great
enough (perhaps from consciousness of demerit) to carry itself above
apprehension and petulance, noble as is the man.

My uncle is a little down upon it; and why? Because, truly, my grandmamma has
told him, that it is really too early yet to fix the day; and he reverences, as
every body does, her judgment.

But why, he asks, cannot there be preparation making? Why may not something be
seen going forward?

What? before the day is named? my aunt asks -- As Harriet had desired to have
his next Letters arrive before she directly answered his question, she could
not recede.

He went from them both greatly dissatisfied, and exclaiming against women's
love of power, and never knowing how to make a right use of it.

A message from Sir Charles. He desires to attend me. I believe I shall be a
little sullen: I know my heart: It is all his own; and I am loath to disoblige
him -- But he was far, far more attendant on Lady Clementina's motions: Don't
you think so, Lady G? But she was all excellence -- Well -- But hush! -- I say
no more! --

I WILL give you an account of our conversation. I verily believe, that, had he
not touched the poor snail with too hasty a singer, which made her shrink in
again into her shell, I might have been brought to name the week, though not the
day.

But I will not anticipate.

He entered with a very polite and affectionate air. He enquired after my
health, and said, I looked not well -- Only vexed, thought I!

It is impossible, I believe, to hold displeasure in the presence of a beloved
object, with whom we are not mortally offended. My dearest Miss Byron, said he,
taking my passive hand, I am come to ask your advice on twenty subjects. In the
first place, here is a Letter from Lady G. recommending to me a house near her
own [He gave it to me. I read it]. Should you, madam, approve of Grosvenor
Square?

I was silent: You will guess how my captious folly appeared to him, by what he
said to me. He respectfully took my hand -- Why so solemn, dear madam? Why so
silent? Has anything disturbed you? Some little displeasure seems to hang upon
that open countenance. Not at me, I hope?

Yes it is, thought I! But I did not intend you should see it. -- I cleared up;
and without answering his question, said, It is in the neighborhood of Lady L.
I hope?

Thank you, madam, for that hope -- It is. Nor far from your cousin Reeves's.

I can have no objection, Sir.

I will refer myself, on this sublect, if you please, to my sisters, and Lord
G. He values himself on his taste in houses and furniture, and will be
delighted to be put into commission with my sisters on this occasion: Or shall
I stay till the happy day is over, and leave the choice wholly to yourself?

Lady G. Sir, seems pleased with the house. She writes, that there is somebody
else about it. It may not, then, be to be had.

Shall I then commission her to take it directly?

What you please, Sir.

He bowed to me, and said, Then that matter is settled. And now, madam, let me
own all my arts. You would penetrate into them, if I did not. You see that the
great question is never out of my view -- I cannot but hope and believe, that
you are above regarding mere punctilio. -- Have you, my dearest Miss Byron,
thought, can you think, of some early weak, in which to fix my happy day? --
Some preparation on your part, I presume, will be thought necessary: As to
mine, were you to bless me with your hand next week, I should be aforehand in
that particular.

I was silent. I was considering how to find some middle way that should make
noncompliance appear neither disobliging, nor affected.

He looked up at me with Love and Tenderness in his aspect; but, having no
answer, proceeded:

Your uncle, madam, and Mr. Deane, will inform you, that the settlements are
such as cannot be disapproved of. I expect every day some slight tokens of my
affection for my dear Miss Byron, which will be adorned by the lovely wearer: I
have not been so extravagant in them, as shall make her think I build on toys
for her approbation. She will allow me to give her my notions on this subject.
In the article of personal appearance, I think that propriety and degree should
be consulted, as well as fortune. Our degree, our fortune, madam, is not mean?
but I, who always wished for the revival of Sumptuary Laws, have not sought, in
this article, to emulate Princes. In my own dress, I am generally a conformist
to the fashion. Singularity is usually the indication of something wrong in
judgment. I rather perhaps dress too shewy, though a young man, for one who
builds nothing on outward appearance: But my father loved to be dressed. In
matters which regard not morals, I choose to appear to his friends and tenants,
as not doing discredit to his magnificent spirit Miss Byron observes, Vol. I.
Let. xxxvi. p. 256. that Sir Charles's dress and equipage are rather gay than
plain. She l^ttle thought, at that time, that he had such a reason to give for
it as he here suggests.
. I could not think it becoming, as those perhaps do, who have the direction of
the royal stamp on the coin, to set my face the contrary way to that of my
predecessor. In a word, all my father's steps, in which I could tread, I did;
and have chosen rather to build upon, than demolish, his foundations. -- But
how does my vanity mislead me! I have vanity, madam; I have pride, and some
consequential failings, which I cannot always get above: But, anxious as I ever
shall be for your approbation, my whole heart shall be open to you; and every
motive, every spring of action, so far as I can trace it, be it to my advantage
or not, shall be made known to you. Happy the day that I became acquainted with
Dr. Bartlett! He will tell you, madam, that I am corrigible. You must perfect,
by your sweet conversation, un -coupled with fear, what Dr. Bartlett has so
happily begun; and I shall then be more worthy of you than at present I am.

O, Sir, you do me too much honor! You must be my monitor. As to the ornaments
you speak of, I hope I shall always look upon simplicity of manners a grateful
return to the man I shall vow to honor, and a worthy behavior to all around
me, as my principal ornaments!

His eyes glistened. He bowed his face upon my hand, to hide, as I thought, his
emotion. Excellent Miss Byron! said he: Then, after a pause, Now let me say,
that I have the happiness to find my humble application to you acceptable to
every one of your friends. The only woman on earth whom, besides yourself, I
ever could have wished to call mine, and all her ever-to-be respected family
(pleading their own sakes) join their wishes in my favor; and, were you to
desire it, would, I am sure, signify as much to you under their own hands. I
know not whether I could so far have overcome my own scruples in behalf of your
delicay (placing myself, as persons always ought when they hope for favor, in
the granter's place) as to supplicate you so soon as I have done, but at the
earnest request of a family, and for the sake of a Lady, I must ever hold dear.
The world about you expects a speedy celebration. I have not, I own, been
backward to encourage the expectation: It was impossible to conceal from it the
motive of my coming down, as my abode was at an inn. I came with an equipage,
because my pride (How great is my pride! permitted me not to own that I
doubted. Have you, madam, a material objection to an early day? Be so good to
inform me, if you have. I wish to remove every shadow of doubt from your heart.

I was silent. He proceeded:

Let me not pain you, madam! -- lifting my hand to his lips -- I would not pain
you for the world. You have seen the unhappy Olivia! You have perhaps heard her
story from herself. What must be the cause upon which self partiality cannot
put a gloss? Because I knew not how (It was shocking to my nature) to repulse a
Lady, she took my pity for encouragement. Pity from a Lady of a man, is noble
-- The declaration of pity from a man for a woman, may be thought a vanity
bordering upon insult. Of such a nature is not mine -- She has some noble
qualities -- from my heart, for her character's sake, I pity Olivia! and the
more, for that violence of temper which she never was taught to restrain. If,
madam, you have any scruples on her account, own them: I will, for I honestly
can, remove them.

O Sir! None! None! -- Not the least, on that unhappy Lady's account --

Let me say, proceeded he, that Olivia reveres you, and wish^s you (I hope
cordially, for she is afraid still of your sister-excellence) to be mine. Give
me leave to boast (It is my boast), that though I have had pain from individuals
of your Sex, I can look back on my past life, and bless God that I never, from
childhood to manhood, WILFULLY gave pain either to the MOTHERLY or SISTERLY
heart See his mother's written acknowlegement to this purpose, Vol. II. p. 214.
; nor from manhood to the present hour, to any other woman.

O Sir! Sir! -- What is it you call pain, if at this instant (and I said it
with tears) that which your goodness makes me feel, is not so? -- The dear, the
excellent Clementina! What a perverseness is in her fate! She, and she only,
could have deserved you!

He bent his knee to the greatly-honoured Harriet -- I acknowledge with
transport, said he, the joy you give me by your magnanimity; such a more than
sisterly magnanimity to that of Clementina. How nobly do you authorize my
regard for her! -- In you, madam, shall I have all her excellencies, without
the abatements which must have been allowed, had she been mine, from
considerations of Religion and Country. Believe me, madam, that my Love of her,
if I know my heart is of such a nature, as never can abate the fervor of that I
vow to you. To both of you, my principal attachment was to MIND: Yet let me
say, that the personal union, to which you discourage me not to aspire, and the
duties of that most intimate of all connexions, will preserve to you the due
preference; as (allow me to say) it would have done to her, had she accepted of
my vows.

O Sir! believe me incapable of affectation, of petulance, of disguise! My
heart (Why should I not speak freely to Sir Charles Grandison?) is wholly
yours! -- It never knew another Lord! I will flatter myself, that, had you
never known Lady Clementina, and had she not been a prior Love, you never would
have had a divided heart! -- What pain must you have had in the conflict! My
regard for you, bids me acknowledge my own vanity, in my pity for you!

I gushed into tears -- You must leave me, Sir -- I cannot bear the exaltation
you have given me!

I turned away my face: I thought I should have fainted.

He clasped me to his bosom: He put his cheek to mine: For a moment we neither
of us could speak.

He broke the short silence. I dread the effects on your tender health, of the
pain I, or rather your own greatness of mind, give you. Beloved of my heart!
kissing my cheek, wet at that moment with the tears of both, forgive me! -- And
be assured, that Reverence will always accompany my Love. Will it be too much,
just now, to re-urge the day that shall answer the wishes of Clementina, of her
noble brothers, of all our own friends, and make you wholly mine?

His air was so noble; his eyes showed so much awe, yet such manly dignity,
that my heart gave way to its natural impulse -- Why, Sir, should I not declare
my reliance on your candor? My honor, in the world's eye, I entrust to you:
But bid men ot do an improper thing, left my desire of obliging you should make
me forget myself.

Was not this a generous resignation? Did it not deserve a generous return? But
he, even Sir Charles Grandison, endeavored to make his advantage of it.
Letters from Italy unreceived! as if he thought my reference to those a
punctilio also.

What a deposit! -- Your honor, madam, is safely entrusted. Can punctilio be
honor? -- It is but the shadow of it. What but that stands against your grant
of an early day? -- Do not think me misled by my impatience to call you mine,
to take an undue advantage of your condescension. Is it not the happiness of
both that I wish to confirm? And shall I suffer false delicacy, false
gratitude, to take place of the true? -- Allow me, madam -- But you seem uneasy
-- I will prolong the time I had intended to beg you would permit me to limit
you to. Let me request from you the choice of some one happy day before the
expiration of the next fourteen --

Consider, Sir! --

Nothing, madam, happening in my behavior to cause you to revoke the generous
trust: From abroad there cannot.

He looked to be in earnest in his request: Was it not almost an ungenerous
return to my confidence in him? Twelve days only had elasped since his personal
declaration; the Letters from Italy which he had allowed me to wait for,
unreceived; Lady D. one of the most delicate-minded of women, knowing too my
preferable regard for your brother: And must not the hurry have the worse
appearance for that? No preparation yet thought of: My aunt thinking his former
urgency, greatly as she honors him, rather too precipitating -- My spirits,
hurried before, were really affected. Do not call me a silly girl, dearest Lady
G: I endeavored to speak; but, at the instant, could not distinctly.

I am sorry, madam, that what I have said has so much disturbed you. Surely,
some one day in the fourteen --

Indeed, indeed, Sir, interrupted I, you have surprised me: I did not think you
could have wished so to limit me -- I did not expect --

What, loveliest of women! will you allow me to expect? The day is still at
your own choice. Revoke not, however, the generous concession, till Mrs.
Shirley, Mrs. Selby, and our Lucy, are consulted. Will you, dearest madam, be
determined by them?

Say, not, Sir, to any of them, after such an instance of my confidence in you
-- for the honor of your accustomed generosity, say it not -- that you could
so limit me; and I will endeavor to forget it.

Consider, my dearest Miss Byron --

I believe my grandmamma is come, said I --

They are all goodness: They will indulge me. I will tell you, madam, taking my
hand, and seating me, what is my intention, if you approve of it. All the
country suppose that my application for your favor meets with encouragement:
They expect, as I have told you, a speedy solemnization. I took my lodgings at
some little distance from you, at a place of public entertainment; perhaps
(pardon me, madam, for the sake of my ingenuousness) with some view, that the
general talk [See, Lady G! it is well he is a good man!] would help to
accelerate my happy day: But, madam, to continue my daily visits from thence,
when my happiness is supposed to be near, will not perhaps look so well [We are
to be studious of looks, it seems] -- Indeed I would not be thought to despise
the world's opinion: The world, when it will have patience to stay till it is
master of facts, is not always wrong: It can judge of others, better than it
can act itself -- The change of my lodgings to others in this house, or in
Shirley-manor, will not perhaps be allowed till I am blessed with the hand of
the dearest relation of both: I therefore think of going up to town, declaredly
(Why not?) to prepare for our nuptials; and to return near the time agreed upon
for the happy celebration. Then will either this house, or Shirley-manor, be
allowed to receive the happiest of men.

He stopped: I was silent. He proceeded, looking tenderly, yet smilingly, in my
downcast face, still holding my hand: -- And now, dearer to me than life, let
me ask you -- Can you think it an unpardonable intrusion on your condescending
goodness, that I make the time of my return to my Miss Byron not over-tedious?
-- Fourteen days, were you to go to the extent of them, would be an age to me,
who have been for so many days past the happiest man that a person in
expectation can be. I do assure you, madam, that I had not the insolence to
suppose I was making you a request that was rather expected to be forgiven,
than complied with. I thought myself not ungenerous to the confidence you
reposed in me, that I gave you so much time. I thought of a week, and began
apologizing, lest you should think it too short; but, when I saw you disturbed,
I concluded with the mention of a fortnight. My dearest creature, think me not
unreasonable in my expectations of your compliance --

What, Sir! in a fortnight? --

As to preparations, madam, you know the pleasure my sisters will have in
executing any commissions you will favor them with on so joyful an occasion.
Charlotte had not so much time for preparation. But were not everything to be
in readiness by the chosen day, there will be time enough for all you wish,
before you would perhaps choose to see company -- Consider, my dearest life,
that if you regard punctilio merely; punctilio has no determinate end:
Punctilio begets punctilio. You may not half a year hence imagine that to be
sufficiently gratified. Again I say, Do you, madam, consider: Let me adhere to
the fourteen days, and within them crown the hope you gave me.

Within them! -- Sir! I did not expect --

You tell me, my beloved Miss Byron, interrupted he, what you did not expect --
Tell me, I beseech you, mistress as you are of one of the noblest of female
hearts, what you did expect, when you condescended to make me the compliment,
that, were it to be carried into effect, would engage my utmost gratitude.

I had not thought of any particular time: But I could not have made you that
compliment, had I thought of a day so very early.

You have, madam, you ought to have, the option: Yet I own, that your declared
generous confidence in me had elated me. The temptation was too great for me,
not to wish to make use of the power you had, as I thought, put into my hands:
And allow me to say, that I cannot give up my hope till your grandmamma and
aunt decide that I ought.

How, Sir! -- And can you thus adhere? -- But I will allow of your reference --

And be determined by their advice, madam?

But I will not trust you, Sir, with pleading your own cause.

Are you not arbitrary, madam?

In this point, if I am, ought I not to be so?

Yes, if you will resume a power you had so generously resigned.

May I not, Sir, when I think it over-strained in the hands of the person to
whom, in better hopes, it was delegated?

That, dear Lady, is the point to be tried. You consent to refer the merits of
it to your grandmamma and aunt?

If I do, Sir, you ought not to call me arbitrary.

It is gracious, bowing, in my sovereign Lady, to submit her absolute will and
pleasure to arbitration.

Very well, Sir! -- But will you not submit to my own award?

Tell me dear Miss Byron, tell me, if I do, how generous will you be?

I was far from intending --

Was, madam -- I hope I may dwell upon that word, and repeat my question?

Am, Sir. I am far from intending --

No more, dear madam. I appeal to another tribunal.

Well, Sir, I will endeavor to recollect the substance of this conversation,
and lay it, in writing, before the judges you have named. Lucy shall be one.

You will permit me, madam, to see your state of the case, before you lay it
before the judges?

No, Sir! None but they must see it, till it makes part of a Letter to Lady G.
who then shall show it only to Lady L.

It is the harder to be thus prescribed to, my dear Miss Byron, because --

What, Sir, in my day? --

That was what I was going to urge, because mine will never come. Every day, to
the end of my life, will be yours [Dear man!] -- Only, Sir, as I deserve your
kindness, I wish not for it on other terms. And you shall be then sole judge of
my deserts. I will not appeal to any other tribunal.

He gracefully bowed. I think, said he, smiling, I must withdraw my intended
appeal: I am half-afraid of my judges; and perhaps ought to rely wholly on your
goodness.

No, no, Sir! Your intention is your act. In that sense you have appealed to
Caesar Alluding to Festus's answer to St. Paul, Acts xxv. 12.


I never before was in Love with despotism. You mention writing to my sisters:
You correspond with them, I presume, as you formerly did with our Lucy. Let me
tell you, madam, that you had not been Miss Byron, FOURTEEN days after I was
favored with the sight of those Letters, had I been at liberty to offer you my
heart, and could I have prevailed on you to accept it. Your distress, your
noble frankness of heart --

And let me own, Sir, as an instance of the frankness you are pleased to
encourage, that gratitude for the deliverance you so nobly gave me, had as much
power over my heart, as the openness of mine, and my distress, could have over
yours.

Sweet excellence! -- Complete your generous goodness to a grateful heart; it
is a grateful one; and shorten the days of your single power, in order to
enlarge it!

Lucy appeared; but seeing us engaged in conversation, was about to retire: But
he, stepping to her, and taking both her hands -- OUR Lucy, obligingly, said
he, you must come in -- You are to be one judge of three in a certain cause,
that will come before you -- And I hope --

No prejudgings, Sir Charles, said I -- You are not to plead at all --

Yet deeply interested in the event, Miss Selby! said he.

A bad sign, cousin Byron! said Lucy. I begin already to doubt the justice of
your cause.

When you hear it, Lucy, make, as you usually do, the golden rule yours, and I
have nothing to fear.

I tell you, beforehand, I am inclined to favor Sir Charles. No three judges
can be found, but will believe, from his character, that he cannot be wrong.

But from mine, that I may! O my Lucy! I did not expect this from my cousin.
You must not, I think, be one of my judges.

To this place, I have shown my three judges. The following is their
determination, drawn up by the dear Lady president, my grandmamma:

Sir Charles Grandison, against Harriet Byron. Et e Contra.
WE, the underwritten, do find, upon the case laid before us by the said
Harriet, That, in the whole conversation between the said Sir Charles and her,
she has behaved herself with that true virgin delicacy, yet with that laudable
unreservedness, that might be expected from her character, and his merits. We
think, the gentleman has the advantage of the Lady in the arguments for the
early day contended for; and, if she had defended herself by little artifices
and disguises, we should have had no scruple to decide against her: But as she
has shown, throughout the conversation, noble instances of generosity, trust
reposed, and even acknowleged affection; we recommend to them both a compromise.

We allow, therefore, Sir Charles Grandison to pursue his intentions of going
up to town, declaredly to prepare for the happy day; and recommend it to
Harriet, in consideration of the merits of the requester (who lays his whole
heart open before her, in a manner too generous not to meet with a like return)
to fix as early a day as in prudence she can.

For the rest, May the Almighty shower down his blessings on both! May all
their contentions, like this, be those of Love, and true Delicacy! May they
live together many, very many, happy years, an example of conjugal felicity!
And may their exemplary virtues meet with an everlasting reward! -- So prays!
so subscribes!

HENRIETTA SHIRLEY. MARIANNE SELBY. LUCY SELBY.


Tomorrow morning, when Sir Charles comes to breakfast, this paper will be
presented to him by my grandmamma.

I wonder whether Sir Charles writes to Dr. Bartlett an account of what passes
here. If he does, what would I give to see his Letters! and particularly, what
he thinks of the little delays he meets with* But do, dear Lady G. acquit me of
affectation and parade. Indeed it is not that. I hope he himself acquits me,
and censures himself; for, upon my word, he is unreasonably hasty.

I could not but express a little curiosity about his hint of Lady Olivia's
favorable opinion of me, though not at the time; and he was so good as to show
me, and my grandmamma and aunt, a most extraordinary character which she gave
me in a long Letter. I saw it was a long Letter (I was very Eve-ish, my dear).
Lucy said afterward, that I did so leer at it: An ugly word, importing
sliness! and, after I was angry at myself for giving her the idea that put her
upon applying it, I chid her for using it.

Lady Olivia writes such high things, my dear! I blushed -- I did not, could
not, deserve them. I always pitied her, you know; but now you cannot imagine
how much more than ever I pitied her. Do all of us, indeed, as the men say,
love flattery? -- I did not think I did -- I shall find out all the obliquities
of my heart, in time. I was supposed once to be so good a creature -- as if
none other were half so good! -- Ah, my partial friends! you studied your
Harriet in the dark; but here comes the sun darting into all the crooked and
obscure corners of my heart; and I shrink from his dazzling eye; and, compared
to Him (and Clementina, let me add) appear to myself such a Nothing --

Nay, I have had the mortification, once or twice, to think myself less than
the very Olivia, upon whom, but lately, secure of my mind's superiority to her
mind, I looked down with a kind of proud compassion: And whence this exaltation
of Olivia, and self-humiliation? -- Why, from her magnifying beyond measure the
poor Harriet, and yielding up her own hopes, entreating him, as she does, to
address me; and that with such honorable distinction, as if my acceptance of
him were doubtful, and a condescension.

I wish I could procure you a copy of what your brother read to me -- Ah, my
dear! it is very soothing to my pride! -- But what is the foundation of that
pride? Is it not my ambition to be thought worthily of by the best of men? And
does not praise stimulate me to resolve to deserve praise? I will endeavor to
deserve it. But, my dear, this Olivia, a fine figure herself, and loving in
spite of discouragement, can praise, to the object of her Love, the person, and
still more, the mind, of her rival! -- Is not that great in Olivia? Could I be
so great, if I thought myself in danger from her?

LETTER XXX. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Selby-house, Wedn. Oct. 25.
SIR Charles came not this morning till we were all assembled for breakfast. I
had begun to think, whether, if I had been Sir Charles, and he had been Miss
Byron, I would not have been here an hour before, expecting the decision of the
judges to whom a certain cause was referred. O my dear Lady G.! how narrow
minded I am, with all my quondam heroism! The knowledge of his past engagements
with the excellent Clementina, and of his earnest wishes then to be hers, makes
me, on every occasion that can be tortured into an appearance of neglect or
coldness, so silly! -- Indeed I am ashamed of myself. But all my petulance was
dispelled, the instant he shone upon us.

Well, my dear Ladies, said he, the moment he took his place, whisperingly to
my grandmamma (who sat between my aunt and Lucy), Is sentence given?

It is, Sir Charles -- He took my hand, cross my Nancy's lap, as she sat
between him and me -- I have hopes, my dear Miss Byron [from the foolishness in
my looks, I suppose] that you are cast.

Have patience, Sir, said I -- It is well that the best of us are not always to
be our own carvers.

He looked, Lucy said afterward, with eyes of love upon me, and of
apprehension on his judges; and the discourse turned upon different subjects.

I retired as soon as breakfast was over; and he demanded his sentence.

My uncle was, as he called it, turned out of door before my grandmamma gave
your brother the paper.

Sir Charles read it -- You are not serious upon it, Sir Charles, said my
grandmamma. -- I am infinitely obliged to you, Ladies, replied he. I love to
argue with my dear Miss Byron: I must attend her, this moment.

He sent up Sally before him, and came up. I was in my closet; and scrupled not
to admit him.

Henceforth, my dearest dear Miss Byron, said he, the moment he approached me
(as I stood up to receive him) I salute you undoubtedly mine -- And he saluted
me with ardor -- I knew not which way to look -- So polite a Lover as I thought
him! -- Yet never man was so gracefully free! -- It remains now, madam,
proceeded he, still holding my hand, to put to trial your goodness to me [You
have done that already, thought I!] in the greater question, by which I am to
conduct myself for the next week, or ten days.

Week or ten days, thought I! Surely, Sir, you are an incroacher.

You see, Sir, said I, when a little recovered, what judges who, on such points
as these, cannot err, have determined.

Yes, they can, interrupted he: As Ladies, they are parties -- But I submit.
Their judgment must be a law to me -- I will go up to town, as they advise. I
cannot, however, be long absent from you. When I return, I will not put up at a
public place. Either your uncle, or your grandmother, must allow me to be their
guest. This will oblige you, I hope, even for dear punctilio sake, to honor me
with your hand very soon after my return.

He paused: I was silent. His first address had put me out. Remember, madam, I
said, resumed he, that I cannot be long absent: You are above being governed by
mere punctilio. Add to the obligations your generous acceptance of me has laid
me under -- Why sighs my Angel? [It was, my dear Lady G. an involuntary sigh!]
-- For the world, I would not give you either sensible or lasting pain. But if
the same circumstances would make your nomination of a day as painful to you,
some time hence, as now, then bless me with as early a day as you CAN give me,
to express myself in the words of my judges.

This, Sir, said I (but I hesitated, and looked down) is one of the solemn
points which precede one of the most solemn circumstances of my life. You seem
more in earnest for an early day than I could have expected. When I have
declared that affectation has no part in the more distant compliance, I may be
allowed, by the nicest of my own Sex, to lay open to a man so generous, though so
precipitating, my whole heart. Indeed, Sir, it is wholly yours -- I blushed, as
I felt, and turned away my face. It was a free declaration: But I was resolved
to banish affectation. He bowed profoundly on my hand, and kissed it. Gratitude
looked out in his eyes, and appeared in his graceful manner, though attentively
silent.

You was my deliverer, proceeded I. An esteem founded on gratitude, the object
so meritorious, ought to set me above mere forms -- Our judges say that you
have the advantage in the argument.

I will lay no stress, madam, on this part of their judgment in my favor -- To
your goodness, and to that so nobly-acknowleged esteem, I wholly refer myself.

I myself think, proceeded I, that you have the advantage in the argument --
All that is in my power, I would wish to do, to oblige you --

Condescending goodness! -- Again he bowed on my hand.

Do you think, Sir --

Why hesitates my Love?

Do you think, six weeks --

Six ages, my dearest, dearest creature? -- Six weeks! For Heaven's sake, madam
-- He looked, he spoke, impatience.

What can a woman, who has owned your title to expect to be obliged, say? --
let me, at least, ask (and I unaffectedly hesitated) a month, Sir -- from this
day -- And that you will acknowledge yourself not perversely or weakly treated.

He dropped on one knee, and kissing my hand, once, twice, thrice, with rapture,
Within the month! then I hope -- I cannot live a month from you -- Allow me to
return in the first fortnight of the month --

O Sir! and take up your residence with us, on your return.

Undoubtedly, madam. -- Consider, Sir -- Do you also, dearest madam, consider;
and banish me not from you for so very long a time.

My heart wanted, I thought, to oblige him; but to allow him to return sooner,
as he was to take up his abode with us, what was that, but, in effect,
complying with his first proposal?

Permit me, Sir, to retire. Indeed you are too urgent.

He asked my excuse; but declared, that he would not give up his humble plea
(humble he called it) unless my grandmamma and aunt told him, that he ought.

On his leaving me to return to company below, he presented me with four little
boxes. Accept, my beloved Miss Byron, said he, of these trifles. I received
them not till this morning. While I had the Day to hope from you, my heart
would not suffer me to offer them, least you should suspect me mean enough to
imagine an influence from them. I oblige myself by the tender, and I comply
with custom, which I am fond of doing, whenever I can innocently do it. But I
know, that you, my dear Miss Byron, value the heart more than a thousand times
the value of these -- Mine, madam, is yours, and will be yours to the end of my
life.

What could I say? -- My heart, on recollection, reproaches me for my
ungraceful acceptance. I courtesied. I was silly. Sir Charles Grandison only
can be present to every occasion.

He looked as if my not refusing them was a favor more than equivalent to the
value of the presents. My dearest life! said he, on my putting them on my
toilette, how much you oblige me! -- Shall I conduct you to our friends below?
Will you acquaint your grandmamma and aunt with our debate, and my bold
expectation?

I stood still. He took my hand, pressed it with his lips, and, with a
reverence more than usually profound, as if he had received instead of
conferred a favor, withdrew. Never was a present so gracefully made! I cannot
describe the grace with which he made it.

My uncle, it seems, as soon as he went down, asked him, How we had settled the
great affair? My grandmamma and aunt in a breath, as he paid his compliments to
them, asked him, If their Harriet had been good? -- or, as good as he expected?

Miss Byron, said he, has taken more time than I could have wished she had. A
month, she talks of.

Has she complied so far? said my grandmamma. I am glad of it. I was afraid she
would have insisted upon more time -- So was I, said my aunt. But who can
withstand Sir Charles Grandison? Has the dear girl given you the very day, Sir?

No, madam. If she had, I should have hoped it would have been considerably
within the month. As yet, Ladies, I hope it will.

Nay, Sir Charles, if you are not pleased with a month, said my aunt -- Hush,
dear Ladies! -- Here comes the Angel. -- Not a word, I beseech you, on that
side of the question -- She will think, if you applaud her, that she has
consented to too short a term -- You must not make her uneasy with herself.

Does not this look as if he imagined there was room for me to be so? -- I
almost wish -- I do'nt know what I wish; except I could think but half so well
of myself as I do of him: For then should I look forward with less pain in my
joy than now too often mingles with it.

Your brother excused himself from dining with us: That Greville has engaged
him. Why would he permit himself to be engaged by him? Greville cannot love
him: He can only admire him, and that everybody does, who has been but once in
his company. Miss Orme, even Miss Orme, is in Love with him. I received a note
from her while your brother was with us. These are the contents:

Dear Miss Byron,
I AM in Love with your young Baronet. It is well that your Beauty and your
Merit secure you, and make every other woman hopeless. To see and know Miss
Byron, is half the cure, unless a woman were presumption itself. O my poor
brother! -- But will you let me expect you, and as many of the dear family as
you can bring, at breakfast tomorrow morning? -- Sir Charles Grandison, of
course. Show your own obligingness to me, and your power over him, at the same
time. Your cousin Holles's will be with me, and three sister-toasts of York;
besides that Miss Clarkson of whose Beauty and Agreeableness you have heard me
talk. They long to see you. You may come. Poor things! how will they be
mortified! If any one of them can allow herself to be less lovely than the
others, she will be least affected by your superiority. But let me tell you,
that Miss Clarkson, had she the intelligence in her eyes that Somebody else
has, and the dignity with the ease, would be as charming a young woman. But we
are all prepared, I to love, they to admire, your gentleman. Pray, pray, my
dear, bring him, or the disappointment will kill

Your KITTY ORME.


Lucy, acquainting Sir Charles with the invitation, asked him, if he would
oblige Miss Orme. He was at our command, he said -- So we shall breakfast
tomorrow at The Park.

But I am vexed at his dining with us today. So little time to stay with us! I
wish him to be complaisant to Mr. Greville; but need he be so very obliging?
There are plots laying for his company all over the county. We are told, there
is to be a numerous assembly, all of gentlemen, at Mr. Greville's. Mr. Greville
humourously declares, that he hates all women, for the sake of one.

WE have just opened the boxes. O my dear Lady G! your brother is either very
proud, or his fortune is very high! Does he not say, that he always consults
fortune, as well as degree, in matters of outward appearance? He has not, in
these presents, I am sure, consulted either the fortune or degree of your
Harriet -- Of your happy Harriet, I had like to have written: But the word
happy, in this place, would have looked as if I thought these jewels an
addition to my happiness. How does his bounty insult me, on my narrow fortune!
-- Narrow, unless he submit to accept of the offered contributions of my dear
friends -- Contributions! -- Proud Harriet! how art thou, even in thy
exaltation, humbled! -- Trifles, he called them! The very ornamenting one's
self with such toys, may, in his eye, be thought trifling, though he is not above
complying with the fashion, in things indifferent: But, the cost and beauty of
these jewels considered, they are not trifles. The jewel of jewels, however, is
his heart! How would the noble Clementina -- Hah, Pen! Heart, rather, Why, why,
just now, this check of Clementina? -- I know why -- Not from want of
admiration of her; but when I am allowing my heart to open, then does --
Something here, in my inmost bosom [Is it Conscience?] strike me, as if it
said, Ah, Harriet! -- Triumph not; rejoice not! Check the overflowings of thy
grateful heart! -- Art thou not an invader of another's right?

LETTER XXXI. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Thursday Morning, Oct. 27.
I Will hurry off a few lines. I am always ready before these fiddling girls:
Lucy and Nancy, I mean. Never tedious, but in dressing! They will over-do the
morning appearance. I could beat them. So well acquainted with propriety as
they are; and knowing the beauty of elegant negligence. Were I not afraid of
Lucy's repartee; and that she would say I was laying out for a compliment; I
would tell them they had a mind to try to eclipse Miss Clarkson, and the
Yorkshire Ladies. Your brother supped, as well as dined, at that Greville's.
Fie upon him! I did not think he had so little command of himself! -- Vain
Harriet! Perhaps he chose to be rather there than here, for novelty -sake. I
shall be saucy, by-and-by. He is below, strongly engaged in talk with my aunt
-- About me, I suppose: Ay, to be sure! methinks your Ladyship says. He can
talk of nobody else! -- Well, and what if one would wish he could not! [What
are these girls about?] No less than one-and-twenty gentlemen at Greville's,
besides the Prince of them all. They all were ready to worship him. Fenwick
looked in just now, and tells us so. He says, that your brother was the
liveliest man in the company. He led the mirth, he says, and visibly exerted
himself the more, finding the turn of the conversation likely to be what might
be expected from such a company of all men. Wretches! Can twenty of them, when
met, be tolerable creatures, not a woman among them, to soften their manners,
and give politeness to their conversation? -- Fenwick says, they engaged him at
one time into talk of different regions, customs, usages. He was master of
every subject. Half a score mouths were open at once whenever he spoke, as if
distended with gags, was his word; and every one's eyes broader than ever they
were observed to be before. Fenwick has humor; a little: Not much; only by
accident. So unlike himself at times, that he may pass for a different man. His
aping Greville, helps his oddness. -- How I ramble! You Will think I am aping my
dear Lady G. Mocking's catching! -- [O these girls!] -- I think time lost when
I am not writing to you. You cannot imagine what a thief I am to my company. I
steal away myself, and get down, before I am missed, half a score times in a
couple of hours. Sir Charles sung to the wretches: They all sung. They encored
him without mercy. -- He talks of setting out for town on Saturday, early. Lord
bless me! what shall I do, when he is gone? -- Do you think I say this? If I
do, I am kept in countenance: Everybody says so, as well as I -- But ah, Lady
G.! -- He has invited all the gentlemen, the whole Twenty-one, and my cousin
James, and my uncle, to dine with him at his inn, tomorrow! -- Inn! nasty inn!
Why did we let him go thither? -- I am afraid he is a reveller. Can he be so
very good a man? O yes, yes, yes! wicked Harriet! What is in thy heart, to
doubt it? A fine reflection upon the age; as if there could not be one good man
in it! and as if a good man could not be a man of vivacity and spirit! From
whom can spirits, can cheerfulness, can debonnairness, be expected, if not from
a good man? -- I will show these girls, by the quantity I have written, how
they have made me wait. Prating I suppose, to my Sally, about Sir Charles: They
can talk of nobody else. -- Ready! Yes, you dear creatures! So you ought to
have been a leaf and half of my writing ago! -- Adieu, Lady G. till our return
from Miss Orme's.

Thursday Noon.
JUST come back from Miss Orme's. Sir Charles and my grandmamma are now got
together, in serious talk. I know I was the subject, by the dear parent's
looking often smiling upon me, as I sat at distance, and by his eyes (taking
the reference, as I may call it, of here is) turned as often toward me; so I
stole up to my pen.

We were very politely treated by Miss Orme. Miss Clarkson is a charming young
Lady: The three Yorkshire sisters are lovely women. Sir Charles has told us,
that mere Beauty attracts only his eyes, as fine flowers do in a gay parterre.
I don't know that, my dear: That Is the philosophical description of himself.
The same men and women are not always the same persons. The Ladies, one and
all, when his back was turned, declared, that he was the gallantest man they
ever were in company with. He said the easiest, politest things, they ever
heard spoken. -- They never were in his company before: They might else have
heard as fine. Such dignity they observed (so does everybody), yet so much
ease, in all he said, as well as in his whole behavior -- Born to be a public
man, would his pride permit him to aim at being so! -- Not a syllable, however,
but what might be said to each with the strictest truth. Sir Charles Grandison
[It is Lucy's observation, as well as mine] addresses himself to women, as
women, not as goddesses; yet does honor to the persons, and to the sex. Other
men, not knowing what better to say, make Angels of them, all at once. The
highest things are ever said by men of the lowest understandings; and, their
bolts once shot, the poor souls can go no further. So silly! -- Has not your
Ladyship some of these in your eye, who make out the rest, by grinning in our
faces, in order to convince us of their sincerity? Complimental men don't
consider, that if the women they egregiously flatter were what they would have
them believe they think them, they would not be seen in such company.

But what do you think the elder sister of the three said of your brother? --
She was sure, those eyes, and that vivacity and politeness, were not given him
for nothing. Given him for nothing! What a phrase is that! In short, she said,
that practice had improved his natural advantages. This I have a good mind to
say of her -- Either she had not charity, or her heart has paid for enabling
its mistress to make such an observation. Practice! What meant she by the word?
-- Indeed your brother was not quite so abstractedly inattentive, I thought, to
the Beauty of Miss Clarkson, but he might give some little shadow of ground for
observation to a censorious person.

I sometimes think, that, free and open as his eyes are, his character might
suffer, if one were to judge of his heart by them. Lord L. I remember, once
said, that Ladies abroad used to look upon him as their own man, the moment
they beheld him. -- Innocently so, no doubt, and in their
conversation-assemblies. Poor Lady Olivia, I suppose, was so caught! at an
unhappy moment, perhaps when her caution was half-asleep, and she was loath to
have it too rudely awakened. But ought I, your Harriet, to talk of this? --
Where was my caution, when I suffered myself to be surprised? -- O but my
gratitude was my excuse. Who knows what Olivia might have to plead? -- We have
not her whole story, you know. Poor Lady! I pity her! To cross the seas, as she
did! -- Ineffectually!

But can you bear this pen-prattling; the effects of a mind more at ease than
it ever expected to be?

I will go down. Can I be so long spared? I am just thinking, that were I one
of the creatures called Coquettes, the best way to attract attention, when it
grew languid, is, to do as I do from zeal in writing to you -- Be always going
out and returning, and not staying long enough in a place to tire one's
company, or suffer them to turn their eyes upon anybody else. Did you ever try
such an experiment, Charlotte? But you never could tire your company. Yet I
think you have a spice of that character in yours. Don't you think so,
yourself? -- But don't own it, if you do -- Hey-day! What Is the matter with me!
I believe by my flippancy I am growing quite well, and as saucy as I used to be
-- Poor Lady Clementina! I wish she were happy! Then should I be so.

MY dear Lady G. we had a charming conversation this day: My grandmamma and
your brother bore the principal parts in it. It began with dress, and fashion,
and suchlike trifling subjects; but ended in the noblest. You know my
grandmamma's cheerful piety. Sir Charles seemed at first only designing to
attend to her wisdom; but she drew him in. O my dear! he seems to be, yet not
to know it, as good a man, as she is a woman! Yet years so different! -- But
austerity, uncharitableness, on one hand; ostentation, affectation, on the
other; these are qualities which can have no place in his heart. Such a
glorious benevolence! Such enlarged sentiments! -- What a happy, thrice happy
woman, thought I, several times, must she be, who shall be considered as a
partaker of his goodness! Who shall be blessed not only in him, but for him; and
be his, and he hers, to all eternity!

My aunt once, in the conclusion of this conversation, said, How happy would it
be, if he could reform certain gentlemen of this neighborhood! And as they
were so fond of his company, she hoped he would attempt it.

Example, he answered, and a silent one, would do more with such men than
precept. They have Moses, and the prophets. They know when they do wrong, and
what is right. They would be afraid of, and affronted at, a man pretending to
instruct them. Decency, from such men, is as much as can be expected. We live
in such an age, added he, that I believe more good may be done by seeming to
relax a little, than by strictness of behavior. Yet I admire those, who, from
a full persuasion of their duty, do not relax; and the more, if they have got
above moroseness, austerity, and uncharitableness.

After dinner, Mr. Milbourne, a very good man, minister of a Dissenting
congregation in our neighborhood, accompanied by Dr. Curtis, called in upon
us. They are good friends; made so by the mediation of my grandmamma, some
years ago, when they did not so well understand each other. Dr. Curtis had been
with us more than once, since Sir Charles was our visiter. He greatly admires
him, you need not doubt. It was beautiful, after compliments had passed between
Sir Charles and the gentlemen, to see the modest man shine out in your
brother's behavior. Indeed he was free and easy, but attentive, as expecting
entertainment and instruction from them; and leading each of them to give it in
his own way.

They staid but a little while; and when they were gone, Sir Charles said, He
wanted no other proof of their being good men, than they gave by their charity,
and friendship to each other. My uncle, who, you know, is a zealous man for the
Church, speaking a little severely of persons whom he called Scismatics; O Mr.
Selby! said Sir Charles, let us be afraid of prescribing to tender consciences.
You and I, who have been abroad, in countries where they account us worse than
Schismatics, would have been loath to have been prescribed to, or compelled, in
articles for which we ourselves are only answerable to the common Father of us
all*

I believe in my conscience, Sir Charles, replied my uncle, if the truth were
known, you are of the mind of that King of Egypt, who said, He looked upon the
diversity of religions in his kingdom with as much pleasure as he did on the
diversity of flowers in his garden.

I remember not the name of that King of Egypt, Mr. Selby; but I am not of his
mind. I should not, if I were a king, take pleasure in such a diversity: But as
the examples of Kings are of great force, I would, by making my own as
faultless as I could, let my people see the excellence of my persuasion, and my
uniform practical adherence to it; instead of discouraging erroneous ones by
unjustifiable severity. Religious zeal is generally a fiery thing: I would as
soon quarrel with a man for his Face, as for his Religion. A good man, if not
over-hated by zeal, will be a good man, whatever be his faith; and should
always be entitled to our esteem, as he is to our good offices as a
fellow creature.

The Methodists, Sir Charles; What think you of the Methodists! Say you love
'em; and, and, and, adds-dines, you shall not be my nephew.

You, now, my dear Mr. Selby, make me afraid of you. You throw out a menace,
the only one you could perhaps think of, that would make me temporize.

You need not, you need not, be afraid, Sir Charles, said my uncle, laughing!
What say you, Harriet? Need he? Hay? looking in my downcast face. Why speak you
not, lovely Love? Need Sir Charles, if he had disobliged me, to have been
afraid? -- Hay?

Dear Sir! you have not of a long time been so --

So, what, Harriet? So, what, dearest? looking me quite down.

Fie, Mr. Selby! said my grandmamma. Sir Charles, stepping to me, very
gallantly took my hand -- O Mr. Selby, you are not kind, said he: But allow me
to make my advantage of your unkindness. My dear Miss Byron, let you and I
withdraw; in compassion to Mr. Selby, let us withdraw: We will not hear him
chidden, as I see the Ladies think he ought to be.

And he hurried me off. The surprise made me appear more reluctant than I was
in my heart.

Every one was pleased with his air and manner; and by this means he relieved
himself from subjects with which he seemed not delighted, and obtained an
opportunity to get me to himself.

Here had he stopped, he would have been welcome: But hurrying me into the
Cedar-parlour; I am jealous, my Love, said he; putting his arm round me: You
seemed loath to retire with me. Forgive me: But thus I punish you, whenever you
give me cause: And, dear Lady G. he downright kissed me -- My lip; and not my
cheek -- and in so fervent a way -- I tell you everything, my Charlotte -- I
could have been angry -- had I known how, from surprise. Before I could
recollect myself, he withdrew his arm; and, resuming his usual respectful air,
it would have made me look affected, had I then taken notice of it. But I don't
remember any instance of the like freedom used to Lady Clementina.

My lovely Love, said he, to express myself in your uncle's style, which is
that of my heart, tell me, Can you have pity for a poor man, when he is
miserable, who, on a certain occasion, showed you none? See what a Letter Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen has written to Dr. Bartlett; who asks my advice about
attending him.

I obtained leave to communicate it to you, my dear Ladies. Be pleased to
return it to me. I presume, you will read it here.

Dear Dr. Bartlett,
CAN your company be dispensed with by the best of men, for one, two, three
days? -- I have not had a happy hour since I saw you and Sir Charles Grandison
at my house on the Forest. All is gloom and horror in my mind: My despondency
is, must be, of the blackest kind. It is blacker than remorse: It is all
repining; but no repentance: I cannot, cannot, repent. Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, what a wretch am I! with such a fortune; such estates! I am rich as
Craesus, yet more miserable than the wretch that begs his bread from door to
door; and who oftener meets repulses, than relief. What a glorious choice has
your patron made! Youth unbroken; conscience his friend; he cannot know an
enemy. O that I had lived the life of your patron! I cannot see a creature who
does not extol him. My wine-merchant's name is Danby -- Good God! What stories
does he tell of him! Lord Jesus! What a heart must he have, that would permit
him to do such things as Danby reports of him, of his own knowledge! While I --
As young a man as himself, for what I know -- With power to do good, as great,
perhaps greater, than his own. -- Lord! Lord! Lord! what a hand have I made of
it, for the last three or four years of my life! who might have reached
Threescore-and-ten with comfort! whereas now, at Twenty-eight, I am on the very
brink of the grave. It appears to me as ready dug: It yawns for me: I am
neither fit to die, nor to live. My days are dreadful: My nights are worse: My
bed is a bed of nettles, and not of down. Not one comfortable thought, not one
good action, to revolve, in which I had not some vile gratification to promote!
Wretched man! It is come home to me, with a vengeance.

You prayed by me: You prayed for me. I have not been so happy since -- Come,
and make me easy -- happy I can never be, in this world -- For pity, for
charity sake, come and teach me how to bear life, or how to prepare for its
cessation. And if Sir Charles Grandison would make me one more visit, would
personally join in prayer with you and me, a glimpse of comfort would once more
dart in upon my mind.

Try your interest with him, my dear Sir, in my behalf; and come together.
Where is he? -- The great God of Heaven and Earth prosper to him all his
wishes, be he where he will, and be they what they will. Everybody will find
their account in his prosperity. But I! what use have I made of the prosperity
given me? -- Merceda gone to his account: Bagenhall undone: Jordan shunning me!
Narrow-soul'd Jordan! He is reformed; but not able to divide the man from the
crime, he thinks he cannot be in earnest, but by hating both. God help me! I
cannot, now, if I would, give him a bad example! He need not be afraid of my
staggering him in his good purposes.

One favor, for God's sake, procure for me -- It s, that the man whose life
once I sought, and thought myself justified by the provocation; who afterward
saved mine, for a time saved it, reserved as I was for pains, for sufferings,
in mind and body, worse than death -- That this man will be the Executor of my
last Will. I have not a friend left. My relations are hungering and watching
for my death, as birds of prey over a field of battle. My next heirs are my
worst enemies, and most hated by me. Dear Sir Charles Grandison, my deliverer,
my preserver, from those bloody Frenchmen, if you are the good man I think you,
complete your kindness to him whom you have preserved; and say, you will be his
Executor. I will (because I must) do justice to the pretensions of those who
will rejoice over my remains; and I will leave you a discretionary power, in
articles wherein you may think I have shown hatred. For justice-sake, then, be
my Executor. And do you, good Bartlett, put me in the way of repentance; and I
shall then be happy. Draw me up, dear Sir, a Prayer, that shall include
Confusion. You cannot suppose me too bad a man, in a Christian sense. Thank
God, I am a Christian in belief, though I have been a Devil in practice. You are
a heavenly-minded man; give me words which may go to my heart; and tell me what
I shall say to my God.

Tell Sir Charles Grandison, that he owes to me the service I request of him.
For if he had not interposed so hellishly as he did, on Hounslow-heath, I had
been the husband of Miss Byron in two hours; and she would have thought it her
duty to reform me: And, by the Great God of Heaven, I swear, it was my
intention to be reformed, and to make her, if I could have had but her
Civility, though not her Love, the best of husbands. Lord God of Heaven and
Earth! what a happy man had I then been! -- Then had I never undertaken that
damned expedition to France, which I have rued ever since. Let your patron know
how much I owe to him my unhappiness, and he will not, in justice, deny any
reasonable, any honest request, that I shall make him.

Lord help me! What a long Letter is here! My Soul complains on paper: I do
nothing but complain. It will be a relief, if your patron and you will visit,
will pray for, will pity,

The most miserable of men, HARGRAVE POLLEXFEN.


Your brother's eye followed mine, as I read. I frequently wept. In a soothing,
tender, and respectful manner, he put his arm round me, and, taking my own
handkerchief, unresisted, wiped away the tears as they fell on my cheek. These
were his soothing words as my bosom heaved at the dreadful description of the
poor man's misery and despair: Sweet humanity! -- Charming sensibility -- Check
not the kindly gush! -- Dew-drops of Heaven! wiping away my tears, and kissing
the handkerchief -- Dew-drops of Heaven, from a mind, like that Heaven, mild
and gracious! -- Poor Sir Hargrave! -- I will attend him.

You will, Sir! That is very good of you! -- Poor man! What a hand, as he says,
has he made of it!

A hand, indeed! repeated Sir Charles, his own benign eyes glistening.

And will you be his Executor, Sir? -- You will, I hope?

I will do anything that my dear Miss Byron wishes me to do; anything that
may comfort the poor man, if indeed he has not a person in whom he ought to
confide, whether he is willing to do so, or not. My endeavor shall be, to
reconcile him to his relations: Perhaps he hates them because they are likely
to be his heirs: I have known men capable of such narrowness.

When we came to the place where the unhappy man mentions my having been likely
to be his in two hours time, a chilness came over my heart; I shuddered. Ah,
Sir! said I, how grateful ought I to be to my deliverer!

Ever-amiable goodness! resumed he, How have I been, how am I, how shall I be,
rewarded? -- With tender awe he kissed my cheek -- Forgive me, Angel of a
woman! A man can show his Love but as a man. Your heart is the heart I wish it
to be! Love, Humanity, Graciousness, Benevolence, Forgiveness, all the amiable
qualities which can adorn the Female mind, are, in perfection, yours! Be your
Sister-excellence happy! God grant it! and I shall be the happiest man in the
world. You, madam, who can pity your oppressor when in misery, can allow of my
grateful remembrance of that admirable woman.

Your tender remembrance of Lady Clementina, Sir, will ever be grateful to me.
-- God Almighty make her happy! -- for your sake! for the sake of your dear
Jeronymo; and for mine!

There spoke Miss Byron, and Clementina, both in one! Surely you two are
informed by one mind! What is distance of countries! What obstacles can there
be, to dissever Souls so paired!

But, Sir! -- Must Clementina be compelled to marry? Must the woman who has
loved Sir Charles Grandison; who stills avows her Love, and only prefers her
God to him; be obliged to give her hand to another man?

Would to Heaven that her friends, tender, indulgent, as they have always been
to her, would not drive too fast! But how can I, of all men, remonstrate to
them in this case, when they think nothing is wanting to obtain her compliance,
but the knowledge that she never can be mine?

O Sir! you shall still call her yours, if the dear Lady changes her
resolution, and wishes to be so -- Ought you not?

And could Miss Byron --

She could, she would, interrupted I -- Yet dear, very dear, I am not ashamed
to own it, would now the resignation cost me!

Exalted loveliness!

I never, but by such a trial, can be as great as Clementina! -- Then could I,
as she does, take comfort in the brevity of human life Never, never, would I be
the wife of any other man. And shall the nobler Clementina be compelled?

Good God! lifting by his hands and eyes, With what noble minds have thou
distinguished these two women! -- Is it for this, madam, that you wish to wait
for the next Letters from Italy? I have owned before, that I presumed not to
declare myself to you till I was sure of Clementina's adherence to a resolution
so nobly taken. We will, however, expect the next Letters. My situation has not
been happy. Nothing but the consciousness of my own integrity (excuse, madam,
the seeming boast) and a firm trust in Providence, could, at certain times,
have supported me.

My mind, my Charlotte, seemed too high wrought. Seeing me much disturbed, he
resumed the subject of Sir Hargrave's Letter, as a somewhat less-affecting one.
You see, my dearest Miss Byron, said he, a kind of necessity for my hastening
up. Another melancholy occasion offers: Poor Sir Harry Beauchamp desires to see
me, before he dies. -- What a chequered life is this! -- I received Sir
Hargrave's Letter to Dr. Bartlett, and this intimation from my Beauchamp, by a
particular dispatch, just before I came hither. I grudge the time I must lose
tomorrow: But we must make some sacrifices to good neighborhood and civility.
Poor Greville had a view, by inviting all his neighbors and me, to let himself
down with a grace, in a certain case. He made a merit of his resignation to me,
before all the company; every one of which admired my dear Miss Byron. Well
received as I was, by every gentleman then present, I could not avoid inviting
them, in my turn; but I will endeavor to recover the time. Have I your
approbation, madam, for setting out on Saturday morning, early? -- I am afraid
I must borrow of the Sunday some hours, on my journey. But visiting the sick is
an act of mercy.

You will be so engaged tomorrow, Sir, said I, with your numerous guests (and
my uncle and cousin James will add to the number) that I suppose we shall
hardly see you before you set out (early, as you say that will be) on Saturday
morning.

He said, He had given orders already (and, for fear of mistakes, should
enforce them tonight) for the entertainment of his guests; and he would do
himself the pleasure of breakfasting with us in the morning. -- Dear Lady
Clementina, forgive me! -- I shall not, I am afraid, know how to part with him,
though but for a few weeks. -- How could you let him depart from you; you knew
not but it would be for ever? -- But you are a wonder of a woman! -- I am, at
least at this present writing, a poor creature, compared to you!

I asked his leave to show my grandmamma and aunt and my Lucy, as well as his
two sisters, Sir Hargrave's Letter. He wished that they only should see it.

The perusal cost the three dear friends just named some tears. My grandmamma,
Lucy tells me (for I was writing to you when they read it) made some fine
observations upon the different situations in which the two gentlemen find
themselves at this time. I myself could not but recollect the gay, fluttering
figure that the poor Sir Hargrave made at Lady Betty William's, perpetually
laughing; and compare it with the dark scene he draws in the Letter before me;
all brought about in so short a space!

There are, I am told, worse men than this: Were those who are but as bad, to
be apprized of the circumstances of Sir Hargrave's story, as fully as we know
them, would they not reflect and tremble at his sat, even though that of Merceda
(whose exit, I am told, was all horror and despair) and of the unhappy
Bagenhall, were not taken into the shocking account?

This last wretch, it seems, his spirits and constitution both broken, is gone,
nobody knows whither, having narrowly escaped in person, from an execution that
was out against him, body and goods; the latter all seized upon: his wife, and
an unhealthy child, and she big with another, turned out of doors; a mortgagee
in possession of his estate: The poor woman wishing but for means to transport
herself and child to her mean friends at Abbeville; a collection set on foot in
her neighborhood, for that purpose, failing; for the poor man was neither
beloved, nor pitied.

These particulars your brother's trusty Richard Saunders told my Sally; and in
confidence, that your brother, a little before he came down, being acquainted
with her destitute condition, sent her, by him, twenty guineas. He never saw a
deeper scene of distress, he said.

The poor woman on her knees, received the bounty; blessed the donor; owned
herself reduced to the last shilling; and that she thought of applying to the
parish for assistance to carry her over.

Sir Charles staid not to supper. My grandmamma, being desirous to take leave
of her favorite in the morning, has been prevailed upon to repose here
tonight.

I must tell you, my Charlotte, all my fears, my feelings, my follies: You are
now, you know, my Lucy. Something arises in my heart, that makes me uneasy: I
cannot account to myself for this great and sudden change of behavior in
Greville. His extraordinary civilities, even to fondness, to your brother! Are
they consistent with his blustering character, and constant threatenings of any
man who was likely to succeed with me? A turn of behavior so sudden! Sir
Charles and he in a manner strangers, but by character -- And did he not so far
prosecute his menaces, as to try, wicked wretch! what bluster and a drawn sword
would do, and smart for it? Must not that disgrace incense him? -- My uncle
says, he cannot be a true spirit; witness his compromise with Fenwick, after a
rencounter, which being reported to be on my account, had like to have killed
me at the time. And if not a true spirit, may he not be treacherous? God
preserve your Brother from all secret as well as open attacks! And do you, my
dear Ladies, forgive the tender folly of

Your HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XXXII. Miss BYRON. In continuation.
Friday Morn. Eight o'Clock, October 27.
THE apprehensions with which I was so weak as to trouble you, in the
conclusion of my last, laid so fast hold of my mind, that, going immediately
from my pen to my rest, I had it broken and disturbed by dreadful, shocking,
wandering dreams. The terror they gave me, several times awakened me; but
still, as I closed my eyes, I fell into them again. Whence, my dear, proceed
these ideal vagaries, which, for the time, realize pain or pleasure to us,
according to their hue or complexion, or rather according to our own?

But such contradictory vagaries never did I know in my slumbers. Incoherences
of incoherence! -- For example -- I was married to the best of men: I was not
married: I was rejected with scorn, as a presumptuous creature. I sought to
hide myself in holes and corners. I was dragged out of a subterraneous cavern,
which the sea had made when it once broke bounds, and seemed the dwelling of
howling and conflicting winds; and when I expected to be punished for my
audaciousness, and for repining at my lot, I was turned into an Angel of light;
stars of diamonds, like a glory, encompassing my head: A dear little baby was
put into my arms. Once it was Lucy's; another time it was Emily's; and at
another time Lady Clementina's! -- I was fond of it, beyond expression.

I again dreamed I was married: Sir Charles again was the man. He did not love
me. My grandmamma and aunt, on their knees, and with tears, besought him to
love their child; and pleaded to him my love of him of long standing, begun in
gratitude; and that he was the only man I ever loved. O how I wept in my dream!
My face and bosom were wet with my real tears.

My sobs, and my distress and theirs, awakenod me; but I dropped asleep, and fell
into the very same resverie. He upbraided me with being the cause that he had
not Lady Clementina. He said, and so sternly! I am sure he cannot look so
sternly, that he thought me a much better creature than I proved to be: Yet
methought, in my own heart, I was not altered. I fell down at his feet. I
called it my misfortune, that he could not love me: I would not say it was his
fault. It might, perhaps, be his misfortune too! -- And then I said, Love and
Hatred are not always in one's power. If you cannot love the poor creature who
kneels before you, that shall be a cause sufficient with me for a divorce: I
desire not to fasten myself on the man who cannot love me. Let me be divorced
from you, Sir -- You shall be at liberty to assign any cause for the separation
but crime. I will bind myself never, never to marry again; but you shall be
free -- And God bless you, and her you can love better than your poor Harriet.
-- Fool! I weep as I write! -- What a weak creature, I am, since I have not
been well!

In another part of my resverie he loved me dearly; but when he nearly
approached me, or I him, he always became a ghost, and flitted from me. Scenes
once changed from England to Italy, from Italy to England: Italy, I thought,
was a dreary wild, covered with snow, and pinched with frost: England, on the
contrary, was a country glorious to the eye; gilded with a sun not too fervid;
the air perfumed with odours, wafted by the most balmy Zephyrs from
orange trees, citrons, myrtles and jessamines. In Italy, at one time,
Jeronymo's wounds were healed; at another, they were breaking out afresh. Mr.
Lowther was obliged to fly the country: Why, did not appear. There was a fourth
brother, I thought; and he, taking part with the cruel Laurana, was killed by
the General. Father Marescotti was at one time a martyr for his Religion; at
another, a Cardinal; and talked of for Pope.

But still, what was more shocking, and which so terrified me that I awoke in a
horror which put an end to all my resveries (for I slept no more that night) --
Sir Charles, I thought was assassinated by Greville. Greville fled his country
for it, and became a vagabond, a Cain, the Accursed, I thought, of God and Man
-- I, your poor Harriet, a widow; left in the most calamitous circumstance that
a woman can be in -- Good Heaven! -- But, avaunt, recollection! -- Painful,
most painful recollection of ideas so terrible! none of your intrusions --

No more of these horrid, horrid incongruities, will I trouble you with! How
have they run away with me! I am hardly now recovered from the tremblings into
which they threw me!

What, my dear, is the reason, that though we know these dreams, these fleeting
shadows of the night, to be no more than dreams, illusions of the working mind,
fettered and debased as it is by the organs through which it conveys its
confined powers to the grosser matter, body, then sleeping, inactive, as in the
shades of death; yet that we cannot help being strongly impressed by them, and
meditating interpretation of the flying vapors, when reason is broad awake,
and tells us, that it is weakness to be disturbed at them? -- But Superstition
is, more or less, I believe, in every mind, a natural defect. Happily poised is
that mind, which, on the one hand, is too strong to be affected by the slavish
fears it brings with it; and, on the other, runs not into the contrary extreme,
Skepticism, the parent of infidelity!

You cannot imagine, my dear, the pleasure I had, the more for my various
dream, when your brother, so amiably serene, Love, Condescension, Affability,
shining in his manly countenance, alighted, as I saw him through my window, at
the same time I had the call to breakfast -- Dear Sir! I could have said, Have
not you been disturbed by cruel, perplexing, contradictory visions! Souls may
be near, when Bodies are distant. But are we not one Soul? Could yours be
unaffected, when mine was so much disturbed? -- But, thank God, you are come?
Come safe, unhurt, pleased with me! My fond arms, were the ceremony passed,
should welcome you to your Harriet. I would tell you all my disturbances from
the absurd illusions of the past night, and my mind should gather strength from
the confession of its weakness.

He talked of setting out early tomorrow morning. His first visit, he said,
should be to Sir Harry Beauchamp; his next to Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. Poor Sir
Harry! he said, and sighed for him.

Tenderhearted man! as Clementina often called your brother! he pitied Lady
Beauchamp. His poor Beauchamp! -- The loss of a father, he said, where a great
estate was to descend to the son, was the test of a noble heart. He could
answer for the sincerity of his Beauchamp's grief, on this trying occasion. Of
what joy, said he [sitting between two of the best of women, equally fond of
him, speaking low] was I, was my father, deprived! He had allowed me to think
of returning to the arms of his paternal love. I make no doubt, but on looking
into his affairs (his son, perhaps his steward) he would have done for his
daughters, what I have done for my sisters. We should both of us have had a new
life to begin, and pursue: A happy one, from my duty and his indulgence, it
must have been. I had planned it out. -- With all humility I would, by degrees,
have laid it before him, first one part, then another, as his condescension
would have countenanced me.

Vile, vile resveries! -- Must not this young man be the peculiar care of
Heaven? How could my disturbed imagination terrify me but in a dream, that the
machinations of the darkest mind (as his must be [Greville is not so bad a man]
who could meditate violence against virtue so sacredly guarded) could be
permitted to prevail against his life!

My grandmamma once, with tears in her eyes, as he talked of taking leave, laid
her hand upon his, and instantly withdrew it, as if she thought the action too
free. He took her hand, and, with both his, lifted it to his lips -- Venerable
goodness! he called her. She looked so proud, and so comforted! every one so
pleased! -- It is a charming thing to see blooming youth fond of declining age!

They dropped away one by one, and I found myself left alone with him. Sweetly
tender was his address to me! How shall I part with my Harriet? said he. My
eyes were ready to overflow. By a twinkling motion, I thought to disperse over
the whole eye the self-felt too ready tear: My upper-lip had the motion in it,
throbbing, like the pulsation which we call the lifeblood -- I was afraid to
speak, for fear of bursting into a fit of tenderness; yet was conscious that my
very silence was more expressive of tenderness than speech could have been.
With what delight did his eager eye (as mine, now-and-then glancing upward,
discovered) meditate my downcast face, and silent concern! Yet such was his
delicacy, that he took not that notice of it, in words, which, if he had, would
have added to my confusion: It was enough for him, that he saw it. As he was
contented silently to enjoy the apparent affection, I am not sorry he did see
it. He merited even open and unreserved assurances of Love. But I the sooner
recovered my spirits, for his delicate non-observance. I could not,
circumstanced as we were, say I wished for his speedy return; yet, my dear, my
purest wishes were, that he would not be long absent. My grandmamma pleases
herself with having the dear man for her inmate, on his return: There is
therefore no need, for the sake of the world's speech, to abridge my month; yet
ought we to be shy of giving consequence to a man who through delicacy is
afraid to let us see that he assumes consequence from our speechless tenderness
for him? -- He restored me to speech, by a change of subject --

Two melancholy offices shall I have to perform, said he, before I have the
honor to attend again my dearest Miss Byron: What must be the heart that melts
not at another's woe! -- As to Sir Hargrave, I don't apprehend that he is near
his end; as is the case of poor Sir Harry. Sir Hargrave labors under bodily
pains, from the attack made upon him in France, and from a constitution ruined
perhaps by riot: And, having nothing of consolation to give himself from
reflection on his past life, as we see by his Letter, his fears are too strong
for his hopes. But shall I tell him, if I find it will give him comfort, that
you wish his recovery, and are sorry for his indisposition? Small crevices let
in light, sometimes upon a benighted imagination. He must consider his attempt
upon your free will (though not meant upon your honor) as one of the enormities
of his past life.

I was overpowered with this instance of his generous goodness Teach me, Sir,
to be good, to be generous, to be forgiving -- like you! -- Bid me do what you
think proper for me to do -- Say to the poor man, whose insults upon you in his
challenge were then my terror (O how much my terror!) in my name say, all that
you think will tend to give him consolation.

Sweet excellence! Did I ever hope to meet in woman with such an enlargement of
heart! -- Clementina only, of all the women I ever knew, can be set in
comparison with you: And had she been granted to me, the union of minds between
us from difference of Religion, could not have been so perfect, as yours and
mine must be.

Greatly gratified as I was by the compliment, I was sorry, methought, that it
was made me at the expense of my Sex. His words, 'Did I ever hope to meet in
woman with such an enlargement of heart!' piqued me a little. Are not women as
capable as men, thought I, of enlarged sentiments?

The leave he took of me was extremely tender. I endeavored to check my
sensibility. He departed with the blessings of the whole family, as well as
mine. I was forced to go up to my closet: I came not down till near
dinnertime; I could not; and yet my uncle accompanied my cousin James to
Northhampton: So that I had no apprehensions of his raillery. One wants trials
sometimes, I believe, to make one support one's self with some degree of
outward fortitude, at least. Had my uncle been at home, I should not have dared
to have given so much way to my concern: But soothing and indulgence,
sometimes, I believe, add to our imbecility of mind, instead of strengthening
our reason.

MY uncle made it near eleven at night before he returned, with my cousin
James. Not one of the company, at his quitting it, seemed inclinable to move.
He praised the elegance of the entertainment, and the ease and cheerfulness,
even to vivacity, of Sir Charles. How could he be so lively! -- How many ways
have men to divert themselves, when anything arduous attacks them! -- While we
poor women! -- But your town-diversions -- Your Ranelaghs, Vaux-halls -- bid
fair to divert such of us as can carry ourselves out of ourselves! -- Yet are
we likely to pay dear for the privilege; since we thereby render our Sex cheap
in the eyes of men, harden our fronts, and are in danger of losing that
modesty, at least of outward behavior, which is the characteristic of women!

Saturday Morning.
HE is gone: Gone indeed! Went early this morning. Every mouth was last night,
it seems, full of his praises: The men admire him as much as the women. I am
glad of it, methinks; since that is an indirect confession, that there are few
among them like him. Not so much superiority over our Sex therefore, in the
other, in general, with their enlarged hearts. Have not we a Clementina, a Mrs.
Shirley, and a long etc? -- I praise you not, my dear Lady L. and Lady G. to
your faces; so I leave the etc. untranslated. We do so look upon one another
here! Are so unsatisfied with ourselves! We are not half so good company as we
were before Sir Charles came among us. How can that be? But my Grandmamma has
left us too! -- that is one thing. She is retired to Shirleymanor, to mortify,
after so rich a regale: Those were her words.

I hope your brother will write to us. Should I not have asked him? To be sure
he will; except his next Letters from Italy should be -- But, no doubt, he will
write to us. Mr. Greville vows to my uncle, he will not come near me. He can
less and less, he says, bear to think of my marrying; though he does what he can
to comfort himself with reflecting on the extraordinary merit of the man, who
alone, he says, can deserve me. He wishes the day were over; and the D -- l's
in him, he adds, if the irrevocableness of the event does not cure him. Mr.
Fenwick had yesterday his final answer from Lucy; and he is to set out on
Monday for Carlisle. He declares, that he will not return without a wife: So,
thank Heaven, his heart is whole, notwithstanding his double disappointment.

BUT my heart is set on hearing how the excellent Clementina takes the news of
your brother's actual address, and probability of succeeding. I should not
think it at all suprising, if, urged as she is, to marry a man indifferent to
her (the Lord of her heart unmarried) she should retract -- O my Charlotte! --
What a variety of strange, strange, What-shall-I-call them? would result from
such a retractation and renewal of claim! I never thought myself superstitious;
but the happiness before me is so much beyond my merit, that I can hardly
flatter myself, at times, that it will take place.

WHAT think you, my dear, made me write so apprehensively? -- My aunt had just
shown me a Letter she had written to you -- desiring you -- to exercise for us
your fancy, your judgment. I have no affectation on this subject -- I long ago
gave affectation to the winds -- But so hasty! -- So undoubting! -- Are there
not many possibilities, and some probabilities, against us? -- Something
presumptuous! -- Lord bless me, my dear, should anything happen -- Jewels
bought, and already presented -- Appare! -- How would all these preparations
aggravate! My aunt says, he shall be obliged: Lucy, Nancy, the Miss Holles's,
join with her. They long to be exercising their fancies upon the patterns which
they suppose your Ladyship and Lady L. will send down. My uncle hurries my
aunt. So as something is going forward, he says, he shall be easy. There is no
resisting so strong a tide: So let them take their course. They are all in
haste, my dear, to be considered as relations of your family; and to regard all
yours as kindred of ours. Happy, happy, the band, that shall tie both families
together!

HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XXXIII. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Miss BYRON.
London, Monday Night, Oct. 30.
YOUR humanity, my dear and ever-dear Miss Byron, was so much engaged by the
melancholy Letter of Sir Hargrave to Dr. Bartlett, which I communicated to you;
and by the distress of my Beauchamp, on the desperate state of his father's
health; that I know you will be pleased to hear that I have been enabled to
give some consolation to both.

Sir Harry, who is in town, wanted to open his mind to me with regard (to some
affairs which made him extremely uneasy; and which, he said, he could not
reveal to anybody else. He showed some reluctance to entrust the secrets to my
bosom. There shall they ever rest. He has found himself easier since. He
rejoiced to me on the good understanding subsisting, and likely to subsist,
between his Lady and Son. He desired me to excuse him for joining me with them,
without asking my leave, in the trusts created by his Will: And on this
occasion, sending for his Lady, he put her hand in mine, and recommended her
and her interests, as those of the most obliging of wives, to my care.

I found Sir Hargrave at his house in Cavendish-Square. He is excessively
low-spirited. Dr. Bartlett visited him at Windsor, several times. The Doctor
prevailed on him to retain a worthy clergyman, as his chaplain.

The poor man asked after you, madam. He had heard, he said, that I was soon
likely to be the happiest of men: Was it so? He wept at my answer; lamented the
wretched hand, as he called it, that he had made of it, blessed as he was with
such prosperous circumstances, in the prime of youth; and wished he had his
days to come over again, and his company to choose. Unhappy man! He was willing
to remove from himself the load which lay upon him. No doubt but this was the
recourse of his companions, likewise, in extremity. He blessed my dearest Miss
Byron, when I told him, she pitied him. He called himself by harsh, and even
shocking names, for having been capable of offending so much goodness.

What subjects are these, to entertain my Angel with! -- But though we should not
seek, yet we ought not perhaps to shun them, when they naturally, as I may say,
offer themselves to our knowledge.

But another subject calls for the attention of my dearest, loveliest of women:
A subject that will lay a still stronger claim to it than either of the solemn
ones I have touched upon. I enclose the Letter which contains it. You will be
so good as to read it in English to such of our friends as read not Italian.

This Letter was left to Mrs. Beaumont to dispatch to me; whence its
unwished-for delay: For she detained it, to send with it an equally-obliging
one of her own. The contents of this welcome Letter, my dearest Miss Byron,
will render it unnecessary to wait for an answer to my last to Signor Jeronymo;
in which I acquaint him with my actual address, and the hopes I presume to
flatter myself with. I humbly hope you will think so.

I am not afraid that one of the most generous of women will be affected with
the passage in which Signor Jeronymo expresses his pity for her, because of the
affection, he says, I must ever retain for his noble sister See p. 236.
. He says right. And it is my happiness, that you, the sister-excellence of the
admirable Clementina, will allow me to glory in my gratitude to her. You will
still more readily allow me so to do, when you have perused this Letter. Shall
not the man who hopes to be qualified for the Supreme Love, of which the purest
Earthly is but a type, and who aims at an universal benevolence, be able to
admire, in the mind of Clementina, the same great qualities which shine out
with such luster in that of Miss Byron?

With what pride do I look forward to the visit that several of this noble
family intend to make us, because of the unquestionable assurance that they
will rejoice in my happiness, and admire the Angel who is allowed to take place
in my affections, of the Angel who would not have scrupled to accept of my
vows, had it not been, as she expresses herself See p. 240.
, for the intervention of invincible obstacles!

Mrs. Beaumont, in her Letter, gives me the particulars of the conversation
between her and Clementina, almost in the same words with those of Jeronymo, in
the Letter enclosed. She makes no doubt that Lady Clementina will, in time,
yield to the entreaties of her friends in favor of a man against whom, if she
can be prevailed upon to forego her wishes to assume the veil, she can have no
one objection. You will see madam, by the enclosed, what they hope for in Italy
from us; what Clementina, what Jeronymo, what a whole excellent family, hope
for. You know how ardently my own family wish you to accelerate the happy day:
Yours refer themselves wholly to you -- Pardon me, my dearest Miss Byron, I
will tell you what are my hopes -- They are, that, when I am permitted to
return to Northamptonshire, the happy day shall not be postponed three.

And now, loveliest and dearest of women! allow me to expect the honor of a
line, to let me know how much of the tedious month, from last Thursday you will
be so good as to abate. Permit me to say, that I can have nothing that needs to
detain me from the beloved of my heart, after Friday next.

If, madam, you insist upon the whole month, I beg to know, out of what part of
our nuptial life, the LAST or the FIRST (happy, as I hope it will be) you would
be willing to deduct the week, the fortnight, that will be carried into the
blank space of courtship, by the delay? I hope, my dear Miss Byron, that I
shall be able to tell you, years and years after we are ONE, that there is not
an hour of those past, or of those to come, that I would abate, or wish to
throw into that blank. Permit me so to call it. The days of courtship cannot be
our happiest. Who celebrates the day of their first acquaintance, though it may
be remembered with pleasure? -- Do not the happy pair date their happiness from
the day of marriage? How justly then when hearts are assured, when minds cannot
alter, are those which precede it, to be deemed a blank!

After all, your cheerful compliance with my wishes, is the great desirable.
Whatever shall be your pleasure, must determine me. My utmost gratitude will be
engaged by the condescension, whenever you shall distinguish the day of the
year, distinguished as it will be to the end of my life, that shall give me the
greatest blessing of it, and confirm me

For ever Yours. CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXIV. Signor JERONYMO della PORRETTA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
[Inclosed in the preceding.]

Bologna, Oct. 18. N. S.
I Gave you, my dear Grandison, in mine of the 5th, the copy of a paper written
by my sister, which filled us with hopes of her compliance with the wishes of
all her family. She took time for deliberation; time was given her; but still
she insisted on receiving your next Letters before she came to any resolution.
Mrs. Beaumont herself was of opinion, that the dear creature only meditated
delay: That also was ours. What, invincibly determined, as she is, to adhere to
the resolution she has so greatly taken, can she hope for, (said we among
ourselves) from the expected Letters? For she had declared herself to be so
determined, to my brother Giacomo, who actually assured her of all our consents
to an alliance with you, if she repented of that resolution.

All this time we offered not to introduce, nor even to name, to her, the Count
of Belvedere. Awed by her former calamity, and by an excursiveness of
imagination, which at times showed itself in her words and behavior, we
avoided saying or doing anything that was likely to disturb her. Giacomo
himself, though he wanted to return to Naples, had patience with her pretty
trifling, beyond our expectation. At last arrived yours of the 29th of
September See Letter v. p. 13.
; kindly enclosing a copy of yours to her, of the same date See Letter iv. p.
11.
. We question not but your reply to mine of the 5th current, is on the road;
not that the contents will be such as we may hope for, from considerations of
our happiness and your own: But these, we thought, without waiting for that,
would answer the desired end. I will tell you what was said by every one, on
the perusal of both.

Is this the man, said the General, whom I sometimes so rudely treated? I
rejoice that we were reconciled before he left us. I had formed a notion to his
disadvantage; that he was capable of art, and hoped to keep his hold in my
sister's affections, in view of some turn in his favor: But he is the most
singlehearted of men. These two Letters will strengthen our arguments.
Clementina, who has more than once declared that she wishes him married to an
English woman, cannot now, that she will see there is a woman with whom he
thinks he can be happy, wish to stand in his way. These will furnish us with
means to attack her in her strongest hold; in her generosity, her delicacy; and
will bring to the test her veracity. The contents of these Letters will confirm
her before half-taken resolution, as in her paper, to oblige us See p. 88. of
this Volume.
. Let Laurana, as the Chevalier says, go into a nunnery: Clementina will marry,
or she is a false girl; and the Sforza woman will be disappointed.

My mother applauded you, and rejoiced to hear that there is a woman of your
own nation who is capable of making you more happy than her daughter could.

What difficulties, said the young Marchioness, (ever your friend) must a
situation so critical have laid him under! A man so humane! And what further
difficulties must he have to surmunt, in offering to a woman, whom even Olivia,
as he says, admires, a hand that has been refused by another? May this admired
woman be propitious to his suit!

She must, she must, said the Bishop. If she has a heart disengaged, she cannot
refuse a man so accomplished. Jeronymo, hasten to be well. If she favor him,
we will all go over, and congratulate them both.

I, for my part, said I, would give up years of life to see my friend as happy
in marriage as he deserves to be.

We must tell Clementina, said my father, as our Giacomo has hinted, that it
will not become her generosity to stand in the way of the Chevalier's happiness.

We sent up your Letter to our sister, by Camilla. She was busy (Mrs. Beaumont
sitting by her at work) in correcting the proportion which once you found fault
with, in a figure in her piece of Noah's Ark, and the rising Deluge. A Letter,
madam, from the Chevalier -- To me! said she; and overturned the table on which
her materials lay, in haste to take it.

When we thought she had had time to consider of the contents, we sent up to
request the favor of speaking with Mrs. Beaumont. We owned to her, that we had
a copy of your Letter to Clementina; and asked, What the dear creature said to
the contents of it?

She read it, answered Mrs. Beaumont, in her own closet. I thought she was too
long by herself. I went to her. She was in tears. O Mrs. Beaumont! as soon as
she saw me, holding out the Letter -- See here! -- The Chevalier is against me!
-- Cruel, I could almost say, cruel Grandison! -- He turns my own words upon
me. I have furnished him with arguments against myself -- What shall I do? -- I
have for many days past repented that I gave, under my hand, reason to my
friends to expect my compliance. I cannot, cannot, confirm the hopes I gave! --
What shall I do?

I took it, read it, continued Mrs. Beaumont, and told her, that the
Chevalier's arguments were unanswerable. I dwelt upon some of them. She wept,
and was silent.

We then, my dear Grandison, showed Mrs. Beaumont your Letter to me. She read
it -- How, said she, has this excellent young man been embarassed! I know, from
some of my countrymen, the character of the Lady whom he mentions: She is an
excellent woman! -- May I take up this Letter, and read it to Lady Clementina?

By all means, answered the General; and support, dear madam, the contents of
both with your weight. It will be from perverseness now, if she withstand us.
Bid her remember, that she has had once at her feet a kneeling father! Bid her
remember the written hopes she has given us!

Mrs. Beaumont went up with it. I will give you an account of what my sister
said as she read it. O Grandison! read it but cursorily: You will more and more
admire and love the Clementina, who, before her malady, was always considered
as one of the first of women; and the glory of our house!

She desired to have it in her own hands: Mrs. Beaumont, to whose pen we owe
the account, looked over her, and followed her eye, as she read See Letter v.
p. 13. of this Volume.
.

'And did he still, said she, after he had got to England, hope for a change in
my resolution?' -- Heaven knows -- She stopped; sighed, and read on.

'He foresaw that my friends would press me to marry!' -- I foresaw it too! --
I have indeed been pressed; vehemently pressed!

'Rather than any other' -- Ah, Chevalier! -- Why, why, were the obstacles
Religion and Country! None less should have -- She stopped -- Then, reading to
herself, proceeded:

'It was not presumptuous to hope' -- No, Grandison; presumptuous it could not
be.

'It was justice to Clementina, to attend the event, and to wait for the
promised Letter.' Kind, considerate Grandison! -- You were all patience, all
goodness! -- O that -- There she stopped. Then proceeding:

'Fourth brother! Nor interested in the event.' -- Indeed I did write so --

'Give up all his hopes!' -- Dear Grandison!

'It could not be expected that he should give the argument all its weight.' --
He has given it too much!

'Duty to yield to the entreaties of all my friends;' Ah, Grandison!

Difficult situations! -- Difficult indeed! And here am I, who have more than
any other in the world, enhanced his difficulties! -- Unhappy Clementina! --
Then reading on --

Good God! Mrs. Beaumont! 'There is an English Lady, with whom he was actually
-- Does he not hint in Love?' -- Nay, then -- Take it, take it, Mrs. Beaumont!
-- I can read no further -- Compassion only, I suppose, brought him over to me!
-- I cannot bear that! -- Yet snatching it from her, and reading.

'Beauty her least perfection' -- [Happy English Lady!] 'Either in my eyes, or
her own!' -- Have I not wished him such a woman? -- 'Had I never known
Clementina!' -- How could I be so captious!

'Loves her with a flame as pure as the heart of Clementina' -- Thank you,
Chevalier! Indeed I have no impurity in my Love -- My God only have I preferred
to you: And I bless God for enabling me to give so due a preference! -- 'or, as
her own heart can boast.' -- Just such a wife did I wish him; and shall I not
rejoice, if such a one will hold out her hand to make him happy?

She sighed often, as she read on? but spoke not, till she came to the words,
'That she was to you, what you might truly call, a first Love;' A first Love,
repeated she: He was indeed mine! Permit me to say, my dear friends, a first
and only one.

'It became him, he says, in honor, in gratitude, though the difficulties in his
way seemed insuperable (And so they must seem) to hold himself in suspense, and
not offer to make his addresses to any other woman.' -- Generous, noble
Grandison! -- He did love me -- Discouraged as he was; nay, insulted by some of
us [Giacomo hears me not, looking round her]; He, the generous Grandison, did
love me. She wiped her eyes.

Recovering herself, and reading on -- See here, Mrs. Beaumont -- 'He thought
himself obliged, in honor to me, and to the persons themselves, to decline
proposals of advantage.' Surely he must think me an ungrateful creature.

But (reading on) did he 'balance in his mind between this Lady and me?' -- He
did. But it was because of his uncertainty with me.

Reading to herself, to the words, 'Almost an equal interest,' How is that,
said she, repeating them? -- O, it is explained -- 'But when his dear
Clementina' [Do I go too fast for your eye, Mrs. Beaumont?] 'began to show
signs of recovery,' [She sighed] 'and seemed to confirm the hopes I had given
him of my partiallty for him,' [Modest, good man!] 'then did I content myself,'
says he [Look, Mrs. Beaumont] 'with wishing another husband to the English
Lady, more worthy of her than my unhappy situation could have made me.' --
Excellent English Lady! If it were in my power, I would make you amends for
having shared a heart with you (so it seems) that ought, my circumstances and
your merit considered, to have been all your own!

'What a disappointment was my rejection of him?' -- See, these are his words.
-- And these too; that 'he admires me, however, for my motives.'

'Marriage, he says, is not in his power; for there is but one woman in the
world, now I have refused him, that, he can think worthy of succeeding me. --
What honor he does me. Thank God she is an English woman! O that I had any
influence over her! Sweet Lady! amiable Englishwoman, let not punctilio deprive
you of such a man as this! -- Show her this Letter, my good Grandison! Let me
transcribe from it, rather, for your perusal, happy English Lady! certain
passages in it, so delicate, so worthy of himself, and of you.

'Thousands, of whom he is not worthy,' he says. How, how can he say so?

'She has for an admirer every one who knows her.' -- She shall have me for an
admirer, Mrs. Beaumont, if she will accept of my fourth brother. She will
accept of him, if she deserves the character he gives her: Let me tell you,
Lady, that your heart is narrower than that of Clementina, if you think it a
diminution to your honor, that he has loved that Clementina. Why cannot you
and I be sisters? My love shall be but a sisterly love. You may depend upon the
honor of the Chevalier Grandison. He will do his duty in every relation of
life! What can be your doubts?

'Even Olivia, he says, admires you!' -- And will such a woman stand upon
punctilious observances, like women of ordinary consequence, having to deal
with common men? -- O that I knew this Lady! I would convince her, that he 'can
do justice to her greater, and to my lesser merits; and yet not appear to be
divided by a double Love; although he should own to all the world, as he says he
will,' [See, see, Mrs. Beaumont, these are his very words] 'his affection for
Clementina, and glory in it!'

O Mrs. Beaumont! how my Soul, putting her hand to her forehead, then to her
heart, loves his Soul! nor but for one obstacle, that would have shaken my
Faith, and endangered my Salvation (had I got over it) should his Soul only
have been the object of my Love.

Let me but continue single, my dear friends; indulge me in the wish that has
been so long next my heart; and take not advantage of the hopes I have given
you in writing; and I shall pass happily through this short life; a life that
deserves not the bustle which we make about it. Ask me not either to 'set or
follow the example you propose to me:' I cannot, cannot, do either. Unkind
Chevalier, why, why, would you strengthen their hands, and weaken mine? -- Yet,
if it became your justice, what had I but justice to expect from a just man;
who has so eminently performed all his own duties, and particularly the filial;
which he here calls an article of Religion?

When she came to the concluding part of this Letter, and your wishes for her
perfect recovery, health and welfare, and for the happiness of us all; May
every blessing, said she, he wishes us, be his!

Then folding up the Letter, and putting it in her bosom; This Letter, and that
which accompanied it, (meaning yours to her) I must read over and over!

Shall I say, my Grandison, that I half-pity the lovely Harriet Byron, though her
name should be changed to yours? You must love Clementina: Were a sovereign
Princess her rival, you must. Clementina! who so generously can give up a Love
as fervent as ever glowed in a virgin heart, on superior motives; motives which
regard Eternity; and receive joy in the prospect of your happiness with another
woman, on a persuasion that that woman can make you happier than she herself
could, because of a difference in Religion.

My sister choosing to retire to her closet, to reperuse the two Letters, Mrs.
Beaumont, knowing our curiosity, put down what had passed; intending, as she
said, to write a copy of it for you.

How were we all, on perusing it, charmed with our Clementina! -- I insisted,
that nothing, at present, should be said to her of the Count of Belvedere, and
of our wishes in his favor. My father gave into my opinion. He said, he
thought the properest time to mention the Count to her was, when we had an
answer to the Letter I wrote to you on the 5th current, if that could give us
assurances that you had made your addresses to the charming Byron, and were
encouraged. The General was impatient; but he acquiesced, on finding every one
come into my motion; but said, that if all this lenity did not do, he must beg
leave to have his own measures pursued.

SOME little particularity has appeared in the dear creature since I have
written the above. She has been exceedingly earnest with her mother, to use her
interest with my father, and us, to be allowed to go to England: But desires
not the permission till you are actually married. She pleads my health, because
of the salutary springs you mention to me.

Several other pleas she offered; but, to say truth, they carried with them
such an air of flightiness, that I am loath to mention them: Yet all of them
were innocent, all of them were even laudable. But (shall I say?) that some of
them appeared too romantic for a settled brain to be so earnest, as she was, in
having them carried into execution.

We have no doubt, but all her view is, to avoid marriage, by such a strange
excursion. Dear creature, said the Bishop, speaking of her just now, the veil
denied her, she must have some point to carry: I wish we saw less rapidity in
her manner.

I, Grandison, for my part, remember how much she and we all suffered by
denying her the farewel-visit from you, on your taking leave of Italy the time
before the last.

But we think an expedient has offered, that will divert her from this
wildness, as I must call it: Mrs. Beaumont has requested, that she may be
allowed to take her with her to Florence for some weeks. Clementina is pleased
with our readiness to oblige them both; and they will soon go.

But all this time she is uniform and steady in her wishes for your marriage.
She delights to hear Mrs. Beaumont talk of the perfections of the Lady to whom
we are all desirous of hearing you are united. You had written, it seems, to
Mrs. Beaumont, a character given of this young Lady by Olivia, upon a personal
knowledge of her. Mrs. Beaumont showed it to Clementina.

How generously did the dear creature rejoice in it! Just such a woman, said
she, did I wish for the Chevalier. Olivia has shown greatness of mind in this
instance. Perhaps I have thought too hardly of Olivia. Little did I think, I
should ever have requested a copy of anything written by Olivia. Ill Will
disables us from seeing those beauties in the person who is the object of it,
which would otherwise strike us to her advantage. You must oblige me, added
she, with a copy of this Extract.

Oct. 20. N. S.
YOU will be pleased, I know, my Grandison, with every particular that shall
tend to demonstrate the pleasure the dear Clementina takes in hoping you will
be soon the happy man we all wish you to be.

This morning she came down with her work into my chamber. I invite myself,
Jeronymo, said she. I will sit down by you, till you are disposed to rise. She
then, of her own motion, began to talk of you; and I, putting it to her (as her
mother did yesterday) whether she would be really glad to hear of your
nuptials, received the same answer she then made; She sincerely should: She
hoped the next Letters would bring an account that it was so. But then,
Jeronymo, continued she, I shall be teazed, persecuted. Let me not, my brother,
be persecuted. I don't know, whether downright compulsion is not more tolerable
than over-earnest entreaty. A child, in the first instance, may contract
herself, as I may say, within her own compass; may be hardened: But the
entreaty of such friends as undoubtedly mean one's good, dilates and disarms
one's heart, and makes one wish to oblige them; and so renders one miserable,
whether we do or do not comply. Believe me, Jeronymo, there is great cruelty in
persuasion, and still more to a soft and gentle temper, than to a stubborn one:
Persuaders know not what they make such a person suffer.

My dearest Clementina, said I, you have shown so glorious a magnanimity, that
it would be injuring you, to suppose you are not equal to every branch of duty.
God forbid that you should be called to sustain an unreasonable trial -- In a
reasonable one, you must be victorious.

Ah Jeronymo! How little do I deserve this fine compliment! -- Magnanimity, my
brother! -- You know not what I yet, at times, suffer! -- And have you not seen
my reason vanquished in the unequal conflict? She wept. But let the Chevalier
be married, and to the Angel that is talked of; and let me confort myself, that
he is not a sufferer by my withholding my hand -- And then let me be indulged
in the single life, in a place consecrated to retirement from this vain world;
and we shall both be happy!

Mrs. Beaumont came to seek her. I prevailed on her to sit down, and on my
sister to stay a little longer. I extolled my sister to her: She joined in the
just praise. But one act of magnanimity, said Mrs. Beaumont, seems wanting to
complete the greatness of your character, my Love, in this particular case of
the expected marriage of the Chevalier Grandison.

What is that, Mrs. Beaumont? -- All attention.

You see his doubts, his apprehensions, of appearing worthy of the Lady so
highly spoken of, because of that delicacy of situation (which, as you observe,
Olivia also hints at) from what may be called a divided Love: Miss Byron may
very well imagine, as his Love of you commenced before he knew her, that she
may injure you if she receive his addresses: You had the generosity to wish,
when you were reading those his apprehensions, that you knew the Lady, and were
able to influence her in his favor.

Well, Mrs. Beaumont --

Can I doubt that Lady Clementina is able to set her name to the noble
sentiments, that so lately, on reading his Letter, flowed from her lips?

What would Mrs. Beaumont have me do?

Let me lead you to your own closet. Pen, ink, and paper, are always before you
there. Assume your whole noble Self, and we shall see what that assumption will
produce.

All that is in my power, to do, replied she, for promoting the happiness of a
man who has suffered so much through my means, it is my duty to do.

She gave her hand to Mrs. Beaumont; who led her to her closet, and left her
there. The following is the result. Generous, noble creature! -- But does it
not show a raised imagination? especially in the disposition of the lines?

Best of Men! Be ye ONE. Best of Women!

CLEMENTINA wishes it!
GRANDISON, Lady, will make you happy.
Be it your study to make Him so! --
Happy, as CLEMENTINA would have made him,
Had not obstacles invincible intervened.
This will lessen her regrets:
For
His Felicity, Temporal and Eternal,
Was ever the wish next her heart.
GOD be merciful to you both,
And lead you into his paths:
Then will everlasting Happiness be your portion.
Be it the portion of CLEMENTINA! --
Pray for Her! --
That, after this transitory life is over,
She may partake of Heavenly Bliss:
And
(Not a stranger to you, Lady, HERE)
Rejoice with you both HEREAFTER!
CLEMENTINA della PORRETTA.


The admirable creature gave this to Mrs. Beaumont: Send this, madam, said she,
if you think proper, to your friend and my friend, the Chevalier Grandison.
Tell him, that I shall think myself very happy, if it may serve as a
testimonial, to the Lady whose merits entitle her to his Love, of my sincere
wishes for their mutual happiness: Tell him, that at present I wish for nothing
more ardently, than to hear of his Nuptials being celebrated.

Dear Grandison! let your next give us an opportunity to felicitate you on this
desirable event. In this wish joins every one of a family to whom you are, and
ever will be dear. Witness, for them all,

The Marquis and Marchioness della PORRETTA. I. T. R. Bishop of Nocera.
JERONYMO della PORRETTA. J. P. M. MARESCOTTI. HORTENSIA BEAUMONT.


LETTER XXXV. Miss BYRON, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Wednesday, Nov. 1.
HOW, Sir, have the contents of your friend Jeronymo's Letter affected me! -- I
am more and more convinced, that, however distinguished my lot may be,
Clementina only can deserve you. What a vain creature must I be, if I did not
think so! And what a disingenuous one, so thinking, if I did not acknowledge it!

I cannot, Sir, misconstrue your delicate sensibilities. My own teach me to
allow for yours.

'Best of men,' I can, I do, with Clementina, think you: But Harriet's ambition
will be gratified, in being accounted second to HER.

And does Clementina 'wish us ONE!' -- Most noble, most generous of women!

'Grandison, you say, will make me happy.'

But ah, my lovely pattern! can Harriet he happy, even with her Grandison, if
you are not so?

Believe me, LADY! your happiness will be essential to hers.

God give YOU happiness! Harriet prays for it!

My next-to Divine Monitress, it shall be my study to make Him happy!

But, most excellent of women, have you regrets? Regrets, which can only be
lessened by the joy you will have in his happiness! -- And with another!

Superlative goodness!

Why, why, when he would allow to you the exercise of your Religion, and only
insists on the like liberty, are the obstacles you hint at invincible!

O Sir! I can pursue this subject no further. Thus far an irresistible impulse
carried me.

How should I be able to stand before this Lady, were the visit she was so
earnest to be allowed to make to England to take place; yet in such a case,
with what pleasure should I pay my reverence to her mind in her person!

And does SHE, do her family, do YOU, Sir, wish us speedily ONE? -- Are you
not* satisfied with the given month? -- Is not a month, Sir, your declaration
so lately made, a short term? (And let me ask you but within parentheses, Do
you not, on an occasion so very delicate, in your limited three days after your
return to us, treat the not-insensible Harriet a little more -- Help me, Sir,
to a word -- than might have been expected from a man so very polite?) -- And
can you so generously, yet so serously, ask me, From which parts of the Nuptial
Life, the LAST (What a dreadful idea do you raise in that solemn word!) or the
FIRST, I would deduct the week's or fortnight's supposed delay? -- O Sir! what
a way of putting it is this! -- Thus I answer -- 'From neither!' My honor is
your honor. Determine YOU, most generous of men, for

Your HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XXXVI. Miss JERVOIS, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Tuesday, Oct. 31. Honored Sir,
YOU will think your ward very bold to address you by Letter; especially as she
is a very poor inditer, and as you are in town: But her heart is in trouble,
and she must write; and must beg the favor of you, the most indulgent guardian
that ever poor Orphan had, to answer her by pen and ink. For whether you can
forgive her or not, she will be equally incapable of bearing your goodness, or
your displeasure* How weakly I express myself! I find I shall write worse to
you, than to anybody else. And why? Because I wish to write, best. But I have
great awe, and no genius. I am a poor girl in every sense, as you shall hear
by-and-by. I hope you will not be very angry with me. If you are, I shall be worse
than poor -- I shall be miserable.

But to come before my guardian as a delinquent, when I have ambition enough to
wish to shine in his eyes, if so it could have been! -- It is a very great
mortification indeed! -- If you were to acquit me, I shall have had great
punishment in that thought.

But to open my troubled heart to you -- Yet how shall I; I thought to tell it
you yesterday; but for my life I could not. Did you not observe me once, Sir,
hanging upon the back of your chair, unable to stand in your sight? O how I
felt my face glow! -- Then it was I thought to have spoken my mind; but you
were so kind, so good to me, I could not, might I have had the world. You took
my hand -- I shall be very bold to repeat it; but am always so proud of your
kind notice, that I cannot help it: And you said, drawing me gently to you, 'Why
keeps my Emily behind me? What can I do for my Emily! Tell me, child; Is there
anything I can do for my ward?' Yet, though the occasion was so fair, I could
not tell you. But I shall tire you, before I came to the point (to the fault, I
should say) that has emboldened me to write.

This then is the truth of the matter:

My poor mother, Sir, is very good now, you know. You have taken from her all
her cares about this world: She and her husband live together happily and
elegantly: They want for nothing; and are grown quite religious: So that they
have leisure to think of their Souls good. They make me cry for joy, whenever I
go to them. They pray for you, and heap blessings upon you; and cry to think
they ever offended you.

But, Sir, I took it into my head, knowing it was a vast way for them to go
from Soho to somewhere in Moorfields to hear the preacher they admire so much,
and coach-hire, and charities, and contributions, of one kind or other (for
their minister has no establishment) and old debts paying off, that at present,
though I believe they are frugal enough, they cannot be much aforehand -- So,
thought I, shall I ride in my guardian's coach, at one time, in Lady G's at
another, in Lady L's at another, though so much better able to walk than my poor
mother; while she is growing into years, and when infirmities are coming on;
and my guardian's example before me, so opening to one's heart? -- I ventured,
therefore, unknown to my mother and her husband, unknown to anybody, by way of
surprise, to bespeak a plain neat chariot, and agreed for a coachman, and a
pair of horses; for I had about 130 guineas by me when I bespoke it. Out of
this, thought I (which is my own money, without account) I shall be able to
spare enough for the first half-year's expenses; after which, they will be in
circumstances to keep it on: And as quarters come round, thought I, I will
stint myself, and throw in something toward it; and then my poor mother and
her husband can go to serve God, and take sometimes an airing, or so, where
they please; and make an appearance in the world, as the mother of the girl who
is entitled to so large a fortune. And I don't grudge Mr. O-Hara; for he is
vastly tender of my mother now: Which must be a great comfort to her, you know,
Sir, now she is come to be sorry for past things, and apt to be very
spiritless, when she looks back -- Poor dear woman!

But here, Sir, was the thing: Believing it became me, as Lady L. Lady G. and
Mrs. Eleanor Grandison, intended to show their respect to you, on a certain
happy occasion, by new clothes, to show mine the same way; I went to the
mercer's, and was so tempted by two patterns, that, not knowing which to
choose, I bought of both; not thinking, at the time, of the bespoken chariot.
To be sure I ought to have consulted Lady L. or Lady G.; but, foolish creature
as I was, I must be for surprising them too, with my fine fancy.

Then I laid out a good deal more than I intended, in milanery matters: Not but
I had my pennyworths for my penny: But the milaners are so very obliging; they
show one this pretty thing, and that fashionable one; and are so apt to praise
one's taste; and one is so willing to believe them, and to be thought mighty
clever; that there is no resisting the vanity they raise. I own all my folly: I
ever will, Sir, when I am guilty of any greater silliness than ordinary; for I
have no bad heart, I hope, though I am one of the flowers I once heard you
compare some of us to, who are late before they blow into discretion.

But now, good Sir, came on my distress: For the bespoken chariot was ready;
ready sooner by a fortnight, than I expected. I thought my quarter would be
nearer ended; and I had made a vast hole in my money. I pulled up a courage; I
had need of it; and borrowed fifty guineas of Lady G.; but, from this foolish
love of surprises, cared not to tell her for what. And having occasion to pay
two or three bills (I was a thoughtless creature, to be sure) which unluckily,
though I had asked for them before, were brought in just then, I borrowed another
sum, but yet told not Lady G. for what; and the dear Lady, I believe, thought
me an extravagant girl; I saw she did, by her looks.

But, however, I caused the new chariot to be brought privately to me. I went
in it, and it carried me to Soho; and there, on my knees, made my present to my
mother.

But do you think, Sir, that she and Mr. O-Hara, when I confessed that I had
not consulted you upon it, and that neither Lady L. nor Lady G. nor yet Mrs.
Eleanor Grandison, knew a syllable of the matter, would accept of it? They
would not: But yet they both cried over me for joy, and blessed me.

It is put up somewhere And there it lies, till I have obtained your pardon
first, and your direction afterward. And what shall I do, if you are angry at
your por ward, who has done so inconsiderate a thing, and run herself into debt?

Chide me, honored Sir, if you please. Indeed you never yet did chide me. But
yours will be chideings of Love; of paternal Love, Sir.

But if you are angry with me more than a day; if you give me reason to believe
you think meanly of me, though, alas! I may deserve it; and that this rashness is
but a prelude to other rash or conceited steps (for that is the fear which most
terrifies me) and is therefore to be resented with severity; then will I fly to
my dear Miss Byron, that now is! -- And if she cannot soften your displeasure,
and restore me to your good opinion -- (Mere pardon will not be enough for your
truly-penitent ward) then will I say, Burst, heart! Ungrateful, inconsiderate
Emily! Thou have offended thy Guardian! What is there left in this life, that
is worth thy cares!

And now, Sir, I have laid my troubled heart open before you. I know you will
not so much blame the thing, even should you not approve of it, as the manner;
doing it (after you had been so extremely generous and inconsiderate to my
mother) without consulting either you, or your sisters. O my vanity and
conceit! They, they have misled me. They never shall again, whether you forgive
me, or not.

But good, indulgent, honored Sir, my Guardian, my Protector, let not my
punishment be the reversing of the gracious grant which my heart has been so
long wishing to obtain, and which you had consented to, of being allowed to
live immediately in your own eye, and in the presence of my dear Miss Byron,
that now is. This rash action should rather induce you to confirm, than reverse
it. And I promise to be very good. I ever loved her. I shall add filial honor,
as I may say, to my love of her. I never will do anything without consulting
her; and but what you, the kindest Guardian that ever poor Orphan had, would
wish me to do.

And now, Sir, honor me with a few lines from your own hand; were it but to
show me that this impertinence has not so far tired you, as (should you think
it just to banish me from your presence for some time) to make you discourage
applications to you, by pen and ink, from, Sir,

Your truly sorrowful Ward, and ever-obliged and grateful EMILY JERVOIS.

LETTER XXXVII. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Miss JERVOIS.
Wedn. Nov. 1.
I Write to the dear child of my tenderest cares, because she requests me to
write: Else, I had hastened to her in person, to comfort her doubting heart;
and to assure her, that nothing but a fault premeditated, and persisted in,
that might have affected her present or future reputation, and consequently her
happiness, could make me, for half an hour, offended with her. Your good
intentions, my dear child, will ever be your security with me. Men, as well as
women, are often misled by their love of surprises: But the greatest surprise
my Emily could give me, would be, if she could do any one thing that would show
a faulty heart.

Once more, my dear, pay your duty to your mother in the chariot which has been
the causless occasion of so much concern to you; and tell her, and Mr. O-Hara,
that they have greatly obliged me in declining the acceptance of the chariot,
so dutifully presented, till they knew my mind: But that, not so much in the
compliment paid to me, as your guardian, as because it has given me an opinion
of their own generosity and discretion. Tell them, that I greatly approve of
this instance of your duty to your mother, and of your regard, for her sake, to
Mr. O-Hara: Tell them, that I join with my ever-amiable ward in requesting
their acceptance of it; and do you, my dear, tell Miss Jervois, that I greatly
honor her for this new instance of her goodness of heart.

I enclose a note, and will, to make you easy, carry it to its proper account,
that will enable you to pay the debt which you with so dutiful an intention
have contracted. -- Forgive you, my dear! I love, I admire, you for it. I will
not have you stint yourself, as you call it, in order to contribute to the
future expense of the chariot. The present is but a handsome one, respecting
your fortune. Be therefore, for your mother's life, the whole expense yours;
and it may possibly contribute not a little to the ease of mind of both (as
they now live together not unhappily) if you have the goodness to assure Mr.
O-Hara, that you are so well satisfied with his kind treatment of your mother,
that you will, on supposition of the continuance of it, before you enter into
engagements which may limit your own power, or make your will dependent on that
of another person, secure a handsome provision for him, for his life, in case
he survive your mother.

I thank you, my dearest ward, for the affection you express for my beloved
Miss Byron. She loves you so tenderly, that it would have been a concern to me,
had she not engaged your love and confidence. You highly oblige me by promising
to consult her on all material occasions. The benefit you will receive from her
prudent advice and example, and the delight she will receive from your company,
will be a happiness to all three. My Emily may depend upon everything to make
it completely so, that shall be in the power of

Her faithful Friend, and humble Servant, CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXVIII. Miss JERVOIS, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Thursday, Nov. 2.
A Few lines, Sir; a very few -- Not to show my vanity, my pride, in being
allowed to write to my Guardian; nor to presume to draw him into an intercourse
of Letters. No, Sir, I write only to thank you, which I do a thousand thousand
times, for the ease, the joy, you have given to my heart. O how I dreaded to
open your Letter! But I could not have expected it to be so very indulgent to a
faulty girl. Not one rebuke! O Sir! how very good you are! And to send me the
money to clear my debts! To bid me make my present! In so gracious a manner to
bid me! And to put me upon promising a provision for life for Mr. O-Hara, if he
survive my mother; which will not oblige them to live a narrower life while
they are together, in order to save, in view of such an unhappy event -- I flew
to them, with the good news -- I read the whole Letter to them. O how their
hearts blessed you at their eyes, for they could not presently speak; and how
my tears mingled with theirs! O Sir, you made us all infants! -- I, for my
part, am still a baby! -- Did I ever cry so much for grief, as you have made me
cry for joy? -- It is well something now-and-then comes to check one's joy;
there would be no bearing it, else. But I shall encroach on your precious time.
Thank you, thank you, Sir, a hundred thousand times. My mother is happy! Mr.
O-Hara is happy! My Miss Byron will soon be the happiest of all human beings,
thank God! -- You, my Guardian, must be one of the happiest of men! May
everybody else be happy that you wish to be so! And then how happy will be,
good Sir,

Your dutiful Ward, and obliged Servant, ever to be commanded, EMILY JERVOIS!
They say you set out for Northamptonshire next Monday or Tuesday, at furthest.
Lord bless me! -- Lord bless you! I would say -- And bless everybody you love!
-- Amen! -- for ever and ever!



LETTER XXXIX. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Thursday, Nov. 2.
I Have laid before you, my dear Lady G. your brother's and Signor Jeronymo's
Letters; as also my answer to your brother's: My spirits never were so unequal.
All joy at one time; apprehension at another; that something will still happen.
-- Greville is reported to be so gloomy! so silent! He hates me, he says. --
And here, unexpectedly, is poor Mr. Orme returned. Amended in his health a
little, those who have seen him say, and he thinks so -- I am glad of it. And
here are we sitting in judgment, my aunt Ladypresident, on the patterns you
have sent: My uncle too will have his opinion be taken -- And Mr. Deane, who
threatened he would not come to Selby-house till the Settlements were to be
signed, or read, I cannot tell what -- will be here on Saturday.

MR. Orme has desired leave to visit me tomorrow. My uncle so hurries my
spirit; not with his raillery, as he used to do -- but with his joy. He talks
of nothing but the coming down of your brother, and the limited three days
after; and numbers the days, nay, the hours, as they fly: For he supposes Sir
Charles will be here on Monday, at furthest; and calls that a delay of
particular grace and favor. For has he not said, says he, that nothing after
Friday can, on his part, detain him from us?

But, Lady G. will he not write, before he comes, to my last? Say my uncle what
he pleases, your brother cannot be down before Saturday se'nnight, at soonest.

Your fancy and Lady L's determine us. My aunt has undertaken this province:
She therefore will write to you what she thinks fit. Is there not too much
glare in the flowered silver, as you describe it? Don't, my dear, let me be a
bride in a masquerade habit. Humility becomes persons of some degree. We want
not glare: We are known to be able to afford rich dresses; need them not,
therefore to give us consequence: Simplicity only can be elegance. Let me not
be gaudy: Let not fancy, or art, or study, be seen in my dresses. Something
must be done, I grant, on our appearance; for an an appearance we must not
dispense with here in the country, whatever you women of quality may do in
town. But let me not, I beseech you, or as little as possible, be marked out
for a luster; and be so good as to throw in a hint to this purpose to the dear
busy girls here, as from yourselves; for they are exercising their fancies, as
if I were to be a Queen of the May. Your authorities will support me, if they
give me cause to differ in opinion from them.

MISS Orme has just been with me. She confirms her brother's amendment. She is
sorry that his impatience has brought him over, when the climate was so
favorable to him. She says, I shall find him sincerely disposed to
congratulate me on my happy prospect; of which she has given him ample
particulars. He could not, she says, but express himself pleased, that neither
Fenwick nor Greville, but that one of so superior a character, is to be the man.

What greater felicity can a young creature propose to herself, in the days of
courtship, than to find every one in her family, and out of it, applauding her
choice? Could I, a few weeks ago, have thought -- But hushed be vanity! Pride,
withdraw! Meek-eyed Humility, stand forth! -- Am I indeed to be the happiest of
women? Will nothing happen -- O no, no! Heaven will protect your brother -- Yet
this Greville is a trouble to me. Not because of my horrid dream; I am not so
superstitious as to let that disturb me: But from a hint he gave Miss Orme.

She met him this morning at a neighboring Lady's. He thus accosted her: I
understand, madam, that your brother is returned. He is a happy man. Just in
time, to see Miss Byron, married. Fenwick, a dog! is gone to howl at Carlisle,
on the occasion. Your brother and I have nothing to do but howl in recitative
to each other, here.

My brother, Mr. Greville, said Miss Orme, I am sure, will behave like a man on
the occasion: Nor can you have reason to howl, as you call it. Sir Charles
Grandison is your particular friend, you know.

True, Miss Orme, affecting to laugh off this hit, I thought I could have
braved it out; but now the matter comes near, it sticks here, just here
pointing to his throat: I cannot get it through my gizzard. Plaguey hard of
digestion! making faces, in his light way.

But will your brother, proceeded he, be contented to stay within the noise of
the bells, which will, (in a few days perhaps) be set a ringing, for ten m^les
round? Sir Charles drives on at a d -- nable rate, I hear. 'But he must let me
die decently, I can tell him: We will not part for ever with the flower of our
county, without conditions.' Shall you see the Siren, madam? If you do, tell
her, that I have no chance for peace, but in hating her heartily. But
(whispering Miss Orme) bid her NOT TO BE TOO SECURE.

I was strangely struck with these words; for my spirits were not high before.
I repeated them; I dwelt upon them, and wept. -- Fool that I was! But I soon
recollected myself; and desired Miss Orme not to take notice of my tender folly.

Friday.
I HAVE had a visit from Mr. Orme. He has given me some pleasure. I added not
to his melancholy. He asked me several interesting questions, which I would not
have answered any other man, as I told him. I shall always value Mr. Orme. Your
brother is the most generous of men: But were he not so very generous, he ought
to allow for my civility to this worthy man; since I can applaud him with my
whole heart, for loving the noble Clementina. What a narrow-hearted creature
must I be, if I did not? But as a woman's honor is of a more delicate nature,
I believe, than a man's with regard to personal love; so perhaps (if this be
allowed me) a man may be as jealous of a woman's civility (in general cases, I
mean) as a woman may be of a man's Love to another object. This may sound
strange, at first hearing, Lady G. but I know what I mean. Nobody else does,
Harriet, perhaps you will say. But they would, I reply, if I were to explain
myself; which at present, if you apprehend me not, I have no inclination to do.

How did this worthy man praise Sir Charles Grandison! He must see that my
pride, no, not pride, my gratitude, was raised by it, as well to the praiser as
praised. He concluded with a blessing on us both, which he uttered in a
different manner from what that Balaam-Greville uttered his: It was followed
with tears, good man! and he left me almost unable to speak. How grateful in
our ears are the praises bestowed on those whom we fondly love!

Lucy thinks I had best go to my grandmamma's before he comes down; and that he
should visit me there from Selby-house. Neither my aunt nor I am of this
opinion; but that he should himself go to Shirley-manor, and visit us from
thence. For is not Selby-house my usual place of residence? My grandmamma will
be delighted with his company, and conversation. But as he cannot think of
coming down before the latter end of next week, at the soonest, it is time
enough to consider of these things. Yet can a young creature, the awful
solemnity so near, and with a man whom she prefers to all others, find room in
her head for any other topic?

I have a Letter from my good Mrs. Reeves. She and my cousin are so full of
this happy subject, that they invite themselves down to us; and hope we will
excuse them for their earnestness on this occasion. They are prodigiously
earnest. I wonder my cousin can think of leaving her little boy! My aunt says,
there is no denying them. How so? -- Surely one may excuse one's self to
friends one so dearly loves! Your presence, my Charlotte, I own, would be a
high satisfaction to me: Yet you would be a little unmanageable, I doubt. There
can be no hope of Lady L's: But if there were, neither she, nor anybody else,
could keep you orderly. -- Poor dear Emily! -- My aunt wishes, that we could
have had her with us: But, for her own sake, it must not be. How often do I
revolve that reflection of your brother's; that, in our happiest prospects, the
sighing heart will confess imperfection! But I will not add another word, after
I have assured you, my dearest Ladies, that I am, and ever will be,

Your grateful and most affectionate humble Servant, HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XL. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Miss BYRON.
Friday, Nov. 3.
REceive, dearest, loveliest, of women, the thanks of a most grateful heart,
for your invaluable favor of Wednesday last. Does my Harriet (Already,
methinks, I have sunk the name of Byron into that of Grandison), do Mrs.
Shirley, Mrs. Selby, think, that I have treated one of the most delicate of
Female minds indelicately, in the wish (not the prescription) I have presumed
to signify to the beloved of my heart; that within three days after my
permitted return to Northamptonshire, I may be allowed to receive, at the
Altar, the greatest blessing of my life? I would not be thought ungenerous. I
signified my wishes; but I told you, in the same Letter, that your cheerful
compliance was to me the great desirable. In everything, from the date of the
condescending Letter before me, to the last of my life, shall your wishes
determine mine. I will have your whole heart in the grant of every request I
make to you, or you shall have the cheerful acquiescence of mine with your
will. Permit me to say, that the family punctilio was not out of my thoughts,
when I expressed my own ardent wishes to you. Does not the world about you
expect, on the return of the happy man, a speedy solemnization? I imagined,
that whether he be permitted to make the place of his abode Selby-house or
Shirleymanor, you would not that the happy day should be long deferred, which
should give him rank as one of the dear family.

Our Equipages, my dearest life, are all in great forwardness. In tenderness to
you, I have forborne to consult you upon some parts of them, as my regard for
your judgment would othewise have obliged me to do. The Settlements are all
ready. Our good Mr. Deane is ready to attend you with them. Allow me, then, to
do myself the honor of presenting myself before you at Selby-house, on Tuesday
next. I will leave it to you to distinguish the happiest day of my life,
whether within the succeeding three, four, five, or even six, of my return.

If I have not your commands to the contrary, Tuesday morning then, if not
Monday night, shall present to you the most ardent and sincere of men, pouring
out on your hand his grateful vows for the invaluable favor of Wednesday's
date, which I consider in the sacred light of a plighted Love; and, as such,
have given it a place next my heart.

My most respectful compliments to all whom we both so justly hold dear,
conclude me, dearest madam,

Your most grateful, obliged, and ever-affectionate, CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER XLI. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Monday Morning, Nov. 6.
I Send you, my dearest Lady G. a copy of your brother's Letter of Friday la^t;
Lucy has transcribed it for you. Lucy is very obliging. She desires to be
allowed to correspond with you; and makes a merit of these transcriptions for
an introduction: That is her view. I give you fair notice of it, that you may
either check or encourage her, as you think fit.

Have I not cause to think your brother a little out of the way in his
resolution of so sudden a return? -- This night perhaps, or tomorrow morning
-- I am vexed, my dear, because he is such an anticipater, that he leaves not
to me the merit of obliging him beyond his expectation. However, I shall
rejoice to see him. The moment he enters the room where I am, he can have no
faults.

My aunt, who thinks he is full hasty, is gone to dine with my Grandmamma, and
intends to settle with that dear parent everything for his reception at
Shirley-manor. Nancy is gone with her. My uncle, at Mr. Orme's invitation, is
gone to dine with that worthy man.

Monday Afternoon.
O MY dearest Lady G! what shall we do? All quarrels are at an end! all
petulance! all folly! -- I may never, never, be his at all! -- I may, before
the expected time of his arrival, be the most miserable of women! -- Your
brother, best of men! -- may be -- Ah -- my Charl --

TERRIFIED to death, my pen fell from my fingers -- I fainted away -- Nobody
came near me. I know I was not along insensible -- My terrors broke through
even the fit I fell into -- Nothing but death itself could make me long
insensible, on such an occasion -- O how I shall terrify you! -- Dearest Lady
G. -- But here, here comes my Lucy -- Let her give the occasion of my anguish.

The following written by Miss Lucy Selby.
AT my cousin's request, while she is lain down, I proceed, my good Lady G. to
account to you for her terrors, and for mine also. -- Dear creature! -- But
don't be too much terrified: God, we hope, God, we pray, will protect your
brother! Mr. Greville cannot be capable of the shocking mischief, barbarity,
villainy, which, it is apprehended, he has in view: God will protect your
brother!

Here, a note was brought from an anonymous hand. -- I don't know what I write,
from an unknown hand signifying, that Mr. Greville was heard to threaten the
life your brother; and we are told, by more than one, that he is moody, and in
a bad way as to his mind. And he left his house the morning; so the note says
(And that he certainly did) and was seen to take the London road, with several
servants, and others -- And the dear Harriet has distracted herself and me with
her apprehensions. My aunt out, my uncle out, none but maidservants at home.
We, before he came up to her closet, ran up and down, directing, and
undirecting; and she promised to go up, and try to compose herself, till my
uncle came from The Park, where he is to dine with Mr. Orme. He is sent for --
Thank God my uncle is come! --


By Miss Byron.
And what, my dear Lady G. can his coming signify? Lucy is gone down to show
him the anonymous writer's note. Dear, dear Sir! Lord of my wishes! forgive me
all my petulance. Come safe -- God grant it! -- Come safe! And Hand and Heart I
will be yours, if you require it, tomorrow morning!

HERE follows the copy of the alarming note. I broke the seal. It was thus
directed:


To GEORGE SELBY, Esquire With speed, speed, speed.
Honored Sir,
A Very great respecter of one of the most generous and noblest of men (Sir
Charles Grandison, I mean) informs you, that his life is in great danger. He
over heard Mr. Greville say, in a rageful manner, as by his voice. 'I never
will allow such a prize to be carried from me. He shall die the death,' and
swore to it. He was a little in wine, it is true; and I should have disregarded
it for that reason, had I not informed myself that he is set out with armed men
this morning. Make what use you please of this: You never will know the writer.
But love and reverence to the young Baronet is all my motive. So help me God!

Two of my uncle's tenants, severally, saw the shocking creature on the London
road, with servants. What will become of me, before morning, if he arrives not
this night in safety!


Monday Night, Eleven.
MY uncle dispatched two servants to proceed on the London road as far as they
could go for daylight. He himself rode to Mr. Greville's. Mr. Greville had
been out all day, and well attended -- Expected, however, to return at night.
-- To prepare for his escape (who knows?) after the blackest of villainies. My
aunt is in tears; my uncle recollects aggravating circumstances. Our
preparations, your brother's preparations, Mr. Deane's expected arrival of
tomorrow -- Lucy weeps; Nancy wrings her hands -- Your Harriet is in silent
anguish -- She can weep no more! -- She can write no more!

Tuesday Morning, 8 o'Clock, Nov. 7.
WHAT a dreadful night have I had! Not a wink of sleep.

And nobody stirring. Afraid to come down, I suppose, for fear of seeing each
other. My eyes are swelled out of my head. -- I wonder my uncle is not down. He
might give orders about something -- I know not what! What dreadful visions had
I ready, as it seemed, to continue my disturbance, could I have closed my eyes
to give seeming form to the flying shadows! Waking dreams: For I was broad
awake: Sally sat up with me. Such startings! such absences! -- I never was so
before. Such another night would I not have for the world! I can only write.
Yet what do I write? To what purpose? -- You must not see what I have written.
Now on my knees, praying, vowing: Now -- O my Lucy!

LUCY entered just here -- Nancy followed her -- Nancy tormented me with her
resveries of the past night: My aunt is not well; she has not slept: My uncle
fell into a dose, about his usual rising-time: He has had no rest. My
grandmamma must not know the occasion of our grief, till it cannot be kept from
her -- If -- But no more -- Dreadful If --

LETTER XLII. Miss BYRON. In continuation.
Tuesday 12 o'Clock, Nov. 7.
In a small hand, under the Superscription of the inner Cover.

My dearest Lady G. pray read the first page of this Letter, before you open
the other dreadful one, sealed with five seals, and stitched to the Cover (that
it may not slide officiously into your hands). Lucy will have me send the whole
of that shocking Letter. Against my judgment, I comply.

WE met this morning soul-less, and forlorn, all equally unable either to give
or receive consolation. The officious note was taken up, laid down, taken up
again; the hand endeavored to be guessed at: And at last it was concluded, to
dispatch a servant to Mr. Greville's, to learn news of the supposed traitor.

But, behold! before the servant could return, in a riding-dress, having
alighted at the outward gate, entered the hall your noble brother. I was the
first whom he saw; the first who saw him. I was just going out, intending (yet
hardly knowing my intention) to walk in the Elm-row fronting the house, in
order to shorten the way of the returning servant with news.

He cast himself at my feet. Something he said, and more he intended to say;
excusing his early return, and thanking me for my favor of the Wednesday
before; when my joyful surprise overpowered both my speech and senses. -- And
what will you say to me, when I tell you, that, on my recovery, I found myself
in his arms, mine clasped about his neck?

He was surprised at my emotion! Well he might -- Every one, in a moment,
crowded about him -- My aunt also folded her arms around him -- Welcome,
welcome, welcome, was all she could, at the instant, say.

I, utterly abasned, trembling, and doubting my feet, motioned to quit the hall
for the parlour -- But nobody minded me; all were busied in congratulating the
joy of every heart; till Sally presenting herself, I leaned upon her, and,
staggering to the parlour, threw myself into an elbow-chair.

Your brother, attended by all my friends, followed me in. My heart again bid
him welcome, though my eye could not, at that instant, bear his. He took my hand,
as I sat, between both his, and, in the most respectful manner pressing it with
his lips, besought me to compose myself.

They had hinted to him in the hall, the cause of all our emotions -- They had
as much reason to blush, as I had. -- Nancy, it seems, even Nancy, snatched his
hand, and kissed it, in raptures. How dear is he to us all! He sees it, now:
There can be no reserves to him, after this. Punctilio! Family Punctilio!
mentioned he in his Letter! -- We have now no pretensions to it --

His eyes shone with grateful sensibility. Look down upon me, loveliest of
women, said he, with a bent knee; Look down upon me, and tell me, you forgive
me, for my early return. But though returned, I am entirely at your devotion.

Lucy says, she never saw me more to my advantage. I looked down upon him, as
he bid me, smiling through my tears. He stole gently my handkerchief from my
half-hid face; with it he dried my unaverted cheek, and put it, she says, in
his bosom. I have lost it.

My uncle and aunt withdrew with him, and acquainted him with all particulars.
To them he acknowleged, in words of eloquent Love, my uncle said, the honor
done him by me, and by us all, in the demonstrations we had given of our tender
regard for him.

I was, by the time of their return to us, pretty well recovered. Sir Charles
approached me, without taking notice of the emotion I had been in. Mr. and
Mrs. Selby tell me, said he, to me, that I am to be favored with a residence
at our venerable Mrs. Shirley's. This, though a high honor, looks a little
distant; so would the next door, if it were not under the same roof with my
Miss Byron: But, smiling tenderly upon me, I shall presume to hope, that this
very distance will turn to my account. Mrs. Shirley's Harriet cannot decline
paying her accustomed duty to the best of grandmothers.

Bowing, I shall not, Sir, said I, be the more backward to pay my duty to my
grandmamma, for your obliging her with your company.

Thus, resumed he, snatching my hand, and ardently pressing it with his lips,
do I honor to myself for the honor done me. How poor is man! that he cannot
express his gratitude to the object of his vows, for obligations conferred, but
by owning to her new obligation!

Then turning round to my aunt -- It is incumbent upon me, madam, said he, to
pay my early devoirs to Mrs. Shirley, the hospitable Mrs. Shirley, repeated he,
smiling; which looked as if he expected to be here. There, besides, (looking
pleasantly upon my aunt) I may be asked -- here I am not -- to break my fast.

This set us all into motion. My uncle ran out to look after Sir Charles's
servants, who, it seems, in our hurry, were disregarded: Their horses in the
courtyard; three of them walking about, waiting their master's orders. My
uncle was ready, in the true taste of old English hospitality, to pull them in.

Chocolate was instantly brought for their master; and a dish for each of us.
We had made but a poor breakfast, any of us. I could get nothing down before.
My aunt put a second dish into my hand: I took her kind meaning, and presented
it to Sir Charles. How gratefully did he receive it! Wiil it always be so, Lady
G.? My love, heightened by my duty, shall not, when the obligation is doubled,
make me less deserving of his politeness, if I can help it.

But still this dreadful note, and Greville's reported moodiness, made us
uneasy. The servant we sent returned, with information that Mr. Greville came
home late last night. He was not stirring, it seems, though Eleven o'Clock, when
the servant reached his house. He is said to be not well; and, as one servant
of his told ours, so very fretful, and ill-tempered, that they none of them
know how to speak to him. God grant -- But let me keep to myself such of my
apprehensions as are founded on conjecture -- Why should I not hope the best?
Is not your beloved brother at present safe? And is he not the care of
Providence? -- I humbly trust he is.

Sir Charles took the note. I think I have seen the hand, said he: If I have, I
shall find out the writer. I dare say, it is written with a good intention.

My uncle and we all expressed, some in words, some by looks, our apprehensions.

There cannot possibly be room for any, said Sir Charles, always present to
himself. Mr. Greville loves Miss Byron. It is no wonder, as his apprehensions
of losing all hopes of her for ever, grow stronger, that he should be uneasy.
He would make but an ill compliment to her merit, and his own sincerity, if he
were not. But such a stake as he has in his country, he cannot have desperate
intentions. I remember, to his advantage, his last behavour here. I will make
him a visit. I must engage Mr. Greville to rank me in the number of his friends.

What he said gave us comfort. No wonder if we women love courage in a man: We
ought, if it be true courage, like that of your excellent brother. After all,
my dear, I think we must allow a natural superiority in the minds of men over
women. Do we not want protection? And does not that want imply inferiority? --
Yet if there be two sorts of courage, an acquired and a natural; why may not
the former be obtained by women, as well as by men, were they to have the same
education? NATURAL courage, may belong to either. Had Miss Barnevelt, for
example, had a boy's education, she would have probably challenged her man, on
provocation given; and he might have come off but poorly.

But we have more silly antipathies than men, which help to keep us down:
Whether those may not sometimes be owing to affectation, do you, Lady G. who,
however, have as little affectation as ever woman had, determine. A frog, a
toad, a spider, a beetle, an earwig, will give us mighty pretty tender terror;
while the heroic men will trample the insect under foot, and look the more
brave for their barbarity, and for our delicate screaming. But for an
adventure, if a Lover get us into one, we frequently leave him a great way
behind us. Don't you think so, Lady G.? -- Were not this Greville still in my
head, methinks I could be as pert as ever.

Sir Charles told us, that he should have been with us last night, but for a
visit he was obliged to pay to Sir Harry Beauchamp; to make up for which
hindrance, he took horse, and ordered his equipage to follow him.

He is gone to pay his duty, as he is pleased to call it, to my grandmamma, in
my uncle's coach, my uncle with him. If they cannot prevail on my grandmamma to
come hither to dinner, and if she is desirous Sir Charles should dine with her,
he will oblige her -- by my aunt's leave, was his address to her. But perhaps
she will have the goodness to add her company to his, as she knows that will
give us all double pleasure: She loves to give pleasure. Often does the dear
Lady say, 'How can palsied age, which is but a terrifying object to youth,
expect the indulgence, the love, of the young and gay, if it does not study to
promote those pleasures which itself was fond of in youth? Enjoy innocently
your season, girls, once said she, setting half a score of us into country
dances. I watch for the failure of my memory; and shall never give it over for
quite lost, till I forget what were my own innocent wishes and delights in the
days of my youth.'

Tuesday, Five o'Clock.
MY uncle and Sir Charles came back to dinner; my grandmamma with them. She was
so good as to give me her company, at the first word. Sir Charles, as we sat at
dinner, and afterward, saw me weak in mind, bashful, and not quite recovered;
and he seemed to watch my uncle's eyes, and so much diverted him and all of us,
that my uncle had not opportunity to put forth, as usual. How did this kind
protection assure me! I thought myself quite well; and was so cheerfully silent
when Sir Charles talked, that my grandmamma and aunt, who had placed me between
them, whispered me severally -- You look charmingly easy, love -- You look like
yourself, my dear. Yet still this mischievous Greville ran in my head.

My uncle took notice, that Sir Charles had said, he guessed at the writer of
the note. He wished he would give him an item, as he called it, whom he thought
of.

You observe, Sir, answered Sir Charles, that the writer says, Mr. Greville was
in wine. He professes to be an encourager of the people of the George in
Northampton. He often appoints company to meet him there. I imagine the writer
to be the head waiter of the house: The bills delivered me in, seem to have
been written in such a hand as the note, as far as I can carry the hand writing
in my eye.

Ads-heart, said my uncle, that is undoubtedly right: Your name's up, Sir, I can
tell you, among men, women, and children. This man, in his note, calls you
(Look, else!) the most generous and noble of men. He says, we shall never know
the writer! -- Ads-dines! the man must deal in art magic, that conceals himself
from you, if you have a mind to find him out.

Well, but, said Lucy, if this be so, I am concerned for the reality of the
information. Such threatenings as Mr. Greville throws out, are not to be
slighted. Very true, said my uncle. Mr. Deane and I (Mr. Deane will certainly
be here by-and-by) will go, and discourse with Greville himself tomorrow,
please the Lord.

Sir Charles begged that this matter might be left to his management. Mr.
Greville and I, said he, are upon such a foot, as, whether he be so sincerely
my friend as I am his, or not, will warrant a visit to him; and he cannot but
take it as a civility, on my return into these parts.

Should he be affronting, Sir Charles? Said my uncle --

I can have patience, if he should. He cannot be grossly so.

I know not that, replied my uncle: Mr. Greville is a roister!

Well, dear Mr. Selby, leave this matter to me. Were there to be danger; the
way to avoid it, is not to appear to be afraid of it. One man's fear gives
another courage. I have no manner of doubt of being able to bring Mr. Greville
with me to an amicable dish of tea, or to dinner, which you please, tomorrow.

Ads-heart, Sir, I wish not to see at either, the wretch who could threaten the
life of a man so dear to us all.

Sir Charles bowed to my uncle for his sincere compliment. I have nothing to
do, said he, but to invite myself either to breakfast, or dine with him. His
former scheme of appearing to the world well with me, in order to save his
spirit, will be resumed; and all will be right.

My aunt expressed her fears, however, and looked at me, as I did at her, with
a countenance, I suppose, far from being unapprehensive: But Sir Charles said,
You must leave me, my dear friends, to my own methods; nor be anxious for my
safty. I am not a rash man: I can pity Mr. Greville; and the man I pity, cannot
easily provoke me.

We were all the easier for what the charmingly-cool, because truly brave, man
said on a subject which has given us all so much terror.

But was he not very good, my dear, not to say one word all this day of the
important errand on which he came down? And to lead the subjects of
conversation with design, as my aunt and grandmamma both thought, as well as I,
that my uncle should not? and to give me time to recover my spirits? Yet when
he did address himself to me, never were tenderness and respect so engagingly
mingled. This my uncle observed, as well as my aunt and Lucy. How the duce,
said he, does this Sir Charles manage it? He has a way no man but him ever
found out -- He can court without speech: He can take one's heart, and say
never a word. Hay, Harriet! looking archly.

MR. Deane is come -- In charming health and spirits -- Thank God! With what
cordiality did Sir Charles and he embrace each other!

Sir Charles attended my grandmamma home: So we had not his company at supper.
Now convenience without its contrary. He is her own son: She is his own parent.
Such an unaffected love on both sides! -- Such a sweetly-easy, yet respectful,
familiarity between them! What additional pleasures must a young woman in my
situation have, when she can consider herself as the bond of union between the
family she is of, and that she is entering into! How dreadful, on the contrary,
must be her case, who is the occasion of propagating dissension, irreconcilable
hatred, and abhorrence between her own relations and those of the man to whom
she for life engages herself!

My grandmother and Sir Charles were no sooner gone, than my uncle began to
talk with Mr. Deane on the subject that is nearest all our hearts. I was afraid
the conversation would not be managed to my liking; and having too just an
excuse to ask leave to withdraw, from bad, or rather no rest, last night, I
made use of it; and here in my closet (preparing now, however, for it) am I

Your ever-affectionate HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XLIII. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Wednesday Morning, Nov. 8.
SIR Charles let my grandmother come hither by herself. He is gone to visit
that Greville. We are all in pain for him: But Mr. Deane comforts us.

After breakfast, thus began my uncle upon me.

Here, Dame Selby, are we still at a fault. Harriet knows not what she would be
at; and you uphold her in her nonsenses. Delicacy! Delicacy! The duce take me,
if I have any notion of it! -- What a pize are you about?

Dear Sir! why am I blamed? said I. What would you have me do, that I have not
done?

Do! why I would have you give him his Day, and keep to it; that I would have
you do: And not shillyshally for ever -- and subject the best of men to
insults. All your men will be easy and quiet, when the ceremony is over, and
they know there is no remedy.

My good Mr. Selby, said my grandmamma, you now blame without reason. Sir
Charles was full hasty. Harriet was a little more nice, perhaps, her Lover
considered, than she needed to be. Yet I don't know, but I, in her case, should
have done as she did; and expected as much time as she was willing to take. It
was not a very long one, Mr. Selby, from the declaration he made; and he is a
man himself of great delicacy. Harriet very readily acknowleged to him the
preference she gave him to all them; and when she found him very earnest for a
short day, she, by her last Letter, threw herself generously into his power. He
is full of acknowlegements upon it; and so he ought to be. To me he has said
all that a man should say of his gratitude, upon the occasion; and he declared
to me last night, that it was with difficulty he forbore taking advantage of
her goodness to him: But that he checked himself, and led to other subjects,
seeing how much the dear creature was disordered, and being apprehensive, that
if he had begun upon one so interesting, or even wished to talk with her alone,
he should have increased her disorder.

Oy, Oy! Sir Charles is considerate; and Harriet should be grateful: But indeed
my Dame Selby is as silly, to the full, as Harriet. She is for having Harriet
keep her in countenance in the dance she led me, so many years ago -- Lady G.
for my money. She finds you all out in your Masonry.

Mr. Selby, said my aunt, I only refer myself to what our venerable parent just
said.

And so don't think it worth while to hold an argument with me, I suppose?

I did not know, my dear, that you wanted to hold an argument.

Your servant, madam -- with that sly leer -- So like Harriet! and Harriet so
like you!

But, Mr. Selby, said my grandmamma, will you be pleased to tell the dear
child, if you think her wrong, what is the next step she should take?

Think her wrong! -- Next step! -- Why the next step is, as she has promised to
oblige him, and to be directed by him, to keep her word; and not hum nor haw
about the matter.

Mr. Deane, who had been shown and told everything that had passed since we saw
him last, said, You don't know that my daughter Byron will make unnecessary
parade, Mr. Selby. Sir Charles you find, in tenderness to her, asked no
questions yesterday; made no claim -- She could not begin the subject.

But, said Lucy, I cannot but say, that my cousin is in some fault.

Look you there, now! said my uncle.

We all stared at Lucy; for she spoke and looked very seriously.

Might she not have said, proceeded she, when Sir Charles surprised her at his
first arrival (what though her heart was divided between past terror, and present
joy?) Here I am, Sir, at your service: Are you prepared for tomorrow? -- And
then made him one of her best courtesies.

Sauce-box! -- Well, well, I believe I have been a little hasty in my judgment
(rapping under the table with his knuckles): But I am so afraid that something
will happen between the cup and the lip -- Here, last night, I dreamt that Lady
Clementina and he were going to be married -- Give me your hand, my dear
Harriet, and don't revoke the kindness in your last Letter to him, but whatever
be the day he proposes, comply; and you will win my heart for ever.

As Sir Charles leads, Harriet must follow, resumed my grandmamma. You men are
sad prescribers in these delicate cases, Mr. Selby. You will be put to it, my
dear love, taking my hand, before this day is over, now you seem so purely
recovered. Sir Charles Grandison is not a dreaming Lover. Prepare your mind, my
child: You Will be put to it, I do assure you.

Why, oy; I cannot but say, Sir Charles is a man -- Don't you, my lovely Love,
be too much a woman! -- Too close a copier of your aunt Selby here! -- and, as
I said, you will have my heart for ever -- Oy, and Sir Charles's too; for he is
not one of your sorry fellows that cannot distinguish between a favor and a
folly.

My uncle then went out with a flourish, and took Mr. Deane with him; leaving
only my grandmamma, my aunt, my Lucy, and your Harriet, together.

We had a good deal of talk upon the important subject. The conclusion was,
that I would refer Sir Charles to my grandmamma, if he were urgent for the day,
and she was vested with a discretionary power to determine for her girl.

Such of my clothes, then, as were near finished, were ordered to be produced,
with some of the nuptial ornaments. They were all to sit in judgment upon them.

Surely, Lady G. these are solemn circumstances, lightly as my uncle thinks of
them. Must not every thoughtful young creature, on so great a change, and for
life, have conflicts in her mind, be her prospects ever so happy, as the day
approaches? Of what materials must the hearts of runaways, and of fugitives, to
men half-strangers to them, be compounded?

My aunt has just left with me the following Billet, from Sir Charles, directed
to my uncle, from Mr. Greville's:

Dear Mr. Selby,
I Regret every moment that I pass out of Selby-house, or Shirley-manor: And as
I have so few particular friends in these parts out of your family, I think I
ought to account to you for the hours I do: Nor will I, now our friendship is
so unalterably fixed and acknowleged, apologize for giving myself, by this
means, the consequence with your family, that every one of yours, for their
single sakes, are of to me, superadded to the tenderest attachments to one dear
person of it.

I found the gentleman in a less happy disposition than I expected.

It is with inexpressible reluctance that he thinks, as my happy day draws
near, of giving up all hopes of an object so dear to him. He seemed strangely
balancing on this subject, when I was introduced to him. He instantly proposed
to me, and with some fierceness, that I would suspend all thoughts of marriage
for two months to come, or at least for one. I received his request with proper
indignation. He pretended to give reasons respecting himself: I allowed not of
them.

After some canvassings, he swore, that he would be complied with in something.
His alternative was, the dining with him, and with some of his chosen friends,
whom he had invited.

I have reason to think these friends are those to whom he expressed himself
with violence at the George, as overheard, I suppose, by the waiter there.

He rode out, he owned, yesterday morning, with intent to meet me; for he
boasts that he knows all my motions, and those of a certain beloved young Lady.
Let him; let everybody, who think it their concern to watch our steps, be made
acquainted with them: The honest heart aims not at secrets. I should glory in
receiving Miss Byron's hand, from yours, Sir, before ten thousand witnesses.

Mr. Greville had rode out the night before; he did not say to meet me; but he
knew I was expected at Selby-house, either on Monday night, or yesterday
morning: And on his return, not meeting me, he and his friends passed their
night at the George, as mentioned, and rode out together in the morning -- In
hopes of meeting me, he said; and to engage me to suspend my happy day. Poor
man! Had he been in his right mind, he could not have hoped (had he met me on
the road) to have been heard on such a subject.

An act of oblivion, and thorough reconciliation, he calls it, is to pass, in
presence of his expected friends.

You will not take notice of what I have hinted at, out of the family, whatever
was designed.

In the temper he would have found me in, had he met me, nothing unhappy could
have happened; for he is really to be pitied.

We are now perfect friends. He is full of good wishes. He talks of a visit to
Lady Frampton, of a month. I write thus particularly, that I may not allow such
a subject as this to interfere with that delightful one which engrosses my
whole attention; and which I hope, in the evening, will be honored with the
attention of the beloved and admired of every heart, as well as of that of

Your ever-obliged and affectionate CHAPTER GRANDISON.


Poor wicked Greville -- May he go to Lady Frampton's, or wherever else, so
it be fifty miles distant from us. I shall be afraid of him, till I hear he has
quitted, for a time, his seat in this neighborhood.

What a glorious quality is courage, when it is divested of rashness! When it
is founded on integrity of heart, and innocence of life and manners! But,
otherwise founded, Is it not rather to be called savageness, and brutality?

How much trouble have I given your brother! What dangers have I involved him
in! It cannot be possible for me evre to reward him. -- But the proudest heart
may deem it a glory to owe obligation to Sir Charles Grandison.

LETTER XLIV. Miss BYRON. In Continuation.
Wednesday Night, Nov. 8.
SIR Charles broke away, and came hither by our tea-time. I was in my closet
writing. They all crowded about him. He avoided particulars: Only said, that
all was friendship between Mr. Greville and himself; and that Mr. Greville came
with him part of the way; full of his resumed scheme, of appearing to be upon a
good understanding with him, and a friend to the alliance between him and us.

Sir Charles looked about him, as if for somebody he saw not. My aunt came up
to me: My dear, do you know who is come? She then told me the above
particulars. We had a summons to tea. Down we hastened. He met us both at the
parlour-door. O madam, said he, what precious hours have I lost! -- I have been
patience itself!

I congratulated him on what my aunt had told me. I found he intended, as he
says in his Billet, that the particulars he gave in it should answer our
curiosity; and to have done with the subject. What a charming possession of
himself, that he could be in such a brangle, as I may call it, and which might
have had fatal consequences; yet to be so wholly, and so soon, divested of the
subject; and so infinitely agreeable upon half a score others, as they offered
from one or other as we sat at tea!

Tea was no sooner over, but he singled me out -- May I, madam, beg the favor
of a half-hour's audience?

Sir, Sir! hesitated the simpleton, and was going to betray my expectation, by
expressing some little reluctance; but, recollecting myself, I suffered him to
lead me into the Cedar parlour. When there, seating me -- Now, madam, let me
again thank you, a thousand and a thousand times, for the honor of your last
condescending Letter.

He but just touched my hand, and appeared so encouragingly respectful! -- I
must have loved him then, if I had not before.

You have, my dearest Miss Byron, a man before you, that never can be
ungrateful. Believe me, my dearest Life, though I have urged you as I have, you
are absolutely your own mistress of the day, and of every day of my life, as
far as it shall be in my power to make you so. You part with power, my lovely
Miss Byron, but to find it with an increase. Only let me beseech you, now I
have given it you back again, not to permit your heart to be swayed by mere
motives of punctilio.

A charming glow had overspread his cheek; and he looked as when I beheld him
in his sister's dressingroom, after he had rescued me from the hands of the
then cruel, now mortified, Sir Hargrave Pollexfen.

Punctilio, mere punctilio, Sir, shall not weigh with me. What I wrote to you,
I intend to comply with. My heart, Sir, is -- Yours! -- I would have said --
Why would not my tongue speak it? -- My, my, I stammered -- Why did I stammer?
-- Had I not owned it before to be so? -- My grandmamma, Sir, and aunt -- I
could not at that instant, for my life, say another word.

Sweet confusion! I urge you no more on this topic, just now: I joyfully take
your reference. Then drawing a chair next me, he kissed his own hand, and held
it out, as it were, courting mine. I yielded it to him, as by an involuntary
motion -- yet my heart was forwarder than my hand. He tenderly grasped it --
retaining it -- and instead of urging the approaching day, talked to me as if
it were past.

I have a request to make to your grandmother, your uncle and aunt, your Lucy,
and our Mr. Deane; it is a very bold one: That when I have been blessed with
your hand, they will be so good as to accompany their beloved Harriet, then no
more Byron, but Grandison, to my family-seat, and see the beloved of every
heart happily fixed, and in possession of it. The house is venerable (I will
not call it old); but large and convenient. Compassion for your neighboring
admirers, will induce you to support me in this request. You cannot bear, I
imagine, without a lessening of your own joy (if I prove the just, the grateful
man to you, that, if I know myself, I shall be) either to see at church, or in
your visits, those men who preferred you to all women; or, if they forbear the
one or the other, to account with a gentle sigh for their forbearance. Other
women might triumph secretly on such occasions; but I, even I, the successful,
the distinguished man, shall not forbear some inward pity for them. Now, madam,
an excursion of a month or two, if no more, made by those dear friends, who
otherwise will be loath, so soon as I wish, to part with you; will wean, as I
may say, these unhappy men from you. Mr. Orme, Mr. Greville, will not then be
obliged to quit their own houses, and this neighborhood. I shall not, whenever
I step into company, see dejected men, whose dejection is owing, as they will
think, to my happiness: All your new relations will attend you, in turn, in the
house that I always loved, and wished to settle in; your own relations with
you, and witnesses of our mutual happiness -- Support me, generously support
me, in this proposal, when I shall be entitled, by your goodness, to make it.
-- Silent, my dearest Love! -- If I have been too early in thus opening my
heart to you, do me the justice to suppose that it is owing to my wishes to
pass over another interesting subject which must take place before my proposal
can; and which, however, engages my whole heart.

I might well be silent: I could not find utterance for the emotions of my
heart. I withdrew my hand to take my handkerchief (You have often told me, Lady
G. that I was born in an April morning); but putting it into my other hand, I
gratefully (I hope not too fondly) laid it in his way to take it again. He did,
with an air that had both veneration and gratitude in it -- My dearest Life,
tenderly grasping it -- how amiable this goodness! -- You are not, I see,
displeased.

Displeased! -- O, Sir Charles! -- But, alas! while I am too-too happy, the
exalted Lady abroad! -- She, she, only! Your friend Jeronymo's last Letter --

Thus brokenly did I express (what my heart was full of) her worthiness, my
inferiority.

Exalted creature! -- Angelic goodness! You are Clementina and Harriet, both in
one: One mind certainly informs you both.

Just then came in my aunt Selby. I have, madam, said he to her, been making a
request to your beloved niece: I am exceedingly earnest in it. She will be so
good as to break it to you; and I hope --

O Sir! interrupted my too eager aunt, supposing it had been for the Day, Mrs.
Shirley has the power --

My dear aunt Selby! said I.

What have I said, Love? --

He caught eagerly at it -- Happy mistake! said he. My dear Mrs. Selby, I thank
you!

He bowed, kissed my hand, and left me to go to my grandmamma, to inform
himself of what he had to hope for, as to the Day, from her.

I told my aunt what the request was, and what a conversation we had had: And
what, madam, said I, have you done!

My aunt approved of his proposal. It will be the pride of your uncle's heart
and mine, to see you settled in Grandison-hall.

What short work did my grandmamma make of it! In less than a quarter of an
hour Sir Charles returned, overjoyed, with an open Billet in his hand, from the
venerable parent. This is it:

'TO me, my Harriet, you have referred the most important Day of your life. May
the Almighty shower down his blessings on it! Thursday, next week, is the Day,
that, God willing, shall crown the happiness of us all. Make no objections, my
dearest child. Hasten to me, and say you acquiesce cheerfully in the
determination of

'Your ever-affectionate 'HENRIETTA SHIRLEY.'


Had you seen, my dear Charlotte, with what tender respect your brother
approached me, and with what an inimitable grace he offered me the open Billet,
how would you have been charmed with him! The excellent Mrs. Shirley, said he,
would not permit me to bring this inestimable paper folded. I have contemplated
the propitious lines all the way. On my knee let me thank you, my dear Miss
Byron, for your acquiescence with her determination. He kissed my hand on one
knee.

He saw me disturbed [Could I help it? There is something awful in the fixing
of the very Day, Lady G. but I tried to recover myself. I would fain avoid
appearing guilty of affection in his eyes]. I will not add a word more, my
Angel said he, on the joyful subject. Only tell me, Shall we hasten to attend
the condescending parent?

My duty to her, Sir, said I (but with more hesitation than I wished) shall be
an earnest of that which I am so soon, so very soon, to vow to you: And I gave
him my hand.

There is no describing to you, my dear Lady G. the looks, the manner, with
which it was received, by the most ardent, and yet most respectful, of Lovers.

I had scare approaced my grandmamma, and begun to utter something of the much
my heart was filled with, when my Uncle and Mr. Deane (by mistake, I believe)
were admitted.

Well, let us know everything about it, said my uncle -- I hope Sir Charles is
pleased. I hope --

The Day was named to him.

Well, well, thank God! And he spoke in an accent that expressed his joy.

Your niece has pleased you now, I hope, Mr. Selby, said my grandmamma.

Pretty well! pretty well! God grant that we meet with no Put-offs! I hardly
longed so much for my own Day with my Dame Selby there, as I have done, and do,
to see my Harriet Lady Grandison -- God, God, bless you, my dearest love! and
kissed my cheek -- You have been very, very good, in the main -- And, but for
Dame Selby, would have been better, as far as I know.

You don't do me justice, my dear, replied my aunt.

Don't I? -- Nor did I ever -- taking kindly her hand -- It was impossible, my
dear Sir Charles Grandison, for such a man as I to do justice to this excellent
woman. You never, Sir, will be so froppish as I have been: It was in my nature:
I could not help it: But I was always sorry for it afterward. -- But if
Harriet make you no worse a wife than my Dame Selby has made me, you will not
be unhappy -- And yet I was led a tedious dance after her, before I knew what
she would be at -- I had like to have forgot that. But one thing I have to
request, proceeded my uncle -- Mr. Deane and I have been talking of it -- God
bless your dear souls, all of you, oblige me -- It is, That we may have a
joyful Day of it; and that all our neighbors and tenants may rejoice with us.
I must make the village smoke. No hugger-mugger doings -- Let private weddings
be for doubtful happiness --

O my uncle! said I --

And O my niece, too! I must have it so. Sir Charles, what say you? Are you for
chamber-marriages? -- I say, that such are neither decent, nor godly. But you
would not allow Lady G. to come off so -- And in your own case --

Am for doing as in Lady G's. I must hope to pay my vows at the Altar to this
excellent Lady. What says my Miss Byron?

I, Sir, hope to return mine in the same sacred place (my face, as I felt, in a
glow); but yet I shall wish to have it as private as possible.

Why, oy, to be sure -- When a woman is to do anything she is ashamed of -- I
think she is right to be private, for example -sake. Shall you be ashamed, Sir
Charles?

Sir Charles has given it under his hand, this very day, said Lucy,
interrupting him, as he was going to speak, that he shall glory in receiving my
cousin's hand before ten thousand witnesses.

Make but my dearest Miss Byron easy on this head, said Sir Charles (That task,
Ladies, be yours); and, so the Church be the place, I shall be happy in the
manner.

The ceremony, said my grandmamma, cannot be a private one with us:
Every-body's eyes are upon us. It would be an affectation in us, that would
rather raise, than allay, curiosity.

And I have as good as promised the two pretty Nedhams, said my uncle -- and
Miss Watson and her cousin are in expectation.

O my uncle!

Dear Harriet, forgive me! These are your companions from childhood! You can
treat them but once in your life in this way. They would be glad at heart to
return the favor.

I withdrew: Lucy followed me -- You, Lucy, I see, said I, are for these public
doings -- But you would not, if it were your own case.

Your case is my case, Harriet. I should hardly bear being made a show of with
any other man: But with such a man as yours, if I did not hold up my head, I
should give leer for stare, to see how envy sat upon the women's faces. You may
leer at the men for the same reason. It will be a wicked day after all,
Harriet; for a general envy will possess the hearts of all beholders.

Lucy, you know, my dear Lady G. is a whimsical girl.

So, my dear, the solemn Day is fixed. If you could favor me with your
supporting presence -- I know, if you come, you will be very good, now I have
not, as I hope you will think, been guilty, of much, no not of any, parade --
Lucy will write Letters for me to Lady D. to my cousin Reeves's, and will
undertake all matters of ceremony for her Harriet. May I but have the happiness
to know that Lady Clementina -- What can I wish for Lady Clementina? -- But
should she be unhappy -- that would be an abatement of my felicity indeed!

There is no such thing as thinking of the dear Emily. What a happiness, could
I have seen Lady L. here! -- But that cannot be! May the Day that will in its
anniversary be the happiest of my life, give to Lord and Lady L. their most
earnest wishes!

Sir Charles dispatches Frederick tomorrow to town with Letters: He will bring
you mine. I would not go to rest till I had finished it.

What have I more to say? -- I seem to have a great deal. My head and my heart
are full: Yet it is time to draw to a conclusion.

Let me, my dearest Lady G. know, if I am to have any hopes of your presence?
Will you be so good as to manage with Emily?

My aunt bids me suppose to you, that since we are to have all the world of our
acquaintance, you should bring down your aunt Grandison with you. -- We have at
both houses a great deal of room.

Sir Charles just now asked my grandmamma, Whether Dr. Curtis would be
satisfied with a handsome present, if every one's dear Dr. Bartlett were to
perform the ceremony? My grandmamma answered, That Dr. Curtis was one of my
admiring friends. He had for years, even from my girlhood, prided himself with
the hopes of joining my hand in marriage, especially if the office were
performed in Northamptonshire. She was afraid he would think himself slighted;
and he was a worthy man.

Sir Charles acquiesced. But, greatly as I respect Dr. Curtis, I should have
preferred the venerable Dr. Bartlett to any man in the world. A solemn, solemn
subject, though a joyful one!

Adieu, adieu, my dear Lady G. Be sure continue to love me. I will, if
possible, deserve your Love.

Witness HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER XLV. Lady G. To Miss BYRON,
Friday Morning, Nov. 10.
EXpect a Letter of hurry, in answer to one, two, three, four, five, six, I
don't know how many, of yours; some filled with tenderness, some with love,
some with nicety, sense, and nonsense. I shall reckon with you soon for one of
them, in which you take intolerable liberties with me. O Harriet! tremble at my
resentment. You are downright scurrilous, my dear.

I imputed extravagance to Emily, in my last. The girl's a good girl. I was too
hasty. I will show you two Letters of hers, and one of my brother, which clears
up the imputation. I love her more and more. Poor girl! Love peeps out in
twenty places of hers: In his, he is the best of men: But that you knew before.

And so the honest man kissed you; kissed your lip! O Lud! O Lud! how could you
bear him afterward in your sight? -- Forgiving creature! -- And so you were
friends with him before you had time to show your anger. -- Nothing like doing
impudent things in a hurry. -- Sometimes respectful, sometimes free: Why this
is the way of all the fellows, Harriet! -- And so they go on till the
respectfulness is drawn off, and nothing but the lees are left; and after two
or three months are over, the once squeamish palate will be glad of them.

I like your uncle better than I like either your aunt or you -- He likes me.

What a miserable dog (Take the word for shortness, I am in haste) is Sir
Hargrave!

Your plea against Clementina being compelled, or over -persuaded (the same
thing) I much like. You are a good girl.

Betwixt her excellencies and yours, how must my brother's soul be divided! --
I wonder he thinks of either of you. Ass and two bundles of hay, Harriet. But
my brother is a nobler animal: He will not starve. But I think, in my conscience,
he should have you both. There might be a law made, that the case should not be
brought into precedent till two such women should be found, and such a man; and
all three in the like situation.

Bagenhall! a miserable devil! Excellent warning-pieces!

Wicked Harriet! You infected me with your horrible inferences from Greville's
temper, threatenings, and-so-forth. The conclusion of this Letter left me a
wretch! -- If these megrims are the effect of Love, thank Heaven, I never knew
what it was. -- Sufficient to the day, and-so-forth.

Devilish girl! to torment me with your dreams! If you ever tell me of any more
of them, except they are of a different sort, woe be to you!

I like your parting seen, and all that. Your realities, thank Heaven, are
more delightful than your resveries. I hope you will always find them so.

And so you were full of apprehensions on the favor your aunt did me in
employing me about your nuptial equipments. Long ago 'you gave affectation to
the winds.' Good! But the winds would not accept of your present. They puffed
it you back again, and your servants never told you it was brought home. I
repeat, my dear, that my brother is much more clever, in these scenes of Love
and Courtship, than his mistress. You are a pretty cow, my Love: You give good
store of milk, but you have a very careless heel. Yet when you bethink you, you
are very good; but not always the same Harriet. Your nurse in your infancy,
see-sawed you -- Margery-dawn -- and you cannot put the pretty play out of your
practice, though it is out of your memory. I can look back, and sometimes by your
frowardness, sometimes by your crowing, know how it was with you eighteen years
ago.

My brother's Letter to you, after he has mentioned his visits to the two sick
Baronets, is that of a man who shows you genteelly, and politely, that he is
sensible he has a pretty trifler to deal with. I wish you would square your
conduct, by what you must imagine a man of his sense would think of you. I
should be too proud a minx, in your case, to owe obligation to my man for
bearing with me -- Spare me, spare me, Harriet! I have hit myself a terrible
box of the ear. But we can find faults in others, which we will not allow to be
such in ourselves -- But here is the difference between your conduct now, and
what mine was. I knew I was wrong, and resolved one day to amend. You think
yourself right, and, while you so think, will hardly ever mend, till your man
ties you down to good behavior.

Jeronymo's Letter! O the next to divine Clementina! Indeed, Harriet, I think
she out-soars you. I adore her. But will she be prevailed upon to marry? -- She
will! -- If she does -- Then -- But, dear Soul! -- Pressed as she is -- Having
refused, instead of being refused, the beloved of her heart, she will still be
greater than any of her Sex, if she does; the man proposed, so unexceptionable;
so tenderly loving her, in the height of her calamity, as well as in her
prosperity! -- Gratitude to him, as well as Duty to her parents; parents so
indulgent as they have always been to her; will incline her to marry. May she
be happy! I am pleased with your solicitude for her happiness.

I like your answer to my brother: A good and welldeserved resignation. Let Us
see how you keep to it.

You do keep to it -- as I expected -- Ah, Harriet! you are quite a girl,
sometimes; though, at others, more than woman! 'Will he not ask leave to come
down?' Fine resignation! -- 'Will he not write, first?' -- Yes, yes, he will do
everything he ought to do. Look to your own behavior, child; don't fear but
his will be all as it should be. As to your finery, how now, Harriet! Are you
to direct everything; yet pretend to ask advice? Be contented that everything
is done for you of this sort, and learn to be humble. Sure we that have passed
the Rubicon, are not to be directed by you, who never came in sight of the
river. But you, maidens, are poor, proud, pragmatical mortals. You profess
ignorance; but in heart imagine you are at the tip-top of your wisdom.

But here you come with your horrid fears again. Would to the Lord the Day were
over; and you and my brother were -- Upon my life -- you are a -- But I will not
call you names.

Lucy thinks you should go to Shirley-manor when my brother comes down.
Egregious folly! I did not think Lucy could have been so silly.

Concerning our cousin Reeves's wanting to be present at your nuptials -- your
invitation to me -- and what you say of Emily -- more anon.

Well, and so my brother has sent you the expected Letter. Does it please you,
Harriet? The duce is in you, if it don't.

But you are not pleased with it, it seems. He is too hasty for you. Where Is
the boasted-of resignation, Harriet? True Female resignation!

Tell Lucy, I am obliged to her, for her transcriptions. I shall be very proud
of her correspondence.

'Your aunt thinks he is full hasty.' -- Your aunt's a simpleton, as well as
you. My service to her.

But is the D -- I in the girl again? What would have become of Lady L. and me,
had you not sent both Letters together that relate to Greville's supposed
malignance? I tremble, nevertheless, at the thought of what might have been.
But I will not forgive Lucy for advising you to send to us your
horribly-painted terrors. What could possess her to advise you to do so, and
you, to follow her advice? I forgive not either of you. In revenge I will
remind you, that you are one of the good women to whom he owes all the
embarrasments of his past life.

But a caution, Harriet! -- Never, never, let foolish dreams claim a moment of
your attention -- Imminent as seemed the danger, your superstition made more
dreadful to you than otherwise it would have been. You have a mind superior to
such foibles: Act up to its native dignity, and let not the follies of your
nurses, in your infantile state, be carried into your maturer age, to
depreciate your womanly reason. Do you think I don't dream, as well as you?

Well might ye all rejoice in his safety. 'Hang about his neck, for joy!' So
you ought, if you thought it would do him honor. Hush, hush, proud girl! don't
scold me! I think, were a king your man, he would have been honored by the
charming freedom. 'Cast himself at your feet!' And you ought to have cast
yourself at his. 'There can be no reserve to him after this,' you say. Nor
ought there, had it not been for this. Did you not signify to him, by Letter,
that you would resign to his generosity? Let me whisper you, Harriet -- Sure
you proud maiden minxes think -- But I did once -- I wonder in my heart,
oftentimes -- But men and women are chears to one another. But we may, in a
great measure, thank the poetical tribe for the fascination. I hate them all.
Are they not inflamers of the worst passions? With regard to the Epics, would
Alexander, madman as he was, have been so much a madman, had it not been for
Homer? Of what violences, murders, depredations, have not the Epic poets been
the occasion, by propagating false honor, false glory, and false religion?
Those of the amorous class ought in all ages (could their future genius's for
tinkling sound and measure have been known) to have been strangled in their
cradles. Abusers of talents given them for better purposes (for all this time,
I put Sacred poesy out of the question); and avowedly claiming a right to be
licentious, and to overleap the bounds of decency, truth, and nature.

What a rant! How came these fellows into my rambling head? O, I remember -- My
whisper to you led me into all this stuff.

Well, and you at last recollected the trouble you have given my brother about
you. Good girl! Had I remembered that, I would have spared you my reflections
upon the poets and poetasters of all ages, the truly -inspired ones excepted:
And yet I think the others should have been banished our commonwealth, as well
as Plato's.

Well, but, to shorten my nonsense, now you have shortened yours -- The Day is
at last fixed -- Joy, joy, joy, to you, my lovely Harriet, and to my Brother!
And it must be a public affair! -- Why -- that is right, since it would be
impossible to make it a private one. My honest man is mad for joy. He fell down
on his knees, to beg of me to accept of your invitation, and of his company. I
made a merit of obliging him, though I would have been as humble to him, rather
than not be with you; and yet, by one saucy line, I imagine you had rather be
without me.

Your cousin Reeves's are ready to set out.

God bless you, invite aunt Nell: She thinks herself neglected. A nephew whom
she so dearly loves! Very hard! she says. -- And she never was but at one
wedding, and has forgot how it was; and may never be at another -- Pink and
yellow, all is ready provided, go down or not -- O but, if you choose not her
company, I will tell you how to come off -- Give her your word and honor that
she shall be a person of prime account at your first Christening. Yet she would
be glad to be present on both occasions.

But ah, the poor Emily! -- She has also been on her knees to me, to take her
down with me -- What shall I do? -- Dear Soul! she embarrasses me! I have put
her upon writing to her Guardian, for his leave: I believe she has written. If
she knew her own case, I think she would not desire it.

Poor Lady L! -- She is robbed, she says, of one of the greatest pleasures of
her life. Ah, Charlotte! said she to me, wringing my hand, these husbands owe
us a great deal. This is an humbling circumstance. Were not my Lord and yours
the best of husbands --

The best of husbands! Wretches! said I. You may forgive yours, Caroline -- You
are a good creature; but not I mine. And something else I said, that made her
laugh in the midst of her lacrymals. But she begs and prays of me, not to go
down to you, unless all should be over with her. I can do her no good; and only
increase my own apprehensions, if I am with her. A blessed way two poor souls
of sisters of us are in. Sorry fellows!

And yet, Harriet, with such prospects as these before them, some girls leap
windows, swim rivers, climb walls -- Duce take their folly: Their choice is
their punishment. Who can pity such rash souls as those? Thanks be praised,
you, Harriet, are going on to keep in countenance the two anxious sisters, Who,
having shot the gulf, delight to see
Succeeding souls plunge in with like uncertainty;
Says a good man, on a still more serious occasion.

Good news! joyful news! -- I shall, I shall, go down to you. Nothing to hinder
me! Lord L. proud as a peacock, is this moment come for me: I am hurrying away
with him. A fine boy! -- Sister safe! -- Harriet, Lucy, Nancy, for your own
future encouragement! Huzzah, girls! -- I am gone.

LETTER XLVI. Miss BYRON, To Lady G.
Thursday, Nov. 9.
MY aunt is so much afraid that everything will not be ready, that she puts me
upon writting to you, to hasten what remains -- I am more than half a fool --
But that I always was. My spirits sink at the thoughts of so public a Day. The
mind, my grandmamma says, can but be full; and it would have been filled by the
circumstance, had not the publicness of the Day given me something more of
grievance.

I am afraid, sometimes, that I shall not support my spirits; that I shall be
ill -- Then I think something will happen -- Can it be, that I shall be the
wife of Sir Charles Grandison? I can hardly believe it. -- Sir Charles is
tenderly concered for me. It would be impossible, he says, that the Day could
be private, unless I were to go to London; and the very proposing of that would
put my uncle out of all patience, who prides himself in the thought of having
his Harriet married from his own house: Nor could I expect my grandmamma's
presence. He does all he can to assure my heart, and divert me: A thousand
agreeable lively things he says: So tender, so considerate, in his joy! --
surely I shall be too happy. But will you come? Can you? And if you do, will
you be good? Will you make my case your own?

My uncle, at times, is prodigiously headstrong. Every hour he does or says
something wrong; yet we dare not chide him. Thursday next will be one of the
greatest days of his life, he says; and it shall be all his own. He either
sings, hums, or whistles, in every motion. He resolves, he says, to get his
best dancing legs in readiness. He started up from table after dinner this day,
and caught hold of Lucy's hand, and whisked her round the room. Dear toad, he
called her; a comman address of his to Lucy (I say, because she has a jewel in
her head); and flourishing about with her in a very humorous manner, put her
quite out, on purpose to laugh at her; for she would have been in, if he would
have let her, for the humour-sake. He was a fine dancer in his youth.

Miss Orme breakfasted with us this morning. She, no doubt, threw herself in
our way on purpose to hear the news of the appointed Day confirmed. My uncle
officiously told her, it would be one day next week. She named the very day,
and turned pale, on his owning she was not mistaken. She hoped, she said, her
brother would bear the shock, as he had been long destitute of hope. But, said
she, he promised me, before he went abroad, to carry me to London on a visit to
some relations there. I will remind him; and hope to prevail on him to set out
next Monday or Tuesday.

God bless you! my dear Miss Byron, said she, at parting; may your bustle be
happily over! I shall pity you. You will pay for being so universally admired.
But your penance will be but for two days; the very Day, and that of your
appearance; and in both your man will bear you out: His merit, his person, his
address. Happy Miss Byron! -- The universal approbation is yours. But I must
have you contrive some how, that my brother may see him before he is yours: His
heart will be the easier afterward.

-- Sent for down by my grandmamma. -- Dear Lucy, make up the Letter for me. I
know you will be glad of the opportunity.

Continued by Lucy.] 'Will Lady G. admit me, in this abrupt manner, into her
Imperial presence! I know she will, on this joyful occasion, accept of any
intelligence. The poor Harriet! My uncle Selby would invite all the country, if
they came in his way. Four of my cousin's old playfellows have already been to
claim his promise. He wished, he said, he had room for all the world; it should
be welcome.

'He will have the Great Barn, as it is called, cleared out; a tight large
building, which is to be illuminated at night with a profusion of lights; and
there are all his tenants, and those of Shirley-manor, to be treated, with
their wives, and such of their sons and daughters as are more than Twelve years
old. The treat is to be a cold one. Hawkins, his steward, who is well respected
by them all, is to have the direction of it. My uncle's October is not to be
spared. It will cost two days, at least, to roast, boil, and bake, for them.
The carpenters are already sent for. Half a dozen bonfires are to be lighted
up, round the Great Barn; and the stacks of wood are not to be spared, to turn
winter into summer, as my uncle expresses himself.

'Neither the poor nor the populace are to be admitted, that the confusion,
almost unavoidable from a promiscuous multitude, may be avoided. But notice
will be given, that two houses in the neighboring village, held by tenants of
the family, and one near Shirley-manor, will be opened at Twelve on Thursday,
and be kept open for the rest of the day, till Ten at night, for the sake of
all who choose to go thither. The Churchwardens are preparing a list of the
poor people; who, on Friday morning, were to receive Five shillings apiece,
which Sir Charles has desired to make Ten; on condition that they shall not be
troublesome on the day.

'Poor Sir Hargrave to whom all this joyful bustle is primarily owing! -- I
tell Harriet, that she has not, with all her punctilio, been half punctilious
enough. She should have had him, after all, on the motive of Prince Prettiman
in the Rehearsal.

'Dear madam, can your Ladyship allow of this idle rattle? But I have not time
to make up for it by a ceremonious conclusion; though I am, with the truest
respect, Lady G's

Most obedient humble Servant, LUCY SELBY.

LETTER XLVII. Lady G. To Miss BYRON.
Saturday, Nov. 11.
I Write a few lines, if, writing to you, I can write a few, by the special
messenger that carries down all the remaining apparatus, which was committed to
my care. We women are sad creatures for delaying things to the last moment. We
hurry the men: We hurry our workwomen, milaners, mantuamakers, friends, allies,
confederates, and ourselves. When once we have given the Day, night and day, we
neither take rest, nor give it: When, if we had the rare felicity of knowing
our minds sooner, all might go on fair and softly. But then the gentle passion,
I doubt, would glide into insipidity. Well, and I have heard my brother say,
'That things in general are best as they are.' Why I believe so; for all these
honest souls, as mantuamakers, attire-women, work-women, enjoy a hurry that is
occasioned by a wedding, and are half as well pleased with it, as if it were
their own. They simper, smirk, gossip, over Bridal finery; spread this upon
their arms or shoulders; admire that -- Look you here -- Look you there! And is
not this? -- Is not that? -- And, Did you ever! -- No, never, in my born days!
-- And is the Bride, do you say, such a lovely creature? -- And is the
Bridegroom as handsome a man, as she a woman! -- O lud! O dear! -- Would to
Heaven Northamptonshire were nearer, that one might see how charming, how
graceful, how becoming! and so-forth.

And why should not we women, after all, contrive to make hurry-skurries [You
see how I correct myself as I go along] and make the world think our affairs a
great part of the business of it, and that nothing can be done without us?
Since, after a few months are over, new novelties take place, and we get into
corners, sigh, groan, look silly and meagre, and at last are thrown into straw,
as it is called; poor Caroline's case; who repines, that she cannot be present
on this new bustle in the family. But I am to write her word of everything --
Look to your behavior, Harriet, on the great occasion.

But a word about Caroline -- Were it not for her being deprived of this
pleasure, the good creature would be very happy. Lord L. and she are as fond as
apes. She has quite forgot all her sufferings for him. He thanks her for his
boy. She follows with her eye the little stranger, and is delighted with all
that is done with him, to him, for him: Is pleased with everybody, even with
the very servants, who crowd in, by permission to see his little Lordship, and
already claim an interest in him. Upon my word, she makes a very pretty fond
mother. And aunt Nell, who, by the way, was at the Crying-out, and was then so
frighted! so thankful to God! and so happy in her own situation! [No, not for
the world, would she be other than she was!] now grudges the nurses half their
cares.

What good creatures are we women!

Well, but I don't know what to do about Emily. The first vice of the first
woman was curiosity, and it runs through all her daughters. She has written to
her Guardian, and nothing but an absolute prohibition will hinder her from
making one in your train. Did the dear girl know the state of her own heart,
she would choose to be a thousand miles off, rather than go. I have set her
woman and mine to discourage her. I have reasoned with her myself; but there is
no such thing as giving her one's true reasons; nor would I, willingly: Because
she herself, having not found out her Love to be Love, I hope the fire may be
smothered in her own heart, by the aid of time and discretion, before
discovery; whereas, if the doors of it were to be opened, and the air let in,
it might set the whole tenement in a blaze. Her Guardian's denial or assent
will come, perhaps, in time; yet hardly, neither; for we shall set out on
Monday. Aunt Nell is so pleased with her nursery of the little Peer, as she
primly calls him, that you are rid of even her wishes to be with you. Being
sure of this, I complimented her, that I knew your aunt Selby would have
invited her, but that Lady L. would not be able to live without her company,
all the world, and the world's wise, attentive and engrossed by your affair.
She, good creature! was pleased -- So as she could but be thought of importance
by somebody, I knew she would be happy. I told her, that you invited nobody,
but left all to your friends -- Ay, poor dear Soul, said she; she has enough to
think of, well as she loves your brother -- and sighed for you -- Worthy
Ancient! The sigh a little deeper, perhaps, for some of her own Recollections.

Mr. and Mrs. Reeves would not stay for us. What will you do with us all? --
Crowd you, I sear. But dispose of us, at Shirley-manor, or Selby-house, as you
please. Yours, and aunt Selby's, and grandmamma Shirley's concern for us, is
all we are solicitous about. But servants rooms, nay, cocklofts, haylofts, will
do. We like to be put to our shifts now-and-then -- Something to talk of --

But I can tell you, if you don't know it already, Lord W. and his Lady are
resolved to do you honor on this occasion; but they will be but little trouble
to you. My Lord's steward has a half-brother, a gentleman-farmer, in your
neighborhood -- Sheldon -- They will be there: But perhaps you know of this a
better way. They will make a splendid part of your train. Gratitude is their
inducement.

Lord L. has just now told me, that my sister, in tenderness to him, and in
honor to you, has besought him to be present. O Harriet! what will you do with
yourself? -- Aunt Nell and I have the heart-burn for you. But Lord L. must be
welcome: He is one of those who so faithfully kept your secret.

So, in our equipages, will be Lord L. my honest man, Emily, and your
Charlotte: Lord L's equipages will be at the service of any of your guests; as
will our spare one -- I wish Beauchamp could permit himself to be present (I
hope he will) on the nuptials of the friend so dear to him, with a Lady he so
greatly admires.

My woman and Emily's will be all our Female attendants: One nook will serve
them both.

My poor man will be mad, before the day comes. He does love you, Harriet. My
brother, he says, will be the happiest man in the world -- himself excepted --
A hypocrite! He just popt this in, to save himself -- Why do make this
exception, friend? said I -- Thou know it to be a mere compliment -- Indeed,
indeed (two indeeds, which implied, that one might have been doubted) I am now
(A sarcasm in his word now) as happy as mortal man can be -- Ah, flatterer! and
shook my head -- A recognition of my sovereignty, however, in his being afraid
to speak his conscience. A little of the old leaven, Harriet! I cannot help it.
It is got out of my heart, half out of my head; but, when I take the pen, it
will tingle now-and-then, at my finger's end.

Adieu, my Love! God bless you; -- I can enter into your joy. A Love so pure,
and so fervent. The man Sir Charles Grandison. -- And into your pain, also, in
view of a solemnity so near, and to you so awful. With all my roguery, I
sympathize with you. I have not either a wicked or unfeeling heart. Such as
yours, however, are the true spirits; such as mine are only bully and flash.

Lucy, you are a good girl. I like the whim of your concluding for Harriet; I
also like your tenants dining room, and other managements, as the affair must
unavoidably be a public one.

Neither of you say a word of good Mr. Deane: I hope he is with you. He cannot
be a cipher wherever be comes, except on the right-side of the figure, to
increase its consequence. Don't be afraid of your uncle; I, I, I, will manage
him, never fear.

There are other passages, Harriet, in your last Letter, which I ought to have
answered to -- But forgive me, my dear; I had laid it by (though pleased with it
in the main); and, having answered the most material part, by dispatching your
things, forgot it as much as if I had not received it, till the moment I came
to conclude. Once more, Adieu, my dearest Harriet.

CHAPTER G.

LETTER XLVIII. Miss JERVOIS, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Friday, Nov. 10.
NO sooner, dear and honored Sir, is one boon granted me, but I have another
to beg; yet I blush as I write, for my troublesomeness. I told you, Sir, I had
furnished myself with new clothes, on a very joyful occasion -- Indeed it is on
a very joyful occasion. You would lay me under a new obligation to your
goodness, if you would be pleased to allow me to attend Lady G. in her journey
down. I shall know, by this fresh favor, that you have quite forgiven your
dutiful ward. I presume not to add another word -- But I dare say, dear Miss
Byron, that now is, will not be against it, if you are not. -- God bless you,
my honored good Sir -- But God, I hope, I am sure, will bless you; and so
shall I, as surely I ought, whether you grant this favor, or not, to

Your ever-obliged, and grateful EMILY JERVOIS.

LETTER XLIX. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Miss JERVOIS.
Sunday, Nov. 12.
IT would give me great pain to deny to my good Miss Jervois the grant of any
request she shall think fit to make to me. You shall know, you say, by the
grant of this favor, that I have quite forgiven my ward. Was such a test
wanted, my dear? I assure you, that what you have lately done for your mother,
though I was not consulted in it, has heightened my opinion of the worthiness of
your heart.

As to your request, I have pleasure in leaving everything relating to the
happy event to my beloved Miss Byron and her friends. I will entreat her to
underwrite her mind on this subject. She grieves that the solemnity cannot be
private; which, beloved as she is in this neighborhood, would be vain to
attempt.

If her aunt has no objection from want of room, there cannot, my dear Emily,
be any from

Your affectionate and true Friend, CHAPTER GRANDISON.

Underwritten.

My dearest Miss Jervois will excuse me, that I gave her not a formal
invitation, when I intimated my wishes for Lady G's presence on the approaching
solemn occasion, though at so many miles distance. It is a very solemn one. One's
heart, my dear, cannot be so much disengaged, as to attend to invitations for
the very Day, as it might on its anniversary. We shall have too great a number
of friends. O my dear! can you bear to make one in so large a company? I shall
not be able to attend to any of my friends on the Day: No, not to you, my Love.
Can you bear with my inattention to everybody, to every subject, but one? Can
you desire to see your Harriet (joyful as the occasion is, and the chosen wish
of her heart) look and behave like a foolish creature? If you can, and Lady G.
will take charge of my lovely young friend, all mine will rejoice in being able
to contribute to your pleasure, as well as

Your ever-affectionate HARRIET BYRON.

LETTER L. Lady G. To Lady L.
Selby-house, Tuesday, Nov. 14.
WELL, my Sister, my Friend, my dear Lady L. how do you? As well as can be
expected, I hope: The answer of a thousand years old, to every enquirer,
careful or ceremonious. And how does my dear little boy? As well as can be
expected, too -- I am glad of it.

Here we are! -- Everybody well, and happy.

I was afraid my brother would have looked more polite upon us than familiar,
as he invited us not: But, no! -- He was all himself, as Harriet says. He met
us at our coach-door. He handed out his ward. She could not speak. Tears were
in her eyes. I could have beat her with my fan. He kissed her cheek. My dear
child, I thank you most sincerely for your goodness to your mother.

I was afraid that her joy would then have been too much for her. She expanded,
she collected, her plumes. Her spread arms (soon, however, closed) showed me,
that she with difficulty restrained herself from falling at his feet. He turned
from her to me. My best Charlotte, how do you? The journey, I hope, has not
incommoded you. He led me out, and, taking each of the honest men by the hand,
My dean Lords, you do me honor. He then congratulated Lord L. on the present
you had made him, and the family, he said.

At the inner-gate met us our sweet Harriet, with joy upon one brow, half the
cares of this mortal life on the other -- She led us into the Cedar-parlour, my
brother returning to welcome in the two honest men, and threw her arms about my
neck -- My dearest Lady G. how much does your presence rejoice me! -- I hope
(and looked at me) your journey -- Be quiet, Harriet! -- You must not think so
much of these matters, my Love. She was a little abashed -- Don't be afraid of
me; I will be very good, said I. Then will I be very thankful, replied she.

My lovely Emily! turning to her: How does my sweet friend! Welcome, once more,
to Selby-house.

The girl's heart was full -- She, thanking her only by a deep courtesy,
abruptly withdrew to the window; and, trying for a third hem, in hopes to
stifle her emotion, it broke into a half-sob, and tears followed.

Harriet and I looked; she compassionately, I vexedly, I believe; and both
shook our heads at each other.

Take no notice, said I, seeing Harriet move toward the window to her -- It
will go off of itself. Her joy to see Harriet, that is all.

But I must take notice (for she found that Emily heard her) My dear Emily, my
lovely young friend -- why, why --

I will tell you, madam, interrupted she, and threw her arms about Harriet's
neck, as Harriet (sitting in the window) clasped here is about her waist; and I
will tell you truth, and nothing but the truth -- You wrote so cool to me,
about my coming -- And yet I to come! But I could not help it -- And I thought
you now looked a little severely upon me -- But Love, and I, will say, Duty to
you, my dearest Miss Byron, AND NOTHING ELSE, made me so earnest to come. Say
you forgive me.

Forgive you, my dearest Emily! -- I had only your sake, my dear, in view. If I
wrote with less warmth than you expected, forgive me. Consider my situation, my
Love. You are, and ever will be, welcome to me. Your griefs, your joys, are
mine -- Give me which you please.

The girl! burst into fresh tears -- I, I, I am now as unable, sobbed she, to
bear your goodness, as before I was your displeasure -- But hide, hide me! Here
comes my Guardian! -- What now, when he sees me thus, will become of me?

She heard his voice at the door, leading in the two Lords; and they followed
by Mr. Selby, Mrs. Selby, Lucy, and Nancy.

Sir Charles went to the two young Ladies. Harriet kept her seat, her arms
folded about Emily; Emily's glowing face in her bosom.

Sweet emotion! said he, my Emily in tears of joy!

-- What a charming picture! -- O my Miss Byron, how does your tenderness to
this amiable child oblige me! I sever you not; clasping his generous arms about
them both.

I have afflicted my dear Emily, Sir, without intending it. I wrote coldly, my
precious young friend thinks; and her Love for me makes her sweetly-sensible of
my supposed ingratitude. But believe me, my dear, I love you with a true
sisterly tenderness.

I took the dear girl aside, and gently expostulated with her, upon the
childishness of her behavior, and the uneasiness she would give to Miss Byron,
as well as to herself, by repetitions of the like weakness of mind.

She promised fair; but, Lady L. I wish there were more of the child, and less
of the woman, in this affair. Poor thing! she was very thankful for my advice;
and expressed how wrong she was, because it might discourage her Guardian and
Miss Byron, that now was, from letting her live with them: But for my life,
said she, whatever was the matter with me, I could not help my foolishness.

Miss Nancy Selby took Emily up with her; and uncle Selby and I had a little
lively hit at each other, in the old style. We drew my brother in. I had not
tried his strength a good while: But, as Harriet said in one of the sauciest
Letters she ever wrote, I soon found he was the wrong person to meddle with.
Yet he is such a charming raillier, that I wonder he can resist his talent. No
wonder, Harriet would say; because he has talents so superior to that which,
she says, runs away with his poor sister.

Emily came down to us very composed, and behaved prettily enough: But had my
brother as much mannish vanity as some of the sorry fellows have, who have no
pretense for it, he would discern the poor Emily's foible to have some little
susceptibility in it. I am glad he does not; for it would grieve him. I have
already told him of the sufferings of poor Lady Anne S. on her hearing he is
near marriage; and he expressed great concern upon it for that really-worthy
woman.

Mr. Reeves, his wife, and Mr. Deane, were abroad when we arrived. They came in
to tea. Our mutual congratulations on the expected happy event, cheared our own
hearts, and would have delighted yours. Charming, charming, is the behavior of
my brother to his Bride-elect. You can have no notion of it; because at
Colnebrook we always saw him acting under a restraint; owing, as since we have
found, to Honor, Conscience, and a prior Love.

He diverts and turns the course of subjects that he thinks would be affecting
to her; yet in such a manner, as it is hardly perceivable to be his intention
to do so: For he makes something of the begun ones contribute to the new ones;
so that, before uncle Selby is aware of it, he finds himself in one that he had
not in his head when he sat out. -- And then he comes with his 'What a pize was
I going to say? But this is not what I had in my head.' And then, as my brother
knows he misses his scent, only because it has not afforded the merry mortal
something to laugh at; he furnishes him with some lively and innocent occasion
which produces that effect, and then Mr. Selby is satisfied. Mrs. Selby and
Lucy see how my brother manages him; yet find it so delicately done, that
something arises from it that keeps the honest man in credit with himself and
everybody else, for facetiousness, good humor, good heart, and those
qualities which really are his due, and make him in his worst subjects
tolerable, and in his best valuable.

Venerable Mrs. Shirley is to be here all tomorrow and next day. Mr. Deane has
chosen Shirley-manor for his abode, for the time he stays; so has James Selby,
in order to make more room at Selby-house for us women. There too Mr. and Mrs.
Reeves take up, of choice, their lodgings, though here all day.

Poor Harriet! She told me once, that fear makes cowards loving. She is so fond
of me and Lucy, and her aunt, at times, it would be a sin not to pity her. Yet
Lucy once tossed up her head, upon my saying so -- Pity her! why, yes, I think
I do, now you have put me in the head of it: But I don't know whether she is
not more to be envied. Lucy is a polite girl. She loves her Harriet. But she
knew I should be pleased with the compliment to my brother.

Harriet has just now looked in upon me -- Writing, Lady G. And of me? -- To
Lady L. I suppose?

She clasped her arms about me: Ah, madam! Thursday! Thursday!

What of Thursday?

Is the day after tomorrow!

Every child can tell that, Harriet.

Ah but I, with such happiness before me, am sillier than a child!

Well, but I can tell you something, Harriet.

What is that?

That the next day to Thursday, is Friday -- The next to that is Saturday --
The next --

Pish! I Will stay no longer with you, giving me a gentle tap -- I would not have
answered you so.

Away she tript, desiring her affectionate compliments to dear Lady L.

Let me see! Have I any more to write? I think not. But a call for supper makes
me leave my paper unsubscribed.

EMILY behaved very prettily at supper; but it would have been as well, if she
had not thought so herself: For she boasted of her behavior afterward to me.
That made it look like an extraordinary in her own account.

Mr. Selby sung us a song, with a good Fox-hunter air. There is something very
agreeable in his facetiousness: But it would become nobody else. I think you
and I agreed at Dunstable, that he is a fine, jolly, hearty, handsome- ish man
-- He looks shrewd, arch, open, a true country gentleman aspect; what he says
is so-so -- What he means is better. -- He is very fond of your Lord -- But I
think rather fonder of mine -- A criterion, Lady L!

As for Lord G. he is in the situation of Harriet's Singleton -- He is prepared
to laugh the moment Mr. Selby opens his mouth; especially when he twists his
neck about, turns a glass upside-down, and looks under his bent brows, at the
company round, yet the table always in his eye: For then we know, that
something is collected, and ready to burst forth.

Well, good night! good night! good night! -- Has my Godson-elect done crying
yet? What a duce has he to cry at? Unswaddled, unpinioned, unswathed, legs and
arms at full liberty: But they say crying does good to the brats -- opens their
pipes -- and-so-forth -- But tell him, that if he does not learn to laugh, as
well as cry, he shall not be related to

CHARLOTTE G.

LETTER LI. Lady G. In Continuation.
Wedn. Nov. 15.
WEdnesday is come, and, as Harriet says, tomorrow is Thursday. Ah, Harriet!
rich as content! poor as patience!

I have been talking to her: Half-comforting her, half-laughing at her. She
says, I am but half-good. -- All the world is come. -- Lord W. and his
ever-agreeable Lady. Beauchamp, as I am alive, with them! I wish I could see
this rogue Emily in love with him. He is certainly in love with her.

'I know it -- I know it! -- Do you go down, about your business.'

Only Lord G. come to tell me what I knew before.

Harriet's gone down to be complimented. She has hardly spirits to compliment.

'Well, well, I Will only tell Lady L. who is come. Does not the poor soul keep
her bed? And are we not to be as complaisant to our ill friends, as our well?
-- I am coming, Child.'

Emily, with her pretty impertinence. Neither Lord G. nor Emily, can be
anything, when strangers come, and I stand not by them to show their
signification.

Duce! a third messenger -- O! Mrs. Selby herself. I Will tell you more
by-and-by, Lady L. 'Your servant, Mrs. Selby. I attend you.

THE two Miss Nedhams, Miss Watson, Miss Barclay, the two Miss Holles's, Mr.
Deane -- 'So, so, so, Harriet, said I, what is the meaning of this?' -- My
uncle's doings! I have no spirits. Sir Charles should not have been so passive:
He, and nobody else, could have prevailed upon my uncle. My aunt has held him
in, till her arms aked. O the dear restiff man! She has now let go; and you see
how he prances over the whole meadow, the reins upon his neck.

Dear girl! said I, I am glad you are so fanciful.

I would fain be lively, if I could, said she. Never any creature had more
reason, Lady G. -- My heart is all Gratitude, and, I will say, Love.

Good girl! hold up your head, my dear, and all will be as it should be.

Sir Charles staid to attend hither the most venerable of women. Mr. and Mrs.
Revees are to come with them. You must, as you expect me to be minute, be
content with bits and scraps, written by snatches of time. I pity you for your
still-life, my dear Lady L. and think your request, that I will so write, as to
make you suppose yourself on the spot, a reasonable one.

Here is come the man of men!

WITH what respect (all his Respect has Love in it) did he attend Mrs. Shirley
to her seat! And then hastening to Lord and Lady W. he saluted them both, and
acknowleged the honor done him by their presence; an hour, he said, that he
could not have expected, nor therefore had the thought, the distance so great,
of asking for it.

He then paid his compliments, in the most affectionate manner, to his amiable
friend Beauchamp; who, on his thanking him for his uninvited presence, said, He
could not deny himself being present at a solemnity that was to complete the
happiness of the best of men, and best of friends.

Sir Charles addressed himself to the young Ladies who were most strangers to
him; apologizing to them, as they were engaged with Mr. Selby, Mr. Deane and
Lord G. that he did not at first. He sat a few minutes with them: What he said,
I heard not; but they smiled, blushed, and looked delighted upon each other.
Everybody followed him in his motions, with their eye. So much presence of
mind, never met with so much modesty of behavior, and so charming a vivacity.

The young Ladies came only intendedly to breakfast, and that at Mr. Selby's
odd invitation. They had the good sense to apologize for their coming this day,
as they were to make part of the cavalcade, as I may call it tomorrow. But the
odd soul had met the four at a neighboring Lady's, where he made a gossiping
visit, and would make them come with him.

I observed, that nobody cared to find fault with him; so I began to rate him;
and a very whimsical dialogue passed between us at one end of the room, while
Sir Charles, Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, Lady W. and Harriet, were in close talk
at the other.

I made the honest man ashamed of himself; and everybody in our circle was
pleased with us. This misled me to go on; and so, by attending to his nonsense,
and pursuing my own, I lost the opportunity of hearing a conversation, which, I
dare say, would have been worth repeating to you by pen and ink. Harriet shall
write, and give it you.

Mr. Orme and his Sister, we are told, set out yesterday for London. Mrs. Selby
and Harriet are yet afraid of Greville.

The gentlemen and some of the Ladies, myself (but not Harriet) among them,
have been to look at the preparations made in the lesser Park, for the
reception of the tenants. Mr. Selby prided himself not a little on his
contrivances there. When we returned, we found Harriet at one end of the great
parlour, sitting with Emily; her grandmother, Mr. Selby, Lucy, in conversation
at the other; the good girl's hand in hers, Emily blushing, looking down, but
delighted, as it seemed; Harriet, with sweetness, love, and compassion,
intermingled in her aspect, talking to her, and bending over her, her fine
neck. I thought I never saw her look so lovely. Elder sister like, and younger,
one instructing in love, the other listening with pleasure. They (unobserved by
themselves) took every-body's attention, as the room filled with the company,
who all crowded about Mrs. Shirley, affecting not to heed the two friends. What
would I give, said Lady W. to Sir Charles and her Lord, for a picture of those
two young Ladies (Emily just then kissed the hand of her lovely friend with
emotion, and Harriet lifted up Emily's to her lips) if Love, Dignity, and such
Expression, could be drawn in the face of one Lady; and that Reverence,
Gratitude, and modest Attention, in the other? I congratulate you, Sir Charles,
with all my heart. I have observed with rapture, from every look, every word,
and from the whole behavior of Miss Byron, that your goodness to hundreds will
be greatly recompensed. O my good Lord W. turning to him, Miss Byron will pay
all our debts.

Every attitude, every look, of Miss Byron's, said my Lord, would furnish out a
fine picture. I cannot keep my eye from her, wherever she is.

My brother bowed, delighted.

How pleased was Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby -- Everybody! But what a different
man is Lord W. to what he once was! lifted up from low keeping, to a wife, who,
by her behavior, good sense, politeness, gives him consequence. Once I thought
him one of the lowest of men. I denied him, in my heart, a relation to my
mother, and thought him a savage.

The two young Ladies, finding themselves observed, stood up, in a parting
posture; but Emily seeming eager to detain her dear friend's attention, Harriet
took a hand of Emily's in each of hers.

I had fidled that way -- Yes, my dear, said the lovely Harriet, friendship
unalterable by time or fate, as you say. Dearest Emily, command me ever.

Emily looked about her -- O madam, I want to kneel to you. I will ever, ever
-- My good Lady G. said Harriet, approaching me, one of Emily's hands in hers,
we have promised a friendship that is to continue to the end of our lives. We
are to tell each the other all her faults. How causelessly has my Emily been
accusing herself! -- The most ingenuous of human hearts is hers.

She left Emily's hand in mine, and bent toward Mrs. Shirley, and the whole
circle of friends surrounding her chair.

O my dear Lady G! said Emily, whisperingly, as we followed the meek-eyed
Goodness of Wisdom [Such her air, her manner, her amiableness, seemed in my
thought, at that time, to make her], never, never was such graciousness! I
cannot hear her goodness. What a happy creature shall I be, if I follow her
example, and observe her precepts! -- You cannot, my dear, said I, have a
better guide: But, Love, you must not be capricious, as you were at first
coming. She professed she would not. I have been excusing myself to her, madam,
said the dear girl, and am (...).

My brother met the lovely creature. He took her hand, and, leading her toward
her grandm there, We have been attentive, my dearest life, to you and Emily. You
love her: She adores you. My Beauchamp, you know not the hundredth part of the
excellencies of this admirable woman.

You were born for each other. God preserve you both, for an example to a world
that wants it.

Harriet courtesied to Beauchamp. Her face was overspread with a fine crimson;
but she attempted not to speak. She squeezed herself, as it were, between the
chairs of her grandmamma and aunt; then turned about, and looked so charmingly!
Miss Jervois, Sir, said she, to my brother, has the best of hearts. She
deserves your kind care. How happy is she, in such protection!

And how much happier will she be in yours, madam! replied he. Of what a care,
my Emily, turning to her, has this admirable Lady already relieved my heart!
the care the greater, as you deserve it all. In everything take her direction:
It will be the direction of love and prudence. What an amiable companion will
you make her! and how happy will your love of each other make me!

Emily got behind me, as it were. Speak for me to my guardian, promise for me,
madam -- You never never, shall break your word through my fault.

Beauchamp was affected. Graciousness, said he, looking at Harriet, and
Goodness, looking at Emily, how are they here united! What a happy man will he
be, who can entitle himself to a Lady formed upon such an example!

A sunbeam from my brother's eye seemed to play upon his face, and dazzle his
eyes. The fine youth withdrew behind Lady W's chair. Mr. Selby, who had been so
good as to give us his silent attention, then spoke, with a twang through his
nose. Adad, adad, said he, I don't know what to make of myself -- But go on, go
on; I love to hear you.

Your good Lord, my dear, enjoyed the pleasure we all had: Mine tossed up his
head, and seemed to snuff the wind: And yet, my dear Lady L. there was nothing
so very extraordinary said; but the manner was the thing, which showed a
meaning, that left language behind it.

My brother is absolutely passive as to the economy of the approaching
solemnity. Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, Lady W. your Charlotte, and Lucy, are the
council appointed; but uncle Selby will put in, to marshal this happy
proceeding. What a pize, he says, is not Harriet his daughter? Will it not be
his Day?

Mrs Selby tries to smile off his oddity; but now-and-then we see her
good-naturedly redden at it, as if for his sake. Lucy looks at her uncle as if
she could hardly away with his particularities; but Mrs. Shirley has always
something to say for him. She enters into his character: She knows the honesty,
as well as generosity, of his heart: That it all proceeds from joy and love;
and always allows for him -- As I would have my friends allow for me: And, to
say truth, I, for my own part, like him the better for wanting allowances;
because his case, in that respect, is mine. Ah, my dear! it is the thoughtful,
half-asleep, half-awake, blinking cat, that catches the mouse. Such as your
Charlotte, with their kittenish tricks, do but fright away the prey; and, if
they could catch it, had rather play with it, than kill it.

Harriet is with her virgins: Her dress is left to her own choice. I stepped in
just now -- She met me at her dressing room door, and looked so lovely! so
silly! and so full of unmeaning meaningness [Do you understand me, Lady L?] She
sighed -- What would my Harriet say to me? said I, taking her hand. -- I don't
know; again sighed -- But love me, Lady G. -- Can I help it? said I; and,
putting my arms about her, kissed her cheek.

Uncle Selby has provided seven gentlemen of the neighborhood, to match the
number of the Ladies; for there will be sixteen of us: Mr. Godsrey, Mr. Steel,
Mr. Falconbridge, three agreeable young men, sons of gentlemen in the
neighborhood, Mr. Selby's chosen friends and companions in his field-sports;
his cousin Holles, brother to the Miss Holles's, an admirer of Miss Nedham;
young Mr. Roberts, an admirer of Miss Barclay; Mr. Allestree, a nephew of Sir
John, a young man of sine qualities engaged to Miss Dolly Nedham: and Lord
Reresby of Ireland (related to Mr. Selby's favorite Sir Thomas Falconbridge),
a young nobleman of shining parts, great modesty, goodnature, and, what is
worth them all, Mrs. Shirley says, a man of virtue.

Lord W. was very desirous of giving so rich a jewel as Harriet to his nephew,
in return, as he said, for as rich a jewel which he had presented to him; but
Mr. Selby would not admit of that. I told him, on his appeal to me, that he was
right, once in his life.

Mr. Selby talks much of the music he has provided for tomorrow. He speaks of
it as a band, I assure you.

WE have had a most agreeable evening. My brother was the Soul of the company.
His address to his Harriet was respectfully-affectionate, yet, for her sake,
not very peculiar. Everybody, in turn, had his kindest notice, and were happy
in it. The next day's solemnity was osten hinted at by Mr. Selby, and even by
my flippant Lord -- But Sir Charles always insensibly led to more general
subjects; and this supported the spirits of the too thoughtful Harriet, and she
behaved, on the whole, very prettily. His joy visibly was joy; but it seemed to
be joy of so familiar and easy a nature, as if it would last.

He once occasionally told the happy commencement of his acquaintance with Miss
Byron; on purpose, I saw, to remind her, that he ought not to be thought of as
a stranger to her, and to engage her in an easy familiarity. But there was a
delicacy observed by him in the remembered commencement. He put it not from the
time that he rescued her from Sir Hargrave; but from the first visit she made
me in St. James's Square; though she, with great gratitude, carried it back to
its real commencement.

Mrs. Shirley retired soon, as is her custom, her Harriet attending her. The
old Lady is lame, and infirm; but, as she sits, is a very fine woman; and
everybody sees that she was once a beauty. I thought I never saw beauty in
full bloom so beautiful as when it supported beauty in ruins, on the old Lady's
retiring with a face so happy, leaning one arm on her lovely grandchild, a neat
crutch-stick in the other, lightning her weight to the delicately-formed
supporter of her old age. It was so striking a picture, that every soul all
standing up, from reverence, or her retreating, observed it; and no one knew
which observed it first, when the door shurt out the graceful figures.

The old Lady's lameness is owing, it seems, to a sprained sinew, got in
leading up a dance, not many years ago, proposed by herself, in order to crown
the reconciliation which she had brought about, between a couple that had, till
then been unhappy; and which her goodnature and joy made her not sensible of
till she sat down. Pity, pity, that anything should have hurt so benign, so
cheerful, so benevolent, a woman! Why did not Harriet tell us this
circumstance? It would have heightened our value for her: And the more, if she
had told us, as is the truth, that she never considers it as a hurt (so
honorably come by) but when she thinks she is troublesome to those about her.

Harriet returned to company more cheerful than when she left it, enriched with
her grandmother's blessings, and prayers for her and my brother (as she
whispered me) and in having been allowed to support the tottering parent.

Harriet, said I, aloud, you were a very naughty girl to accuse me, as once you
did, of reflecting upon age. You never, in my eyes, looked more lovely than you
did half an hour ago, supporting the best of old Ladies.

We are of your Ladyship's mind, said Lady W. A new grace, believe me, my dear,
shone out in every graceful feature.

Your kind notice, Ladies, bowing to me and Lady W. does me honor; but more to
your own hearts.

Most gracefully does the dear girl receive and return a compliment; but this,
Lady L. I need not now say to you: We have both admired her on these occasions.
How happy will she make a man, who can be so sensible of his happiness! And how
happy will he make her! He, who has the most grateful and enlarged of human
hearts!

Mr. Deane, Sir Charles, Lord and Lady W. Mrs. Shirley, Mr. and Mrs. Selby,
Lucy, Lord L. and I withdrew, to read, and see signed, the Marriagearticles,
soon after tea (I tell you things out of course, Lady L. as they come into my
head): When they were ready to sign, the dear Harriet was sent for in. She
would not come before. She begged, she prayed, she might not. The first line of
each clause, and the last for form sake, were run over, by Mr. Deane, as fast
as he could read. How the dear creature trembled when she came in, and all the
time of the shortened reading! But when the pen was given her, to write her
name, she dropped it twice, on the parchment. Sir Charles saw her emotion with
great concern; and held her up, as she stood. My dearest life, said he, take
time, take time -- Do not hurry; putting the pen each time, with reverence, in
her fingers. She tried to write, but twice her pen would not touch the
parchment, so as to mark it. She sat down. Take time, take time, my Love,
repeated he. She soon made another effort, his arm round her waist -- She then
signed them; but Sir Charles held her hand, and the parchments in them, when
she delivered them. -- 'As your act and deed, my dearest Love?' said Sir
Charles. -- 'Yes, indeed,' said the dear creature, and made him a courtesy;
hardly knowing what she did.

She must hear of this, when she can bear it. You charged me to be very minute
on the behavior of our Harriet: You was sure it would be a pattern. But, no!
you see she is too timid.

She accompanied me to my chamber when we retired for the night. She signed. I
took notice of it. -- O my Charlotte! said she, Tomorrow! Tomorrow! --

Will be the beginning of your happiness, my Harriet! -- What virgin heart,
said I, but must have had joy, on her contemplating the man of sense and
politeness, had his behavior of this night only been the test of her judgment
of him?

True! And I have joy: But the circumstance before me is a solemn one: And does
not the obligation lie all on his side?

Does he behave to you, my Love, as if he thought any of it did?

O no, no! But the fact is otherwise; and as I know it, the obligation is
heightened by his polite goodness to me.

Dearly does he love his Harriet (Tomorrow will you be his Harriet for life).
Are you not convinced that he loves you?

I am, I am! But --

But what, my dear?

I never can deserve him. Hapless, hapless Clementina! she only could! Let a
sortnight after tomorrow be over, and she be not un -happy, and what a thrice
happy creature shall I be!

I kissed her glowing cheek. -- Support yourself like a heroine tomorrow, my
dear. You will have a task, because of the crowds which will attend you; but it
is the tax you pay for being so excellent, and so much beloved.

Is it not strange, Lady G. that my grandmamma should join to support my uncle
in his vehemence for a public day? Had it been only his command, I would have
rebelled!

The pride they take in the alliance with my brother, not for his situation in
life, but for his transcendent merit, is their motive; your grandmother's
particularly. She considers the day as one of the happiest of her life: She has
begged of me to support you in undergoing it. She says, If there should be a
thousand spectators, she knows it will give pleasure to as many hearts; and to
hers the more, for that reason. And you will be, continued I, so lovely a Pair,
when joined, that every beholder, man and woman, will give him to you; you to
him.

You are very good, my dear Lady G. to encourage me thus: But I told my
grandmother, this night, that she knew not the hardship she had imposed on me,
by insisting on a public day; but I would not begin so great a change, whatever
it cost me, by an act of opposition or disobedience to the will of so dear a
parent. But your brother, my dear Lady G. continued she, who would have thought
he would have given into it?

As your friends mean a compliment to my brother, replied I; so he, by his
acquiescence, means one to you, and to them. He is not a consident man: He
looks upon Marriage in as awful a light as you do; but he is not shy of making
a public declaration of his Love to the woman he has chosen. He has told me,
talking of this very subject, that a public ceremony is not what, for your
delicacy-sake, he would have proposed: But being proposed, he would not, by any
means, decline it. He had no concern but for you; and he took your acquiescence
as a noble instance of your duty and obligingness to one of the most
affectionate and worthy of parents.

O my dear Lady G. how good was you to come down! Support me in the arduous
task of Tomorrow! -- You will not want my support, my love; you will have Sir
Charles Grandison, bound, both by Duty and Love, to support you.

She threw her arms about me: I will endeavor to behave as I ought, in a
circumstance that shall entitle me to such protection, and to such a Sister.

My fidgeting Lord thrust in (unsent for) his sharp face; and I chiding him for
his intrusion, she slipped away, or I had designed to a tend her to her chamber;
and there, perhaps, should we have staid together most part of the night. If I
had, I don't suppose that I should have deprived her of any rest. What makes my
foolish heart throb for her? so happy as she is likely to be! -- But sincerely
do I love her.

I should have told you, that Emily behaved very prettily. Mr. Beauchamp had a
rich opportunity to engage her, while the settlements were executing.

On our return to them, the poor girl was wiping her eyes. How now, Emily? said
I softly. O madam, Mr. Beauchamp has been telling me how ill Sir Harry is! His
own eyes set mine the example. How I pity him! And how good he is! -- No wonder
my Guardian loves him.

Beauchamp may possibly catch her in a weeping fit. The heart softened by
grief, will turn to a comforter. Our own grief produces pity for another: Pity,
Love. They are next neighbors, and will call in to ask kindly how a sufferer
does: And what a heart must that be, that will not administer comfort when it
makes a neigbourly call, if comfort be in its power?

'Lord G. you are very impertinent.' I am in the scribbling vein, my Caroline.
And here this man -- 'Say another word, Lord G. and I Will sit up all night --
Well, well, now you return not sauciness for threatening, I will have done.'

Good night -- Good morrow, rather, Lady L. -- O Lady L.! Good morrow may it be!

CHAPTER G.

LETTER LII. Lady G., Miss SELBY, To Lady L.
THURSDAY Morning, Nov. 16.
YOU shall find me, my dear Sister, as minute as you wish. Lucy is a charming
girl. For the humour's sake, as well as to forward each other, on the joyful
occasion, we shall write by turns.

It would look as if we had determined upon a public day, in the very face of
it, were we to appear in full dresses: The contrary, therefore, was agreed upon
yesterday. But every one, however, intends to be dressed as elegantly as
Morning-dresses can make them. Harriet, as you shall hear, is the least shewy.
All in Virgin white. She looks, she moves, an Angel! I must go to the dear
girl. 'Lucy, where are you?'

'Here, madam -- But how can one write, when one's thoughts -- '

'Write as I bid you. Have I not given you your cue?'

Lucy; taking up the pen.] Dear Lady L. I am in a vast hurry. Lord W. Lady W.
and Mr. Beauchamp, are come in my Lord's coach. Sir Charles, Mr. Deane, Mr. and
Mrs. Reeves, have been here this half-hour. Has Lady G. dated? No, I protest!
We women are above such little exactnesses. Dear Lady L! the Gentlemen and
Ladies are all come. They say the Churchyard is crowded with more of the
living, than of the dead, and there is hardly room for a spade. What an image,
on such a day! We are all out of our Wits between joy and hurry. My cousin is
not well; her heart misgives her! Foolish girl! -- She is with her grandmamma
and my grandmamma Selby. One gives her hartshorn, another salts. 'Lady G. Lady
G. I must attend my dear Miss Byron: In an hour's time that will be her name no
longer.'

Lady G.] Here, here, child! -- Our Harriet's better, Lady L. and ashamed of
herself. Sir Charles was sent for up, by her grandmother and aunt, to sooth
her. Charming man! Tenderness and Love are indeed Tenderness and Love in the
brave and manly heart. Emily will not be married, on any consideration. There
is a terror, and not joy, she says, in the attending circumstances. Good Emily,
continue to harden thy heart against Love, and thoughts of Wedlock, for two
years to come; and then change thy mind, for Beauchamp's sake!

'Dear Lucy, a line or two more. Your uncle, I hear his voice, summoning -- The
man's mad! mad indeed, Lady L. -- In such a hurry!' -- Lucy, They are not yet
all ready.

'Nor I, says the raptured saucy-face, to take up the pen -- Not a line more
can I, will I, write, till the knot is tied.

Nor I, my dear Lady L. till I can give you joy upon it.

I fib: For this hurrying soul himself, in driving every body else, has forgot
to be quite ready -- But we are in very good time. Lucy has brought me up the
Order of Procession, as Earl-marshal Selby has directed it.

Here I pin it on.

First Coach (Mr. Selby's). THE BRIDE, Mr. SELBY. Mrs. SHIRLEY, THE BRIDEGROOM.
Bride-Men and Maids. Second Coach (Mrs. Shirley's). Miss EMILY JERVOIS, Lord
RERESBY. Miss NEDHAM, Mr. BEAUCHAMP. Third Coach (Sir Charles's). Miss BARCLAY,
Mr. FALCONBRIDGE. Miss WATSON, Mr. ALLESTREE.
Fourth Coach (Lord W's). Mrs. SELBY, Lord W. Lady W. Lord L. Fifth Coach (old
Mrs. Selby's). Old Mrs. SELBY, Lord G. Lady G. Mr. DEANE. Sixth Coach (Mr.
Reeves's). Mrs. REEVES, Mr. JAMES SELBY. Miss LUCY SELBY, Mr. REEVES. Seventh
Coach (Sir John Holles's). Miss NANCY SELBY, Mr. HOLLES. Miss KITTY HOLLES, Mr.
STEEL. Eighth Coach (Lord G's). Miss PATTY HOLLES, Mr. GODFREY. Miss DOLLY
NEDHAM, Mr. ROBERTS.


Each coach four horses. Sir Charles's state-coach to be reserved for the day
of public appearance.

[From Selby-house to the Church, Half a mile, in Coaches; Foot-way not so
much.]

Emily was very earnest to be Bride-maid, though advised to the contrary.

Mr. Beauchamp was a Brideman, at his own request also.

I will go back to the early part of the morning.

We are each of us serenaded, as I may say, by direction of this joyful man
uncle Selby (awakened, as he called it, to music) by James Selby, playing at
each person's door an air or two, the words from an Epithalamium (whose, I know
not);

The Day is come, you wished so long:
Love picked it out among the throng:
He destines to himself this Sun,
And takes the reins, and drives it on.
It is indeed a fine day. The sun seemed to reproach some of us; but Harriet
slept not a wink. No wonder.

I hastened up to salute her. She was ready dressed. Charming readiness, my
Love, said I! I took the opportunity while I was able, answered she.

Lucy, Nancy, were with her, both dressed, as she, for the Day; that they might
have nothing to do but attend her. What joy in their faces! What sweet
carefulness in the lovely Harriet's! -- And will this Day, said she once, in a
low voice, to me, give me to the Lord of my Heart? -- Let not grief come near
it; joy can be enough painful!

Her grandmamma was soon ready. Harriet hurried in to her grandmamma'a
apartment, to crave her blessing.

Lucy.]My cousin, her spirits over-hurried, was ready to saint in her
grandmother's arms; but, revived by the soothings, the blessings, of her
venerable parent, soon recovered. Let nobody be frighted, said her grandmother:
Affright not, by your hurryings, my lovely child! A little fatigued; her
spirits are hurried: Her joy is too much for them.

What a charming presence of mind has Mrs. Shirley! Lady G. bids me write
anything to your Ladyship, so I will but write; and forbids me apologizing
either for manner or words.

Sir Charles was admitted. She stood up the moment she saw him, Love and
Reverence in her sweet aspect. With a kind impatience he hastened to her, and
threw himself at her feet, taking her hand, and pressing it with his lips --
Resume your magnanimity, my dearest Life: With the man before you, by God's
blessing, you will have more than a chance for happiness.

Forgive me, Sir, said she, sitting down (She could hardly stand): I can have
no doubt of your goodness: But it is a great Day! The Solemnity is an awful one!

It is a great, a solemn, Day to me, my dearest creature! But encourage my joy
by your smiles. It can suffer abatement only by giving you pain.

Generous goodness! But --

But what, my Love? -- In compliment to the best of Parents, to the kindest of
Uncles, resume your usual presence of mind. I else, who shall glory before a
thousand witnesses in receiving the honor of your hand, shall be ready to
regret that I acquiesced so cheerfully with the wishes of those parental
friends for a public celebration.

I have not been of late well, Sir: My mind is weakened. But it would be
ungrateful, If I did not own to you, that my joy is as strong as my fear: It
overcame me. I hope I shall behave better. You should not have been called to
be a witness of my weakness --

This Day, my dearest Love, we call upon the world to witness to our mutual
vows. Let us show that world, that our Hearts are one; and that the Ceremony,
sacred as it is, cannot make them more so. The engagement is a holy one: Let us
show the Multitude as well as our surrounding Friends, that we think it a
laudable one. Once more I call upon you, my dearest Life, to justify my joy by
your apparent approbation. The world around you, loveliest of women, has been
accustomed to see your Lovers; show them now the husband of your choice.

O Sir! you have given me a motive! I will think of it throughout the whole
Sacred Transaction. She looked around her, as if to see if everybody were
ready that moment to attend her to Church.

Lady G.] The Ceremony is happily over; and I am retired to oblige my Caroline.
You have the form of the Procession. When ever-thing was ready, Mr. Selby
thought fit to call us down in order into the Great Hall, according to it,
marshalling his Fours; and great pride and pleasure did he take in his office.
At his first summons, down came the Angel, and the four young Ladies, and each
of the four had her partner assigned her.

Emily seemed, between the novelty and the parade, to be wholly engaged.

Harriet, the moment she came down, flew to her grandmamma, and kneeled to her,
Sir Charles supporting her as she kneeled, and as she arose. A tender and sweet
fight!

The old Lady threw her arms about her, and twice or thrice kissed her
forehead; her voice faltring -- God bless, bless, sustain my child! -- Her aunt
kissing her cheek. Now, now, my dearest Love, whispered she, I call upon you
for fortitude.

She visibly struggled for resolution, but seemed, in all her motions, to be in
a hurry, as if afraid she should not hold it. She passed me with such a sweet
confusion! Charming girl! said I, taking her hand, as she passed, and giving
way to her quick motions for fear restraint should disconcert her.

When her uncle gave the word for moving, and approached to take her hand, she
in her hurry, forgetting her cue, put it into Sir Charles's. Hold, hold said
her uncle, sweeping his bosom with his chin, in his arch way, that must not yet
be. My brother, kissing her hand, presented it in a very gallant manner to her
uncle. I yield it to you, Sir, said he, as a precious trust; in an hour's time
to be confimred mine by Divine, as well as human Sanctions.

Mr. Selby led the lovely creature to the coach, but stopped at the door with
her, for Mrs. Shirley's going in first: The servants at distance all admiring,
and blessing, and praying, for their beloved young Lady.

Sir Charles took the good Mrs. Shirley's hand in one of his, and put the other
arm round her waist, to support her. What honor you do me, Sir! said she. I
think I may throw away this (meaning her ebony crutch-stick): Do I ail
anything? Her feet, however, seconded not her spirits. My brother lifted her
into the coach. It was so natural to him to be polite, that he offered his hand
to his beloved Harriet; but was checked by her uncle (in his usual pleasant
manner): Stay your time, too ready Sir, said he. Thank God it will not be so
long before both hands will be yours.

We all followed, very exactly, the order that had been, with so much proud
parade, prescribed by Earlmarshal Selby.

The coach-way was lined with spectators. Mr. Selby, it seems, bowed all the
way, in return to the salutes of his acquaintance. Have you never, Lady L.
called for the attention of your company in your coach, to something that has
passed in the streets, or on the road, and at the same time thrust your head
through the windows so that nobody could see but yourself? So it was with Mr.
Selby, I doubt not. He wanted every one to look in at the Happy Pair; but took
care that hardly anybody but himself should be seen. I asked him afterward,
If it were not so? He knew not, he said, but it might. I told him, he had a
very jolly comely face to show, but no head. He does not spare me: But true
jests are not always the most welcome. Tell a Lady of Forty, that she is Sixty
or Seventy, and she will not be so angry as if she were guessed to be Eight or
Nine-and-thirty. The one nobody will believe; the other everybody. My Lord G.
I can tell you, fares well in Mr. Selby's company.

'Lucy, my dear girl, take the pen -- You don't know you say, what I wrote last
-- Read it, my girl -- You have it -- Take the pen; I want to be among them.'

Lucy.] Lady G. must have her jest, whether in the right place, or not. Excuse
me, both Sisters. How could she, however, in a part so interesting? She says, I
must give an account of the Procession, and she will conduct them into the
Church; I out of it. I cannot, she says, after so many wishes, so many
suspenses, so much expectation, before it came to this, be too minute. Every
woman's heart leaps, she says, when a Wedding is described; and wishes to know
all, how and about it. Your Ladyship will know, that these words are Lady G's
own: But what can I say of the Procession?

The poor Harriet -- Fie upon me -- The rich Harriet, was not sorry, I believe,
that her uncle's head, now on this side, now on the other, in a manner, filled
the Coach: but when it stopped at the Churchyard, an enclosed one, whose walls
keep off coaches near a stone's throw from the Church Porch, then was my lovely
cousin put to it; especially as her grandmother walked so slow. We were all out
of our Coaches before the Father and the Bride entered the Porch. I should tell
your Ladyship, that the passage from the entrance of the Churchyard to the
Church is railed in. Every Sunday the crowd (gathered to see the gentry go in
and come out) are accustomed to be bounded by these rails and were the more
contentedly so now: The whole Churchyard seemed one mass (but for that
separating passage) of living matter, distinguished only by separate heads; not
a hat on the men's; pulled off, perhaps, by general consent, for the convenience
of seeing, more than from designed regard in that particular. But, in the main,
never was there such silent respect shown, on the like occasion, by mortal mob.
We all of us, Lady L. have the happiness of being beloved by high and low.

But one pretty spectacle it is impossible to pass by. Four girls, tenants
daughters, the eldest not above Thirteen, appeared with neat wicker-baskets in
their hands, filled with flowers of the season. Cheerful way was made for them.
As soon as the Bride, and Father, and Sir Charles, and Mrs. Shirley, alighted,
these pretty little Flora's, all dressed in white, chaplets of flowers for
head-dresses, large nosegays in their bosoms, white ribbands adorning their
stays and their baskets; some streaming down, others tied round the handles in
true-lover's knots; attended the company, two going before, two other here and
there, and everywhere, all strewing flowers: A pretty thought of the tenants
among themselves. Sir Charles seemed much pleased with them: Pretty dears he
called them, to one of them.

God bless you, and God bless you, was echoed from many mouths. Your brother's
attention was chiefly employed on Mrs. Shirley, because of her age and
lameness. Here my good Lady G. perhaps would stop to remark upon the worthy
nature of the English populace, when good characters attract their admiration;
for even the populace took notice, how right a thing it was for the finest
young Gentleman their eyes ever beheld, to take such care of so good an old
Lady. He deserved to live to be old himself, one said: They would warrant,
others said, that he was a sweettemper'd man; and others, that he had a good
heart. In the Procession one of us picked up one praise, another another. Though
Lady G. Lady W. and the four Bride-maids, as well as the Lords, might have
claimed high notice; yet not any of them received more than commendation: We
were all considered but as Satellites to the Planetr that passed before us.
What, indeed, were more? But let me say, that Mrs. Shirley had her share in
Reverence, as the lovely Couple had theirs in Admiration. But O how my dear
cousin was affected, when she alighted from her uncle's coach!

The Churchwardens themselves were so complaisant as to stand at the
Church-door, and opened it, on the approach of the Bride, and her Nuptial
Father. But all the pews near the Altar were, however, filled (one or two
excepted, which seemed to be left for the company) with Ladies and well-dressed
women of the neighborhood: And though they seemed to intend to shut the doors
after we had all got in, the Church was full of people. Mr. Selby was
displeased, for his Niece's sake; who trembling, could hardly walk up to the
Altar. Sir Charles seated his venerable charge on a covered bench on the
left-side of the Altar; and by her, and on another covered bench on the
rightside, without the rails, we all, but the Bride-maids and their partners,
took our seats. They stood, the Men on the Bridegroom's side; the Maids on
Harriet's -- Never --

Lady G.] 'Are you within the Church, Lucy? -- You are, I protest. Let me read
what you have done. Come, pretty well, pretty well. -- You were going to praise
my brother: Leave that to me. I have an excellent knack at it.'

Never was man so much, and so deservedly, admired. He saw his Harriet wanted
support and encouragement. The Minister stood suspended, a few moments, as
doubting whether she would not faint. My dearest Love, whispered Sir Charles,
remember you are doing honor to the happy, thrice happy, man of your Choice:
Show he is your Choice, in the face of this Congregation. Pardon me, Sir! I
will endeavor to be all you wish me.

Sir Charles bowed to the Minister to begin the Sacred Office. Mr. Selby, with
all his bravery, trembled, and, overcome by the Solemnity of the Preparation,
looked now pale, now red. The whole Congregation were hushed and silent, as if
nobody were in the Church but persons immediately concerned to be there. Emily
changed color frequently. She had her handkerchief in her hand; and (pretty
enough!) her sister Bride-maids, little thinking that Emily had a reason for
her emotion, which none of them had, pulled out their handkerchiefs too, and
permitted a gentle tear or two to steal down their glowing cheeks. I fixed my
eye on Emily, sitting outward, to keep her in order. The Doctor began -- '
Dearly Beloved' -- Ah, Harriet! thought I; thou art much quieter now, than once
thou were at these words When Sir Hargrave Pollexfen would have compelled her
to be his, Vol. I. p. 216.
.

No impediments were confessed by either of the parties, when they were
referred to by the Minister, on this head. I suppose this reference would have
been omitted by Sir Hargrave's snuffling Parson. To the question, to my
brother, ' Will thou have,' etc. he cheerfully answered, I will. Harriet did
not say, I will not. 'Who gives this woman, etc. I, I, I, said uncle Selby;
and he owns, that he had much ado to refrain saying -- 'With all my heart and
soul!' Sir Charles seemed to have the office by heart; Harriet in her heart:
For before the Minister could take the Right Hand of the good girl to put it
into that of my brother, his had knew its office; nor did her trembling hand
decline the favor. Then followed the words of acceptance; 'I Charles, take
thee, Harriet,' etc. on his part; which he audibly, and with apparent joy and
reverence in his countenance, repeated after the Minister. But not quite so
alert was Harriet, in her turn: Her hand was rather taken, than offered. Her
lips, however, moved after the Minister; nor seemed to hesitate at the little
piddling word obey, which, I remember, gave a qualm to my poor heart, on the
like occasion. The Ring was presented. The Doctor gave it to Sir Charles; who,
with his usual grace, put it on the singer of the most charming woman in
England; repeating after the Minister, audibly, ' With this Ring I thee wed,'
etc. She brightened up; when the Minister, joining their Right-hands, read,
'Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder.' And the
Minister's address to the company, declaring the Marriage, and pronouncing them
Man and Wife, in the name of the Holy Trinity; and his blessing them; swelled,
she owns, her grateful heart, ready to bursting. In the Responses, I could not
but observe, that the Congregation generally joined, as if they were interested
in the celebration.

Sir Charles, with a joy that lighted up a more charming flush than usual on
his face, his lively Soul looking out at his fine eyes, yet with an air as
modest as respectful, did credit to our Sex before the applauding multitude, by
bending his knee to his sweet Bride, on taking her Hand, and saluting her, on
the conclusion of the ceremony -- May God, my dearest Life, said he, audibly,
be gracious to your Grandison, as he will be good to his Harriet, now no more
Byron! -- She courtesied low, and with so modest a grace, that every soul
blessed her; and pronounced her the loveliest of women, and him the most
graceful and polite of men.

He invited Dr. Curtis to the Wedding-dinner, and led his Bride into the
Vestry; where already were her grandmother, her aunt, Lady W. her Lord, mine,
and Lord L. She was followed by her Virgin train; they by their partners. She
threw herself, the moment she beheld her grandmother, at her feet. Bless, bless
madam, your happy, happy Child.

God for ever bless the Darling of my heart!

Sir Charles bent his knee to the venerable Lady, with such a condescending
dignity, if I may so express myself; Receive and bless, also, your Son, my
Harriet's reverend parent, and mine.

The dear Lady was affected. She slid off her seat on her knees, and with
up-lifted hands and eyes, tears trickling on her cheeks; Thou, Almighty, bless
the dear Son of my wishes!

He raised her, with pious tenderness, and saluted her. Excellent Lady! -- He
would have said more, but was affected -- Everybody was -- And having seated
the old Lady, he turned to Mrs. Selby -- Words are poor, said he; my actions,
my behavior, shall speak the grateful sense I have of your goodness, saluting
her; of yours, madam, to Mrs. Shirley; and of yours, my dearest Life,
addressing himself to his lovely Bride, who seemed hardly able to sustain her
joy, on so respectful a recognition of relation to persons so dear to her. Let
me once more, added he, bless the Hand that has blessed me!

She cheerfully offered it: I give you, Sir, my Hand, said she, courtesying,
and with it a poor Heart -- A poor Heart, indeed! But it is a grateful one! It
is all your own!

He bowed upon her Hand: He spoke not: He seemed as if he could not speak.

Joy, Joy, Joy, was wished the Happy Pair, from every mouth. See, my dear young
Ladies,' said the happy and instructing Mr. Shirley, addressing herself to
them, 'the Reward of Duty, Virtue, and Obedience! How unhappy must those
Parents and Relations be, whose Daughters, unlike our Harriet, have disgraced
themselves, and their families, by a a shameful Choice -- As my Harriet's is,
such, looking around her, be your Lot, my amiable Daughters!

They every one besought her Hand, and kissed it; and some by speech, all by
looks and courtesies, promised to cherish the memory of this happy transaction,
for their benefit.

Emily, when she approached the venerable Lady, sobbing, said, Bless me, me
also bless, my dear grandmamma Shirley! -- Let me be your own Granddaughter. --
She embraced and blessed the dear girl -- Ah, my Love! said she, But will you
supply the place of my Harriet to me? Will you be my Harriet? Will you live
with me, and Mrs. Selby -- as Harriet did? -- Emily started. Ah, madam! you are
all goodness! Let me try to make myself, in some little way, agreeable to my
dear Miss Byron that was, and live a little while in the sunshine of my
Guardian's eye; and then how proud shall I be to be thought, in any the least
degree, like your Harriet!

This I thought a good hint of Mrs. Shirley. Our Harriet (my dear Caroline)
shall not be made unhappy by the chit; nor shall the dear girl neither, if I
can help it, be made so by her own foible. We will watch over both, for the
good of both, and for the tranquillity of the best of men.

Beauchamp's joy shone through a cloud, because of his Father's illness; but it
did shine.

Mr. Selby and my Lord were vastly alive. Lord L. was fervent in his joy, and
congratulations; but he was wiser than both put together. Nothing was wanting
to show that he was excessively pleased; but I was afraid the other two would
not have considered the Vestry as part of the Church; and would have struck up
a tune without music.

How sincerely joyful, also, were Lord and Lady W* My Lord's eyes burst into
tears more than once: Nephew, and dear Nephew, at every word, whether speaking
of or to my brother; as if he thought the Relation he stood in to him, a
greater glory than his Peerage, or aught else that he valued himself upon, his
excellent Lady excepted.

Upon my Honor, Caroline, I think, as I have often said, that people may be
very happy, if not most happy, who set out with a moderate stock of Love, and
supply what they want in that, with Prudence. I really think, that my Brother
and Harriet cannot be happier than are this now worthy Couple; times of life
considered on both sides, and my Lord's inferior capacity allowed for. For
certainly, men of sense are most capable of joyful sensations, and have their
balances; since it is as certain, that they are also most susceptible of
painful ones. What, then, is the stuff, the nonsense, that romantic girls,
their romancing part of life not wholly elapsed, prate about, and din one's
ears with, of first Love, first Flame, but first Folly? Do not most of such
give indication of gunpowder constitutions, that want but the match to be
applied, to set them into a blaze? Souls of tinder, discretions of flimsy
gauze, that conceal not their folly -- One day they will think as I do; and
perhaps before they have daughters who will convince them of the truth of my
assertion.

But here comes Lucy. -- 'My dear girl, take the pen -- I am too sentimental.
The French only are proud of sentiments at this day; the English cannot bear
them: Story, story, story, is what they hunt after, whether sense or nonsense,
probable or improbable.'

Lucy.] 'Bless me, Lady G! you have written a great deal in a little. What am I
to do?

Lady G.] You brought the Happy Pair into Church. I have told Lady L. what was
done there: You are to carry them out.

Lucy.] 'And so I will.' -- My dearest Love, said her charming man to my
cousin, who had a little panic on the thought of going back through so great a
crowd, imagine, as you walk, that you see nobody but the happy man whom you
have honored with your Hand: Everybody will praise and admire the loveliest
of women. Nobody I hope, will blame your Choice. Remember at whose request it
was, that you are put upon this difficulty: Your Grandmamma's and Uncle's. She,
one of the best of women, was so married to one the best of men: I was but
acquiescent in it. Show, my dearest Life, all your numerous admirers and
well-wishers, that you are not ashamed of your Choice.

O Sir! how charmingly do you strengthen my mind! I will show the world, that
my Choice is my Glory.

Everybody being ready, she gave her Hand to the Beloved of her Heart.

The Bells were set a ringing the moment the Solemnity was concluded; and Sir
Charles Grandison, the Son of our venerable Mrs. Shirley, the Nephew of my
uncle and aunt Selby, Husband of my dear and ever-dear Harriet, and the
Esteemed of every heart, led his graceful Bride through a lane of applauding
and decent behaving spectators, down through the Church -- and still more
thronging multitudes in the Churchyard; the four little Flora's again strewing
flowers at their feet, as they passed. My sweet girls, said he, to two of them,
I charge you, complete the honor you have done us, by your presence at
Selbyhouse: You will bring your companions with you, my Loves.

My uncle looked around him as he led Mrs. Shirley: So proud! and so stately!
By some undesigned change, Mr. Beauchamp led Miss Jervois. She seemed pleased,
and happy; for he whispered to her, all the way, praises of her Guardian. My
Guardian, twice or thrice, occasionally reported she aloud, as if she boasted
of standing in some relation to him.

The Bride and Bridegroom stopped for Mrs. Shirley, a little while, at the
Coach-side: A very grateful accident to the spectators. He led them both in,
with a politeness that attends him in all he does. The Coach wheeled off, to
give way to the next; and we came back in the order we went.

'Now, my dear Lady G. you, who never were from the side of your dear new
sister for the rest of the day, resume the pen.'

Lady G.] 'I will, my dear; but in a new Letter. This fourth sheet is written
down to the very edge. Caroline will be impatient: I will send away this.'

Joy to my Sister! Joy to my Aunt! Joy to the Earl! To Lady Gertrude! To our
dear Dr. Bartlett! To every one, on an event so happy; and so long wished for
by us All!

'Sign, Lucy, sign.'

'After your Ladyship.'

There, then, CHARLOTTE G.
And, There, then, LUCY SELBY.

LETTER LIII. Lady G. To Lady L. In Continuation.
THIS happy event has been so long wisned for by us all; were so much delighted
with the Bride, as well as the Bridegroom; so many uncertainties, so many
suspenses, have fallen in; so little likelihood once that it ever would have
been; and you are so miserably tied by the leg, poor Caroline! and so little to
divert you, besides the once smiling to the ten times squalling of your little
stranger; that Compassion, Love, both, incite me to be minute; that so you may
be as much with us in idea, as we all wished you could have been in person.

Crowds of people lined the way, in our return from Church, as well as in our
way to it; and blessings were pronounced upon the Happy Pair, by hundreds, at
their alighting at Selby-house.

When we were all assembled in the Great Hall, mutual congratulations flowed
from every mouth: Then did every man salute the happy, happy Bride: Then did
the equally-happy Bridegroom salute every Lady -- There was among us the height
of joy; joy becoming the awful Solemnity; and every one was full of the decency
and delight which were given and shown by the crowds of spectators of all
ranks, and both Sexes; a delight and decency worthy of the characters of the
admirable Pair: And Miss Nedham declared, and all the young Ladies joined with
her, that if she could be secure of the like good behavior and encouragement,
she would never think of a Private Wedding for herself. Mr. Selby himself was
overjoyed too much, even to utter a jest! Now, now, he said, he had attained
the height of his ambition.

The dear Harriet could look up: She could smile around her. I led her, with
Lucy, into the Cedarparlour -- Now, my dear Love, said I, the moment we entered
it, throwing my arms about her, just as her lips were joyfully opening to speak
to me, do I salute my real Sister, my Sister Grandison, in my dear Lady L's
name, as well as in my own: God Almighty confirm and establish your happiness!

My dearest, dearest Lady G. how grateful, how encouraging, to my heart, is
your kind Salutation! Your continued Love, and that of my dear Lady L. will be
essential to my happiness.

May our Hearts be ever united! replied I. But they must: For were not our
Minds kindred Minds before?

But you must love my Lucy, said she, presenting her to me. -- You must love my
Grand -- -Mamma, said I, catching the word from her, your Aunt, your Uncle,
your Cousins, and your Cousins Cousins, to the twentieth Generation -- And so I
will: Ours yours; Yours ours! We are all of one Family, and will be for ever.

What a happy creature am I! replied she -- How many people can one good man
make so! -- But where, where is my Emily, sweet girl? Bring to me, Lucy, bring
to me, my Emily!

Lucy went out, and led in the sweet girl. With hands and eyes uplifted, My
dear Miss Byron, that was, now Lady Grandison, said she, love me; love your
Emily. I am now your Emily, your Ward; love me as well as you did when Miss
Byron.

Harriet threw her arms about her neck; I do, I will, I must: You shall be my
Sister, my Friend; my Emily now, indeed! Love me, as I will love you; and you
shall find your happiness in mine.

Sir Charles entered; his Beauchamp in his hand. Quitting his, and taking hers,
he kissed it. Once more, said he, do I thank my dearest Life for the honor she
has done me: Then resuming, with his other hand, his Beauchamp's, he presented
each to the other, as Brother and Sister.

Beauchamp, in a graceful manner, bowed on her hand: She courtefied to him with
an air of dignity and esteem.

He then turning to Emily; Acknowledge, my dear, said he, your elder Sister: My
Harriet will love her Emily. Receive, my dearest Life, your Ward. Yet (to
Emily) I acquit not myself of the power, any more than of the will, of obliging
you at first hand.

O Sir! said the sobbing girl, you are all goodness! But I will make no request
to you, but through my dearest Lady Grandison's mediation. If she approve of it
first, I shall not doubt of its fitness to be complied with.

Was not that pretty, in Emily? -- O how Beauchamp's eyes loved her!

But why, Ladies, said Sir Charles, do you sequester yourselves from the
company? Are we not all of a Family today? The four little Flora's, with their
baskets in their hands, were entering the gate, as I came in: Receive them, my
Love, with your usual graciousness. We will join the company, and call them in.
My Beauchamp, you are a Brideman; restore my Bride to her friends and admirers
within.

He took Emily's hand. She looked so proud! -- Harriet gave hers to Beauchamp.
We followed them into the Great Hall: Mr. Selby had archness in his look, and
seemed ready to blame us for withdrawing. -- Sir Charles was aware of him. My
dear Mr. Selby, said he, Will you not allow us to see the pretty Flora's -- By
all means, said Mr. Selby; and hurried out, and introduced them. Sweet pretty
girls! We had more leisure to consider the elegant rusticity of their dresses
and appearance. They had their baskets in their hands, and a courtesy and a
blush ready for every one in company. Sir Charles seemed to expect that his
Bride would take notice of them first; but observing that she wanted presence
of mind, he stepped to them, took each by the hand, the youngest first, called
them pretty Loves; I wish, said he, I could present you with as pretty flowers
as you threw away in honor to this company; putting into each basket, wrapped
up in paper, five guineas: Then presented them, two in each hand, to his Bride;
who, by that time, was better prepared to receive them with that sweet ease and
familiarity which give grace to all she says and does.

The children afterward desiring to go to their parents, the polite Beauchamp
him elf, accompanied by Lucy, led them to them, and returned, with a request
from all the tenants, that they might have the honor, some time in the day, to
see the Bride and Bridegroom among them, were it but for two minutes. What says
my Love? said Sir Charles. O, Sir! I cannot, cannot -- Well, then, I will
attend them, to make your excuse, as well as I can. She bowed her thanks.

The time before dinner was devoted to conversation. Sir Charles was nobody's;
no, not very particularly his Bride's: He put every one upon speaking in turn.
For about half an hour he sat between the joyful Mrs. Shirley and Mrs. Selby;
but even then, in talking to them, talked to the whole company: Yet, in his air
and manner to both, showed so much respect, as needed not the aid of a
particular address to them in words.

This was observed to me by good Lord L. For Harriet (uneasy, every eye
continually upon her, thoughtful, bashful) withdrawing, a little before dinner,
with a cast of her eye to me, I followed her to her dressing room. There, with
so much expressiveness of meaning, though not of language; so much tenderness of
love; so much pious gratitude; so much true virgin sensibility; did she open
her heart to me; that I shall ever revolve what passed in that conversation, as
the true criterion of Virgin Delicacy unmingled with Affectation. Nor was I
displeased that, in the height of her grateful Self-congratulation, she more
than once acknowleged a sigh for the admirable Clementina. We just began to
express our pleasure and our hopes in the good behavior of our Emily, when we
were called to dinner.

It was a sumptuous one.

Mr. Selby was very orderly, upon the whole: But he remembered, he said, that
when he was married (and he called upon his Dame to confirm it) he was obliged
to wait on his Bride, and the Company; and he insisted upon it, that Sir
Charles should.

No, no, no, every one said; and the Bride looked a little serious upon it: But
Sir Charles, with an air of gaiety that infinitely became him, took a napkin
from the butler; and putting it under his arm, I have only one request to make
you, my dear Mr. Selby -- When I am more awkward than I ought to be, do you
correct me: and I shall have both pride and pleasure in the task.

Adad! said Mr. Selby, looking at him with pleasure -- You may be anything, do
anything; you cannot conceal the Gentleman. Ads-heart, you must always be the
first man in company -- Pardon me, my Lords.

Sir Charles was the modestest servitor that ever waited at table, while his
napkin was under his arm: But he laid it down, While he addressed himself to
the company, finding something to say to each in his pithy, agreeable manner,
as he went round the table. He made every one happy. With what delight did the
elder Ladies look upon him, when he addressed himself to each of them! He stopped
at the Bride's chair, and made her a compliment with an air of tenderness. I
heard not what it was, sitting at distance; but she looked grateful, pleased;
smiled, and blushed. He passed from her to the Bride-maids, and again
complimented each of them. They also seemed delighted with what he said. Then
going to Mr. Selby; Why don't you bid me resume the napkin, Sir? -- No, no; we
see what you can do: Your conformity is enough for me. You may now sit down,
when you please. You make the waiters look awkward.

He took his seat, thanked Mr. Selby for having reminded him of his duty, as he
called it, and was all Himself, the most graceful and obliging of men.

You know, my dear Lady L. how much I love to praise my brother. Neither I, nor
the young Ladies, not even those who had humble servants present, regarded
anybody but him. My poor Lord! -- I am glad, however, that he has a tolerable
good set of teeth -- They were always visible. A good honest sort of man, though,
Lady L. whatever you may think of him.

After dinner, at Mr. Selby's reminding motion, Sir Charles and the men went to
the tenants. They all wished him joy; and, as they would not sit down, while he
stood, Sir Charles took a seat among them, and all the rest followed his
example.

One of the honest men, it seems, remembered the Nuptials of Mr. and Mrs. Byron,
and praised them as the best and happiest of the human race: Others confirmed
his character of both: Another knew the late Mr. Shirley, and extolled him as
much: Another remembered the birth, another the christening, of the Bride; and
others talked of what an excellent creature she was from her infancy. Let me
tell you, Sir, said one grey-headed man, you will have much ado to deserve her;
and yet you are said to be as good as you are handsome. The women took up the
cause: They were sure, by what they had heard, if any man in the world could
deserve the Bride, it was Sir Charles Grandison; and they would swear for him
by his looks. One of the honest men said, they should all have taken it as an
hugeous favor, were they allowed to wish the Bride joy, though at ever so great
a distance.

Sir Charles said, He was sure the women would excuse her this day; and then
the men would, in complaisance to them. We will hope, said he, looking all
round him, before we leave Northamptonshire, for one happy dinner together.

They all got up to bow and courtesy, and looked upon each other; and the men,
who are most of them freeholders, wished to the Lord for a new election, and
that he would come among them. They had no great matter of fault to find, they
said, with their present representatives: but anybody who would oppose Sir
Charles Grandison, would stand no chance. The women joined in the declaration,
as if they thought highly, as Sir Charles pleasantly observed, of their own
influence over their husbands. They all wondered that he was not in Parliament,
till they heard how little a while he had been in England.

He took leave of the good people (who, by their behavior and appearance, did
as much credit to their landlords as to themselves) with his usual affability
and politeness; repeating his promise of a day of Jubilee, as some of them
called it.

The Ball, at the request of the whole company, was opened by the Bride and
Bridegroom. She was very uneasy at the general Call. Sir Charles saw she was,
and would have taken out Miss Nedham; but it was not permitted. the dear
creature, I believe, did her best at the time; but I have seen her perform
better: Yet she did exceedingly well. But such a figure herself, and such a
partner; How could she do amiss?

Emily was taken out by Beauchamp. He did his best, I am sure; and almost as
much excelled his pretty partner, as his beloved friend did his.

Emily, sitting down by me, asked if she did not perform very ill. Not very
ill, my dear, said I; but not so well as I have seen you dance. I don't know,
said she, what ails me: My heart is very heavy. madam. What can be the meaning
of it? But don't tell Lady Grandison so. -- High-ho! -- Lady Grandison! What a
sound is that? A charming sound! But how shall I bring my lips to be
familiarized to it?

You are glad she is married, my love, I dare say?

Glad! To be sure I am! It is an event that I have long, long wished for: But
new names, and new titles, one knows not how to frame one's mouth to presently.
It was some time before I could call you Lady G. But don't you pity poor Lady
Clementina, a little, madam?

A great deal, I do. But as she refused my brother --

Ah! dear! that is the thing! I wonder she could -- when he would have let her
have the free exercise of her Religion.

Had you rather your Guardian had had Lady Clementina, Emily?

O no! How can you ask me such a question, madam? Of all the women in the
world, I wished him to have Miss Byron. But she is too happy for pity, you
know, madam! -- Bless me! What does she look so thoughtful for? Why does she
sigh so? Surely she cannot be sorry!

Sorry! No, my Love! But a change of condition for life! New attachments! A new
course of life! Her name sunk, and lost! The property, person and will, of
another, excellent as the man is; obliged to go to a new house; to be ingrafted
into a new family; to leave her own, who so dearly love her; an irrevocable
destiny! -- Do you think, Emily, new in her present circumstances; every eye
upon her: it is not enough to make a considerate mind, as hers is, thoughtful!

All these are mighty hardships, madam! putting up her lip -- But, Lady G. can
you suppose she thinks them so? If she does -- But she is a dear good Lady! --
I shall ever love her! She is an ornament of our Sex! See, how lovely she
looks! Did your Ladyship ever see so sweet a creature? I never did.

Not for Beauty, Dignity, Ease, Figure, Modesty, good Sense, did I ever.

She is my Guardianess, may I say? Is there such a word? -- I shall be as proud
of her, as I am of my Guardian. Yet there is no cause of sighing, I think! --
See my Guardian! her Husband? Unfashionable as the word is, it is a pretty
word. The House-band, that ties all together. Is not that the meaning? -- Look
round! How does he surpass all men! -- His Ease, talk of Ease! His Dignity,
talk of Dignity! As handsome a man, as she is a woman! See how every young Lady
eyes him; every young Gentleman endeavors to imitate him. I wish he would take
me out: I would do better.

This was the substance of the whispering Dialogue that passed between Emily
and me -- Poor girl!

Mr. Selby danced with Lucy, and got great applause. He was resolved, he said,
to have one dance with the Bride. She besought him not to think of it. Her
grandmamma, her aunt, entreated for her. She desired Sir Charles to interpose
-- If, my dearest Life, you could oblige your uncle -- I cannot, cannot think
of it, said she.

Lady G. said Sir Charles, be so good as to challenge Mr. Selby. I stood forth,
and offered my hand to him. He could not refuse it. He did not perform so well
as he did with Lucy. Go, said I, when we had d ne, sit down by your Dame, and
be quiet: You have lost all your credit. You dance with a Bride! -- Some people
know not how to bear applause; nor to leave off when they are well. Lord L.
took out Mrs. Selby. She dances very gracefully. My Lord, you know, is above
praise. The young Lord Reresby and Miss Nedham distinguished themselves. My odd
creature was in his element. He and Miss Barclay, and another time he and
Emily, did very handsomely; and the girl got up her reputation. Lord W. did
hobble, and not ungracefully, with old Mrs. Selby; who had not danced, she
said, for twenty years before; but on so joyful an occasion, would not refuse
Lord W's challenge: And both were applauded; the time of life of the Lady, the
limpingness of my Lord, considered.

There was a very plentiful sideboard, of rich wines, sweetmeats, etc. We all
disclaimed formal supper.

We went afterward into country dances. Mrs. Shirley retired about Ten.
Harriet took the opportunity of attending her; and it was a seasonable relief
to her. I had an intimation to attend her. I found her just dropped on her knees
to her grandmamma; who, with her arms about her neck, was folding to her fond
heart the darling of it. The sweet girl was so apprehensive! I was called upon
to give my opinion, whether she should return to the company, or not: I gave
it, that she should; and that she should only retire, for the night, about
Eleven. As to the Bride-maids, I said, I would manage, that they should only
attend her to her chamber, and leave her there, with her aunt, Lucy, and me.
Lord L. undertook to make the gentlemen give up form; which, he said, they
would the more easily do, as they were set into dancing.

After all, Lady L. we women, dressed out in ribbands, and gaudy trappings, and
in Virgin-white, on our Wedding-days, seem but like milk-white heifers led to
sacrifice. We ought to be indulged, if we are not shameless things, and very
wrong indeed, in our choice of the man we can love.

We returned to company. The Bridegroom was looking out for us. My dearest
Life, said he, Are you returned? -- I thought -- There he stopped.

Mr. Selby broke from his partner, Miss Barclay, to whisk into the figure the
Bride. Sir Charles joined the deserted Lady, who seemed much better pleased
with her new partner than with her old one. Lord W. who was sitting down, took
Mrs. Selby, and led her into the dance.

I drew Miss Nedham to the sideboard, and gave her her cue: She gave theirs to
the three other Bride-maids.

About Eleven, Mrs. Selby, unobserved, withdrew with the Bride. The
Bride-maids, one by one, waited on her to her chamber; saluted her, and
returned to company.

The dear creature wanted presence of mind. She fell into my reflection above. O
my dear Lady G! said she, was I not right when I declared, that I never would
marry, were it not to the man I loved above all the men in the world?

She complimented me twenty times, with being very good. She prayed for me; but
her prayers were meant for herself. You remember, that she told me, on my
apprehensiveness on the like occasion, that fear made me loving to her. On her
blessing me, Ah, Harriet, said I, you now find, that apprehension will make one
pious, as well as loving.

My Sister, my Friend, my own, my Caroline's, my Brother's, dear Lady
Grandison! said I, when I left her, near undressed, God bless you! And God be
praised, that I can call you by these tender names! My Brother is the happiest
of men; You of women. May we never love each other less than we do now. Look
forward to the serene happiness of your future lot. If you are the Joy of our
Brother, you must be our Joy; and the Jewel of our Family.

She answered me only by a fervent embrace, her eyes lifted up, surcharged, as
I may say, with tears of joy, as in thankfulness.

I then rushed down-stairs, and into the company.

My brother instantly addressed me -- My Harriet, whispered he, with
impatience, returns not this night.

You will see Mrs. Selby, I presume, by-and-by, returned I.

He took his seat by old Mrs. Selby, and fell into talk with her, to avoid
joining in the dances. His eye was continually turned to the door. Mrs. Selby,
at last, came in. Her eyes showed the tender leave she had taken of her Harriet.

My brother approached her. She went out: He followed her. In a quarter of an
hour she returned.

We saw my brother no more that night.

We continued our dancings till between Three and Four.

I have often observed, that we women, whether weakly or robust, are hardly
ever tired with dancing. It was so with us. The men, poor souls! looked silly,
and sleepy, by two; all but my ape: He has a good many Femalities, as uncle
Selby calls them. But he was brought up to be idle and useless, as women
generally are. I must conclude my Letters whimsically, my dear: If I did not,
you would not know them to be written by

Your CHARLOTTE G.

LETTER LIVE. Lady G. In Continuation.
EMILY, Lucy, and I, went to pay our morning-congratulations as soon as we
arose, which was not very early, to my brother, being told that he was in the
Cedar parlour, writing. He received us like himself. I am writing, said he, a
few very short Letters. They are to demand the felicitations, one, of our
beloved Caroline; one of our aunt Grandison; one of the Earl of G. and one of
our dear Dr. Bartlett. There is another; you may read it, Charlotte.

That also was a short one; to signify, according to promise, as I found, to
Signor Jeronymo della Porretta, the actual celebration of his Nuptials. I
returned it -- 'Like my brother,' was all I said. It concluded with a caution,
given in the most ardent terms, against precipitating the admirable Clementina.

We went up to the Bride. She was dressing. Her aunt was with her, and her two
cousin Holles's, who went not home the preceding night.

The moment we entered, she ran to us; and, clasping her arms about my neck,
hid her blushing face in my bosom -- My dearest, dearest Lady G. murmured she
-- Am I indeed your Sister, your Sister Grandison? And will you love me as well
as ever?

My dearest, lovely Sister! My own Sister Grandison! My Brother's Wife! Most
sincerely do I repeat, Joy, Joy, Joy, to my Harriet!

O Lady G! How you raise me! Your goodness is a seasonable goodness to me! I
never, never, but by yours and your sister's example, shall be worthy of your
brother!

Then disengaging herself from my arms; Yesterday, Lucy, said she, was a happy,
happy Day! I have but one, one regret -- There is a Lady in the world that
deserves the best of men better than your Harriet -- And, lifting up her hands
and eyes, God preserve and protect her! -- She shall be the subject of my
prayers, as often as I pray for myself, and for him who is dearer to me than
myself.

Then embracing Emily; Wish me Joy, my Love! In my Joy shall you find your own!

Emily wept, and even sobbed -- You must, you must, treat me less kindly,
madam. I cannot, cannot bear your good -- your goodness. On my knees I
acknowledge my other Guardian. God bless my dear, dear Lady Grandison!

At that moment, as they were folded in each other's arms, entered my brother
-- He clasped his round his sweet Bride; pardon this intrusion, said he --
Excellent creature, continue to love my Emily! -- Continue, my dear Emily, to
deserve the sisterly love of my Harriet!

Then turning to me, saluting me, My Charlotte loves my Harriet; so does our
Caroline. She fondly loves you both. God continue your love to each other! What
Sisters has Yesterday's happy event given to each other! -- What a Wife to me!
-- We will endeavor, my Love (to her) to deserve our happiness; and, I humbly
trust, it will be continued to us.

He saluted Mrs. Selby -- My own Aunt Selby! What obligations am I under to
you, and to our venerable Mrs. Shirley, for giving to an Angel an Angel's
education, and conferring on me the blessing!

Congratulate me, my dear Cousin Holles's, saluting each. May you both be as
happy, whenever you alter your single state, as I will endeavor to make your
lovely Cousin!

He withdrew, bowing to us, and with so much respectfulness to the happy
Harriet, as delighted us all.

Lucy went down with him, to pay her morning compliments to the two
Grandmamma's.

Sister, said Kitty Holles, after he was gone -- we never, never, can think of
marrying, after we have seen Sir Charles Grandison, and his behavior.

Lucy came up with Nancy. They embraced their cousin. Your grandmamma and my
grandmamma, my dearest cousin, are impatient to see you, in your grandmamma's
chamber; and the gentlemen are crying out for their breakfasts in the great
parlour. We hurried down. The Bride threw herself at her grandmamma's feet, for
her blessing. It was given in such a tender and pious manner, that we were all
affected by it. The best of Sons, of Men, said she, afterward, has but just
left me. What a blessing to all around him, is a good man! Sir Charles
Grandison is everything. But, my dear Loves, to the younger Ladies, Let a good
man, let life, let manners, be the principal motive of your choice: In goodness
will you have every sanction; and your Fathers, Mothers, Relations, Friends,
every joy! My dearest Love, my Harriet, taking her hand, there was a time that
I thought no man on earth could deserve you: Now it is my prayer, and will be,
that you may deserve this man. But let us join the gentlemen. Fear not, my
Harriet -- Sir Charles's character will preserve with every one its dignity,
and give a sanction to the solemnity that has united you to him. My dearest
Love! be proud, and look assured: You may, or who can? Yesterday's transaction
is your Glory; glory in it, my Harriet!

We attended the two elder Ladies down. Harriet, as bashful people ever do,
increased her own difficulties, by staying behind with her Lucy. We were all
seated at the breakfast-tables, and staid for them: Mr. Selby grew impatient;
every one having declared themselves ready for breakfast. At last, down came
the blushing Bride, with her Lucy. Sir Charles seeing Mr. Selby's countenance
turning peevishly arch; just as he had begun 'Let me tell you, Niece,' and was
coming out with something, he arose, and taking his Bride's hand, led her to
her seat. Hush, my dear Mr. Selby, said he; Nobody must call to account my
Wise, and I present. -- How, Sir! How, Sir! Already have I lost my Niece?

Not so, Mr. Selby. All her duties will have strength given them by the happy
event of yesterday: But you must not let a new-married man see how much easier
it is to find fault than to be faultless.

Your servant, Sir! replied Mr. Selby -- You Will one day pay for your
complaisance, or my Niece is not a woman. But I was ready primed. You have
robbed me of a jest; and that, let me tell you, would have been more to me than
my breakfast.

After breakfast, Lucy gave us a lesson on the harpsichord. Sir Charles
accompanied her finger, at the desire of the company.

Lord and Lady W. excused themselves to breakfast, but came to dinner. We
entertained one another with reports of what passed yesterday; what people
said; how the tenants feast was managed; how the populace behaved at the houses
which were kept open. The Churchwardens List was produced of the Poor
recommended by them: It amounted to upwards of 140, divided into two classes;
one of the acknowleged poor, the other of poor housekeepers and laboring
people who were ashamed to apply; but to whom the Churchwardens knew bounty
would be acceptable. There were above thirty of these, to whom Sir Charles gave
very handsomely, but we knew not what. The Churchwardens, who are known to be
good men, went away blessing him, with hearts running over at their lips, as if
they themselves were to find their account in his goodness.

Saturday.
WE have had a smart debate this morning, on the natural independency of our
Sex, and the usurpation of the other. Particulars by-and-by.

My brother is an irresistible man. Tomorrow he has carried it to make his
appearance at Church, against all their first intentions, and that by their own
consents. He had considered everything: They had not. Mr. Beauchamp has
Letters which require him to go up to town: Lord and Lady W. are desirous to
get thither; my Lord having some gouty warnings: I am obliged to go up; having
hated to set about anything preparatory to your case, Caroline! [If the wretch
were to come in my way just now, I should throw my standish at him, I believe.]
The Earl and Lady Gertrude are in town; and I am afraid of another reprimand.
The Earl never jests but he means the same as if he were serious. I shall take
Emily with me, when I go. Mrs. Reeves wants to be with her little boy. Yet all
these people are desirous to credit the appearance. -- I had like to have
forgot your good man -- He longs to see his Caroline; and hopes to engage my
brother to stand in person as his urchin's sponsor. So you see that there is a
necessity to consent to make the appearance tomorrow, or the Bride will lose
the flower of her company.

On Monday it stands determined, that Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, Mr. Beauchamp,
Emily, Lord L. Lord and Lady W. myself, and Lord G. will set out for London.

God continue the happiness of this charming Pair! Their behavior to each
other is just what I would wish it to be; tender, affectionate, without fulsome
fondness, He cannot be more respectful to the dear creature now, than he was
before marriage: But from his present behavior, I dare answer for him, that he
will not be less so: And yet he is so lively, that he has all the young man in
his behavior, whenever occasions call for relaxation; even when subjects
require seriousness, as they do sometimes, in conversations between Mrs.
Shirley, Mrs. Selby, Mr. Deane, and him; his seriousness, as Mrs. Shirley
herself finely observed in his absence, is attended with such vivacity, and
intermingled with such entertaining illustrations, all naturally arising from
and falling into the subject, that he is sure of every one's attention and
admiration. The features of his manly face, and the turn of his fine eye,
observed she, on another occasion, are cast for pity, and not for censure. And
let me add a speech of his, when he was called upon to censure a person, on a
slight representation of facts. 'The whole matter is not before us, said he: We
know not what motives he may have to plead by way of extenuation, though he may
not be able entirely to excuse himself. But, as it appears to me, I would not
have done so.'

But what, my dear, am I about? Are they not my brother's praises that I am
expatiating upon? Was I ever to be trusted with that subject? Is there no man,
I have been asked, that is like your brother? -- He, I have answered, is most
likely to resemble him, who has an unbounded charity, and universal
benevolence, to men of all professions; and who imitating the Divinity, regards
the heart, rather than the head, and much more than either rank or fortune,
though it were princely; and yet is not a leveller, but thinks that rank or
degree intitles a man who is not utterly unworthy of both, to respect.

I will write one more Letter, and then give way to other affairs. I never
thought I should have been such a scribbler. But the correspondence between my
Brother and Dr. Bartlett, into which we were all so eager to peep; that of this
dear creature with her Lucy, which so much entertained us, and which led us, in
her absence, to wish to continue the series of it; the story of Clementina so
interesting; all our suspenses so affecting, and the state of this our lovely
friend's heart so peculiar; and the task removed from you to me, of promoting
and contributing to the correspondence: All these, together, led me on. But now
one Letter more shall conclude my task.

Lord L. has just now mentioned to my brother his wishes that he would stand
Godfather to the little Lord. My brother caught his hand, and besought his
pardon for not offering himself. You do me, my dear Lord, said he, both honor
and pleasure. Where was my thought? But this dear creature, turning to his
Bride, will be so good as to remind me of all my imperfections. I am in a way
to mend; for the duties inseparable from my delightful new engagement will
strengthen all my other duties.

I have taken upon me, Sir, said she, to request the favor of my Lord and Lady
L's acceptance of me for a Godmother.

To which I have objections, said I. I have a prior claim. Aunt Eleanor has put
in hers, Lady W. hers, and this before Miss Byron was Lady Grandison.

Your circumstance, my dear Lady G. according to a general observation of our
Sex, is prohibitory.

Will you, my brother, appealed I, allow of superstitious observances,
prognostics, omens, dreams?

O no! My Harriet has been telling me how much she suffered lately from a
dream, which she permitted to give strength and terror to her apprehensions
from Mr. Greville. Guard, my dear Ladies, against these imbecillities of tender
minds. In these instances, if in no other, will you give a superiority to our
Sex, which, in the debate of this morning, my Charlotte would not allow of.

I will begin my next Letter with an account of this debate; and if I cannot
comprise it in the compass I intend to bring it into, my one more Letter may
perhaps stretch into two.

LETTER LV. Lady G. In Continuation.
THE debate I mentioned, began on Friday morning at breakfast-time; brought on
by some of uncle Selby's good-natured particularities; for he will always have
something to say against women. I bespoke my brother's neutrality, and declared
I would enter the lists with Mr. Selby, and allow all the other men present to
be of his side. I had a flow of spirits. Man's usurpation, and woman's natural
independency, was the topic. I carried on my argument very triumphantly:
Now-and-then a sly hint, popt out by my brother, half-disconcerted me; but I
called him to order, and he was silent: Yet once he had like to have put me out
-- Wrapping his arms about himself, with inimitable humor -- O my Charlotte,
said he, how I love my country; ENGLAND is the only spot in the world, in which
this argument can be properly debated! -- Very sly -- Was it not?

I made nothing of Mr. Selby. I called him the tyrant of the family. And as
little of Mr. Deane, Lord L. and still less of my own Lord, who was as eager in
the debate as if it concerned him more than anybody to resist me; and this
before my brother; who by his eyes, more than once, seemed to challenge me,
because of the sorry creature's earnestness. All those, however, were men of
straw with me; and I thought myself very near making Mr. Selby ask pardon of
his Dame for his thirty years usurpation. In short, I had half-established our
Sex's superiority on the ruin of that of the sorry fellows, when the debate was
closed, and referred to Mrs. Shirley, as moderatrix; my brother still excluded
any share in it. -- She indeed obliged me to lower my topsails a little.

'I think, said the venerable Lady, women are generally too much considered as
a species apart. To be sure, in the duties and affairs of life, where they have
different or opposite shares allotted them by Providence, they ought not to go
out of their own sphere, or invade the men's province, any more than the men
theirs. Nay, I am so much of this opinion, that though I think the confidence
which some men place in their wives, in committing all their affairs to their
care, very flattering to the opinion both of their integrity and capacity; yet
I should not choose (and that not out of laziness to avoid the trouble) to
interfere with the management without doors, which I think more properly the
man's province, unless in some particular cases.

'But in common intercourse and conversation, why are we to be perpetually
considering the Sex of the person we are talking to? Why must women always be
addressed in an appropriated language; and not treated on the common footing of
reasonable creatures? And why must they, from a false notion of modesty, be
afraid of showing themselves to be such,and affect a childish ignorance?

'I do not mean, that I would have women enter into learned disputes, for which
they are rarely qualified: But I think there is a degree of knowledge very
compatible with their duties; therefore not unbecoming them, and necessary to
make them fit companions for men of sense: A character in which they will
always be found more useful than that of a plaything, the amusement of an idle
hour.

'No person of sense, man or woman, will venture to launch out on a subject
with which they are not well acquainted. The lesser degree of knowledge will
give place to the greater. This will secure subordination enough. For the
advantages of education which men must necessarily have over women, if they
have made the proper use of them, will have set them so forward on the race,
that we can never overtake them. But then don't let them despise us for this,
as if their superiority were entirely founded on a natural difference of
capacity! Despise us as women, and value themselves merely as men: For it is
not the hat or cap which covers the head, that decides of the merit of it.

'In the general course of the things of this world, women have not
opportunities of sounding the depths of science, or of acquainting themselves
perfectly with polite literature: But this want of opportunity is not entirely
confined to them. There are professions among the men no more favorable to
these studies, than the common avocations of women. For example; merchants,
whose attention is (and perhaps more usefully, as to public utility) chained
down to their accounts. Officers, both of land and sea, are seldom much better
instructed, though they may perhaps, pass through a few more forms: And as for
knowledge of the world, women of a certain rank have an equal title to it with
some of them. A learned man, as he is called, who should despise a sensible one
of these professions, and disdain to converse with him, would pass for a
pedant; and why not for despising or undervaluing a woman of sense, who may be
put on the same footing? Men, in common conversation, have laid it down for a
rule of good breeding, not to talk before women of things they don't
understand; by which means, an opportunity of improvement is lost; a very good
one too; one that has been approved by the ablest persons who have written on
the education of children, because it is a means of learning insensibly,
without the appearance of a task. Common subjects afford only commonplace, and
are soon exhausted: Why, then, should conversation be confined to such narrow
limits, and be liable to continual repetition; when, if people would start less
beaten subjects, many doubts and difficulties concerning them might be cleared
up, and they would acquire a more settled opinion of things (which is what the
generality much want, from an indolence that hinders them from examining) at
the same time that they would be better entertained, than with talking of the
weather, and such kind of insipidities.'

Lady W. applauding Mrs. Shirley's sentiments, Apropos, said she; let me read
you the speech (taking it out of her Pocketbook) of an East India officer, to
a pedant, who had been displaying his talents, and running over with terms of
art, and scraps of Latin, mingled with a profusion of hard words, that hardly
any of the company understood; and which, at the same time that it diverted all
present, cured the pretended scholar of his affectation for ever after. My Lady
read it as follows:

'I am charmed with this opportunity, said the officer, of discoursing with a
gentleman of so much wit and learning; and hope I shall have his decision in a
point which is pretty nice, and concerns some Eastern manufactures, of ancient
and reverend etymology. Modern critics are undetermined about them; but, for my
part, I have always maintained, that Chints, Bullbulls, Morees, and
Ponabaguzzy's, are of nobler and more generous uses than Doorguzzees or
Nourfurmannys: Not but I hold against Byrampauts in favor of Niccannees and
Boralchauders. Only I wish, that so accurate 2 judge would instruct me, why
Tapzils and Sallampores have given place to Neganepauts? And why Bejatapoutz
should be more esteemed than the finer fabric of Blue Chelloes Transcribed
from a collection of papers, entitled, The Plain-dealer, in 2 Vols. Vol. 1.
No. 37.
?

A very good rebuke of affectation, said Sir Charles (and your Ladyship hints
it was an efficacious one). It serves to show, that men, in their different
seize, may be equally useful; in other words, that the knowledge of polite
literature leads not to every part of useful science. I remember, that my
Harriet distinguishes very properly, in some of her Letters to her Lucy,
between Language and Science; and that poor Mr. Walden (that I think was his
name) was pretty much disconcerted, as a pedant may sometimes be, when (and he
bowed to his Harriet) he has a natural genius to contend with. She blushed, and
bowed as she sat -- And I remember, Sir, said she, you promised to give me your
animadversions on the Letters I consented you should see: Will you be pleased
to correct me, now?

Correct you, my dearest Life! -- What a word is that? I remember, that, in the
conversation in which you were obliged, against your will, to bear so
considerable a part, you demonstrated, that genius, without deep learning, made
a much more shining figure in conversation, than learning without genius: But,
upon the whole, I was a little apprehensive, that true learning might suffer,
if languages were too slightly treated. Mr. Walden made one good observation,
or rather remembered it, for it was long ago made, and will be always of weight,
that the knowledge of languages, any more than the advantage of birth, was never
thought lightly of by those who had pretensions to either. The knowledge of the
Latin language, in particular, let me say, is of singular use in the mastery of
every science.

There are who aver, that men of parts have no occasion for learning: But,
surely, our Shakespeare himself, one of the greatest genius's of any country or
age (who, however, is an adept in the superior learning, the knowledge of
nature) would not have been a sufferer, had he had that greater share of human
learning which is denied him by some critics.

But, Sir Charles, said Mr. Deane, don't you think that Shakespeare, who lived
before the great Milton, has an easier, pleasanter, and more intelligible
manner of writing, than Milton? If so, may it not be owing to Milton's greater
learning, that Shakespeare has the advantage of that immortal poet in
perspicuity?

Is the fact certain, my dear Mr. Deane, that Milton wants perspicuity? I have
been bold enough sometimes to think, that he makes a greater display of his
reading, than was quite necessary to his unbounded subject. But the age in
which Shakespeare flourished, might be called, The age of English Learning, as
well as of English Bravery. The Queen and her court, the very Ladies of it,
were more learned than any court of our English Sovereigns was before, or has
been since. What a prodigy of learning, in the short reign of Edward the VIth,
was the Lady Jane Gray! -- Greek, as well as Latin, was familiar to her: So it
was to Queen Elizabeth. And can it be supposed, that the natural genius's of
those Ladies were more confined, or limited, for their knowledge of Latin and
Greek? Milton, though a little nearer us, lived in harsher and more tumultuous
times.

O, Sir! said Harriet, then I find I was a very impertinent creature in the
conversation to which you refer.

Not so, my dearest Love! -- Mr. Walden, I remember, says, that learning in
that assembly was not brought before a fair tribunal. He should have known,
that it had not a competent advocate in him.

But, Sir Charles, said Mr. Beachamp, I cannot but observe, that too much
stress is laid upon Learning, as it is called, by those who have pretensions to
it. You will not always find, that a scholar is a more happy man than an
unlearned one. He has not generally more prudence, more wisdom, in the
management of his affairs.

What, my dear Beauchamp, is this saying, but that there is great difference
between theory and practice? This observation comes very generously, and, with
regard to the Ladies, very gallantly, from you, who are a learned man: But as
you are also a very prudent man, let me ask you, Do you think you have the less
prudence for your learning? If not, Is not learning a valuable addition?

But pray, Sir Charles, said Mrs. Selby, let me ask your opinion: Do you think,
that if women had the same opportunities, the same education, as men, they
would not equal them, in their seize?

Women, my dear Mrs. Selby, are women sooner than men are men. They have not,
therefore, generally, the learning-time that men have, if they had equal
genius's.

'If they had equal genius's,' brother. Very well. My dear Sister Harriet, you
see you have given your hand to one of the Lords of the creation! -- Vassal!
bow to your Sovereign.

Sir Chapter My dearest Love, take not the advice without the example.

Lady G. Your servant, Sir. Well, but let me ask you, Do you think that there
is a natural inferiority in the faculties of the one Sex? A natural superiority
in those of the other?

Sir Chapter Who will answer this question for me?

Not I, said Lord L. Not I, said Mr. Deane. Not I, said Mr. Beauchamp.

Then I have fairly taken you in -- You would, if you could, answer it in the
Ladies favor: This is the same as a confession. I may therefore the more
boldly pronounce, that, generally speaking, I have no doubt but there is.

Help me, dear Ladies, said I, to fight this battle out. You say, Sr, you have
no doubt that there is a natural inferiority in the faculties of us, poor
women; a natural superiority in you, imperial men.

Generally speaking, Charlotte. Not individually you Ladies, and us men: I
believe all we who are present, shall be ready to subscribe to your
superiority, Ladies.

I believe, brother, you fib: But let that pass.

Thank you, madam. It is for my advantage that it should; and perhaps for
yours, smiling -- There is a difference, pardon me, Ladies, we are speaking
generally, in the constitution, in the temperament, of the two Sexes, that
gives to the one advantages which it denies to the other: But we may not too
closely pursue this subject; though the result, I am apt to believe, would put
the matter out of dispute. Let us be more at large: Why has nature made a
difference in the beauty, proportion, and symmetry, in the persons of the two
Sexes? Why gave it delicacy, softness, grace, to that of the woman -- as in the
Ladies before me; strength, firmness, to men; a capacity to bear labor and
fatigue; and courage, to protect the other? Why gave it a distinction, both in
qualities and plumage, to the different sexes of the feathered race? Why in the
courage of the male and female animals? -- The surly bull, the meek, the
beneficent, cow, for one instance?

We looked upon one another.

There are exceptions to general rules, proceeded he. Mrs. Shirley surpasses
all the men I ever knew, in wisdom -- Mrs. Selby and Lady G. --

What of us, brother! What of us -- to the advantage of your argument?

Heroic Charlotte! -- You are both very happily married -- The men the women,
the women the men, you can mutually assist and improve each other. But still --

Your servant, brother, interrupted I. -- Your servant, Sir Charles, said Mrs.
Selby -- And I say, Your servant too, said Mr. Selby.

Who sees not that my sister Charlotte is ready to disclaim the competition in
fact, though not in words? Can there be characters more odious than those of a
masculine woman, and an effeminate man? What are the distinguishing
characteristics of the two Sexes? And whence this odiousness? There are,
indeed, men, whose minds, if I may be allowed the expression, seem to be cast
in a Female mould; whence the fops, foplings, and pretty fellows, who buz about
your Sex at public places; women, whose minds seem to be cast in a masculine
one; whence your Barnevelts, my dear, and most of the women who, at such
places, give the men stare for stare, swing their arms, look jolly; and those
married women who are so kind as to take the reins out of their husbands hands,
in order to save the honest men trouble.

Your servant, Sir -- Your servant, Sir -- And some of them looked as if they
had said, You cannot mean me, I hope; and those who spoke not, bowed and smiled
thanks for his compliment to one fourth of the Sex.

My Lord insultingly rubbed his hands for joy; Mr. Selby crowed; the other men
slily smiled, though they were afraid of giving a more open approbation.

O my Sister! said I, taking Harriet's hand, we women are mere Nothings -- We
are nothing at all!

How, my Charlotte! Make you no difference between being Everything and
Nothing?

Were it not, my dear Ladies, proceeded he, for male protectors, to what
insults, to what outrages, would not your Sex be subject? Pardon me, my dearest
Love, if I strengthen my argument by your excellencies, bowing to his Harriet.
Is not the dear creature our good Mrs. Shirley's own Daughter? All the feminine
graces are here. She is, in my notion, what all women should be -- But wants
she not a protector? Even a dream, a resverie --

O Sir, spare me, spare me! sweetly blushing, said the lovely Harriet. I own I
should have made a very silly, a very pusilanimous man! It is not long since,
you know, Lady G. that I brought this very argument in favor of --

Hush, Harriet! You will give up the Female cause.

That is not fair, Charlotte, rejoined my brother; you should not intercept the
convictions of an ingenuous mind -- But I will spare my Harriet, if she will
endeavor, for her own sake, to let nothing disturb her for the future but
realities, and not any of these long, if they are inevitable ones.

But pray, Sir, said I, proceed in your argument, if you have any more to say.

O Charlotte! I have enough to say, to silence all your opposition, were I to
give this subject its due weight. But we are only, for pleasantry-sake,
skimming over the surface of the argument. Weaker powers are given generally
for weaker purposes, in the economy of Providence. I, for my part, however,
disapprove not of our venerable Mrs. Shirley's observation; That we are apt to
consider the Sex too much as a species apart: Yet it is my opinion that both
God and Nature have designed a very app^rent difference in the minds of both,
as well as in the peculiar beauties of their persons. Were it not so, their
offices would be confounded, and the women would not perhaps so readily submit
to those domestic ones in which it is their province to shine, and the men
would be allotted the distaff, or the needle; and you yourselves, Ladies, would
be the first to despise such. I, for my part, would only contend, that we men
should have power and right given us to protect and serve your Sex; that we
should purchase and build for them; travel and toil for them; run through, at
the call of Providence, or of our King and Country, dangers and difficulties;
and, at last, lay all our trophies, all our acquirements, at your feet; enough
rewarded in the conscience of duty done, and your favorable acceptance.

We were all of us again his humble servants. It was in vain to argue the
tyranny of some husbands, when he could turn upon us the follies of some wives;
and that wives and daughters were never more faulty, more undomestic, than at
present; and when we were before a judge, that, though he could not be absolutely
unpolite, would not flatter us, nor spare our foibles.

However, if stuck a little with Harriet, that she had given Cause to Sir
Charles, in the dispute which she formerly bore a part in, relating to learning
and languages, to think her more lively than she ought to be, and had spoken
too lightly of languages. She sweetly blushing, like a young wife solicitous
for the good opinion of the Beloved of her heart, revived that cause.

He spoke very highly in her praise, upon the occasion; owned, that the Letters
he had been favored with the sight of, had given him deeper impressions in her
favor, than even her Beauty: Hoped for farther communications; applauded her
for her principles, and her inoffensive vivacity -- That sweet, that innocent
vivacity, and noble frankness of heart, said he, taking her hand, which I hope
you will never think of restraining.

As to the conversation you speak of, proceeded he, I repeat, that I was
apprehensive, when I read it, that languages were spoken of in it slightly; and
yet, perhaps, I am mistaken. You, my Beauchamp, I think, if my dearest Life
will oblige us both by the communication, and chooses to do so (for that must
be the condition on which all her goodness to us must be expected) shall be
judge between us: You know, better than I, what stories of unexhausted
knowledge lie in the works of those great Ancients, which suffered in the hands
of poor Mr. Walden: You know what the past and present ages have owed, and what
all future will owe, to Homer, Aristotle, Virgil, Cicero: You can take in the
necessity there is of restraining innovation, and preserving old rules and
institutions, and of employing the youth of our Sex, who would otherwise be
much worse employed (as we see in those who neglect their studies) in the
attainment of languages that can convey to them such lights in every science:
Though it were to be wished, that morals should take up more of the learner's
attention than they generally do. You know, that the truest parts of learning
are to be found in the Roman and Greek writers; and you know, that translation
(were everything worthy our notice translated) cannot convey those beauties
which scholars only can relish; and which learned foreigners, if a man travels,
will expect should not have escaped his observation. As to the Ladies, Mrs.
Shirley, has admirably observed, that there is a degree of knowledge very
compatible with their duties (Condescending excellence! bowing to Mrs. Shirley)
and highly becoming them; such as will make them rejoice, and, I will add,
improve a man of sense, sweeten his manners, and render him a much more
sociable, a much more amiable creature, and, of consequence, greatly more happy
in himself, than otherwise he would be from books and solitude.

Well but, brother, you said just now, that we were only, for pleasantry-sake,
skimming over the surface of the argument; and that you had enough to say to
silence all my opposition, were you to give the subject its due weight. I do
assure you, that, to silence all my opposition, you must have a vast deal more
to say, than you have said hitherto; and yet you have thrown in some hints
which stick with me, though you have concluded with some magnificent intimations
of superiority over us -- Power and right to protect, travel, toil for us, and
lay your trophies at our feet, and-so-forth -- Surely, surely, this is
diminishing us, and exalting yourselves, by laying us under high obligations to
your generosity. Pray, Sir, let us have, if you please, one or two intimation*
of those weightier arguments, that could, as you fancy, silence your
Charlotte's opposition. I say, that we women, were our education the same --
You know what I would be at -- Your weightier arguments, if you please -- or a
specimen only on passant.

Supposing, my Charlotte, that all human souls are, in themselves, equal; yet
the very design of the different machines in which they are enclosed, is to
superinduce a temporary difference on their original equality; a difference
adapted to the different purposes for which they are designed by Providence in
the present transitory state. When those purposes are at an end, this
difference will be at an end too. When Sex ceases, inequality of Souls will
cease; and women will certainly be on a foot with men, as to intellectuals, in
Heaven. There, indeed, will you no longer have Lords over you: neither will you
have Admirers: Which, in your present estimate of things, will perhaps balance
the account. In the mean time, if you can see any occasions that may call for
stronger understandings in male life, than in your own; you, at the same time,
fee an argument to acquiesce in a persuasion of a present inequality between
the two Sex. You know, I have allowed exceptions. Will you, Charlotte,
compliment yourself with being one?

Now, brother, I feel, methinks, that you are a little hard upon Charlotte:
But, Ladies, you see how the matter stands. -- You are all silent. -- But, Sir,
you graciously allow, that there is a degree of knowledge which is very
compatible with the DUTIES of us women, and highly becoming us: will you have
the goodness to point out to us what this compatible learning is, that we may
not mistake -- and so become excentric, as I may say, burst out orb, and do
more mischief than ever we could do good?

Could I point out the boundaries, Charlotte, it might not to some spirits be
so proper: The limit might be treated as the one prohibited tree in the garden.
But let me say, That genius, whether in man or woman, will push itself into
light. If it has a laudable tendency, let it, as a ray of the Divinity, be
encouraged, as well in the one Sex as in the other: I would not, by any means,
have it limited: A little knowledge leads to vanity and conceit. I would only,
methinks, have a Parent, a Governor, a Preceptor, bend his strength to restrain
its foibles; but not throw so much cold water upon the sacred flame as should
quench it; since, if he did, stupidity, at least dejection, might take place of
the emanation, and the person might be miserable for life.

Well, then, we must compromise, I think, said I: But, on recollection, I
thought I had injoined you, Sir Charles, to the observance of neutrality.
Harriet, whispered I, we are only, after all, to be allowed, as far as I can
find, in this temporary state, like tame doves, to go about house,
and-se-forth, as Biddy says, in the play.

Harriet, could she have found time (But, by mutual consent, they are hardly
ever asunder) would have given you a better account of this conversation than I
have done; so would Lucy: But take it, as it offers, from

Your ever-affectionate CHARLOTTE G.

LETTER LVI. Miss LUCY SELBY, To Lady L.
Sunday, Nov. 19.
MY dear Lady G. insists upon my writing to your Ladyship an account of the
appearance which the loveliest Couple in England made this day at Church.

We all thought nothing could have added to the charms of our Harriet's person;
but yet her dress and jewels did. I sighed, from pride for the honor of Female
Beauty, to think they did. Can my dear Harriet, thought I, exquisitely lovely
as she is in any dress, be ornamented by richer silks than common, by costly
laces, by jewels? Can dress add grace to that admirable proportion, and th^se
fine features, to which no painter yet has ever done justice, though every family
related to her has a picture of her, drawn by a different hand of eminence?

We admired the Bridegroom as much as we did her, when, (before we could have
thought he had been half ready) he joined Mrs. Shirley, my Aunt Selby, and me,
in the great Parlour, completely dressed. But what we most admired in him was,
that native dignity and ease, and that inattentiveness to his own figure and
appearance, which demonstrate the trulyfine gentleman, accustomed, as he is, to
be always elegant.

When his Lady presented herself to him, and to us, in all her glory, how did
the dear creature dazzle us! We involuntarily arose, as if to pay our homage to
her. Sir Charles approached her with rather an air of greater freedom than
usual, as if he considered not the dress, as having added to the value he has
for her: Yet, Loveliest of women, he called her; and taking her hand, presented
her to her grandmamma: Receive, and again bless, my Angel, said he, best of
Parents! -- How lovely! But what is even all this amazing loveliness to the
graces of her mind? They rise upon me every hour. She hardly opens her lips,
but I find reason to bless God, and bless you both, my dear Ladies: For God and
you have given her goodness. -- My dearest Life, allow me to say, that this
sweet person, which will be your first perfection in every stranger's eye, is
but a second in mine.

Instruct me, Sir, said she, bashfully, bowing her face upon his hand, as he
held hers, to deserve your Love, by improving the mind you have the goodness to
prefer; and no creature was ever on earth so happy as I shall be.

My dear Daughter, said her delighted grandmother, you see* can hardly bare
your goodness, Sir. You must blame her for something, to keep down her pride.

My Harriet, replied he, cannot be proud of what the silkworm can do for her,
or of the jeweller's polish: But now you call upon me, madam, I will tax her
with a real fault. I open all my heart to her, as subjects occasionally offer:
I want her to have a will, and to let me know it. The frankest of all Female
hearts will not treat me with that sweet familiarity which banishes distance.
You see, my dearest Love, that I chide you before your parental friends, and
your Lucy.

It is your own fault, Sir: Indeed it is. You prevent me in all my wishes. Awe
will mingle with the Love of persons who are under perpetual obligation. My
dear two mamma's, you must not blame me; you must blame Sir Charles: He takes
away, by his goodness, even the power of making suitable acknowlegements, and
then complains I do not speak.

My uncle Selby came in. He stood looking upon my cousin, for a few moments, in
silence; then broke out, Sir Charles Grandison, you may indeed boast, that you
have for a Wife the Flower of the British world, as you once called her: And,
let me tell you, Niece, you have for a Husband the noblest and gallantest of
men. Happy, happy Pair! say I. My dear Mr. Deane, said he, who just then
entered, if you will keep me in countenance, I will venture to salute that
charming creature.

Sir Charles presented his Bride to them both. With a bent knee she received
their salutes. At that moment came in the three Lords, who followed the
example. Lord W. called her Angel -- Sir Charles looked delighted with the
praises of his Bride.

The rest of the company being come, we proceeded to church.

We were early; but the Church was crowded. How were the charming Couple
admired on their alighting, and as they walked to their pew! Never did my
Cousin herself look so lovely! How charmingly looked the Bridegroom! But he
forgot not that humble deportment, full of reverence for the place, and the
Divine Offices, which seemed to make him absent for the time to that splendour
and beauty which took every eye out of our own pew. His example was enough to
give a proper behavior, had it been needful, to every one in it.

I should have told your Ladyship, that Mr. Greville had sent, ever-night, a
sullenly-complaisant request to my aunt, in writing, importing, that as he
heard the Bride would make her appearance on the morrow, the Bride-men and
maids, if it broke not into our Ceremonial, would accept of his pew, which is
over against ours, for the look of the thing, he said; though he could not
promise but he should all the day curse the occasion. By this we found, he was
not gone to Lady Frampton's, as he had designed. His offer was thankfully
accepted.

There was a great concourse of the genteelest people there. Everybody, men
and women, looked delighted on the occasion. The humility of the Bride was
tried, by the respects paid her between the offices, by all who had ever been
in her company. They should have reined in their own pride; for it was to that,
as much as to respect to her, I doubt not, that their notice was owing. She
looked conscious, bashful; sly, I told her afterward. She hates the word: But,
as I said, she should not have given the idea, that made no other word so
proper to express it, and which must be more observable in her generally open
free countenance, than in that of any other. She more than once saw devoirs
paid her by a leer, when her sweet face was so disposed, that, had she not
returned the compliment, it might have passed that she had not seen them. But
what an Insensible must have been my cousin, had she not been proud of being
Lady Grandison! She is not quite an Angel, yet: She has a few Femalities, as my
uncle whimsically calls our little foibles. So, perhaps, she should. But nobody
saw the least defect in your brother. His dress most charmingly became him; and
when he looked upon his Bride, his eyes were fixed on her eyes, with such a
sweet benignity and complaisance, as if he saw her mind through them, and could
not spare a glance to her ornaments: Yet by his own dress he showed, that he
was not Stoical nonconformist to the fashion of the world. But the politeness
and respect with which he treated her, did them both credit, and credit (as
Lady G. observed) to the whole Sex, Such unaffected tenderness in his respect;
and known to be so brave, so good a man! -- O my dear Lady L. what an admirable
man is your brother! What a happy creature is my Harriet!

When Divine Service was over, I was afraid our Procession, as I may call it,
would have been interrupted by the compliments of some of the gentry of our
acquaintance, whose opened pew-doors showed their readiness to address them:
But all passed in silent respects from Gentlemen and Lady. My cousin, when she
came home, rejoiced that one of her parading times was over: But when, my
dearest Love, said Sir Charles, will the time be past, that all who see you
will admire you?

The Church in the afternoon was still more crowded than before. How were Sir
Charles and my uncle blessed by the poor, and people of low degree, for their
well-dispensed bounty to them!

My cousin has delighted Mrs. Shirly, by telling her, that Sir Charles had said
there would be a Rite wanting, till he and she had communicated, according to
the order of the Church, at the Altar, on this particular occasion.

Just now is everything settled that Sir Charles wished to be settled. Lady G.
will acquaint you with particulars, I doubt not.

Permit me to commend myself to your Ladyship's favors, as one of the

Humblest and sincerest of your Servants, LUCY SELBY.
P. S. Lady G. has half broke my heart.

On perusal of what I have written, she says, I have not done my best: I have
not given half particulars enough. -- In short, she finds a multitude of faults
with me -- Even calls me names, Sorry girl, lazy, and I cannot tell what.

But do you, madam, acquit me, and I shall be easy.

I told her, that I thought I had been very minute.

What! to a lying-in-woman, she says, who has no variety before her! All one
dull chamberscene, hourly acted over again -- The subject so rich!

I answered, It should then have had the richest pen! -- Why did she not write
herself? If it was not for laziness-sake, it was for self-sake, that she did
not. As I knew Lady L. would have been a gainer by the change of pen, I had
much rather have been in the company for which she quitted the task, than
grubbing pens in my closet; and all to get nothing but discommendation.

I have shown her this my Postcript. She raves: But I am hardened. She will
soon have an oppertunity to supply all my defects, in person.



END of VOL. VI

