THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN: BEING A COLLECTION OF USEFUL FAMILY REMEDIES.

TOGETHER WITH PLAIN and FULL DIRECTIONS for Administering them, and properly
Nursing the Sick, where the Advice of a PHYSICIAN is difficult to be procured.

ALSO Some USEFUL OBSERVATIONS upon DIET.

AND A Short Account of those CASES in which BLEEDING and BLISTERS are really
serviceable.

By HUGH SMITH, Apothecary.

The EIGHTH EDITION, considerably enlarged, and interleaved for the Benefit of
the Readers own Remarks.

LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR, at his CHEMICAL WAREHOUSE, No. 57: in
Newgate-Street: And published by G. KEARSLY, NO. 1. Ludgate Street, London.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence, or Two Shillings in Boards.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE institution of Hospitals in this metropolis for the relief of the Poor,
afflicted with bodily infirmities, has been, and justly too, esteemed one of
the noblest of Charities: an Asylum this, to succor the distressed, when their
afflictions render them incapable of laboring for their daily subsistence;
where they receive every indulgence their misfortunes can require: the Sick
being healed, the Lame made sound, and both again rendered fit Members of
Society, oftentimes to the joy of a young family opening their mouths for
bread, -- the fruits of their industry. How laudable such institutions!

From these considerations, great must be the satisfaction of the Benefactors!
This is, indeed, in a very essential point, acting up to the tenets of the
religion we profess, and following the example of our blessed Savior, who went
about healing the Sick, and feeding the Poor.

There are, no doubt, many thousand objects equally claiming our compassion,
who, from distance of situation, are deprived of the relief. It must give
infinite pleasure to every good Christian, to observe such a blessing rendered
universal over this island.

Nothing is more practicable. -- May we live to see some humane and
public-spirited gentleman take it into consideration, and erect Hospitals in
every county in England! Surely no physical persons, from mercenary views, will
object to it! for, if they reflect, they can be no losers in such unhappy
patients being taken off their hands, who have not wherewithal to pay them for
their trouble.

It will also be the means of having more able practitioners in the country: --
A valuable consequence! And, as goodness meets with its own reward, from the
experience of those who are appointed to attend the sick, the Benefactors
themselves may receive a Benefaction.

In some seaport towns there are Hospitals, and it is with pleasure to be
observed that some few counties have adopted the plan; but in the more inland
parts they are greatly wanted, where the inhabitants, though the most
laborious, are the most indigent; and consequently, when infirm, true objects
of compassion.

Until such time as this meritorious work is become more universal, it is
presumed the present design will prove acceptable to the Benevolent, as it, in
some measure, supplies the defect; at a trifling expense enabling the wealthy,
either for their own amusement, or by means of a servant, in the strictest
sense of the word, to render Charity to the Needy.

PREFACE.
THE intention of the Family Physician is, to direct a right use of those
medicines which are necessary to be kept in families, whose distance from a
good practitioner, or any other circumstance, renders an immediate application
in sudden illnesses almost impossible, and occasions those delays in trifling
complaints, which oftentimes prove of very bad consequence. It has been sound
by experience, for want of proper hints and directions in respect to the doses
of medicines, several fatal errors have been committed; either from the
ignorance of persons themselves, or from being obliged to have recourse, for
want of better, to quack medicines, or to the advice of nurses, and such good
women, whose greatest skill extends to the making a posset for a sweat, or a
plaster for a sore shin.

Those captains of ships whose vessels are too small to allow of carrying a
surgeon, and gentlemen whose business may call them to take a long voyage in
such small vessels, or to travel by land through unfrequented or poor places,
or those who are going to settle in any of his Majesty's plantations, will find
a great advantage from being thus enabled, in cases of necessity, to become
their own physicians; and we often see that Nature, with a little assistance,
will free the constitution from disorders which are not too deeply rooted, or
very malignant in their first attack. I would by no means be understood to
pretend, that the medicines I here recommend are infallible in the respective
disorders they are prescribed for. They are, for the most part, such only as
are to be found in the Dispensatory of the College of Physicians: where I have
been under a necessity of compounding, I have attended to the practice of the
principal physicians in town, and my own experience, in selecting such
medicines whose operations are the least dangerous. Thus far, however, I will
venture to assert, that, by following these directions, which are plain and
easy, and written in a style fitted to the meanest capacity, perspicuity being
always preferable to elegance in this kind of writing, the patient may, by
applying what is necessary in time, prevent those ills that follow from
neglect, which good nursing and a few innocent things might at first remove.

Those who have a knowledge in physic, and do not stand in need of my
assistance, will, in the chests, find many useful medicines to be kept at hand;
and may extend their practice, by giving me a catalogue of such others as they
would choose to have added.

Ladies and gentlemen, who reside in the country, will hereby be enabled to
assist their poor neighbors; which many of them, I doubt not, would take a
pleasure in doing, did they but know what to apply.

With each chest of medicines may be had a box of scales and weights; each
weight marked distinctly, that any person may at once adjust the proper
quantity for a dose.

As many persons may choose to keep by them what is proper for their own
particular complaints, whom it may not suit to have the box complete, I think
it necessary to mention, that any of the medicines here recommended may be had
separately, or as many of them as agreeable, packed up in lesser boxes for the
convenience of carriage.

For the satisfaction of the public, in order that they may depend upon the
medicines, I think it necessary to mention that such compositions as are not
made under my immediate inspection are prepared at Apothecaries-Hall.

WEIGHTS used in PRESCRIPTION.

A pound TROY, containing Twelve ounces. An ounce TROY, containing Eight drams.
A dram TROY, containing Three scruples. A scruple TROY, containing Twenty
grains.
Sixteen ounces in measure are equal to one pint.

The MEDICINE CHESTS (in Deal) are seven, or eleven guineas;

The MEDICINE CHESTS (in Mahogany) are nine or thirteen guineas; Utensils
included.

A CHEST may be purchased for five guineas; but as the medicines are upwards of
sixty in number, the quantity of each particular article must necessarily be so
small, that it does not completely answer the purpose, and therefore is not
recommended. The size of the MEDICINE CHEST may be increased to any further
price, according to the largeness of the family, distance of place, or
extensiveness of the plan for which it is designed.

SMALL CABINETS, very neatly fitted up, and convenient for traveling; complete
with medicines, price eight guineas.

LARGE, ELEGANT CABINETS, forming a handsome piece of furniture for a lady's
dressing room at a country house, complete with medicines, price twenty-five
guineas.

The very lowest prices are fixed, and no orders will be executed but for ready
money.

By the Public's most obedient humble servant, HUGH SMITH.
If the following utensils are not wanted, their value will be deducted in the
price of the Chest. l. s. d. Scales and weights 0 5 0 A marble mortar and
pestle 0 8 0 Measures and funnel 0 2 6 Knives and tile 0 2 0 A spatula 0 1 6
Lancet 0 2 0 1 1 0



INTRODUCTION.
IT has been suggested to the author, that it would be more eligible to print
the Family Physician in a small pocket-volume, the size of his Letters to
Married Women, and indeed he had some thoughts of so printing this edition;
but, upon mature deliberation, a quarto seems best calculated to answer the
intention of this work.

The Family Physician is seldom or never removed from the place where the
medicines are kept, which in some measure obviates the objection to a quarto
volume: add to this the advantage of a larger margin, which enables the reader
to make his own notes and observations; and the blank sheets which are now
interleaved will further assist the laudable designs of the intelligent and
benevolent.

The author received the last hint from a person of fashion, who has made a
very judicious use of blank leaves, by inserting the histories of remarkable
cases opposite to the medicines which effected a cure. Such memorandums may not
only prove serviceable to those who take the trouble of making them, but may
likewise assist others upon a future occasion.

Experience in physic is the wisest path to tread; and considering what poor
crazy constitutions too many of the human race unhappily sustain, and the
various disorders which even the most robust are liable to, no one can be too
particular in remarking such innocent remedies as may relieve slight
indispositions, and consequently prevent terrible and fatal diseases.

Good nursing is a point which has either been too much neglected, or mistaken;
nevertheless it is of the first consequence toward the cure of diseases, and
the preserving of delicate and feeble constitutions. It is equally so to render
advanced age easy and comfortable; and to preserve helpless infants. To
speculative minds it must be matter of astonishment to observe the fatality
amongst children, which the following table of births and infantburials,
collected from the bills of mortality, presents for their serious consideration.

Total number of births. Burials under 5 years of age. Burials under 2 years of
age. In 1762 15351 10659 8372 1763 15133 11163 820O 1764 16801 9699 7673 1765
16374 9948 8073 1766 16257 10197 8035 1767 15980 9489 7668 1768 16042 10670
8229 1769 16714 10061 8016 1770 17109 10121 7994 1771 17072 9447 7617 10)
162833 10) 101454 10) 79877 16283 10145 7987

The average upon the last ten years.

Thus we see that almost two thirds of the children born in this metropolis and
its environs are entirely lost to society: 16283 are, upon the average, the
annual births; 10145 the infantburials; and, what deserves particular
attention, 7987 are cut off before they are two years old, which is more than
three fourths of those children who die under five years of age. How ardently
therefore is it to be wished that such a fatality could be prevented I -- it
may be prevented.

Is it not affecting, that so many beings, just entering into life, should be
so untimely cut off, to the detriment of society, and the affliction of their
weeping mothers? It is, truly, a subject of commiseration, a scene which draws
a silent tear from the eye of humanity, and pierces the wounded bosoms of
afflicted parents. -- Above three fourths of these little innocents fall a
sacrifice under two years old. It is well known, that the thrush and watery
gripes generally terminate their existence in the early months; and if they
survive these maladies, the time of teething too frequently brings on a fatal
catastrophe.

Could we but conquer the prejudices of the times, and abolish unnatural and
absurd practices; could we but restore that natural and simple method of
rearing children, which the all-wise Giver of life has sufficiently pointed
out; did we but confine them to that nutriment which HE has prepared for their
first state of existence; and consult that reason which He has bestowed upon us
to conduct them forwards -- all would be well. But alas, indolence and luxury
forbid the task! Nevertheless, to the rational few the following remarks are
submitted.

The thrush and watery gripes are, in the author's opinion, artificial
diseases, and both of them totally occasioned by improper food; such as all
kinds of pap, whether made from flour, bread, or biscuit: they all cause too
much fermentation in the stomach, and irritate their tender bowels beyond what
nature can support. This appears to him to be the evident cause of the
beforementioned complaints.

When infants are past this period, the danger in cutting their teeth is justly
to be feared. This difficulty proceeds altogether from a weakness of
constitution, arising from the same first mistaken cause in point of diet: and
here a train of dreadful symptoms present themselves; the head, the stomach,
the bowels, are all at times terribly affected; a general wasting of the body
frequently ensues, and unconquerable fevers prevail, which generally terminate
in convulsions and death.

To prevent all these unhappy consequences, let us but for a moment reflect
that every mother is designed by Nature to foster her own child. If the breast
is not to be obtained, cows milk is in general to be preferred For the
preservation of children, the author has caused the Milk-pots, which he
invented to supply the place of the breast, to be made in the Queen's ware, in
order that the poor, who cannot afford to purchase silver ones, may be
accommodated; and this natural method of feeding infants with milk only will,
upon experiment, be found so much more convenient to their nurses, that he
hopes to see it generally adopted, whereby the lives of thousands will annually
be preserved. A piece of fine rag should be tied loosely round the spout of the
Milk-pot, with which the children will be equally pleased as with the nipple of
the breast itself.


to any kind of sood that can be invented, because it is nearly similar to that
which Nature intended. But it would be swelling these pages unnecessarily to
enter further upon the management of children, as the treatise promised in the
preface to the last edition of this work is now published under the title of
LETTERS TO MARRIED WOMEN, which is intended as a companion for the sick chamber
and the nursery.

This book is dedicated to the ladies, as a grateful tribute due to them for
their tender care; an humble offering meet to be laid at the feet of those,
whose compassion and delicacy greatly contribute to render the misfortunes of
life supportable, and whose not least endearing province is, where amiable
characters may be drawn, the sick chamber and the nursery.

It would be ungrateful in the author not to acknowledge the candor with which
the public have been pleased to receive that little volume, although it
contains some doctrines repugnant to the present opinions. With a view then to
promote the happiness and comfort of his fellow creatures, and to preserve
helpless infants from their present almost certain death, he begs leave to
recommend the perusal of those Letters to such as are likely to have a young
family; and also to those whose duty may require their attendance in a sick
chamber, and likewise to invalids. They will most assuredly find their account
in attending to the maxims there laid down, which are evident to common sense,
and the result of an assiduous attention to the duties of his profession; and
it may with truth be added, that they have the further sanction of many years
successful experience.

THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN.
ON DIET.
WHEN the physician, by means of medicines, has subdued a disease, unless the
patient is put upon a proper method of diet, exercise, etc. to prevent a
relapse, his work is oftentimes in vain. A few observations upon food, to
enable persons, in some measure, to judge for themselves of the fit or unfit,
will, I trust, prove acceptable; as physic and good nursing ought ever to go
hand in hand. My reader will remember I am giving directions to invalids; the
glutton will not be satisfied with my meal, neither will the epicure relish my
dishes. Yet I would wish this friendly caution to be attended to even by the
vaunters of health; place not too much confidence in the supposed strength of a
good constitution, one night's debauch may too late convince you -- you are
mistaken.

First, with respect to Vegetables. Those who would wish to live free from
burning fevers, and escape the rage of inflammatory disorders, particularly if
their constitutions have been already shaken by such complaints, cannot use
them too plentifully; those whose stomachs are weakened by disease, will find
the tender vegetable diet frees them from the oppressive labor, that slted
meats require to make them fit for nourishment: on the contrary, where the
constitution is subject to gouty complaints, and particularly if the stomach
has been affected by frequent spasms, such persons must be exceedingly cautious
in the use or vegetables, especially at the time the stomach is disordered. One
gross mistake which we lie under I cannot pass by unnoticed; I mean the
pernicious practice of eating pepper with such food, and it is still worse if
it be not finely powdered, which is generally the case; gouty persons who plead
this necessity, would do better to avoid vegetables; and the common argument in
vindication of its supposed excellency is, that it prevents vegetables from
colicking. I am well convinced, and speak from experience, that it is
oftentimes the reason why vegetables occasion the colic, which might clearly
be demonstrated: but it is not my business here to enter into arguments; all
that I mean, is to give some useful hints to those who find it necessary to
nurse themselves, and to correct some common errors in our method of living.
Thus far I grant, if the man who has been long accustomed to highseasoned
soups, rich wines, and cordial liquors, was of a sudden to change his diet to
melons and cucumbers, he would very probably feel some disagreeable effects
from it: but even when the appetite has been many years pampered, and the body
accustomed to heating food; yet, by degrees, with a prudent regulation, step by
step, the method of living may be again changed to the more wholesome and
cooling diet. This is a piece of advice well worthy of notice, for in many
constitutional disorders it is absolutely necessary to be complied with. Do not
mistake me, I am far from thinking it needful for every one who does not boast
a good state of health to submit himself entirely to a vegetable and milk diet;
on the contrary, I am truly sensible that a moderate use of flesh is far from
being unwholesome; nay, it is even necessary for some delicate constitutions,
and for those who use much exercise, or are required to labor. It is not the
prudent use, but the abuse of these things I mean to caution you against.

Of vegetables; the turnip, parsnip, potatoe, are very good; fruits, and
fruit-pies, sallads of all kinds, and pot herbs, are wholesome; which I would
recommend to most persons, and in a particular manner to the young and growing,
and to those who have craving appetites, because such food will prevent them
eating too large a quantity of flesh; and these vegetables being easy of
digestion; after a full meal pass off quickly, and leave the stomach more at
liberty to exert its force upon that aliment which requires so much more time
and labor to digest.

I come next to speak of Animal-food. One general rule, which seldom should be
transgressed by the infirm, I must beg leave to lay down: Never eat flesh more
than once a day, and that at noon. The plain roast and boiled, whether butchers
meat or poultry, is far preferable to made-dishes; there is danger to be
dreaded, not only from the noxious qualities of the ingredients used to prepare
such kitchen poisons, but also from the quantities which are devoured of them;
for these savory scents and tastes so quicken the appetite, that people gorge
themselves, and regard not the dictates of nature, ever to be observed, and
which, if attended to, will always inform us when the stomach has received a
sufficient supply. Animal-food, which has been any considerable time in salt,
becomes hard, and requires more force to break and digest it, proper for
nourishment, than weak stomachs are capable of exerting; consequently, salted
beef, pork, and suchlike things, are improper for children, invalids, and aged
persons. Notwithstanding what I have said, salt is very wholesome to be eaten
with flesh; and, in some measure, necessary. The stimulus which salt gives to
the coats of the stomach, makes them exert their power with greater force upon
the food; and, of course, helps digestion: -- hence, though salted meats are
improper, it is from the effect which salt has upon flesh that lies long in it;
in rendering it hard, and unfit for nourishment; not the salt itself, that is
hurtful. Broths of all kinds, which are not seasoned, are wholesome; broths
contain the juices of the flesh they are made from, which is the part proper
for nourishment: -- hence, although your made, high-seasoned gravies are to be
avoided, those gravies which run out of flesh upon cutting it after it is
brought to table, are good and nourishing, because they are nothing more than
the juices of the meat.

FISH in general are good, particularly shellfish; but let us remember, that
by stewing them with high-seasoned gravies, and suchlike arts, they, though
innocent in their nature, may be rendered as formidable poisons as your ragoes,
etc. -- witness the sacrifices made to health at a turtle-feast.

MILK is a valuable food indeed! this requires little or no labor from the
stomach; it has already passed through such strainers, as render it a kind and
wholesome nourishment. This caution I must give, because custom has made it
almost a general practice, -- never eat milk with acid fruits -- reason tells
us it is wrong: codlings and milk or cream, strawberries, rasberries, etc. are
highly improper to be eaten together; for, by mixing these acid fruits with the
milk, it is the most likely method to make it curdle too hastily in the
stomach; of which every one who will give himself time to think must be
convinced. Almost all the kitchen preparations of milk are wholesome, such as
custards, white-pots, blamange, etc. Much indeed might be said upon this head;
but as it is treated at large in my Letters to Married Women, I shall beg leave
to refer my readers to them, especially those who are desirous of knowing the
nature and properties of milk, and of understanding its superior excellence. It
is a nutriment the most simple, yet the most perfect. It requires no labor
from the digestive faculties, yet fully possesses every principle of
nourishment, to give strength to infants, and health to the infirm. Would to
God that this natural and salubrious diet was more particularly attended to!
One thing, however, let me observe; a little salt being sprinkled into milk
will oftentimes prevent its curdling too hastily upon the stomach, where it
meets with an acidity, and is particularly to be recommended for children; in
general, milk is best without boiling; if it purges, it must be boiled. You
will find an excellent method of using it in the directions for giving salop in
the Family Physician.

With respect to Liquids. -- It would take up too much time to enter upon them
here. -- We are, however, too fond of acidulated liquors, especially in sick
chambers. The doctrine of acids, in my opinion, has been carried to an
extravagant length. I mean to caution the reader against too free an use of
them; and as it is impossible to discuss this point at present, let your own
observations direct you with regard to your general plan, and abide by such
liquors as best agree with your constitution. I shall conclude this head with a
few remarks upon eggs. -- Eggs are a fine food for weak stomachs, but our
method of eating them is very erroneous: -- they certainly afford much
nourishment, and that without labor to the stomach; but if they are heated so
as to set the yolk, they will never properly digest. Some time since I attended
a gentleman who was troubled with a vomiting and purging, and notwithstanding
the usual remedies were applied, the disorder continued very violent for ten
days: -- he had taken a gentle puke at the beginning of the complaint; but
finding it would not submit to the medicines afterward given, it plainly
appeared to me the cause of the disorder was still in the stomach, and so it
proved; for, upon another vomit being administered, a large quantity of
undigested egg came off his stomach, which, upon recollection, he remembered to
have eaten two days before he was ill, a circumstance that escaped his memory
at the time I first attended him, and, upon its coming away, the disorder left
him. This remarkable instance led me to reflect upon the nature of eggs, -- and
ever after made me careful, when I recommended them, to give a strict charge
that they were not boiled hard; and, indeed, the method I have found most
successful, where patients have been much emaciated, is the following -- Take a
new-laid egg, and beat it in a basin as you would do to make a pudding; then
add half a glass of madeira, mountain, or mead, to it, and let it be thus
taken, with or without a bit of bread; by this means it is rendered palatable,
sits easy on the stomach, and will surely turn to nourishment: -- several
patients to whom I have recommended eggs, that have not been able to keep any
other nourishment, have, in this manner, eaten one, two, and, sometimes, three
eggs in a day, which for a considerable time have been their only support.

From these hints, I think it no difficult matter for those who are in an
indifferent state of health to find out a method of diet suitable to their own
constitutions; and it is a just observation, that every man at the age of
forty, with respect to himself, is either a fool or a physician.

THE MEDICINES.
ASTHMATIC TINCTURE.
THIS tincture is of use in a difficulty of breathing, or tightness across the
breast, and likewise for short coughs, particularly if brought on by cold
northeasterly winds, which frequently affect the breast, sides, and lungs: it
allays the cough, opens the chest, and loosens the phlegm, so that it easily
comes away; and also frees the pores of the skin which have been shut up by the
winds.

It may be taken as often as occasion requires, from thirty to sixty or eighty
drops, in a little Every medicine here referred to is digested alphabetically.
pectoral drink or barley water, with which you should dilute plentifully,
drinking it of the same heat as you would a dish of tea.

ASTRINGENT ELECTARY.
NEVER be too hasty in the use of this electary; it is often found that a
purging is the means made use of by Nature to carry off other complaints, or to
free the body from bad humors, which might in time bring on disorders; now, by
stopping this wholesome drain too soon, these bad humors may be thrown back
into the blood, and produce the worst consequences: therefore you will seldom
or never err, by suffering the purging, if not over violent, to continue two or
three days; at the end of that time, should you find the patient weakened by
it, or that it is really a disorder itself, and not a cure for other disorders,
then you may give a dose or two of rhubarb, and afterward proceed to the use
of the electary: by these means you will cleanse the stomach and bowels, and
get rid of the complaint without any farther trouble.

Fluxes, which seafaring persons are subject to, are to be treated much in the
same manner; but be very careful to cleanse the bowels first.

Some of my friends, who have been many years accustomed to the sea, recommend
the purging apozem before the use of astringents: they say it cools the body,
and carries off every thing which is disagreeable to the bowels, better than
rhubarb, or any other purge. After having cleansed the stomach and bowels of
the filth which occasioned the disorder, by the one or other of these means,
you will find ipecacuanha, given with the astringent electary in very small
quantities, viz. from half a grain to one or two grains, of infinite service;
to which likewise a few drops of laudanum may occasionally be added, but this
should be practiced with caution, and not till the astringent electary has been
first tried; and in desperate cases you will have the satisfaction to find the
method here recommended will seldom, if ever, fail of success.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 2 scruples to 1 dram. Between 7 and 14 -- from 1
scruple to 2 scruples. Between 3 and 7 -- from 10 grains to 20 grains.

Under three years old decrease the quantity in proportion.

This may be given once in six or eight hours, or night and morning, as the
case requires; either swallowed whole, or dissolved in a little hartshorn drink.

Remember beer should be avoided; and hartshorn drink supply the place of other
small liquors. Rice gruel is a proper food, with a little red port or a
spoonful of brandy in it.

Should this or any other of the electaries grow dry, they may be softened with
a little syrup, or a spoonful of white wine.

BALSAMIC ELECTARY
Is good in all tickling coughs, foreness at the breast, inward bruises, and
suchlike complaints.

The quantity of a nutmeg may be taken, night and morning, and once or twice in
the day besides, with a large draught of pectoral drink made hot after it.

If costive, take a little of the opening electary, or a few spoonfuls of the
purging apozem, as you judge most proper.

BARK.
THE febrifuge quality of this bark, and its peculiar efficacy in curing agues
Intermittent fevers of every kind, with regard to the intention of cure, must
be treated in the same manner as agues; the cold fit being rather accidental,
than essential to this disease.
and intermittent fevers, is now universally known; yet a too hasty use of it
oftentimes proves prejudicial, a remittent or continual fever being the
consequence. You will seldom or never err, by giving a vomit first, and, if the
sick be of a full habit of body, you may also purge with safety; you will act
more prudently by waiting till they have had four or five ague fits before you
throw in the bark, giving a salt of wormwood draught once in six or eight
hours, which will make the fits more regular, and prepare the blood for the
bark. You should begin when the fever is gone entirely off, and give at least
one ounce before you expect it to return In low fenny countries, where the
atmosphere is moist and foggy, it is sometimes necessary to give one ounce and
a half of bark between the fits, but in general an ounce is sufficient.
; half a dram, two scruples, or a dram may be given for a dose, as the stomach
will bear it; the less you administer at a time the more frequently it must be
repeated; for, unless you get the whole quantity down within the time, you do
nothing.

The fit being put by, a second ounce should be taken in the like small doses
within the three following days, at the distance of about six or eight hours;
the patient may now rest six days, unless signs of the ague's return require
the bark to be repeated sooner, when a third ounce is to be taken in like
manner, a dose every six or eight hours; another week being elapsed, a fourth
ounce is also to be administered; when you may take your leave of them, and be
pretty well assured they will not be subject to a return.

The common mixture to give it in, may be made of three quarters of a pint of
spring water, and a quarter of a pint of good French brandy, sweetened with a
bit of sugar, a tea-cupful of which should be taken with each dose; mix the
powder in a little of it, and drink the remainder after it.

If it purges, which is oftentimes the case, it should be given in a little
cinnamon tea; should not that answer, two, three, or four drops of laudanum
must be added to each dose.

If, on the contrary, the bark should bind, a few grains of rhubarb may be
given with each dose as long as you see necessary.

Above the age of fourteen it will require this quantity to cure the ague,
under these years your judgment must direct you to decrease it; the manner of
giving it must be exactly the same.

BARK DECOCTION.
WE frequently, and with success, for children, and those of delicate
constitutions, boil bruised bark a long while in water, and give the strained
liquor instead of the powder in substance; the proportion is, an ounce in two
or three pints of water, till you can pour off one. This method of
administering the bark is, in my opinion, always to be preferred to the powder
when patients are much reduced in their strength. In agues and intermittent
fevers this decoction must be given to bear a proportion to the quantity of
bark before ordered, and a tea-spoonful or two of brandy may be added to each
dose. This preparation will frequently be referred to in the following pages;
it is a most excellent medicine, where the intention is to brace up, and
strengthen the constitution.

BARK WINE.
SOMETIMES, when the season is unfavourable, you may meet with cases which do
not entirely give way to this treatment; if so, let them continue the following
a fortnight or three weeks afterward, viz.

TAKE of bark, grossly powdered, two ounces, the yellow peel of two Seville
oranges, and one nutmeg grated; pour three pints of old rough red port upon
these ingredients; let them stand by a gentle fire, in a large bottle, for
three or four days, shaking it frequently; then pour off a wine-glassful of the
clear liquor at the time you take it, which should be morning, noon, and night;
when you have taken one half, another pint of wine may be added, and kept upon
the ingredients till the whole is taken, at least for ten days or a fortnight.
A few drops of elixir of vitriol two or three times a day with the wine, or
mixed in a glass of water, may be also serviceable in agues, and feverish
complaints, such as hectic heats, and the like.

BARLEY WATER.
TAKE two table-spoonfuls of pearl barley, wash it, and boil it in half a pint
of water for two or three minutes; pour away this water, which will be
colored, and add about three pints of boiling water; let it simmer till one
pint is consumed. This is a common and good drink in fevers, and every other
complaint, when a soft diluting liquor is advisable.

COLIC MIXTURE This is a medicine I can strongly recommend indeed, and what no
family ought to be without. -- Complaints of this kind we are every day subject
to, and for want of a proper relief at hand, strong waters and cordial drams
are too often used. I have received several letters from those I never saw, in
praise of the colic mixture: the letter I have now before me, from the late
Richard Weddel, Esquire; concludes with these words: "It is an excellent remedy,
and has done me great service."
.
THIS mixture is warm and comfortable to the stomach and bowels, somewhat
opening, proper in colic complaints, and for the wind, particularly if after
meals; it is likewise serviceable for pains in the stomach.

Two or three table-spoonfuls may be taken at a time.

But if the pain is very violent, and stools are much wanting, give of the
purging apozem freely, or the opening electary.

If there are too many stools, first give a little rhubarb, then use the
astringent electary, which see.

DIACHYLON PLASTER.
THE use of this plaster is well known in slight cuts, or other little
accidents; it should be spread with a warm knife upon a piece of fine rag or an
old glove.

DIACHYLON WITH GUMS.
THIS is to be spread in the same manner as the other diachylon, and is used to
ripen boils, and suchlike tumors.

DIURETIC MIXTURE.
THIS mixture is good in all gravelly complaints, and for the dropsy, heat of
urine, pains in the loins, and stoppage of water. One large spoonful, or two
upon an emergency, may be given for a dose, every six or eight hours, or night
and morning, as the case requires, mixed in half a pint of marshmallow drink,
if you can procure it, if not, barley water. But observe, if the pain is
violent, you will do right first to give the purging apozem to promote stools,
and let them drink plentifully of thin water gruel, which will cleanse the
bowels and urinary passages, and greatly assist the intention of this mixture.
Remember the body should always be kept open; and those who are subject to
these complaints, should accustom themselves to drink very plentifully of small
liquors at all times By small liquors, I would be understood to mean any liquor
between water and twelve-shilling table beer.
, which will often of themselves perform a perfect cure.

ELIXIR OF VITRIOL.
THIS is esteemed good to strengthen the stomach and bowels, to create an
appetite and brace up the solids.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 20 to 30 drops. Between 7 and 14 -- from 10 to 20.
Under that age -- from 5 to 7 or 8.

It may be given in a little water, or wine and water; but where the patient
can be brought to take it, a cup of chamomile tea is preferable to any other
liquid whatever.

The proper times for taking it are, in a morning fasting, an hour before
dinner, and two hours after dinner.

When properly joined with the tincture of bark, it will be found to add
considerably to the efficacy of that noble medicine.

FEVER POWDER The fever powder is an antimonial preparation, similar in its
nature to that which is called JAMES'S Powder, but it is prepared with such
care as to render it much more gentle in its operation: I frequently administer
it to infants without its producing any material evacuation. Should the
stomach, however, be foul, it will cause sickness; in that case give a little
warm water, or chamomile tea, to cleanse the stomach, and you will find the
patient greatly relieved by this operation; and if the second dose should
either vomit or purge too much, you may decrease the quantity, or not
administer it so frequently.
.
WHEN the skin is hot and parched, the tongue white, and other common signs of
a fever appear, which every one is acquainted with, such as thirst, weariness,
etc. put them to bed, and give a dose of the fever powder every six or eight
hours; let them drink freely of small wine whey, pectoral drink, barley water,
or the like small liquors, to dilute the blood, and encourage a breathing
sweat; if you find them mend under this management, and the fever to disappear
in day or two, before you quit them, give a little rhubarb, or some other
gentle medicine, to procure two or three stools, and after that a wine-glassful
of the decoction of bark two or three times a day for the course of a week: a
spoonful or two of the decoction will be sufficient for children. Where there
is a loss of appetite, the stomach tincture may be added to the bark with great
advantage. Observe well these directions, which will secure the patient's
health, and gain you reputation.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 12 to 30 grains. Between 7 and 14 -- from 8 to 20.
Between 1 and 7 -- from 4 to 12.

Within the months as your judgment directs.

If after taking a few doses the disorder does not give way, unless you have
some knowledge in physic, it will be most prudent, where you can have advice,
to commit them to the care of some gentleman of the faculty, as you may
conclude it is that kind of fever which will not yield to this simple method.

Should I attempt to describe the various kinds of fevers, it would only puzzle
the unskilful; therefore the above directions are sufficient for those who
stand in need of any assistance, to enable them frequently to render service,
and prevent their ever doing any injury. The excellency of this powder is very
great.

FIT DROPS FOR CHILDREN.
THESE drops are very good against fits in general, for grown persons as well
as children; but they are particularly serviceable to the latter, more
especially in those fits which attend the cutting their teeth.

From three to ten drops may be given for a dose to children under twelve
months old, above that age increase the number as you think fit; grown persons
may take a large tea-spoonful for a dose.

They may be given in black cherry water, or any other liquor, and repeated as
often as necessity requires.

FRYAR'S BALSAM
Is applied to fresh wounds, and is esteemed good to stop bleeding; be careful
not to use it to old sores, as it frequently proves prejudicial.

It is given internally, from ten to sixty drops, in a little powdered sugar or
a glass of water, in inward decays, bleedings or bruises, also in coughs and
hoarseness.

GASCOIGN'S POWDER.
THE reputation of this powder, so long established, renders it almost
unnecessary to say any thing about its efficacy; its use among children is very
common, to correct gripings, prevent acidities, and remove little feverish
heats; it is frequently, and with great propriety, joined with a few grains of
rhubarb.

A child within the month may take from 1 to 4 grains. Between 1 and 12 months
-- from 4 to 8. Between 1 and 5 years -- from 8 to 12.

Those who are more advanced in life from 10 to 30.

It may be taken every six or eight hours, as you see necessary.

GARGLE FOR SORE THROATS.
TAKE half a pint of pectoral drink, or red sage tea, two spoonfuls of virgin
honey, and a like quantity of the best white wine vinegar; let the throat be
gargled frequently with this, as hot as you can bear it. If the glands are much
swelled, so as to render it difficult to swallow, and the patient is very hot
and feverish, with a full quick pulse, let him take the fever powder, in a salt
of wormwood draught, and dilute very plentifully with pectoral drink, or the
like small liquors.

If, on the contrary, there is a small fluttering pulse (sometimes rather
quick) with specks in the throat, and it looks discolored, give wine and water
with spice in it, red sage tea with wine in it, and cordial beverages of every
kind.

GLAUBER'S SALTS.
THIS salt is seldom taken alone, except by common people who cannot afford to
join manna with it, which not only makes it more palatable, but prevents the
roughness of its operation.

From ten years old its dose is from half an ounce to one ounce, with an equal
quantity of manna (some add a double quantity of manna) dissolved in a little
water, water gruel, or sena tea; but the best form is the purging apozem, which
see.

HARTSHORN DROPS
ARE given in faintings, and esteemed good to thin the blood; their known use
renders a more minute detail unnecessary.

The dose is from ten to sixty drops, in any liquid you please.

HARTSHORN AND GUM.
POUR three pints of water on each paper of hartshorn and gum, let it boil till
you can strain off a quart, which should be poured through a piece of fine rag,
or a lawn sieve; just before you take it from the fire, you may add a crust of
bread and a bit of cinnamon, if agreeable; it may be sweetened to your palate.
This is the proper drink to be used in common for purgings, after a little
rhubarb or something of that kind has been given, to which may occasionally be
added a little red port, or a spoonful of brandy.

HEART-BURN LOZENGES.
ONE of them may be kept in the mouth as often as agreeable; if costive, a few
grains of rhubarb should be taken, or a little magnesia alba.

HIERA PICRA
Is a warm physic, good for disorders in the stomach, and particularly in
female complaints.

Its dose from one table-spoonful to four, at bedtime or in a morning.

HYSTERIC MIXTURE.
THIS mixture may be taken from a tea-spoonful to a tablespoonful, which is the
proper dose for a grown person, in any hysterical complaint; it should be mixed
with a little water, or with a cup of hysteric and pennyroyal water, being too
strong to take alone The great demand for this mixture, in female and
hysterical complaints, proves it to be an excellent medicine. I have lately had
the honor of a noble lady's testimony of its great virtues, whose charity adds
a luster to her titles.
.

JAUNDICE ELECTARY.
WHERE the jaundice has not been preceded by the colic, nor is attended with a
fever or bleedings, it is most likely to proceed from sluggish, viscid bile; in
which case the cure is easy, and may be effected in the following manner: the
symptoms, every one knows, are a yellowness of the skin and upon the whites of
the eyes, high-colored urine and white stools, an inactivity, weariness,
oppression of the spirits, and loss of appetite.

First give a gentle vomit of ipecacuanha, the following morning let them be
purged four or five times with the purging apozem, which should be repeated
every fourth or fifth day; on the intermediate days of purging give them the
quantity of a nutmeg of this electary, night and morning, with a salt of
wormwood draught after it; let them dilute plentifully with lemonade, and live
upon light food. This method will quickly restore their color, strength and
spirits.

IPECACUANHA
Is a gentle vomit, and may, where there is occasion, be safely given to
children. I am afraid it is in general rather over-dosed, whereby patients are
sometimes injured, by straining more violently than their stomachs and
constitutions will bear. I am convinced from experience, that a few grains will
operate on many persons far better than large doses. The best way of
administering it to children, and indeed to every body, is to give three, four,
five, or six grains, mixed in a little water or chamomile tea; and, if it does
not take effect in ten minutes, or a quarter of an hour, repeat the same
quantity. This method will certainly prevent the bad consequences sometimes
attending violent vomits, and make the operation more easy and pleasant.

Let them drink thin water gruel, chamomile tea, or the like, to work it off.

FOR THE ITCH.
AN ointment made of one third part of flowers of sulphur, and two thirds of
hog's-lard, rubbed in night and morning where it appears, is a safe and
accounted a certain cure; but if a little white hellebore is added, it is more
effectual, though perhaps not so expeditious as mercurial preparations; but
they have no place here I have not put up any thing for the itch, and some
other complaints that need no immediate assistance, or require more experience
than the generality of my readers are acquainted with, such as the smallpox,
measles, etc. in which the constitution and symptoms must vary the practice.
Particular medicines in these complaints, setting aside the almost
impossibility of giving clear directions, would swell the box too large, and
answer little or no end; my greatest care through the whole being to prevent
mischief in improperly administering medicines, and I should be fearful in
these cases the bold unskilful practitioner might oftentimes be puzzled, to the
detriment of his patient; and those who are capable of rendering service, will
find medicines in the box to answer their intention in most disorders.
.

LAUDANUM.
I HAVE directed the use of this with the bark; a few drops may also be joined
with the astringent electary, if the purging is obstinate, and does not readily
give way: it is likewise proper in many other cases; but I would not have the
unexperienced be too free with it, therefore shall say no more.

MAGNESIA ALBA This medicine seems well calculated for disorders in the
stomach, and, from my own experience, I can attest it is a valuable one, if
genuine; and think it my duty to caution the public where they buy it, for
there are many notorious abuses practiced, to enable the venders to sell this,
and many other compositions, cheap: -- very often chalk is mixed with the
magnesia; some prepare it from alum, which affords a large quantity of white
earth, but of a very different nature; and too frequently lime is washed until
it becomes insipid, and sold for magnesia alba.

Is a medicine strongly recommended by many writers, particularly for young
children.

It corrects acidities in the stomach more powerfully than chalk,
oyster-shells, pearls, coral, crab's-eyes, or the like testaceous powders; and,
joined to this, it has a gentle purgative property, and is the only one of an
alkaline nature at present made use of; it is also serviceable in the
heart-burn.

It may be given to children from twenty grains to a dram, or even two drams in
a day, a little at a time, mixed in their food; grown persons may take it more
freely.

Refer to the note on stomach tincture for further excellencies of this powder:
-- in which cases half a dram or a dram is the dose, mixed in water, ginger
tea, wine and water, or the like, the first thing in the morning, and the last
thing at bedtime.

MANNA
Is a gentle purge, which affects only the stomach and bowels; it is in much
esteem for children, and given from one or two drams to one ounce; grown
persons may take one ounce and a half or two ounces, without stirring them, for
which reason it is quickened with Glauber's salts, -- which see.

MARSHMALLOW DRINK.
TAKE a quarter of a pound of marshallow roots washed very clean, and boil them
in three quarts of water until one is consumed, remove it from the fire, and,
when cold, decant off the liquor; if you do not think the thickness
disagreeable, it will be more efficacious by pressing the roots; it may be
sweetened with virgin honey. This may be drank at pleasure, and is recommended
in all cases were a soft lubricating regimen is proper; it is much esteemed for
the gravel and heat of urine.

NERVOUS TINCTURE.
NERVOUS complaints are too common in England to need a particular description;
in all kinds of them this tincture is very serviceable; it is likewise proper
in lowness of spirits, faintings, and hysterical cases, giving strength and
cheerfulness, and raising the depressed spirits. The dose is from one to two
tea-spoonfuls, two or three times a day, in a glass of wine and water, or
valerian tea.

OIL OF ROSES.
THIS is an excellent outward remedy for all parts in a state of inflammation,
especially when attended with great pain; in which case it is also proper to
refer to Bleeding, and the purging apozem.

The method of applying it, is, by rubbing it in with a warm hand.

OILY EMULSION.
TAKE four large spoonfuls of oil of almonds, half a pint of cold barley water,
two drams of fine sugar in powder, and sixty drops of spirit of hartshorn;
shake them well together, and the whole immediately becomes a white emulsion;
two spoonfuls of cinnamon water being added, will make it very palatable.

It is good in stitches and pleuritic pains in the side and breast, hoarseness,
coughs, etc.

A tea-cupful may be taken frequently.

If these complaints are attended with a feverish heat, a dose of the fever
powder should be taken at bedtime, with a little whey. Where there is no
fever, twenty drops of laudanum may be added to the emulsion.

OPENING ELECTARY.
THIS electary gently relaxes the belly, without causing sickness or gripings,
which quick purges are apt to do.

When intended only to open the body, for a grown person, the dose is the
quantity of a nutmeg at bedtime; if designed to purge more briskly, repeat the
dose in the morning.

It may be given to children in a proportionably less degree, and proves a good
physic, particularly where they are troubled with phlegm.

If more agreeable in a liquid form, you may dissolve it in a small quantity of
any weak drink.

OPODELDOC
Is very serviceable in bruises or strains; it should be rubbed in with the
warm hand three or four times a day.

PALSY DROPS.
IN all cases where a heaviness hangs upon the spirits, with a drowsiness,
dizziness, or swimming of the head, these drops are equally serviceable as in
the palsy; all these complaints proceeding from the same bad disposition of the
blood.

The dose is from one to two tea-spoonfuls, two or three times a day, in a
glass of wine and water, or valerian tea.

PARALYTIC OR PALSY-LINIMENT.
THIS liniment is good in all paralytic complaints, likewise where a stiffness
and numbness remain after the rheumatism: it will remove those acute rheumatic
pains which seize the limbs on taking cold, and oftentimes proves a cure for
the sciatica or hip gout: its warm stimulating quality puts the part rubbed
with it into a glow, frees the pores of the skin, and, by quickening the
circulation, removes those obstructions which were the cause of pain.

It should be applied, night and morning, with a warm hand, if before the fire
the better, and the part afterward covered with a piece of warm flannel; where
the disorder does not give way, let the palsy drops be taken also.

PARLIAMENT LOZENGES.
FOR COUGHS, especially when there is an huskiness or tickling in the throat. I
have lately introduced them into my private practice with great success. They
are totally different from all other preparations for this purpose: the
generality of these compositions occasion thirst; these, on the contrary, abate
the irritation in the throat, and are calculated to prevent inflammation. They
may be taken at pleasure. They are called parliament lozenges, from their
resembling, in taste, parliament gingerbread.

PECTORAL DRINK.
TAKE two table-spoonfuls of pearl barley, boil it two or three minutes in half
a pint of water, pour away that water, and add a quart and half a pint of fresh
water to the barley; let it boil ten minutes; then add twenty stoned raisins,
and one fig cut into slices, also a bit of stick liquorice as long as your
finger; let these boil together a few minutes, and strain off a quart of the
pectoral drink.

This is an agreeable soft liquor, good in any case where the intention is to
dilute; but more especially in coughs, colds, oppressions of the breast, and
such like complaints.

PILE ELECTARY.
TAKE the quantity of a nutmeg of this electary night and morning, so as to
keep the body gently open; avoid pepper and all heating things; little or no
wine should be drank, and your food must be of the lighter and vegetable kind.

PILE LINIMENT.
IF the piles are external, apply a little of this liniment upon a piece of
fine rag very frequently, which will cool the part, and procure ease. Sitting
over the steam of warm water is oftentimes serviceable, especially if an
handful or two of marshmallow leaves and a little bran be added.

POWDER FOR SWEATS.
I NEED not point out the particular circumstances in which this is necessary,
every one being sensible how much it is of service in colds, achs, and pains in
the bones, and the like complaints.

ITS DOSE.
Above the age of 14 from 20 to 30 grains. Between 7 and 14 years from 10 to
20.

Under seven years old decrease the quantity as your judgment directs; let it
be taken at bedtime, with a large draught of white wine whey, or something of
that kind, and, if very hard to sweat, twenty or thirty drops of spirits of
hartshorn or sal volatile in it; but observe, if there is any fever, the fever
powder is most proper.

PURGING APOZEM.
POUR a pint of boiling water upon one ounce of Glauber's salts, one ounce of
manna, and one dram of bruised caraway seeds; stir them a little to dissolve
the manna and salts; cover the vessel, and let it stand to cool; you may, if
you please, add a little slice of Seville orange-peel to the above.

This is the best, method, I know, of disguising the salts, and making them sit
easy upon the stomach.

Of the strained liquor a draught may be taken in the morning, and repeated
once in half an hour or an hour, as the stomach will bear it, till it purges
sufficiently. The age of the person must be considered; and, as you know the
strength of the apozem, it will be easy to adjust the dose.

If intended only to relax the body, a few spoonfuls taken at bedtime, or in
the morning, will have the desired effect.

A less quantity may at any time be prepared as you find occasion for it.

QUICK PURGING POWDER.
IN many cases, such as dropsical and gross habits of body, or foulness of
stomach (when a vomit is sometimes previously to be taken) and for persons of
strong constitutions, who live much upon a flesh diet and salt provisions,
where you think manna and salts are not powerful enough; and even to younger
persons whom you want to purge very briskly, this purging powder is
recommended, and may be given in a little of any liquor.

ITS DOSE.
Above the age of 14 from 25 grains to 2 scruples. Between 7 and 14 from 15
grains to half a dram. Between 3 and 7 from 6 grains to 1 scruple.

RHEUMATIC POWDER.
THIS powder may be given night and morning, from one to two scruples, with
twenty or thirty drops of sal volatile, in white wine whey, sage tea, I must
not omit noticing an egregious and common error in making these herb teas for a
sick person, that is, the putting such a large quantity of leaves and stalks
into a pot, and letting water stand upon it three or four hours, which is the
general method used by nurses and attendants: it not only makes the drink
nauseous, but, in many inflammatory cases, it proves very prejudicial; for,
instead of being the cooling draught which is advisable, it is become so hot
by the pungency of the herbs, that it absolutely adds fuel to the fire. Put
from 10 to 20 leaves, according to the strength of the different herbs, into a
pot, and pour upon them a quart of boiling water; after standing three or four
minutes (just as you manage your green tea) pour it out into a basin to cool;
by this means you have the fine flavor of the plant, and, I am convinced, many
persons will find herbs which our own climate produces, such as sage, mint,
balm, ground ivy, etc. thus properly managed, produce a more grateful liquor
than that tea so commonly used in England, and for which we pay so extravagant
a price.
buck-bean tea, or any small liquor.

The dose should be increased or diminished, so as to keep the body open; if
the pains are very violent, and the pores of the skin shut up by preceding
colds, let the paralytic liniment be used.

RHUBARB POWDER.
ALL physicians agree in the excellency of this root; it is a good purge in
many complaints, and strengthens the stomach and bowels; it is particularly
recommended for children, more especially for the worms, as it frequently
purges off those crudities in which they breed.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years from 15 to 30 grains. Between 7 and 14 from 10 to 20 grains.
Between 1 and 7 from 5 to 15 grains. Within the months from 1 to 5 grains.

RUM CAUDLE.
THIS is made by adding a wine-glassful of rum to a pint of thin water gruel,
with some spice boiled in the gruel; to which a little nutmeg and sugar may
likewise be added.

GENUINE RUM thus used is an excellent medicine. As a pure spirit, it possesses
all the qualities of a cordial, and that too so softened by its natural
essential oil, as kindly to promote both urine and perspiration; consequently,
in colds and feverish complaints, it is justly to be preferred to whey, and a
little experience will convince the public of its great utility in a sick
chamber.

SALOP
IS of late years brought into much esteem in England; it is of a restorative
and strengthening quality Salop, like most other things for which there is a
large demand, to enable the trader to sell cheap, is very frequently much
adulterated. I am afraid the greatest part of what is commonly sold for powder
of salop, will be found to have in it a considerable quantity of starch and gum
arabic, which ought to put persons upon their guard where they purchase it;
for, although the virtues of the true are undeniable, the adulterated must fall
short of its excellency, and the false in appearance, if artfully managed, will
deceive very good judges.
; many ladies, whom I have had the honor to recommend it to, of tender
constitutions, where tea has been found to prey overmuch upon a weak stomach,
and where more nourishment has been necessary than they received from their
ordinary food, eat it in a morning for breakfast; and I must confess it would
much please me to see it more universally received, particularly by those who
are subject to nervous complaints, being in its own nature very strengthening,
easy of digestion, and, in the manner here recommended, affords a great deal of
nourishment in an impoverished state of blood; therefore the properest food
that can be received after a severe fit of sickness, whereby the patient is
much weakened.

The common way of preparing it is with water, and a glass of wine added to it,
but the method I think far preferable is this:

Boil half a pint of milk with as much water; while it is in a boiling state,
let two tea-spoonfuls of the powder of salop, first mixed in a basin with a
spoonful or two of cold water, be thrown into it; after it has simmered a
minute or two, stirring it the while, you will find the whole of a smooth
creamy consistence; a bit of sugar, and a little nutmeg may be added to make it
palatable. Those whom milk is apt to render costive, should mix the salop with
the water alone as above directed, and add the milk to it after it is taken
from the fire.

We all know how serviceable a milk diet is in many cases; by this method it
will agree with them, upon whose stomachs it otherwise turns sour and too
hastily curdles.

SALT OF WORMWOOD DRAUGHT.
TAKE a scruple of salt of wormwood, pour upon it by little and little fresh
lemon-juice, till it has done fermenting and tastes quite insipid; about one
large spoonful is sufficient; then add a little fine sugar to make it
palatable; about a wine-glass of spring or barley water, and a pap-spoonful of
cinnamon water, makes a most pleasant draught.

Above the age of fourteen, it may be given once in six or eight hours; in any
little feverish complaints, sickness at stomach, watchings, parched dryness of
the mouth, and suchlike ills, and is often of service with the fever powder.
From seven to fourteen years, half a draught is sufficient; under that age
still decrease the quantity.

When the fever powder increases any of the evacuations over much, give the
powder only once or twice in the twenty-four hours, and the salt of wormwood
draught every six hours; in this case four or five drops of laudanum may with
propriety be added to the draught, especially if the patient complains of pain
or sickness.

SAL VOLATILE.
THE use of these drops is so common and well known for raising the spirits,
that I need only take notice of its dose, which is from ten to sixty drops, in
a glass of water, or what you please.

This preparation is the acid of the sea salt, reduced into a convenient form
to be carried into remote parts; the purgative quality of the sea water is, in
a great measure, taken away, so that it remains longer in the body, and,
consequently, takes a greater effect upon the blood; -- and many whose stomachs
will not bear sea water, will find this an agreeable palatable liquor, -- if
they do not make it too acid; -- and for scorbutical eruptions a valuable
present: but gouty patients must not be too free with it.
SCORBUTIC ELIXIR.
THIS preparation is, in an especial manner, devoted to the relief of scorbutic
disorders. It is of a scouring nature, breaks and divides all obstructions of
the glands proceeding from a more than ordinary thickness of the blood, and, by
restoring the mass to a due state of fluidity, prevents those feverish
indispositions which naturally arise from any hindrance in the necessary
secretions, such as urine, stool, etc. It is a great promoter of urine, and a
great quickener of the motions of the fluids; it may be likewise serviceable in
an unweildy habit from sluggish humors, and help to throw off a dropsy. From
fifteen drops to two tea-spoonfuls may be taken two or three times a day, in a
draught of sage tea, spring water, orange-peel tea Orange-peel tea is made by
pouring boiling water upon the yellow rind of a Seville orange in the manner of
other teas, and is an agreeable liquor to take drops or powders of any kind in.
, made agreeably sweet, or any other liquor, and continued for some months.

SENA TEA.
THE usual method of preparing this, is, by putting as much of the sena leaves
as your thumb and two fingers will contain into a tea-pot, and pouring upon it
a gill of boiling water; when cold, pour out the liquor, which will be strong
enough to give a grown person a stool or two.

A little manna and salts may be dissolved in this sena tea, which makes it
operate brisker.

SHAM ASSES MILK.
Boil two ounces of hartshorn shavings in two quarts of water, to one quart. At
the time you use it add one third part, or one half, of milk. This is
preferable to all other receipts for this purpose, because it is more
strengthening, and not ill-flavoured.

It is a good nourishment for children and invalids, and much to be recommended
after long fevers. Where milk is not proper, a little wine, or a spoonful of
rum or brandy, may be added to it; and it is then an excellent drink to be used
in a sick chamber.

SNUFF FOR THE HEADACHE.
THIS snuff may be safely used in all complaints of the head. It is prepared
from herbs which have a peculiar efficacy in those cases, as is manifest from
the infinite service received from it, in old and settled pains of the head.

It may be taken as freely as you please.

SPERMA CETI BOLUS.
TAKE of sperma ceti one scruple, of powder for sweats ten grains, make these
into a bolus with a sufficient quantity of syrup, to be taken once in six or
eight hours, -- with a little pennyroyal and hysteric water, in lying-in cases
and miscarriages; in either of which, where the pains are violent, you may add
three, four, or five drops of laudanum to each bolus; remember also to prevent
costiveness, either by gentle clysters, a little sena tea, or some other mild
purgative. If the after-pains are very severe, you may increase the dose of
laudanum, especially at bedtime, or immediately after the delivery.

SPERMA CETI EMULSION.
TAKE two drams of the powder of sperma ceti, rub it in a marble mortar, with a
quarter part of the yolk of one egg, till it is a smooth pulp; then add two
drams of fine sugar in powder, mix them well together, and by little and little
pour on half a pint of cold barley water; strain it through a fine hair or
coarse lawn sieve, which will keep back the undissolved part of the sperma
ceti, and render the emulsion smooth and even; to the whole you may add two
spoonfuls of cinnamon water, and from ten to twenty drops of laudanum.

A wine-glass may be taken as often as agreeable, in coughs and hoarseness,
likewise when troubled with phlegm, or any of the like complaints; a spoonful
may be given to children in the hooping cough, when, if they are feverish, you
should join a little fever powder with it, and purge them with rhubarb or the
quick purging powder once in four or five days; you may likewise give the
stomach tincture between breakfast and dinner, and between dinner and supper:
gentle vomits are oftentimes also serviceable in the hooping cough. And after
proper evacuations have been used, if the fever intermits, the decoction of
bark three times in the day, with a drop or two of laudanum in each dose, will
perform a perfect cure. These remarks are worthy attention.

SPERMA CETI AND SUGAR CANDY.
THIS may be taken at pleasure, when troubled with a cough or hoarseness,
difficulty of breathing, or with phlegm; it is often of some service, and so
innocent, it can do no harm even to young children.

SPIRIT OF LAVENDER
Is used in lowness of spirits as a cordial; it is also given in faintings and
pains in the head; and may be taken frequently, from ten to sixty drops, on a
lump of sugar, in wine and water, or any other liquor.

STEEL ELECTARY.
IN female obstructions this electary may be given from half a dram to one
dram, night and morning, in the form of a bolus, or made into pills, as is most
agreeable, drinking a cup of cold chamomile-flower tea, or a little pennyroyal
and hysteric water; if you have reason to think physic is proper, give a dose
of hiera picra; at bedtime, let the feet be bathed in warm water for ten
minutes, then wipe them very dry, and, if the weather is cold, wrap them up in
a piece of flannel. This is an excellent medicine for the green sickness, and
for young girls, at a certain period, when they are approaching toward the age
of women.

I cannot pass by this tincture without giving that praise which is justly due
to it. -- In weak stomachs, whether from intemperance or constitutional, it is
equally efficacious; when there is also an acidity in the stomach, or the
patient be of a costive habit of body, a dose of the magnesia should be taken
likewise, once or twice a day. -- I speak with the certainty of success, when I
declare, that this regimen, pursued for a month or two, will remove complaints
in the stomach that have been of long standing, and thought incurable. And in
hectic and intermittent fevers, attended with loss of appetite, after proper
evacuations have been used, it is a sovereign remedy, when joined with the
decoction of bark.
STOMACH TINCTURE.
THIS tincture is highly proper in a weakness of stomach, loss of appetite, or
bad digestion; as a bitter, it frequently contributes to the destroying of
worms; and not only excites the sense of hunger, but, by its warm aromatic
property, at the same time that it gives a grateful sensation, strengthens the
coats of the stomach, which by any cause may have been weakened, and renders it
more able to break and digest the food taken in for the nourishment of the body.

The dose for a grown person is from one to two tea-spoonfuls, an hour before
dinner, and three hours after dinner, in a glass of water; those who are
accustomed to drink wine, may add an equal quantity to the water.

When given to children for the worms, it should be taken the first thing in
the morning, and last at bedtime, in a little water or chamomile-flower tea,
or decoction of bark.

A child of seven years old may take a tea-spoonful for a dose; under that age
decrease the quantity as your judgment directs.

If you have reason to imagine the stomach is foul, let a gentle puke of
ipecacuanha be taken before the use of this tincture.

If inclined to be costive, now and then at bedtime take a dose of the opening
electary, or a few grains of rhubarb.

STRENGTHENING PLASTER.
A PIECE of this plaster may be applied in any wrench or strain, weakness of
the loins, or other parts.

TO MAKE A SYRUP.
DISSOLVE a pound of sugar in half a pint of water, over a gentle fire, in an
earthen pipkin; let it simmer one minute or two, take off the scum, and
preserve the syrup, which is proper to soften the electaries when they grow
dry, to make up pills or boluses, and to give children their powders in.

TINCTURE OF BARK.
THIS is serviceable in many complaints, such as weak and relaxed habits of
body, flushings and hectic heats; it checks profuse sweats, and braces up the
solids; it is highly proper in all kinds of bleedings, but more efficacious
when joined with a fourth part of elixir of vitriol.

It may be given on any emergency; when taken for a constancy, the proper hours
are the same as for elixir of vitriol, which see.

The dose is from one or two tea-spoonfuls to a table-spoonful, in any liquor.

TOOTH POWDER FOR THE SCURVY IN THE GUMS.
THIS powder cleanses and preserves the teeth and gums, takes off scales and
all kind of filth without injuring the enamel, which gritty powders are apt to
do.

It should be used with a piece of sponge or a very soft brush, every thing
which is hard or rough being prejudicial, as they destroy the enamel, when the
teeth must necessarily decay This is a piece of advice worthy the attention of
my readers, particularly the fair ones, who frequently destroy their teeth by
using bole ammoniac, scuttle-bone, and many other gritty powders, which rub off
the polish: -- those of a very acid nature are also hurtful, as their frequent
use certainly destroys the enamel. -- The tooth powder here mentioned, I will
stake my credit, is prepared with every caution laid down, and I am strenuous
in recommending it to the world; for, in however trifling a light Stoics may
hold a powder for preserving the teeth, every man, who has sensibility enough
to be pleased with a fine face, must thank me for endeavoring to preserve so
material a part of female beauty.
.

All compositions which have gums in them, such as myrrh, and the like, are, in
my opinion, very pernicious, as they tend to stop up the glands by which the
spittle comes into the mouth, and thereby occasion the breath to become
offensive, which is also the forerunner of the scurvy.

TURNER'S CERATE
Is commonly used for burns, cuts, scalds, bruises, chilblains, and other
little complaints where the skin is worn off, and is so well known I need not
be more particular.

VALERIAN ROOT
Is, of late years, come into great esteem in all nervous disorders; of the
bruised root they make a tea in the same manner as sena tea, and drink it three
or four times a day, which is a proper thing to take the nervous tincture in,
being of itself, I am afraid, not effectual, as the quantity of the root given
in this manner, or in the tincture prepared from it, is too trifling to have
any great dependence upon.

VALERIAN ROOT IN POWDER.
IF you intend to reap benefit from it, you must take it in pretty large
quantities. It is usually given from half a dram to one dram, in a little
liquor of any kind, and should be repeated once in six or eight hours.

YELLOW BASILICON
Is made use of in cases which require more discharge than the Turner's cerate
will promote, but in a great measure applied for the same intention.

WORM POWDER.
THIS powder should be taken the very first thing early in the morning, and the
last at bedtime, at least one hour after supper, mixed in a little honey,
current jelly, treacle, or somewhat of the like nature; and where it is not a
spoiled child, let a teaspoonful of the stomach tincture be taken in a little
chamomile tea, or decoction of bark, an hour or two before, and after dinner.
This powder will keep them open; nevertheless, in most cases, you should purge
once in four or five days: for very young children rhubarb is proper; should
that not prove strong enough, the quick purging powder may be given; but where
they are older, and will take it, cleanse their bowels with the purging apozem.
Calomel given in small doses, two or three times in a week, is an excellent
vermifuge, but that requires too much judgment for the unexperienced to
administer it; and this powder will generally destroy worms without the
assistance of mercurial preparations, which, however praiseworthy, should
never be given without proper advice.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years from 25 grains to 2 scruples. Between 7 and 14 from 1 scruple
to half a dram. Between 3 and 7 from 12 grains to 1 scruple. Between 1 and 3.
from 6 to 12 grains.

ON BLEEDING.
I RATHER choose to mention the complaints in which bleeding is recommended
under this general head, than with the medicines for the respective disorders,
because it may naturally be supposed that assistance cannot always be procured;
for which reason, directing to bleed before the use of the medicines, in cases
where it might prove serviceable, may be a means of preventing the
administering those remedies, which, taken in time, will frequently alone
remove the complaints. Besides, I would not wish the unskilful to be too free
with the lancet, as an injudicious evacuation of blood may be succeeded with
very bad consequences. My intention through the whole, as I observed in the
preface, being no other than to supply families with a few useful remedies for
slight indispositions, by which they may frequently prevent tedious illnesses,
-- not to put the unexperienced upon trifling with themselves, or wantonly
sporting with human blood, when patients are really ill, and can have proper
advice.

The best authors advise blood to be taken away in the beginning of fevers,
when there is a strong, quick pulse, the eyes red and fiery, with great heat
and thirst; but never when they are in the decline, as, from being
inflammatory, they are often at this period degenerated into the nervous kind,
when the chief of the affair is to be managed by the frequent application of
blisters.

In asthmatical complaints, if the patient be of a full habit of body.

In coughs, if the pulse is quick and full, with an oppression at the breast,
or difficulty in breathing.

In colics, where the pain is violent, the bowels inflamed, and no stools.

In fits, if the spirits are hurried and overpowered, and the patient full of
blood.

In swimmings, dizziness, and pains of the head.

In stitches, and pleuritic disorders of the side and breast, particularly if
it gives pain to take a deep breath.

In sore throats, where there is a strong, quick pulse, and the throat greatly
swelled and inflamed.

For the piles it is sometimes thought serviceable; as likewise in female
obstructions, and frequently in rheumatic complaints; in apoplectic disorders,
a dysentery or bloody flux, and irksome heat of the bowels; for the hooping
cough, particularly if of a full habit of body, and the phlegm which is brought
up appears streaked with blood; in all which cases, the quantity taken away
must be proportioned to the age of the patient, and the violence of the
complaint.

Bleeding again is sometimes directed in large abscesses or swellings, where
the heat and pain is immoderate; for, in these cases, by drawing blood, it is
supposed that the matter is more easily and speedily brought to ripen, and, by
that means, the body more effectually freed from its distempers.

In a word, wherever prevail sore eyes, sciatica or hip-gout, a dry husky
cough, an headache, pains of the womb or of the bladder, dry gripes, strangury,
gravel, pain from the stone, violent bleedings of the nose, ears, or other
parts, an inveterate scorbutical itch, and the like, opening a vein is esteemed
of peculiar service; but in dropsies, a jaundice, the gout, and all illnesses
occasioned by a relaxed state of body, an impoverished blood, or too great
weakness of the vessels, you must seek relief from the medicines recommended in
this little manual, and not, by an abrupt and preposterous use of bleeding,
increase the disorder, and ruin the health of the patient and your own
reputation.

The reader will be pleased to understand, that what has been said concerning
the taking away blood is in conformity to the most respectable authorities, and
the present practice. I will now beg leave to add my own opinion, that it would
be happy for mankind if a lancet had never been invented.

ON THE APPLICATION OF BLISTERS.
TO the cautions here laid down, with respect to bleeding, I shall add a word
or two concerning the application of blisters.

The most excellent remedy may be prostituted by an inconsiderate, rash, and
foolish practice; which, it is plain, oftentimes happens with regard to
blisters, by ordering them indiscriminately in all fevers, and without
distinction in any time of the distemper, which can only be the effect of
ignorance.

Therefore, before we resolve on an expedient of this nature, it will be
convenient to consider whether the fever be of the inflammatory or nervous
kind; if of the former, instead of blistering the lancet is generally used, and
a mild cooling regimen set on foot, as already directed; this will moderate the
heat of the blood, and, by degrees, restore it to its due temper. On the other
hand, in fevers of the nervous class, where the symptoms are quite different,
the pulse being low and weak, the spirits almost spent, and the eyes, instead
of appearing sparkling, red and fiery, grown quite dim, we ought, by all means,
to make use of blisters, and that freely.

They are oftentimes proper in paralytic and nervous complaints, as likewise in
rheumatic pains and pleurisies, in which cases a blister applied immediately
upon the part affected frequently affords great relief; and in a variety of
other cases they are of infinite service: but then regard must be paid to the
state of the patient's blood; for, if a full, quick pulse, great heat, thirst,
and the other symptoms of an inflammatory fever attend upon the disorders, the
fever must first be conquered, and afterward, if necessity requires it, let
blisters be applied. Should they cause a strangury, which will sometimes be the
case, give the patient plentifully of marshmallow drink, or barley water with a
little gum arabic dissolved in it; or if there is a purging, which you would
wish to be stopped, of the hartshorn drink; and this inconvenience will soon be
remedied.

In regard to the management of blisters, the plaster should be spread upon a
piece of an old glove, and bound on to the part intended; after twenty-four
hours, the strength of the flies being pretty well spent, you may remove the
blister, and, if you cannot procure the proper dressings, a little Turner's
cerate, spread upon a piece of fine rag, may supply its place.

Should any blisters appear unbroken, snip them with a pair of scissars; if
they give violent pain, this may be done when the plaster has been applied only
twelve hours; when, by discharging the water, and laying it smoothly on again,
you ease the patient, and give the blister an opportunity of acting more
effectually.

Thus much has been advanced in conformity to the present practice, in which I
have endeavored to assist the intelligent reader, by familiar language, to
form clear ideas of the various diseases treated of in this book. The cure of
diseases is certainly a laudable and noble study. It is a science which
dignifies human nature: many important truths have been illustrated both by the
ancients, and some modern writers -- yet much remains to be known: which future
experience and accurate observation may possibly discover. Permit me to say
that, in my humble station, I have reaped the advantage of both; and if a
distant period should afford me leisure regularly to digest my thoughts upon
the curative intention of diseases, I shall not hesitate to promulge doctrines,
which are, perhaps, at this time not generally understood: and if I continue to
be so happy as to recommend them by a successful practice, I hope to live to
see my opinions generally adopted by medical practitioners, for the good of
this country, and the benefit of the world in general.

This Day is also Published, by the same AUTHOR, The THIRD EDITION, Price bound
3 s. 6d. LETTERS TO MARRIED WOMEN, Upon several important Female Duties,
especially those of the Nursery and Sick Chamber, and concerning aged Parents:
The real Benefits of a Milk Diet are demonstrated, with particular Cautions to
Invalids.
These Letters are principally addressed to those Ladies who already have, or
are likely to have children, and they will do well to attend to them; as
thousands of little innocents are annually sacrificed to vulgar errors, which a
moment's reflection would explode. Those errors are here exposed, and a natural
and easy method of rearing children, approved by experience, is laid down. It
necessarily follows, that such precautions as are proper for the management of
a feeble infant-state, should be equally attended to, when the digestive powers
are weakened by disease; and also that the slow progressive steps by which we
mount into life, are the safest and best paths to descend peaceably into the
grave.

INDEX.
A.
AGUE -- See Bark pages 9 and 10, bark wine 11 Acidities at the stomach --
Gascoign's powder 15, magnesia alba 19 Asthma -- Asthmatic tincture 7 Appetite,
to create -- Elixir of vitriol 13, stomach tincture 31, tincture of bark 32
B.
Bleeding, outward -- See Fryar's balsam 15 --, inward -- Elixir of vitriol 13,
Fryar's balsam 15, tincture of bark 32 Blood, to thin -- Hartshorn drops 16,
scorbutic elixir 28 Bones, achs and pains in -- Fever powder 13, powder for
sweats 23 Boils, to ripen -- Diachylon with gums 12 Breast, tightness and pain
across -- Asthmatic tincture 7, oily emulsion 21 --, soreness at -- Balsamic
electary 9, parliament lozenges 22 Breathing, difficulty in -- Asthmatic
tincture 7, oily emulsion 21, spermaceti and sugarcandy 30 Bruises -- Opodeldoc
21, Turner's cerate 33 --, inward -- Balsamic electary 9, Fryar's balsam 15
Burns -- Turner's cerate 33, yellow basilicon 34
C.
Chilblains -- See Diachylon plaster 12, Turner's cerate 33, yellow basilicon
34 Colic -- Colic mixture 11 --, with stools -- Astringent electary 7, colic
mixture 11 Cough -- Asthmatic tincture 7, balsamic electary 9, pectoral drink
22, parliament lozenges 22, spermaceti emulsion 30, spermaceti and sugar candy
30 --, hooping -- Spermaceti emulsion 30 Cuts -- Diachylon plaster 12, Turner's
cerate 33, yellow basilicon 34
D
Digestion, bad -- See Stomach tincture, page 31 Dilute, liquors proper to --
Barley water 11, pectoral drink 22, rum caudle 26, sham asses milk 29 Dizziness
-- Palsy drops 21 Dropsy -- Diuretic mixture 12, quick purging powder 24,
scorbutic elixir 28 Drowsiness -- Palsy drops 21
F
Faintings -- See Hartshorn drops 16, nervous tincture 20, sal volatile 28,
spirit of lavender 30 Fever -- Decoction of bark 10, fever powder 13,
Gascoign's powder 15, salt of wormwood draught 27 --, intermittent -- Bark 9,
10, bark wine 11 --, upon the spirits -- As above, nervous tincture 20,
valerian 34 Fits -- Fit drops for children 14 Food easy of digestion -- Salop
26, observations on diet 1 to 6, sham asses milk 29 Flux -- Astringent electary
7
G
Gravel -- See Diuretic mixture 12, marshmallow drink 20 Gripings -- Colic
mixture 11, Gascoign's powder 15
H
Headache -- See Nervous tincture 20, palsy drops 21, snuff for the headache 29
Heart-burn -- Heart-burn lozenges 17, magnesia alba 19 Hoarseness -- Asthmatic
tincture 7, Fryar's balsam 15, oily emulsion 21, parliament lozenges 22,
spermaceti emulsion 30 Hooping cough -- Parliament lozenges 22, spermaceti
emulsion 30 Hysterics -- Hysteric mixture 17, fit drops for children 14
I.
Jaundice -- See Jaundice electary, page 17 Itch -- Page 18 Inflamed parts --
Oil of roses 20 Inflammation in the throat, to prevent -- Parliament lozenges
22
L.
Liquors, proper for a sick chamber See Rum caudle 26, sham asses milk 29,
pectoral drink 22, barley water 11, etc. etc. Loins, pain in -- Diuretic
mixture 12, strengthening plaster 32 Lyings in -- Sperma ceti bolus 29
N.
Nervous complaints -- See Nervous tincture 20, valerian root 34 Nourishment
proper for weak stomachs -- Salop 26, observations on diet 1 to 6, rum caudle
26, sham asses milk 29
O.
Obstructions, female -- See Steel electary 31
P.
Palsy -- See Palsy drops 21, and liniment 22 Phlegm -- Asthmatic tincture 7,
fever power 13, sperma ceti emulsion 30, sperma ceti and sugar candy 30 Piles
-- Pile electary 23, and liniment 23 Pleurisy -- Oily emulsion 21, see also
blisters 38 Purges, various ki^ds of -- Glauber's salts 16, magnesia alba 19,
manna 20, opening electa^y 21, purging apozem 24, quick p^^^ing powder 24,
rhubarb 25, se^^tea 28 Purgings, to stop -- Astringent electary 7, ^audanum 19
R
Rheumatism -- See Palsy liniment 22, rheumatic powder 25
S.
Scalds -- See Turner's cerate 33, yellow basilicon 34 Scurvy -- Scorbutic
elixir 28, tooth powder 33 Side, stitches in -- See Oily emulsion, page 21
Solids, to brace up -- De^oction of bark 10, elixir of ^^^riol 13, tincture of
bark 32 Spirits, lowness of -- Nervous tincture 20, sal volatile 28, spirit of
lavender 30, valerian 34 Stomach-ach -- Colic mixture 11 --, foulness of --
Ipecacuanha 18, quick purging powder 24 --, sickness at -- Salt of wormwood
draught 27 -- strengtheners -- Elixir of vitriol 13, rhubarb 25, stomach
tincture 31, tincture of bark 32 --, weakness of -- Stomach tincture 31 Strains
-- Opodeldoc 21, strengthening plaster 32 Sweats, to promote -- Power for
sweats 23 --, to prevent -- Elixir of vitriol 13, tincture of bark 32 Swellings
-- Oil of roses 20, diachylon with gums 12
T.
Throat, sore -- See Gargle for a sore throat 15, parliament lozenges 22 --,
ticklings, or huskiness, in Parliament lozenges 22
U.
Urine, heat of -- See Diuretic mixture 12, marshmallow drink 20 Vomits --
Ipecacuanha 18
W.
Water, stoppage of -- See Diuretic mixture 12 Wind, to expel -- Colic mixture
11 Worms -- Rhubarb 25, stomach tincture 31, worm powder 34 Wo^^^s, fresh --
Diachylon plaster 12, Fryar's balsam 15 --, old -- Turner's cerate 33, yellow
basilicon 34 Wrench -- Opodeldoc 21, strengthening plaster 32
FINIS.

