GEORGE. III.
portrait of George III

A COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE LATE WAR, OR ANNUAL REGISTER OF ITS Rise, Progress,
and Events, IN Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.

AND EXHIBITING The STATE of the BELLIGERENT POWERS at the Commencement of the
WAR; their Interests and Objects in its Continuance: Interspersed with The
CHARACTERS of the able and disinterested STATESMEN, to whose WISDOM and
INTEGRITY, and of the HEROES, to whose COURAGE and CONDUCT we are indebted for
that NAVAL and MILITARY Success, which is not to be equalled in the ANNALS of
this or any other NATION.

Illustrated with A Variety of HEADS, PLANS, MAPS, and CHARTS.

By J. WRIGHT, Gent.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for DAVID STEEL, Bookseller, at the Bible and Crown,
King Street, Little Tower Hill.

MDCCLXV.

THE PREFACE.
WE have taken the earliest opportunity that a judicious inspection, and mature
consideration of events could give us, of presenting to the public, A COMPLETE
HISTORY OF THE LATE WAR, not less important than, we hope, useful and correct,
written with an impartiality which should be the guide of every historian, and
from which we have not deviated through national affection.

WE have taken up our HISTORY from the commencement of the war, and have
bestowed all the pains upon it, so interesting a subject requires, which,
however, we must acknowledge, deserves much more skilful workmen. None was ever
more formed to excite curiosity, from the importance of events, the dignity of
the persons engaged, the greatness of the actions performed, and the amazing
revolutions of fortune; for the Reader will here find the scattered accounts of
this war, which has been carried on in the four quarters of the world, united
in one connected narrative, and continued to the peace.

To effect this from the materials that offered, has been a work of more
labor, than may at first appear, and to render these transactions (which have
not been less our amazement, than the world's in general) the more conspicuous
and clear, we have added, in Notes, the accounts transmitted from the
commanders of our fleets and armies, and published by authority, when facts
were recent, and the immediate object of universal attention. These will
illustrate and confirm the History; and our readers must be pleased to see so
many curious and important pieces, which while they give the clearest evidence,
support the national character to future ages. In many places we find them
filled with the actions of inferior officers, which, with less care in their
superiors, would have been lost in the multiplicity of events: This care, not
less commendable than useful, will excite officers to seize every opportunity
of immortalizing their fame, and doing honor to their respective corpse. Some
of these letters must be useful in forming the young soldier, as they are very
expressive of that character, pointing out the care, circumspection, anxiety,
and perseverance to form a WOLF, or a GRANBY.

THE CONTENTS.
ORIGIN of the troubles in North America, page 1
M.DCC.LV.
Admiral Boscawen and General Braddock sent to America, 2 Different operations
undertaken, 4 Two French men of war taken by Adm. Boscawen, ib. Genesis Braddock
defeated near Fort du Quesne, 5 -- Dieskau defeated, and taken by Genesis Johnson.
ib. Seizure of the French trading ships, ib.
M.DCC.LVI.
French threaten an invasion, 6 Fort St. Philip in the island of Minorca,
besieged, and taken by the French, ib. Sea Fight off Minorca, between Admiral
Byng, and M. Galissoniere, ib. Treaty with Russia, 7
M.DCC.LVII.
Alliance with the King of Prussia, ib. Ground of the quarrel between her
Imperial Majesty and the King of Prussia, 9 Treaty of Petersbourg, 10 -- of
Versailles, 11 King of Prussia enters Saxony, and Bohemia, ib. Battle of
Lowositz, 12 Saxon army surrenders, ib. State of the English Ministry, 13 The
characters and designs of the several factions, ib. A coalition of parties, 17
Oswego taken by the French, ib. Calcutta taken by the Nabob, 18 Angria reduced
by Adm. Watson, 19 State of the confederacy against the King of Prussia, ib.
The French pass the Weser, 22 King of Prussia enters Bohemia, ib. Battle of
Prague, ib. Prague invested, 23 Count Daun takes command of the Austrian army,
ib. Battle of Colin, 24 Consequences of the battle of Colin, 25 King of Prussia
evacuates Bohemia, ib. Battle of Hastenbeck, 26 Convention of Closter-seven,
ib. Expedition to Rorchfort, ib. Russians enter Prussia, 27 Austrians besiege
Schweidnitz, ib. French and Imperialists make incursions into Brandenbourgh, ib
Swedes enter Pomerania, ib. Battle of Norkitten, 28 General Lehwald defeated,
ib. Melancholy state of the King of Prussia, ib. Battle of Rosbach, 30
Schweidnitz taken by the Austrians, 32 Prince of Bevern attacked in his
entrenchments, 32 Bresiau taken by the Austrians, ib. King of Prussia marches
into Silesia, 33 Battle of Lissa, ib. Breslau retaken, 35 Austrians driven out
of Silesia, ib. Russians and Swedes retire, ib. Hanoverians resume their arms,
36 Cruelty of the French, ib. Condition of their army, ib. Castle of Harburg
besieged, 37 Preparations for an expedition to Louisbourg, and laid aside, 39
Fort William Henry taken, 41
M.DCC.LVIII.
Exploits of Adm. Watson and Colonel Clive in India, 42 Chandenagore, a French
fort taken, 43 Victory over the Nabob, 44 Nabob taken and beheaded, ib.
Revolution in Bengal, 45 Treaty advantageous to the East India company, ib.
Admiral Watson dies, ib. French retire to Hanover, 46 The taking of Hoya, 47
Minden taken, 48 Distress of the French, 49 Generosity of the Duke de Randan,
ib. The French retire beyond the Rhine, ib. Recovery of Embden by Com. Holmes,
50 Alterations in the French Ministry, 51 The state of the English affairs, 53
Subsidy treaty with the King of Prussia, 54 Affairs of Sweden and Russia, ib.
Schweidnitz taken by the King of Prussia, 55 He enters Moravia and invest^
Olmutz, ib Conduct of Count Daun, 59 He attacks the Prussian convoy 57 Siege of
Olmutz raised, ib. King of Prussia marches into Bohemia, 58 Allies pass the
Rhine, 59 Battle of Crevelt, ib. Action at Sangershausen, 62 -- at Mere, 63
Allies repass the Rhine, 65 Retreat from Bohemia, 66 Measures of Count Daun,
ib. Battle of Custrin, 70 King of Prussia marches into Saxony, and joins Prince
Henry, 73 General Oberg defeated at Lanwerenhagen, 75 King of Prussia surprised
at Hohkirchen, 77 M. Keith and Prince Francis of Brunswick killed, ib. Affair
at Gorlitz, 80 M. Daun invests Dresden, 82 King of Prussia raises the siege of
Neis and Cosel, 84 Death of the Duke of Marlborough. ib. Dispositions for the
winter, 86 The burning of the ships at St. Malo, 90 Taking of Cherbourg, 91
Defeat of St. Cas, 94 Operations in America, 95 Siege and taking of Louisbourg,
97 English army defeated at Ticonderoga, 121 They take Frontenac, 125 The
French abandon Fort du Quesue, ib. Goree taken, 127
M.DCC.LIX.
The inclination of the powers at war at the closing of the last campaign, 132
The King of Spain's death apprehended, 133 Condition of the King of Prussia,
Empress Queen, Sweden, Holland, France and England, 134 The allied army moves,
141 Battle of Bergen, ib. Plan of the campaign, 143 General Macguire defeated,
144 Bamberg pillaged, ib. Hesse abandoned by the allies, 145 Expedition to the
West Indies under Hopson and Moore, 146 Account of Martinico, ib. Failure
there, ib. Guadaloupe invaded, and description of that island* 147 Basse Terre
attacked and burned, 149 General Hopson dies, 150 Operations against Grand
Terre, ib. The inhabitants capitulate, 151 Letters to the Government on the
occasion, ib. Bravery of a French lady, 152 Mariegalante taken, 154 Progress of
the French after the battle of Bergen, 160 Munster and other places taken, 163
Motions of Prince Ferdinand, 164 Battle of Minden, 166 Hereditary Prince of
Brunswick defeats the Duke of Brisac, ib. Prince Ferdinand's order after the
battle of Minden, 167 The French pass the Weser, ib. Lord George Sackville
resigns the command of the British forces; Marquis of Granby succeeds him, 170
The French driven to Marpurg, 171 Siege of Munster, ib. Project of France for
an invasion, 172 Havre bombarded, 173 Action of Cape Lagos, 174 Admiral
Boscawen's account of the action, ib. Count Dohna disgraced and succeeded by
Wedel, 177 Battle of Zulichau, ib, Russians take Franckfort on the Oder, 178
Battle Cunnersdorf, 179 King of Prussia repasses the Oder 182 Soltikoff and
Daun communicate, 183 Parallel of the King of Prussia and Prince Ferdinand of
Brunswick, ib. Plan of the campaign in North America, 184 Ticonderoga and Crown
Point abandoned, 186 Colonel Townshend killed, 18^ Expedition to Niagara, 18^
Sir William Johnson's accoun^ of it, ib Colonel Prideaux killed, 190 Sir
William Johnson defeats the French, 192 Takes the fort of Niagara, ib. The
expedition against Quebec, 193 Description of the town and harbor of Quebec,
195 Action at the Falls of Montmerenci, 196 General Wolf sickens, 198 His
remarkable letter, 199 Admiral Saunders's letter, 206 The battle of Quebec, 211
General Wolf killed, ib. French defeated, 212 M. de Montcalm killed, 213
Quebec surrenders, ib. Genesis Monckton's account, ib. -- Townshend's 214 Admiral
Saunders's 218 Movements of Genesis Amherst, on Lake Chaplain, 222 Prince Henry's
march into Saxony, and Genesis Vehla defeated, 224 K. of Prussia's surprising
march into Saxony, 225 Prussians defeated at Maxen, 226 Again defeated at
Meissen, 228 Munster surrenders to the allies, 229 Hereditary Prince of
Brunswick defeats the Duke of Wurtemberg at Fulda, ib. The preparations at
Vannes and Breast, 231 Remarkable behavior of Adm. Saunders, and Genesis
Townshend, 232 French fleet defeated near Belleisle, 233 Admiral Hawk's account
of his engagement with M. de Conflans, 234 List of the two fleets, 238 French
fleet under M. d'Ache twice beaten, 241 M. de Lally takes Fort St. David's and
repulsed at Tanjour, ib. Lays siege to Madrass which he is obliged to raise,
242 M. Lally's remarkable letter, ib. Behavior of the French in Germany, 244
The Duke de Belleisle's letter on the occasion, ib.
M.DCC.LX.
Nothing decided in the war, and the state of the several powers concerned, 249
Great Britain and Prussia propose an accommodation, 254 Difficulties in
concluding a peace, 254 State of the English garrison at Quebec, 255 Designs of
Mons. Levi, 256 Preparations for a siege, ib. Genesis Murray's resolutions on the
occasions, 257 Battle of Sillery, and defeat of Genesis Murray, 258 Quebec
besieged, 259 The English fleet under Lord Colville arrives, 260 M. Levi raises
the siege, ib. General Murray's letter on the occasion. ib. Distress of Saxony,
267 Preparations for opening the campaign, ib. Losses sustained by the King of
Prussia, 268 Theater of war in the East of Germany, 571 Battle of Landshut, 272
Prussian army under Fouquet destroyed, ib. The Austrians take Glatz, 274 King
of Prussia marches toward Silesia and deceives M. Daun, 275 Siege of Dresden,
ib -- raised by M. Daun, 277 Breslau besieged by the Austrians, ib. Cause of
the slowness of the allies and French, 280 Difference between Broglio and St.
Germain, 281 Marpurg and Dillenburg taken by the French, 282 Battle of Corbach
where the Hereditary Prince was wounded, 283 Surprise and defeat of M. Gloubitz
at Ermsdorf, 283 Action at Warbourg, 285 Prince Ferdinand's letter on the
occasion, 286 The Marquess of Granby's letter, 288 Prince Ferdinand's order
after the day of battle, 290 Laudohn blocks up Schweidnitz, 293 March of the
King of Prussia, from Saxony to Lignitz, 295 Laudohn defeated near Lignitz, 296
Daun forms the blockade of Schweidnitz, and compelled to raise it, 298 Action
between General Hulsen and the army of the Empire, 299 Intercepted letter from
the King of Prussia to the Marquis d'Argens, 300 Situation of the French and
English armies. 302 Hereditary Prince surprises a body of French in Zierenberg,
ib. General Bulow takes Marpurg 307 Defeated by Mons. Stainville, ib.
Hereditary Prince marches to the Rhine, passes that river, 308 Cleves taken and
Wesel besieged ib. Battle of Campen, 313 Allies defeated, ib. Hereditary Prince
repasses the Rhine, 312 Siege of Wesel raised, ib. Death and eulogium of George
II. ib. Accession of George III. and his resolution of supporting his allies,
ib. Russians and Austrians enter Brandenburgh, 315 General Hulsen retreats from
Saxony to Berlin, 316 Evacuates it, and the city capitulates, 317 Enemy retires
out of Brandenburgh, after having pillaged it, 318 Imperialists make themselves
masters of Misnia, 319 Russians besiege Colberg, 320 Battle of Torgau, 322 M.
Daun wounded, ib. Siege of Colberg raised, 324 The allies raise the siege of
Gottingen, 326 Winter quarters and sufferings of the British troops, ib.
Popular debates in England concerning the German war, 328 Thurot sails from
Dunkirk, 333 Puts into Gottenburgh and Bergen, ib. Puts into the Isle of Ilay,
ib. He takes Carrickfergus, 334 Sails from thence, ib. He is killed, and whole
squadron taken, 335 Capt. Elliot's account of the engagement, 336 War in
America, ib. General Amherst goes down the river St. Lawrence. 337 General
Murray marches from Quebec, ib. Montreal surrenders, 340 Cherokee war, 341
Affairs of the East Indies, 344 Lally defeated by Colonel Coote, 345 Col.
Coote's account of his proceeding in the East Indies, 346
M.DCC.LXI.
Preliminary remarks, 353 Treaty proposed and entered into by the belligerent
powers, 357 Mr. Stanley sent to Paris, and M. Bussy to London, 358 French
machinations in Spain, 359 Difficulties in the negotiation, ib. Design of the
campaign in Hesse, and of the expedition to Belleisle, 360 Prince Ferdiand's
plan, 361 Allies enter into Hesse and Thuringia, 363 French retire, ib.
Hereditary Prince repulsed at Fritzlar, 363 Fritzlar taken, 364 Blockade at
Marpurg and Ziegenhayn, 365 Siege of Cassel, ib. Battle of Langenfaltze, 366
Broglio reinforced from the Lower Rhine, 367 Hereditary Prince defeated at
Stangerode, ib. Siege of Cassel, etc. raised, and the allies retire behind the
Dymel, 368 The negotiation continued, ib. Proposition of uti possidetis, 370
Debate concerning the periods, ib. Belleisle described, 371 English repulsed at
Lochmaria bay, 372 Genesis Hodgson and Commodore Keppel's account of their
proceeding at Belleisle, 373 They make good their landing, 374 Palais besieged,
377 Town abondoned, 378 Citadel capitulates, ib. England and France agree to
treat of a separate peace, 379 Epochas proposed by England, 380 Court of Vienna
agree, 380 Objects of the negotiation, 381 Proposals of France with regard to
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. 382 French memorial concerning Spain, 385
Indignation of the English Minister, ib. English answer to the French memorial,
386 Motions of the French and allied armies, 387 General Sporcken attacked, 388
French pass the Dymel, ib. Position of Prince Ferdinand, 389 Junction of
Broglio and Soubise, ib. Battle of Kirch Denkern, and the French defeated, ib.
Prince Ferdinand's account of the battle, 391 French threaten Hanover, 393
Remarkable behavior of Lord Geo. Lenox, and Major Walsh, ib. Prince Henry of
Brunswick killed, 394 Taking of Dorsten, ib. Various movements of the armies,
ib. Destruction of Schartsfelts-castle, 395 Prince Xavier of Saxony takes
Wolfenbuttle, and invests Brunswick, 396 Detachments from Prince Soubise take
and abandon Embden, ib. Attempt on Bremen, 397 Sufferings of Lower Westphalia,
ib. Condition of the King of Prussia, 398 Motions of the Russians and of
Laudohn, 400 Breslau cannonaded, ib. Tottleben removed, and Colberg besieged,
401 Russian magazines in Poland destroyed, 402 War transferred to Pomerania,
403 King of Prussia quits his strong camp, ib. Schweidnitz taken by a coup de
main, ib. Genesis Platen repulsed, 405 -- Knoblock made prisoner at Treptow, ib.
Prince Wurtenburg retreats, 406 Colberg taken, ib. Russians winter in
Pomerania, ib. The negotiation resumed, 407 French concessions, 408 Difference
concerning the German alliance, 409 -- concerning the captures antecedent to
the declaration of war, 410 Treaty breaks off, and Messieurs Stanley and Bussy
recalled, 411 Conduct of Spain during the negotiation, 412 Spanish minister's
memorial, 413 Treaty between France and Spain, ib. Difference in the English
ministry, 414 Mr. Pit resigns, 415 Lord Granville's speech on the occasion,
ib. Dispute concerning the resignation, 418 Addresses, 419 Mr. Pitt's letter to
a person of eminence in the city, 420 Parliament meets, 423 Dispute with Spain,
ib Representation of the Earl of Bristol. 424 Disposition of the court of
Madrid, ib. Treaty between France and Spain, 426 England desires a
communication, 427 Court of Spain refuses, ib. The Ministers mutually withdraw,
429 Blockade of Pondicherry, 430 Fleet dispersed in a storm, but returns again,
431 Genesis Lally's letter on the occasion. 432 Town surrenders, 433 Mahie taken,
ib. Enterprises of Mr. Law, ib. Mogul army defeated by Major Carnac, 434 Nabob
of Bengal deposed, 435 Coast of Sumatra ravaged by the Count d'Estaing, ib.
Dominica taken by Lord Rollo and Sir James Douglas, ib.
M.DCC.LXII.
State of Europe in the beginning of this year, 436 Ill state of the British
alliance, 437 Condition of the Northern Powers, ib. War reaches to the
Southern, 438 Family Compact, ib. Some articles from it, 440 Observations upon
them, ib. Consequences of this treaty to Europe 441 War declared against Spain,
442 State of Spain and Great Britain at the beginning of the war between them,
ib. Advantages and disadvantages on each side, ib. Portugal threatened, and the
melancholy state of that kingdom, 443 Arrogant proposition of the French and
Spanish Ministers to the court of Lisbon, 445 Answer of that court, 446
Resolution of the court of Portugal, 448 French and Spanish Ministers depart,
ib. War declared by those powers against Portugal, ib. Death of the Empress
Elizabeth of Russia, and her character, 449 State of the power of Russia on her
decease. 450 Her nephew Peter III. succeeds, 451 Entire change of system, and
peace with Prussia, 453 Peace between Prussia and Sweden, ib. The Czar enters
into an alliance with the King of Prussia 454 War with Denmark threatened, and
its cause, ib. Campaign between Prussians and Austrians opens, 455 Prussians
obtain advantages in Saxony and Silesia, 456 Sudden revolution in Russia, ib.
Causes of the revolution in Russia, 457 Czar irritates the clergy and soldiery,
458 Differences with the Czarina, 459 Czar deposed by the Senate, 460 His
imprisonment and death, 461 The Czarina declared Empress, 462 Effect of the
revolution in Russia on the King of Prussia's affairs, 463 Situation of the new
Empress, 464 Russian conquest restored, 465 Russians quit the Prussian camp,
ib. King of Prussia draws Marshal Daun from Buckersdorf, ib Schweidnitz
besieged, 466 Marshal Laudohn attacks the Prince of Bevern and is repulsed, 467
Disposition of the French and allied armies, ib. Battle of Grabenstein, 468
Lord Granby drives the French from Hombourg, 469 Prince Xavier of Saxony
defeated, and Gottingen evacuated, 470 War in Portugal, 473 Miranda, Braganza
and Chaves, taken, 474 Almeida besieged and taken, 475 Count of la Lip
arrives in Portugal, 476 Surprise of Valentia d'Alcantara by General Burgoyne,
ib. Affair of Villa Velha, 478 Spaniards retire, ib. Expedition against
Martinico, 479 Troops land at Cas Navire, 480 Attack of the posts near Fort
Royal, 481 Fort Royal surrendered, 482 General Monckton's and Admiral Rodney's
letter relative to the conquest of Martinico, ib. St. Lucie, the Grenades and
St. Vincent taken, 491 Preparations for war against the Spanish West Indies,
493 Commanders in the Expedition against the Havannah, and departure of the
fleet, 495 Passage through the old streights of Bahama, 496 Town and harbor of
Havannah described, ib. Troops land, 498 The siege of Fort Moro, ib. Distress
of the English forces, 501 Succors arrive from North America, 502 The Fort
stormed, 503 Operations against the town, 504 The Havannah surrenders, 505
Letters from the Earl of Albemarle and Admiral Pocock relative to their
operations, ib. An expedition against the Philippine Islands, undertaken by Gen
Draper and Adm. Cornish, 510 Departure of the forces, 511 City of Manila
invested, 513 The place stormed and taken, 514 Genesis Draper and Adm. Cornish's
account of the expedition, 516 Proposals for peace, 524 State of the Ministry
and parties, 525 Dukes of Bedford and Nivernois employed in the negotiation.
528 Newfoundland taken and retaken, ib. War in Germany, 532 Hereditary Prince
defeated at Johannisberg, 538 Cassel in^ested, 539 Remarkable cannonade at
Bucker Muhl, ib. French take Amoneberg, 540 Cassel surrendered to the allies,
ib. War in Westphalia concluded, 541 Lord Granby's letter of thanks to the
army, ib. Siege and surrender of Schweidnitz, 543 War transferred to Saxony,
544 Austrians defeated at Freyberg, ib. Prussians ravage the Empire, 545
Preliminaries of peace between Great Britain and France, 548 Mr. Fox comes into
administration, 556 Preliminaries approved by parliament, 557 Peace of
Hubertsbourg between Austria and Prussia, 558 Conclusion, ib.
A List of HEADS, MAPS, and PLANS, in the COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE LATE WAR.
I. The Head of his present Majesty to face the Title. II. The Head of Admiral
Boscawen, Page 4 III. -- of General Amherst, 95 IV. -- of Prince Ferdinand, 164
V. -- of the Marquess of Granby, 170 VI. -- of General Wolf, 220 VII. -- of
Admiral Hawke, 232 VIII. -- of the King of Prussia, 300 IX. -- of the Right
Hon. Wm. Pit, 420 X. -- of General Monckton, 480
MAPS and PLANS.
XI. Plan of the Siege of Louisbourg, 110 XII. -- of the Island of Goree, 128
XIII. View of Montreal, 339 XIV. Plan of the Siege of the Havannah, 498 XV. Map
of Germany, at the End. XVI. -- of America, at the End.
A list of FRENCH, ENGLISH, and SPANISH Ships of War taken, destroyed, or lost,
during the late War.
FRENCH Line of Battle Ships.
Taken. Guns. FOrmidable 80 Foudroyant 80 Centaur 74 Temeraire 74 Achille 64
Alcide 64 Belliqueux 64 Lys 64 Modeste 64 Orphee 64 Raisonable 64 St. Anne 64
Arc en Ciel 50 Oriflamme 53

Destroyed Guns. Ocean 84 Soleil Royal 84 Bein Aim 74 Entreprennant 74 Heroes
74 Prudent 74 Redoutab 74 Thesee 74 Just 70 Superbe 70 Capricieux 64 Celebre
64 Alegon 50 Apollon 50

FRENCH FRIGATES.
Taken. Guns. Abenquais 44 Danae 40 Arethuse 32 Bellone 32 Blonde 32 Boufonne
32 Brune 32 Commette 32 Diane 32 Hermione 32 Sirene 32 Vestale 32 Emeraude 28
La Folle 24 Opale 24 Galathee 24 Terpsichore 24 Tygre 24 Zephire 24 Guirlande
22 Hardy 20 Mignonne 20 Escarboucle 16 Anemone 14 Epreuve 14 Sardoigne 14

Destroyed. Guns. Aquilon 48 Atalante 36 Felicite 36 Fidelle 36 Rose 36 Fleur
de Lys 32 Nymphe 30 Pomona 24 Cleone 16 Biche 16

ENGLISH Men of War taken and destroyed by the FRENCH, this whole War.
Taken. Guns. Warwick, retaken 60 Greenwich, since lost 50 Winchelsea, retaken
24 Blandford, restored 20 Hawke, retaken 16 Merlin, retaken 14 Stork 14

Destroyed. Guns. Bridgewater 20 Triton 20

FRENCH Ships lost by Accident.
Guns. Northumberland 70 Opiniatre 64 Leopard 60 Aigle 50 Greenwich 50 Concord
30 Sauvage 30 Harmony 26 Zenobie 26 Minerve 24

ENGLISH Ships lost this War by Accident.
Guns. Ramalies 90 Prince George 84 Invincible, F. 74 Resolution 70 Conqueror
70 Duc d'Aquitaine 54 Essex 64 Mars, F. 64 Raisonable, F. 64 Sunderland 60
Tilbury 60 Litchfield 50 Newcastle 50 Chesterfield 44 Humber 40 Hassar 28
Leostoffe 28 Lyme 26 Tartar's prize, F. 24 Biddeford 20 Mermaid 20 Queenborough
20 Ferret 16 Pheasant, F. 16 Peregrine 16 Diligence 14 Scorpion 14

SPANISH Line of Battle Ships.
Taken. Guns. Tigre 70 Reyna 70 Soverano 70 Infant 70 Aquilon 70 America 60
Conquestado 60 San Genaro 60 San Antonio 60

Sunk. Guns. Neptuno 70 Asia 64 Europa 60

Frigates.
Taken. Guns. Vinganaza 24 Thetis 24 Mart 18 N. B. There were two ships of war
taken on the stocks, at the Havannah.

THE ANNUAL REGISTER OR HISTORY OF THE WAR.
CHAP. I.
Origin of the troubles in North America. Admiral Boscawen and General Braddock
sent thither. Operations intended. Two French men of war taken. Braddock
defeated. Genesis Johnson repulses the French. French threaten an invasion. Fort
St. Philip besieged and taken. Treaty with Russia, the spirit of it. Alliance
with the King of Prussia. Ground of the Quarrel between her Imperial Majesty
and that Monarch. Treaty of Petersbourg. Treaty of Versailles. King of Prussia
enters Saxony and Bohemia. Battle of Lowositz. Saxon army surrenders.

THE original plan of this work proposed no more than, that each volume should
contain a narrative of those events which distinguish its own Year. But,
because we have entered upon our undertaking in the heat of an almost general
and very important war, I thought it would not be unnecessary or disagreeable
to look a little farther back. It would be difficult, perfectly to understand
the operations of the several powers at war, without reviewing the transactions
of the preceding years; nor would it be easy to enter into the spirit of these,
without examining the causes which more nearly or remotely operated to produce
those troubles that have involved so many parts of the world in one common
distraction.

The war in which all parties and interests seem now to be so perfectly
blended, arose from causes which originally had not the least connection: the
uncertain limits of the English and French territories in America; and the
mutual claims of the Houses of Austria and Brandenbourg on the duchy of
Silesia. It is no wonder that the two former powers seizing on a country in
which they considered the right of the natural Inhabitants as nothing, should
find it a very difficult matter to settle their own. For a long time neither of
these powers were sufficiently acquainted with the geography of America, to
enable them to ascertain the limits of their several pretensions with any
tolerable exactness; nor, indeed, were these matters deemed of sufficient
moment to call for a very laborious discussion. At the treaty of Utrecht,
whilst so many more important Interests, or what then seemed more important,
were discussed, the limits of Nova Scotia, then called Acadia, were expressed
only in general terms, and left to be put on a more certain footing by
subsequent negotiations. These negotiations pursued with no vigor, and drawn
out into an excessive length, seemed only to increase the former confusion.
After the accession of the present Royal Family, a French connection, perhaps
necessary from the circumstances of the time, and afterward a certain
negligence of all affairs but those of our domestic polity, suffered this
important point to vanish almost wholly out of our consideration. During this
interval, our colonies on the continent of North Amerca, extended themselves on
every side. Whilst agriculture and the maritime commerce flourished on their
coasts, the Indian trade drew several of our wandering dealers far into the
inland country, and beyond the great mountains. Here they found themselves in a
delightful climate, in a soil abundantly fruitful, and watered with many fair
and navigable rivers. These advantages, joined to those of the Indian trade,
appeared to compensate for its remoteness from the sea. It was judged, that as
the first settlers on the coast, we had a good right to the inland country;
and, if so, to the navigation of the Missisippi, which opened another door to
the ocean. With these views, a company of merchants and planters, obtained a
charter for a considerable tract of land near the river Ohio, on the western
side of the Alleganey mountains, but within the province of Virginia; and the
adventurers began to settle pursuant to the terms of their patent.

Now began to shoot forth the seeds of another dispute, which had long lain
unobserved, but which proved altogether as thorny and intricate as that
concerning the limits of Acadia. The French pretending to have first discovered
the mouths of the Missisippi, claimed the whole adjacent country, toward New
Mexico on the east, quite to the Apalachian or Alleganey mountains on the west.
They drove off the new settlers, and built a new fort called du Quesne, on the
forks of the River Monongahela, a situation which commanded the entrance into
all the country on the Ohio and Missisippi.

The reader will observe, that I do not pretend to decide concerning the right
of either nation in this contest. It is evident enough, that the consideration
of the right had much less influence on both parties, than the consideration of
convenience. Should the French be able to unite Canada to their colonies at the
mouth of the Missisippi by a possession of all that vast country which lies
between them, the English colonies must lose all share in the Indian trade in
time of peace; and in time of war be exposed to continual dangers, or to the
ruinously chargeable defense of a frontier more than 1500 miles in length. If
on the contrary, the French should fail to make good these claims on the Ohio,
and those on Nova Scotia, their two colonies entirely disunited, and the
entrance into one shut up for the winter season by frost, and the entrance into
the other difficult in all seasons by the banks at the mouth of the Missisppi,
must certainly lose all their value to France, and in their fall involve much
of the fortune of their great settlements in the West Indies.

colonies to arm; and three operations were actually undertaken, one against
Fort du Quesne under Braddock; the other two against the French forts in Nova
Scotia, and the fort of Crown Point on the Frontiers of New York. The two
courts in the mean time breathed nothing but peace, and exchanged reciprocal
professions of friendship, and good will, which deceived neither party.

They who are of opinion that the passions and characters of the ruling men
influence all public concerns as much as the public interests themselves,
thought they saw other causes operating to hasten this breach. On the death of
a great Minister, which happened some time before, the administration was new
molded. Some persons then taken in, were considered as belonging to a party
not perfectly united with the remains of the old administration. It was
thought, that the leading man of this party proposed to work out the old
Servants of the crown, in order to make way for a more uniform system. As long
as peace subsists, government is supported by itself; and any change is
difficult. But the conduct of a war, is a thing critical to a ministry. The
leader of this party therefore, conscious of his own talents, which all men
acknowledged to be conspicuous, and of his connections which were considerable,
warmly pushed on a war, seconded by the fairness of the public motives, and the
general voice of the people. In this war his friends relied, that things must
necessarily be so embarrassed, that the old party would find themselves obliged
to retire, and to leave the stage clear for them to serve their country
according to their own plans, and on their own terms. This design was believed
to be pushed forward by another great man of that party, who had played a game
nearly of the same kind before, and in whom an advanced age had not abated any
thing of his natural fire and love of violent councils.

ADM. BOSCAWEN
portrait of Admiral Boscawen under General Braddock. That General abounding
too much in his own sense for the degree of military knowledge he possessed,
commanding in a country which he did not know, and carrying on a species of war
in which he had no experience, suffered himself, when he had advanced within 10
miles of Fort du Quesne, to be surprised by an ambuscade of French and Indians.



During this summer, our court took a resolution not to wait the precarious
operation of our arms in America for redress of the grievances complained of,
but to strike such a blow as would at once put a security into our hands, for
the evacuating the places the enemy had fortified in our territories, and
disable them in the two most material points, the resources of their trade, and
their seamen. Their merchant ships were every where attacked, as if war had
been actually declared, and vast numbers brought into our ports. The French
made all Europe resound with complaints of what they called a proceeding so
unjust, and a violation of the law of nations so flagrant and unprecedented.
But, whether it was that they were really in no condition to act, or that they
intended to influence the other courts in their favor, by a show of
extraordinary moderation, they contented themselves with this, and neither
declared war, nor made any sort of reprisal for several months after.

This was done whilst the nation trembled under a shameful panic, too public to
be concealed, too fatal in its consequences to be ever forgotten. The real
invasion did not lessen our fears of the imaginary one; it threw us into a
confusion that suffered us to be sensible of nothing but our own weakness. We
did not look upon ourselves sufficiently secured by the arrival of the
Hanoverian and Hessian troops, which the same weakness had induced us to call
to our assistance. The ministry seemed to have been infected with the common
terror; for though they had very early notice or the French designs, such was
the apprehension of the invasion, or such the ill-contrived disposition of our
navy, that Admiral Byng was not dispatched to the Mediterranean before the 5th
of April, and then with a squadron of no more than 10 ships of the line.

The engagement with the French fleet under M. Galissoniere; the retreat of
Byng by which the garrison of fort St. Philip was cut off from all hopes of
relief; of a court martial to revive the British spirit, and to the unfortunate
necessity of shedding the blood of an Admiral, a person of a noble family, as a
sacrifice to the discipline of our navy.



The alliance with Russia was chosen for reasons which were then sufficiently
plausible; though it is to be hoped they can never subsist again. The long ill
understanding between the King of Prussia and our court, and his close
connection with that of Versailles, raised no ill-grounded apprehensions that he
might be induced to act a dangerous part on this occasion. Russia was therefore
a proper ally, who had both a political and personal enmity to this monarch,
and who would be sure to employ a great power with great vigor in such a
cause. But this system was in a short time totally reversed. The King of
Prussia had been too well apprised of the close conjunction of the courts of
Petersburg and Vienna, and of the real motive to that conjunction, to have the
least design of embroiling himself with England. Matters were therefore very
soon explained, and the treaty between his Prussian majesty and this court, to
keep all foreigners out of the Empire, was signed at London in January 1756.
These treaties were censured as inconsistent with each other; but in reality
they were consistent enough, aiming precisely at the same object, to oppose the
schemes meditated by France for disturbing the affairs of Germany.

If reflecting on the sentiments of these courts, there was something
unexpected in the alliance between great Britain and Prussia; it was soon
followed by another alliance of a nature infinitely more surprising. The
Empress Queen of Hungary, finding England in no disposition to cooperate in
her designs, had recourse to other measures. The house of Austria, which had
formerly united Europe to preserve her from the power of France, now entered
herself into the most intimate union with that power. By this extraordinary
revolution the whole political system of Europe assumed a new face; it was
indeed a revolution so extraordinary, that we shall be justified if we
interrupt the course of this narrative, to look back at the causes which
produced it.

The house of Brandenbourg, a little more than two centuries ago, was in a very
humble condition. But by the part she took in the reformation, which put into
her hands the estates of the Teutonic order; by a marriage from which she
acquired the duchy of Cleves; and by an uncommon succession of able princes who
carefully improved every turn in the affairs of Germany to their advantage, she
raised herself by degrees to a considerable state, to an electorate, and at
last to a royalty, not only in name but in power. The late King of Prussia, in
order to strengthen this power, though he past almost his whole reign in the
most profound peace, gave his whole attention to his army; frugal in all other
respects, in this alone he was expensive; it was his business, and what was
perhaps of greater moment, it was his only diversion. Thus in a reign
apparently inactive, there was always kept up an army of near 100,000 men, in
as much exercise as they could have in war, and formed with the most perfect
discipline.

When his present Majesty came to the throne, he immediately showed a
disposition of employing effectually that military force, which his father had
spent his life only in forming and training. He managed his dispute with the
Bishop of Liege by the summary method of force; and seemed disposed to carry
all things with so high an hand, as made him indeed much respected, but much
dreaded too by the Princes of the Empire, who saw that there was another power
to be feared in Germany, besides that of Austria. But these were small matters,
rather signs of the disposition of this Prince, than exertions of it. He
meditated much greater things; and only waited an opportunity to make good the
ancient claims of his family on the most considerable part of the duchy of
Silesia. The right to that duchy had been a very intricate affair; but the
house of Austria availing herself of the greatness of her power, and of a
dissension between the Elector Frederick II. and his son, prevailed with the
Elector to give up that right for an equivalent; then she persuaded his son to
confirm the treaty; and at the same time for a trivial consideration to give up
the equivalent itself. The King of Prussia, not thinking himself bound by these
acts, though confirmed be a long possession, took advantage of his own power,
and the embarrassed circumstances of the house of Austria, to resume what their
power and the embarrassed circumstances of his family had formerly deprived him
of. For immediately on the death of Charles the 6th,

The Queen of Hungary could not easily lose the memory of the wound she had
received in the loss of one of the finest and richest parts of all her
dominions. Silesia, which she had just yielded, extended in length 200 miles
along the course of the large and navigable river Oder. A country of the most
exquisite fertility and highest cultivation; abounding with men, abounding with
valuable manufactures, and yielding a clear yearly revenue of 800,000 pounds
sterling. The peace was hardly concluded by which she resigned this valuable
territory, than she set on foot practices for recovering it. She entered into a
treaty with the court of Petersbourg, of an innocent and simply defensive
nature, so far as appeared to the public; but six secret and separate articles
were added to it;

To this so extraordinary a treaty, the King of Poland was invited to accede;
and he did so far accede to it, as to show he perfectly agreed in his
sentiments with these courts. But his situation in the jaws of a formidable
enemy, and the experience of passed misfortunes, had rendered him so weary,
that he declined signing the treaty; but still, with the consent of the parties
concerned, whom he fully convinced of his resolution to cooperate in all their
measures. He desired and they agreed, that in the success of their arms he
should have a share in the spoil, on the footing of a treaty for the eventual
portion, of the King of Prussia's dominions made in the last war.

In consequence of these measures, all sort of means were employed to embroil
the King of Prussia's affairs in the North, and particularly to render him
personally odious to the Czarina. When their machinations had taken full
effect, and Russia was fixed in an unalterable enmity to that monarch,
preparations of magazines and armies were made in Bohemia and Moravia; and the
King of Poland, under pretense of a military amusement, drew together about
16000 men, with which he occupied the strong and important Post of Pirna. The
Queen of Hungary saw that she stood in need of yet stronger supports than these
in the arduous business she had undertaken. She found that Great Britain, which
had often done so much for her distress, would do little for her ambition: she
therefore had recourse to France, who joyfully accepted an alliance, that
promised to confound the whole Germanic body, concluded a treaty with the
Empress at Versailles the 1st of May 1756, a remarkable era in the political
history of Europe.

The secret articles of the treaty of Petersbourg, the fountain of the present
troubles, and the steps taken to put that treaty in execution, though formed
and carried on with as much secrecy as earnestness, could not escape the
vigilance of his Prussian majesty, who watched all their motions, and had
perfect intelligence of their most hidden designs. When, therefore, he
perceived that by the breach between England and France, the Empress Queen
would take advantage of these troubles to avail herself of her alliances and
her armament; he ordered his minister at Vienna to demand a clear explication,
and proper assurances concerning the preparations he saw making: and receiving
only a dry and equivocal answer, that the Empress had taken measures for her
own security and that of her allies and friends, the King believed himself no
longer bound to preserve any terms; a dangerous war was to be kept out of his
own territories at any rate; and being always in perfect readiness for action,
he fell upon Saxony with a considerable army.

At first the King of Prussia seemed only to demand a free passage for his
troops, and an observance of the neutrality professed by the King of Poland;
might be able to convey some relief to the Saxons, resolved to bring him to
action, to the success of which he knew his own presence would greatly
contribute. He therefore left the blockade of the Saxon army, joined his forces
under Keith, and engaged the Austrians at Lowositz. Here he obtained a victory,

CHAP. II.
State of the English ministry. The characters and designs of the several
factions. A coalition. Oswego taken by the French. Calcutta taken by the Nabob.
Angria reduced by Admiral Watson.

WHILST the King of Prussia passed the winter in the most vigorous preparations
for carrying on the war, his ally Great Britain presented a very different face
of things. The loss of Minorca plunged the people into the utmost grief mixed
with shame, for such a blot on the national honor, and with indignation not
only against those who had acted weakly, but those who had proved
insufficiently for the loss of that important possession. The public resentment
which at first seemed to have no other object than Byng, was soon turned
against the ministry. The clamor in parliament was great; without doors it was
excessive. Addresses praying a strict enquiry into the cause of our
misfortunes, were presented from all parts of the kingdom. The ministry,
notwithstanding this general discontent, had a real strength; and they might
have stood, had they agreed amongst themselves. The commons could not be
brought to any angry votes; and the result of the enquiry into the loss of
Minorca, was as favorable as they could have wished. But Mr. F -- x thought it
not advisable to bear a large proportion of the odium caused by counsels, in
which he had little share. Perhaps he thought this embarrassment, a situation
not unfavourable to the arrangement he had always aimed at? he therefore
suddenly threw up an employment, which he hoped to resume augmented with
greater power.

On the removal of this principal prop, the whole structure of the ministry
fell to pieces. The D. of N. the Ld. Chapter the first lord of the admiralty
resigned; and the chiefs of the party by whose maneuvers they were displaced,
and having no ministry established, we had no plan to follow.

Three factions divided the ruling men of the nation, for the gross of the
people seemed to have no further views than a redress of their grievances, by
whatever means that could be brought about; the first of these factions was
composed of those who had grown to place and power, or had formed their
connexions under the old ministry. They were some of the most respectable
persons in the nation, and had undoubtedly the greatest parliamentary interest.
They had at the same time another interest hardly less considerable, that of
the monied people; but in some points, and those material too, they were weak.
They were not at all popular; a matter of great consideration in a government
like ours; and they were supposed by the gross of the people, not to be under
the direction of great political abilities.

The second faction, though not suspected of the want of sufficient ability,
was yet more unpopular than the former; they had not attempted to preserve even
the appearances essential to popularity; and to them the more essential, as
their parliamentary strength was, however respectable, much inferior to the
first. If their influence at one court was able to balance that of the old
ministry, by means of a then powerful connection, that very connection made them
far worse at another court, and worse with the generality of the people, who
entertained or pretended at least to entertain, suspicions of a nature the more
dangerous, as they were only dropped in hints and whispers, and never could
come to a full and open explanation.

The third party, had little parliamentary and less court influence; but they
had a prodigious popularity, which supplied every other defect. The abilities
of their leader were of the most shining kind; his application equal to his
abilities; his disinterestedness was confessed by his enemies; and though it
would have shined in the days of heroism, was now the more valued, and set off
to the greater advantage by the general selfishness which prevailed among the
men of business. The nation reposed the most perfect confidence in his
integrity and love to his country. This party, conscious where its strength
lay, cultivated with great care the popularity which was the basis of their
power; even perhaps so as to impair on some occasion the dignity of government.

These three factions differed from each other extremely with regard to power,
the grand object of all factions. But in the general scheme of their politics,
the two first were pretty much agreed. Looking on France as the most constant
and most dangerous enemy of Great Britain, they dreaded the increase of her
power and influence among the neighboring nations as the greatest of all
evils. To prevent so dangerous an aggrandisement, they thought it absolutely
necessary to preserve a constant attention to the balance of power, and to
seek our particular safety and liberty in the general safety and liberty of
Europe. A close connection was therefore to be kept up with the powers of the
continent, not only by continual negotiations, but by large subsidies, and even
by assisting them with our troops if the occasion should require such
assistance. For this purpose, as well as to secure the more effectually our
present happy establishment, a considerable regular land force ought to be
constantly maintained. Our navy, they thought, ought by no means to be
neglected; but it was only to be cultivated and employed subserviently to the
more comprehensive continental system. These parties were far from being
friends to arbitrary power, or in any sort averse to parliaments; they loved
the constitution; but they were for preserving the authority of government
entire, and in its utmost lawful force. To make government more easy, knowing
that many would disturb it, from disaffection or disgust, or mistaken notions
of liberty, they thought it just to rule men by their interests, if they could
not by their virtues, and they had long been in the practice of procuring a
majority in parliament, by the distribution of the numerous lucrative places
and employments which our constitution leaves in the disposal of the Crown.
Several believed that no other method was practicable, considering the nature
of mankind, and our particular form of government.

But the third and popular party, was influenced by different principles. They
looked indeed on the power of France in the same light with the two former, and
were of the same opinion concerning the necessity of setting bounds to it. In
the means of attaining this end they differed. Our situation they thought
dictated a narrower, but a more natural, a safer, and a less expensive plan of
politics, than that which had been adopted by the other party. We ought never
to forget, said they, that we are an island: and that this circumstance, so
favorable both to our political and to our civil liberty, prescribes to us a
conduct very different from that of any other nation. Our natural strength is a
maritime strength, as trade is our natural employment; these must always go
hand in hand, and they mutually support each other. But, if turning our back to
our real interests, and abandoning our natural element, we enter that
inextricable labyrinth of continental politics; if we make ourselves parties in
every controversy; if we exhaust our wealth in purchasing the useless and
precarious friendship of every petty prince or state; if we waste the blood of
our people in all the quarrels that may arise on the continent; so far from
going in the right way to reduce France, that we attack her on the strong side,
and only destroy ourselves by our ill judged efforts against the enemy. That we
can have nothing to fear from the superiority of France on the continent,
whilst we preserve our superiority at sea; that we can always cut the sinews of
the enemy's strength by destroying their traffic; that to fear an invasion from
a power weak in its marine, is the idlest of all fears; that in case an
invasion were possible, a well trained national militia, supplying by their
zeal the defects of their discipline, would prove our best protection; that a
standing army is in whatever shape dangerous to freedom; and that a government
like ours, connected by its very essence with the liberty of the subject, can
never be in want of the supports of despotic power, As little is parliamentary
influence necessary. A government pleasing to the people, as every good
government must be, can never be generally opposed; and men need no bribes to
persuade them to their duty.

These notions, so opposite in their extremes, might be reconciled in a medium,
and used to temper each other. For as, on one hand, it would be very absurd to
make no sort of advantage of our insular situation, but to engage in all the
business of the continent without reserve, and to plunge ourselves into real
evils out of a dread of possible mischiefs; so on the other hand, to think
ourselves wholly unconcerned in the fortunes of our neighbors on the
continent, or to think of aiding them in any case, only by the way of diversion
with our fleets, would be a way of proceeding, still more extravagant than the
former. If such notions were reduced to practice, we might soon lose all those
advantages derived from a situation which we abused.

The reasonableness of such a temperament, could not be perceived during the
ferment of that time, in which these topics were bandied to and fro with
infinite heat. The resignation, or rather deprivation, of the popular ministry,
only increased their popularity, and the general discontent; the people could
not believe that good measures could be pursued, when those, in whom alone they
confided, were not employed; almost all the corporations of the kingdom
presented the deprived ministers with their freedom, and addressed them in the
warmest manner, testifying the most entire approbation of their conduct, and
the sincerest concern to see them out of employment.

This conflict between an old established interest, and the torrent of
popularity, continued for a long time, and the nation was almost ruined by it.
It is not easy, nor perhaps quite proper, to attempt to trace the steps by
which so happy a coalition, as we have seen take place, was brought about. But
it was formed in such manner, has held together with such solidity, and
produced such excellent effects,

It was high time that our domestic dissentions should be composed at last.
From every quarter of the world, in which we had any concern, by General
Shirley, and designed to cover the country of the Five Nations; to secure the
Indian trade; to interrupt the communication between the French northern and
southern establishments; and to open a way to our arms to attack the forts of
Frontenac and Niagara. For these purposes, some frigates had been fitted out
for cruizing, and a number of boats prepared for the transportation of troops;
but they all fell to the enemy with the fort, where 100 pieces of cannon were,
and a considerable quantity of provision. 1600 men were made prisoners of war.
The place made but a trifling resistance, scarce holding out three days; the
attempts to relieve it were too late. The French demolished the fort.

Our losses were not confined to America. The E. India company received a blow,
which would have shaken an establishment of less strength to its foundations.
The news of the war between France and England had not yet reached India, but a
new and very formidable enemy was raised up in that quarter. The Nabob of
Bengal (the Nabobs are a species of viceroys to the Grand Mogul, grown almost
independent in their several provinces,) irritated at the protection given to
one of his subjects in the English fort of Calcutta, and, as it is said, at the
refusal of some duties to which he claimed a right, levied a great army, and
laid siege to that place. The Governor, terrified by the numbers of the enemy,
abandoned the fort with several of the principal persons in the settlement, who
saved themselves with their most valuable effects on board the ships.

Thus deserted. Mr. Hollwel, the second in command, bravely held the place to
the last extremity, with a few gallant friends, and the remains of a feeble
garrison. A very noble defense was insufficient to keep an untenable place, or
to affect an ungenerous enemy. The fort was taken, and the garrison being made
prisoners, were thrust into a narrow dungeon.

In the space of this unfortunate year, we were stripped of Minorca and Oswego;
we apprehended an invasion of Great Britain itself: our councils were torn to
pieces by factions; and our military force was every where in contempt. Amidst
these losses, we considered as some advantage,

CHAP. III.
State of the confederacy against the King of Prussia. French pass the Weser.
King of Prussia enters Bohemia. Battle of Prague. Prague invested. Count Daun
takes the command of the Austrian army. Battle of Colin.

WHAT turn the English politics were like to take in the year 1759, seemed for
some time uncertain. The new ministry did not seem well established; nor was it
well known, whether they would pursue the plans and preserve the connections of
the old. Abroad, every thing was prepared for opening the campaign with the
utmost eclat. All Europe was in motion.

France, in order to demonstrate to the Queen of Hungary, the advantageous
choice she had made in connecting herself with the house of Bourbon, formed two
great armies. The first was composed of near 80,000 men, the flower of the
French troops, attended with a vast artillery and commanded by M. d'Etrees, a
General of the best established reputation she had in her service. Under him
served M. de Contades, M. Chevert, and the Count de St. Germain, all officers
of high character, and all fit to command in chief, if M. d'Etrees had not been
appointed to that eminence. This formidable army passed the Rhine, and marched
by Westphalia, in order to invade the King of Prussia's dominions in quality of
allies to the Empress Queen, and guardians of the liberties of the Empire, and
to no other intent, as it was pretended; but in reality, with a view to reduce
Hanover also. They judged that their operations against the King of Prussia
might be executed, and their scheme to drive the King of England into some
concessions with regard to America, might be completed by one and the same
blow. The second army was commanded by the Prince de Soubise; it consisted of
about 25,000 men. This army was destined to strengthen the Imperial army of
execution; but before it had passed the Rhine, it made itself master of Cleves,
Meurs and Gueldres, whilst a detachment from d'Etrees's army seized upon the
town of Emden, and whatever else belonged to Prussia in East Friesland.

As soon as the King of Prussia had entered Saxony in the beginning of the
preceding summer, process was commenced against him in the Emperor's Aulic
council, and before the diet of the Empire. It is not difficult to conceive how
the affair must have been decided; when those who feared the King of Prussia,
believed they had a fair opportunity to reduce him: and when those who feared
the house of Austria, were, by that very fear, obliged to support the power
they dreaded: accustomed as they were to the influence of a family in which the
Empire had so long been in a manner hereditary; and overawed by the appearance
of a confederacy, the most formidable the world had ever yet seen. Accordingly
the King of Prussia was condemned for contumacy: and the Fiscal had orders to
notify to him that he was put under the ban of the Empire, and adjudged fallen
from all the dignities and possessions which he held under it. The circles of
the Empire were ordered to furnish their contingents of men and money to put
this sentence in execution; but the contingents were collected slowly, the
troops were badly composed, and probably this army had never been able to act,
if it had not been for the Assistance offered under the Prince de Soubise.

The Austrians, who were principals in the quarrel, were not behind their
auxiliaries in the greatness of their preparations; they made the most
strenuous efforts, by which they assembled a body of upwards of 100,000 men in
Bohemia, and committed the command to Prince Charles of Lorrain, assisted by M.
Brown. In the north all things threatened the King of Prussia. The Czarina true
to her resentments and her engagements, had sent a body of 60,000 men commanded
by M. Apraxin, who were in full march to invade the Ducal Prussia, whilst a
strong fleet was equipped in the Baltic, to cooperate with that army. Although
the King of Sweden was allied in blood and inclination to his Prussian majesty,
yet the jealousy which the Senate entertained of their sovereign; the hope of
recovering their ancient possessions in Pomerania by means of the present
troubles, and in fine their old attachment to France, newly cemented by
intrigues and subsidies, made their ill inclinations to the cause of Prussia
more than suspicious. Hitherto indeed nothing more than the tendency of their
councils was fully known. The Duke of Mecklenbourg took the same party, and
agreed to join the Swedish army when it should be assembled, with 6000 men; a
proceeding which he has since had reason to repent bitterly. Thus were the
forces of five mighty states Austria, Russia, France, Sweden, the Empire.
, each of which had in their turn been a terror to all Europe, united to reduce
the heir of the Marquisses of Brandenbourg; and in such a point of danger and
glory, had the great and formidable abilities of his Prussian majesty placed
him, with little, in comparison, that could enable him to sustain the violence
of so many shocks, except what those abilities supplied. But his astonishing
economy, the incomparable order of his finances, the discipline of his armies
beyond all praise, a sagacity that foresaw every thing, a vigilance that
attended every thing, a constancy that no labor could subdue, a courage that
no danger could dismay, an intuitive glance that catches the decisive moment,
all these seemed to form a sort of balance to the vast weight against him,
turned the wishes of his friends into hopes, and made them depend upon
resources that are not within the power of calculation.

The only army that appeared in his favor was a body of between 30 and 40,000
Hanoverians and Hessians, who with some reinforcements of his own troops,
formed an army of observation, commanded by his Royal Highness the Duke of
Cumberland; this army was posted on the Weser, to watch the motions of M.
d'Etrees. The vast and unwieldy body of the French, encumbered as the French
armies always are by an immense baggage, and an innumerable multitude of mouths
without hands, made a very slow progress through the rough and barren country
that lies between the Rhine and the Weser. All the abilities of the French
general were employed in finding subsistence for his troops. His Royal Highness
on the other hand, displayed great abilities in throwing all possible
impediments in his way. But when these impediments were removed by the
superiority of numbers, the Hanoverian army gradually gave way, yielding to
that superiority, and the French troops passed the Weser without opposition.

In the mean time, his Prussian majesty being determined according to his
maxim, to lay the cloth as from home as possible; made his dispositions for
carrying the war into Bohemia as speedily as the season would admit. Three
great bodies of his troops entered into that kingdom by three very different
ways, but nearly at the same time. M. Schwerin penetrated into it from Silesia.
The Prince of Bevern entered with the corpse under his command from Lusatia, and
defeated as a preliminary to a more decisive victory, a body of 28,000
Austrians who opposed him.

The Austrian army was little short of 100,000 men, and the situation of their
camp, fortified by every advantage of nature, the death of two of the best
generals in Europe. M. Schwerin was killed at the age of eighty-two, with the
colonels standard in his hand at the head of his regiment. M. Brown received a
wound, which, from the chagrin he suffered rather than from its own nature,
proved mortal.

About 40,000 of the Austrian army took refuge in Prague. The rest fled
different ways. The King of Prussia lost no time to invest the place, and to
cut off all succors. If on one hand such an immense garrison made an attack
unadviseable, on the other that formidable number itself seemed to make the
reduction of the place by famine the more certain. The King of Prussia not
relying solely on this, prepared to bombard the town. On the 29th of May, at
midnight, after a most dreadful storm of rain and thunder, as if it were to
display how much more ruinous the malice of men may be, than the greatest
terrors of nature, on the signal of a rocket, four batteries, which discharged
every twenty-four hours two hundred and eighty-eight bombs, besides a vast
multitude of red hot balls, began to pour destruction on that unfortunate city,
which was soon in flames in every part. The garrison made a vigorous defense,
and one well conducted and desperate sally: but they were repulsed with great
loss. The principal magistrates, burgesses, and clergy, seeing their city on
the point of being reduced to an heap of rubbish, made the most moving
supplications to the commander to listen to terms. The commander was deaf to
their prayers. Twelve thousand of the most useless mouths were driven out of
the city. The Prussians forced them in again. The affairs of the empress seemed
verging to inevitable destruction; a whole army was upon the point of
surrendering prisoners of war; the capital of Bohemia on the point of being
taken, and with it all the rest of that flourishing kingdom. The sanguine
friends to the King of Prussia began to compute the distance of Vienna.

In this desperate situation of affairs, Leopold Count Daun entered on the
stage, and began to turn the fortune of the war. This General never had
commanded in chief before; but he was formed, by a long course of experience in
various parts of Europe, under the greatest Generals, and in the most
illustrious scenes of actions. Though of a very noble family, he had, without
the least assistance from court favor, risen insensibly by the slow gradation
of mere merit, with much esteem and without any noise. This General arrived
within a few miles of Prague, the day after the great battle. He collected the
fugitive parties of the Austrian army, and retired to a post of great strength,
from whence he fed the troops in Prague with hopes of relief. But as no man
better understood the superiority of the Prussian troops, and as he was
sensible of the impression which the late defeat had left upon his men, he
carefully avoided to precipitate matters by an hasty action. He knew that the
situation he had chosen would embarrass the Prussians; that a large party of
their army must be always employed to watch him; that this would weaken their
efforts against the great body shut up in Prague, whilst his own forces gained
time to recover their spirits, and to increase in strength by the daily
succors, which his court exerted all their powers to send him: with these
ideas he waited in his entrenched camp at Colin, to act as events should direct.

The King of Prussia was not less sensible than Count Daun of the effects of
this conduct. He determined at all adventures to dislodge him from the post he
held; but whether it was that the King feared to weaken his army, which had
actually an army to besiege, or whether he was blinded by a train of uniform
success, which made him believe his arms irresistible under every disadvantage,
or whatever were his motives or necessities, the whole army employed in this
undertaking, including the Prince of Bevern's corpse, did not exceed 32,000 men,
cavalry and infantry; and with these he was to attack 60,000 men, in one of the
strongest situations which could be chosen, in a ground where his cavalry could
not support them, the want of an equal artillery, the advantageous situation of
the enemy, their numbers, their bravery, their General, obliged the King of
Prussia to quit the field. What his loss was is not so certain; it wa s
undoubtedly great in the action, but still greater by desertions, and the
innumerable ill consequences that follow a defeat.

Though the King of Prussia was defeated in this battle, and though he brought
on his defeat in a great measure, by some errors of his own, yet whatever small
blemish his military skill might have suffered, his reputation was raised
higher than ever, in the opinion of all judicious men, by the noble and candid
manner in which he acknowledged his mistake, by the firmness with which he bore
his misfortune, and by those astonishing strokes of genius and heroism, by
which he retrived his loss. The smiles of fortune make conquerors; it is her
malice which discovers heroes.

CHAP. IV.
Consequence of the battle of Colin. King of Prussia evacuates Bohemia. Battle
of Hastenbeck. Convention of Closter-seven. Expedition to Rochfort. Russians
enter Prussia. Austrians besiege Schweidnitz. French and Imperialists make
incursions into Brandenburgh. Swedes enter Pomerania. Battle of Norkitten.
General Lehwald defeated. Bad condition of the King of Prussia.

NEVER was the old observation, une bataille perdue a un mauvais ^u, more
verified than in the consequences of the unfortunate battle of Colin. Though
the King retired unpursued by his enemies, he was obliged to rejoin his own
army before Prague without delay, and to raise the blockade of that place. The
imprisoned Austrians with joy received Count Daun their deliverer, and their
united forces became greatly superior to the Prussians. The King was in a short
time obliged to evacuate Bohemia, and take refuge in Saxony. The Austrians
harassed him as much as possible; but their armies, notwithstanding their great
superiority, were not in a condition from their late sufferings to make any
decisive attempt upon him, as the frontiers of Saxony abound with situations
easily defended.

The King of Prussia's misfortunes now poured in upon him at once, and from
every quarter. The army commanded by the Duke of Cumberland, who continually
retired before the French, after they had passed the Weser, came however to a
resolution to make a stand at Hastenbeck, within a few Miles of Hammelen, where
it was judged that the superior numbers of the enemy might be the least
prejudicial; but notwithstanding the advantages of the situation, the bravery
of the Hanoverians, and the conduct of the Duke, the allied army was driven
from the field of battle, cul de sac. Unable by his situation to retire, or by
his strength to advance, he was compelled to sign the remarkable capitulation
of Closter-seven,

An enterprise was concerted in England against the coast of France, to make a
diversion in his favor, by drawing a part of the French army to the defense of
their own country. England proposed to compass another great design, and which
she had equally at heart, by the expedition, which was to give an effectual
blow to the marine of France. The destination of this armament was kept a
profound secret, and whilst it excercised the penetration of all the
politicians of Europe, it filled France with the most serious alarms. The
English Fleet at last appeared before Rochfort. Some time was spent before it
could be resolved what plan was to be followed in the attack; actions, the
militia of the country had time to gather, and there was an appearance of two
camps on the shore. The commanders now took into consideration the badness of
the coast, the danger of landing, the time the enemy had to put the place in
such a posture of defense, as might make any sudden attempt, or coup de main,
unsuccessful: in consequence of these deliberations, they unanimously resolved
to return without making any attempt. The disappointment of the nation was
equal to the sanguine hopes we had conceived; court of enquiry, of officers of
reputation, censured the commander; a court martial, of officers of reputation,
acquitted him. The expedition served only in England to increase and imbitter
our dissentions, and to turn our attention to vain disputes. It did nothing
toward relieving the King of Prussia.

The Russians, who had made for a long time a dilatory march and seemed
uncertain of their own resolution, all at once hastened their motions. They
entered the Ducal Prussia under M. Apraxin and General Fermer, and marked their
progress by a thousand inhuman cruelties. A large body of Austrians entered
Silesia, and penetrated as far as Breslau. Then they made a turn backwards, and
laid siege to the important fortress of Schweidnitz, justly considered as the
key of that duchy, which was the cause of the war. Another body entered
Lusatia, and made themselves masters of Zittau. Twenty-two thousand Swedes
pierced into the Prussian Pomerania, took the towns of Anclam and Demmein, and
laid the whole country under contributions. Richlieu, freed from all opposition
on the side of Hanover, made his way into Halberstad, and the old march of
Brandenburgh, first exacting contributions, and then plundering the towns. The
army of the Empire, reinforced by that of the Prince de Soubise, after many
delays, was at last on full march to enter Saxony; this left the Austrians at
liberty to turn the greatest part of their forces to the reduction of Silesia.
General Haddick pierced through Lusatia, passed by the Prussian armies, and,
suddenly presenting himself before the gates of Berlin, laid the King of
Prussia's capital under contribution; and though he retired on the approach of
a body of Prussians, yet he still kept possession of his former post, in order
to interrupt the communication of the King with Silesia. The fate which seemed
to have threatened the Empress some months ago, was now looked upon as the
certain lot of her antagonist. All his endeavors to retrieve his affairs had
hitherto been equally brave and unsuccessful. General Lehwald had orders at any
hazard to engage the Russians: with thirty thousand he attacked double that
number strongly entrenched, at a place called Norkitten; but after several of
those wonderful efforts,

"Many persons, who saw the King of Prussia, when he passed lately through
Leipsic, cannot express how much he is altered. They say he is so much worn
away, that they scarce knew him. This, indeed, is not to be wondered at; he
has not a body of iron, like Charles XII. and he endures as great fatigues as
he did. He is as much on horseback as Charles was, and often lies upon the
ground. His inward sufferings cannot be less than his outward: let us cast our
eyes on a map of the Prussian dominions; and measure what he has left of the
many fair possessions he had in the month of April last, of which a space of
seven months has stripped him. Whence can he have men? he is shut out from the
Empire; and from whence can he draw money? the duchy of Guelders, the duchy
of Cleves, the principality of Moers, the county of Lingen, the county of
Lipstadt, the principality of Minden, East-Friesland, Embden, and its infant
company, part of the archbishopric of Magdeburgh, some other parts of the
march, Ducal Pomerania, a great part of Silesia, a great part of the kingdom
of Prussia, Berlin itself, almost all his dominions, in short, are either taken
from him, or laid under contribution, and possessed by his enemies, who collect
the public revenues, fatten on the contributions, and with the money which they
draw from the electorate of Hanover, and other conquests defray the expenses of
the war. This picture certainly differs greatly from that which the King of
Prussia might have sketched out, the day he took arms to enter Saxony. Add to
this the Duke of Cumberland's convention, which deprived him of all his allies,
and left him without any assistance whatever, excepting four or five hundred
thousand pounds sterling, which the British parliament may give him. Add
likewise some domestic uneasinesses."

CHAP. V.
Battle of Rosbach, Schwaidnitz taken by the Austrians. Prince of Bevern
attacked in his entrenchments. Breslau taken by the Austrians. King of Prussia
marches to Silesia. The battle of Lissa. Breslau retaken. Austrians driven out
of Silesia.

THIS was the King of Prussia's situation, when the will of Providence, and his
own wonderful abilities, as wonderfully changed the scene. His majesty deferred
to bring on a decisive action, distressed as his affairs were, until the
approach of winter; had he marched to attack the Imperial army, whilst it was
at a considerable distance, he must either have left Saxony exposed to the
insults of the Austrian parties, or have greatly weakened his own forces
employed in the principal action. He therefore suffered the army of the Empire
to advance to the frontiers of Misnia, and even to threaten the siege of
Leipsic, before he began to act against them: he however moved toward them,
leaving an army in Lusatia to observe the Austrians. On his first motions, the
enemy retired with precipitation. But when they had reinforced themselves with
numbers and courage sufficient to persuade them to advance, the King of Prussia
in his turn retired. His resolution seemed to have been to fight as near Misnia
as possible, and as deep in the winter, as he conveniently might, for if he
should have the good fortune to succeed against the Imperial army, such a blow,
at such a season, would effectually disable them from acting any thing to his
prejudice, for that year at least; but if, on the contrary, he should fail,
Saxony was at hand, in which it would prove difficult for the enemy to make any
impression whilst the winter continued. As for the time to be lost by following
this plan, and the advantage it would afford the Austrians in their designs on
Silesia, they were not to be compared with the advantages which the King
received from it. He knew that Schweidnitz was strong, and excellently
provided; the prince of Bevern was strongly posted near it to obstruct the
enemy's operations; the winter would lean heavier on the besiegers; and on the
whole, he had reason to trust that his troops, animated by his own presence and
example, would prove far superior to the enemy, in enduring all the hardships
of a winter campaign.

After some time spent in various movements, between the allied army of the
Imperialists and French on one side, and the Prussians on the other, the King
resolved to give battle to his enemies, who were now advanced to the confines
of Misnia. On the 24th of October, the King had taken his resolution; at that
time his army happened to be divided into several corpse, some of them at a
distance of no less than twenty leagues asunder; yet such were the spirit and
excellent dispositions of the Prussians, that the junction of all these corpse
were fully effected on the 27th, and the King advanced toward the enemy. The
enemy fell back at his approach, and repassed the Sala; they were followed
close.

The united army, commanded by the prince of Saxe Hilburghausen and the prince
of Soubise, was 50,000 men complete. But the troops of the Circles were new
raised, and many of them not well affected to the service, nor to their French
allies. The Prussians did not amount to 25,000; but then they were Prussians,
and led on by the King of Prussia. As soon as the armies were formed, and the
battle going to begin, which was to decide the fate of so many nations, and to
determine between force and virtue, the King of Prussia addressed his troops
nearly in the following words.

My dear friends, the hour is come, in which all that is, and all that ought to
be dear to us, depends upon the swords which are now drawn for the battle. Time
permits me to say but little; nor is there occasion to say much. You know that
there is no labor, no hunger, no cold, no watching, no danger that I have not
shared with you hitherto; and you now see me ready to lay down my life with
you, and for you. All I ask, is the same pledge of fidelity and affection that
I give. And let me add, not as an incitement to your courage, but as a
testimony of my own gratitude, that from this hour, until you go into quarters,
your pay shall be double. Acquit yourselves like men, and put your confidence
in God. The effect of this speech was such as cannot be described. The general
emotion burst in an universal shout, and the looks and demeanor of the men were
animated to a sort of heroic phrensy. In this disposition, which prognosticated
the success, engagement began.

In the beginning of the action, the French cavalry came on with great spirit,
but they were repulsed; some regiments having gained an eminence, defended
themselves bravely, but in the end they were totally routed. The infantry, both
French and Imperialists, made but a faint resistance. The King of Prussia in
person, exposed to the hottest fire, led on his troops; the enemy gave way in
every part; they were seized with a panic, and fled in the utmost disorder.
They left 3000 men dead on the field of battle; 63 pieces of cannon, and many
colors. Eight French generals, 250 officers of different ranks, and 6000
private men were taken. Night alone saved from total destruction the scattered
remains of an army that in the morning was so numerous and so formidable.

I have not undertaken on this, nor shall I undertake upon any other occasion,
in these preliminary chapters, to enter into the detail of all the various
maneuvers of every battle; they are matters little understood by, and little
interesting to, the generality of readers. Besides, the accounts are sometimes
inaccurate, and seldom or never consistent with each other.

The glorious success of the battle of Rosbach, was such as hardly wanted to be
improved; the enemy was left totally incapable of action. The King was set free
on that side; but it was a freedom which gave him no respite from his labors;
it only gave him an opportunity of undergoing new labors in another part. The
Austrians had a vast force, and had now begun to make a proportionable progress
in Silesia. The dependence which the King had upon the fidelity of his Generals
there, seemed shaken by something which then appeared, and still seems
ambiguous in their conduct. The Austrians after a siege from the 27th of
October to the 11th of November, carried on under infinite difficulties and
with a prodigious loss, had reduced Schweidnitz, and obliged the Prussian
garrison of 4000 men to surrender prisoners of war. Soon after, as they had
intelligence of the victory of Rosbach, and knew that the king of Prussia was
on full march to the relief of Silesia, the Austrians resolved to lose no time
to attack the prince of Bevern in his strong camp under the walls of Breslau. A
treble superiority incited them to this attempt. They attacked the prince's
army with great resolution, and their attack was sustained with amazing
intrepidity.

This advantage, though dearly bought, was immediately followed with many
others. Breslau, the capital of Silesia, as not to permit his own excellent
generals and incomparable troops to triumph any where but in his own presence.

The King immediately after the battle of Rosbach, with those troops which he
had a few days before collected from places an hundred miles distant from each
other, began a march of upwards of two hundred more, and led them from engaging
one superior army, to engage another still more superior; from danger to
hardship, and from hardship to renewed danger. In the most rapid march he
passed through Thuringia, through Misnia, through Lusatia, in spite of the
efforts of the Generals Haddick and Marshal, who were posted in Lusatia to
obstruct him; and entering Silesia arrived the 2d of December at Parchwitz upon
the Oder. Here he was joined by the Prince of Bevern's corpse who crossed that
river to meet him.

About this time an incident happened which was very remarkable; one of these
agreeable adventures that relieve the mind amidst the perpetual horror that
attends a narrative of battles and bloodshed. The garrison of Schweidnitz had
seen, with the greatest reluctance, the capitulation which bound their hands
from the Service of their King and Country. Whilst the Austrians were
conducting them to prison, on their route they chanced to hear of the victory
their master had gained at Rosbach; animated with this news, they unanimously
rose upon the escorte which conducted them, and which happened not to be very
strong, and entirely dispersed it. Thus freed, they marched on not very certain
of their way, in hope to rejoin some corpse of the Prussian troops. The same
fortune which freed them, led them directly to the army commanded by the King
himself, which was hastening to their relief. Great was the joy on both sides
at this unexpected meeting, for the prisoners had heard nothing of his
Majesty's march. This little incident, whilst it added a considerable strength
to the army, added likewise to its spirit, and seemed an happy omen of success
in the future engagement.

As his Prussian majesty approached to Breslau, the Austrians confiding in
their superiority, abandoned their strong camp (the same which had been
occupied by the Prince of Bevern) and resolved to give the King battle. He was
marching with the utmost diligence not to disappoint them; Leuthen. The ground
which the Austrians occupied was very advantageous, and every advantage of the
situation was improved to the utmost, by the diligence and skill of Count Daun;
who remembering that he was the only General who had ever carried the field from
the King of Prussia, knew better than any body how difficult it was to obtain
such a victory. All the dispositions were made accordingly; the ground they
occupied was a plain, except that in some part it had small eminences; these
they surrounded with artillery; the ground was also interspersed with thickets,
which they sought to turn to their advantage. On their right and left were
hills on which they planted batteries of cannon. The ground in their front was
intersected by many causeways; and to make the whole more impracticable, the
Austrians had felled a vast many trees, and scattered them in the way. The King
of Prussia was not terrified with this situation, nor with the consciousness
that above 70,000 excellent troops, commanded by Count Daun, were so posted.
The Prussians, who did not exceed, as it is said, 36,000 men, attacked them
with their usual resolution. It was almost impossible, at the beginning of the
engagement, for the Prussian horse to act, on account of the impediments we
have just mentioned, but a most judicious disposition of the King himself
overcame that disadvantage; he had in his first dispositions placed four
batallions behind the cavalry of his right wing, foreseeing that General
Nadasti, who was placed with a corpse de reserve on the enemies left, designed
to take him in flank. It happened as he had foreseen; that General's horse
attacked the King's right wing with great fury; but he was received with so
severe a fire from the four battalions, that he was obliged to retire in
disorder. Then the King's flank well covered and supported, was enabled to act
with such order and vigor, that the enemy's right was obliged to give way. The
Prussian artillery, which was incomparably served, and silenced that of the
enemy, concurring to maintain the King's infantry, and to enable them to act in
grounds where their horse could give them but little assistance. The Austrians
made a gallant resistance during the whole battle. The panic of the enemy did
not here, as at Rosbach, do half the business; every foot of ground was well
disputed. The Austrians rallied all their forces about Leuthen, which was
defended upon all sides with intrenchments and redoubts. After reiterated
attacks made with the utmost impetuosity, and sustained with great firmness,
the Prussians mastered the post; then the Austrians fled on all parts; they
were entirely routed. The King pursued them to Lissa. 6000 of the Austrians
were slain, 15,000 were made prisoners; and an immense artillery, upwards of
200 pieces of cannon were taken.

This great and decisive action was fought on the very same day of the next
month after the no less important and decisive battle of Rosbach. The
consequences that followed the action of Leuthen, declared the entireness of
the victory. Notwithstanding the rigor of the season, the siege of Breslau was
immediately undertaken, and prosecuted with such spirit, that by the 29th of
December it surrendered; and with it surrendered the garrison of 13,000 men
prisoners of war; the blockade of Schweidnitz was formed as closely as the
inclemency of the winter would permit; whilst the Prussian parties not only
re-possessed those parts of Silesia which belonged to the King, but penetrating
into the Austrian division, reduced Jagerndorf, Troppau, and Tetschen, and left
to the Empress Queen, except a forlorn garrison in Schweidnitz, no sort of
footing in that country, in which a few days before she reckoned her dominion
perfectly established.

CHAP. VI.
Russians and Swedes retire. Hanoverians resume their arms. Cruelty of the
French. Condition of their army. Castle of Harburg besieged. Re-capitulation of
the events of the year 1757.

AS the misfortunes of his Prussian Majesty, after the battle of Colin, came on
him all at once, so his successes, after his victories at Rosbach and Lissa,
flowed upon him all at once likewise, and in a full tide. The Russians, though
they had repulsed General Lehwald, suffered so much in that action, and their
barbarous method of making war had so destroyed the country, that they seemed
to themselves to have no way of safety left but in retiring out of the Prussian
territories. This extraordinary retreat of so great an army, and so lately
victorious, and still possessed of a good seaport in the country, could
scarcely be accounted for on those motives we have assigned, and astonished all
Europe, whilst it left Genesis Lehwald at liberty to turn his arms into Pomerania
against the Swedes. The Swedes on this occasion did nothing worthy of their
ancient military fame; but every where retiring, left the Prussians an easy
conquest, not only of the Prussian but of every part of the Swedish Pomerania,
excepting the port of Stralsund; they left their allies of Mecklenbourg quite
exposed to all the resentment of the King of Prussia, who chastised them with
the most severe contributions and levies. The French, who had been ravaging the
old march of Brandenburg, evacuated that country immediately after the battle
of Rosbach. But one of the greatest revolutions of fortune in the war, and one
of the most glorious and important consequences of that victory, was, that the
Hanoverian troops were enabled to resume their arms.

From the moment the capitulation of Closter-seven was signed, the Duke the
Richlieu, who came to the command only to reap the advantages, and sully the
honor of another's conquest, seemed to think of nothing but how to repair,
from the plunder of the unhappy Hanoverians, the fortune which he had shattered
by a thousand vices. The most exorbitant contributions were levied with the
most inflexible severity; every exaction, which was submitted to, only produced
a new one still more extravagant; and all the orderly methods of plunder did
not exempt them from the pillage, licenciousness, and insolence of the French
soldiery. However, in justice to merit, we must exempt from this general charge
the conduct of the duke de Randan, Governor of Hanover for the French; who
saved the capital of the Electorate from utter ruin by the strictness of his
discipline, by the prudence, the justice and moderation of all his conduct; a
conduct which does more real honor to his name, than the most splendid
victories.

The Duke de Richlieu's rapaciousness and oppression, whilst they leaned so
heavily on the conquered people, did the conquering army no kind of service.
Intent only on plunder, which he did not confine to the enemy, he relaxed every
part of military discipline; and that numerous army which M. d'Etrees had
sustained, and brought in health and spirits through the dismal deserts of
Westphalia, under all the opposition of a skilful adversary, were now, in full
peace, in the quiet possession of a conquered and plentiful country, reduced in
their numbers, decayed in their health, and their spirits, without clothes,
without subsistence, without order, without arms. In this condition they began
at last to perceive that the Hanoverians, with the yoke of the capitulation
about their necks, were still formidable. As they had broke almost every
article of that treaty, they made no scruple to add another breach in order to
secure them in all the rest. They attempted actually to take their arms from
the Hanoverian and Hessian troops. These gallant troops, who had with a silent
grief and indignation seen the distresses of their ruined country, were
ravished to find that the victory at Rosbach encouraged their sovereign to
resent at last this and all the other indignities they had suffered. They began
to collect and to act, and under the command of the gallant Prince Ferdinand of
Brunswick, reinforced with a body of Prussian troops, they broke from their
confinement. They reduced the town of Harburg, and laid close siege to the
castle, which it must be owned was defended very bravely. In all other respects
the French did not seem in a condition to maintain their ground any where.
Those troops, which a few months before had so submitted as to make it
necessary to declare that they were not prisoners of war, in order to explain
their condition, were now on the point of pushing their adversaries to almost
the same streights. Such was the force of French military discipline, and such
the triumphs of Voltaire's hero.

The King of Prussia now saw the full effect of his counsels and his labors.
His dominions were freed; his allies were enabled to assist him; and his
enemies defeated, broken, and flying every where before him. In what light
posterity will view these things is uncertain; we, under whose eyes, as we may
say, they were achieved, scarcely believed what we had seen. And perhaps in
all the records of time, the compass of a single year, on the scene of a single
country, never contained so many striking events, never displayed so many
revolutions of fortune; revolutiens not only beyond what might have been
expected, but far beyond what the most sagacious foresight, reasoning from
experience, and the nature of things, could possibly have imagined. The King of
Prussia at first triumphant: the whole power of the Austrians totally defeated;
their hopes utterly ruined: then their affairs suddenly re-established, their
armies victorious, and the King of Prussia in his turn hurled down; defeated;
abandoned by his allies; surrounded by his enemies; on the very edge of
despair: then all at once raised beyond all hope, he sees the united Austrian,
Imperial, and French power levelled with the ground; 40,000 Hanoverians, a
whole army, submit to 80,000 French, and are only not prisoners of war. The
French are peacable masters of all the country between the Weser and the Elbe:
anon, these subdued Hanoverians resume their arms; they recover their country,
and the French in a little time think themselves not secure to the eastward of
the Rhine. 500,000 men in action. Six pitched battles fought. Three great
armies annihilated. The French army reduced and vanquished without fighting.
The Russians victorious, and flying as if they had been vanquished. A
confederacy, not of samller potentates to humble one great power, but of five
the greatest powers on earth to reduce one small potentate; all the force of
these powers exerted and baffled. It happened as we have related; and it is not
the history of a century, but of a single campaign.

CHAP. VII.
Preparations for an expedition to Louisbourg. Laid aside* Fort William-Henry
taken. Exploits of Admiral Watson and Colonel Clive in India. Chandenagore a
French fort taken. Victory over the Nabob. Nabob taken and beheaded* Revolution
in Bengal. Treaty advantageous to the East India company. Admiral Watson dies.

WITH regard to the part we had in the transactions of this year, though it was
not so full of striking events, nor does it afford such a splendid subject for
narrative, yet it is as interresting to an English reader, and may perhaps
prove more instructive; as it shows us in so strong a light, the miserable
consequences of our political divisions, which produced a general unsteadiness
in all out pursuits, and infused a langour and inactivity into all our military
operations. For, whilst our commanders abroad knew not who were to reward their
services or punish their neglects, and were not assured in what light even the
best of their actions would be considered, (having reason to apprehend that
they might not be judged of as they were in themselves, but as their
appearances might answer the end of some ruling faction;) they naturally wanted
that firmness and that enterprizing resolution, without which the best
capacity, and intentions the most honest, can do nothing in war. The attachment
of most men to their parties, weakened their affection to their country. It has
been imagined that ministers did not always wish success even to their own
schemes lest obnoxious men should acquire credit by the execution of them; as
it was suspected that officers even at the expense of their own reputation, did
not exert their faculties to the utmost, lest a disagreeable ministerial system
should establish the credit of its counsels by the vigor of their operations.
For my part, I think that these refinements, in which there is often as much
malice discovered as penetration, have carried the matter infinitely too far.
But certain it is, that the spirit of personal parties and attachments, never
carried to greater lengths than at that time, proved of very bad consequences,
if it had no other effect than to raise and to give a color to such suspicions
as we have first mentioned. Whatever was the cause, it is most certain, that
our success in America this year, no more answered to the greatness of our
preparations and our hopes than it did in the two preceding.

The attack upon Crown Point, which had been a principal object of our
attention in the beginning, seemed at this time to be laid aside; and an
expedition to Louisbourg, undoubtedly a more considerable object in itself,
supplied its place. Lord Loudoun was to command the land forces in this
expedition; Admiral Holborn the navy. The former left New York with a body of
6000 men, and sailed to Halifax, where he was joined by the latter, course to
defer the enterprise to a more favorable opportunity. This resolution seems to
have been most eligible in their circumstances, because the council of war was
almost unanimous in it.

Lord Loudoun returned to New York, and the Admiral now freed from the care of
the transports set sail for Louisbourg, in hopes as it was said, of drawing the
French fleet to an engagement. But upon what grounds this hope was conceived, I
confess I cannot see; as it could not be imagined, that the French fleet having
no sort of occasion to fight in order to protect Louisbourg, would choose out of
a bravado to bring on an unnecessary battle. However it was, the English
squadron continued to cruize off that harbor until the 25th of September, when
they were overtaken by a terrible storm, in which one of our ships was lost,
eleven dismasted, and the rest returned to England in a very shattered
condition. This was the end of the expedition to Louisbourg from which so much
was expected. But it was not the worst consequences which attended it.

Since Oswego had been taken, the French remained entirely masters of all the
lakes, and we could do nothing to obstruct their collecting the Indians from
all parts, and obliging them to act in their favor. But our apprehensions, (or
what shall they be called?) did more in favor of the French than their
conquests. Not satified with the loss of that important fortress, we ourselves
abandoned to the mercy of the enemy all the country of the Five Nations, the
only body of Indians who preserved even the appearance of friendship to us. The
forts we had at the Great carrying Place were demolished; Wood Creek was
industriously stopped up and filled with logs; by which it became evident to
all those who knew that country, that our communication with our allied Indians
was totally cut off; and what was worse, our whole frontier left perfectly
uncovered to the irruption of the enemies savages, who soon availed themselves
of our errors. For after the removal of these barriers, and the taking of Fort
William Henry, of which we shall speak presently, they destroyed with fire and
sword the fine settlements which we possessed on the Mohawks river and on those
grounds called the German flats. Thus with a vast increase of our forces, and
the clearest superiority over the enemy, we only abandoned our allies, exposed
our people, and relinquished a large and valuable tract of country. The French
soon made us feel effectually the want of what we had lost, and what we had
thrown away.

A considerable fort called Fort William-Henry, had been built on the southern
edge of the Lake George, in order to command that lake, and to cover our
frontiers; a garrison of 2500 men defended it. General Webb with about 4000 men
was posted at no great distance. No sooner had the French learned that my Lord
Loudoun with the body of the army was gone on the Louisbourg expedition, than
they prepared to take advantage of his absence. They drew together all the
forces which they had at Crown-Point, Ticonderoga, and the adjacent posts; they
added a considerable body of Canadians, and a greater number of Indians than
they had ever yet employed; the whole made near 8000 men. With these and a very
good artillery, Monsieur Montcalm prepared to besiege Fort William-Henry. It is
said that the advances of this commander were not made with so much secresy as
to prevent General Webb from having early intelligence of his motions; but
unfortunately no credit being given to this intelligence, orders were not sent
to collect the militia in sufficient time, which in conjunction with his own
forces, and with those in the fort had either obliged the French to relinquish
their attempt, or to have made it a very great hazard. But the siege being now
regularly formed, and the besiegers meeting but little opposition from within,

The garrison marched out with their arms, and engaged not to serve during
eighteen months. The French savages paid no regard to the capitulation, but
falling upon our men as they marched out, dragged away the little effects they
had left, hawling the Indians and Blacks in our service out of their ranks,
scalping some, carrying off others, and committing a thousand outrages and
barbarities, from which the French commander endeavored in vain to restrain
them. All this was suffered by 2000 men with arms in their hands, from a
disorderly crew of savages. However, the greatest part of our men, though in a
bad condition, got to Fort Edward, some by flight; some having surrendered
themselves to the French, were by them sent home. The enemy demolished the
fort, carried off the provision, ammunition, artillery, and the vessels which
we had prepared on the lake, and departed without attempting any thing farther.
Neither was any thing farther attempted on our side. And thus was finished the
third campaign in North America, where we had actually near 20,000 regular
troops, a great number of provincial forces, and a great naval power of upwards
of twenty ships of the line.

A war between the maritime powers is felt in all parts of the world. Not
content with inflaming Europe and America, and dissentions of the French and
English pursued the tracts of their commerce, and the Genges felt the fatal
effects of a quarrel on the Ohio. But here the scene is changed greatly to the
advantage of our nation; the bravery of Admiral Watson and Colonel Clive,
re-established the military honor of the English, which was sinking there as
it had done in all other places. Admiral Watson with no more than three ships
of the line, sailed from Madrass, and afer a tedious voyage arrived at the port
of Balasore in the kingdom of Bengal,

The Nabob, who saw that the torrent of the English valor could not be
resisted by such feeble dams as forts defended by Indians, drew down a whole
army consisting of 10,000 horse, and 12,000 foot, to drive them from their
conquests, Infinitely inferior as our troops were in number, they did not
hesitate to attack the Nabob's army. Though our forces did not entirely rout
the Indians, East India company was re-established in all its ancient
privileges; an immunity from all taxes was granted, and a restitution promised
for all that the trade had suffered in the taking of Calcutta.

When all obstruction on the side of the Indians was removed, and the company's
officers had taken possession of their ancient establishments, the Admiral
turned his arms against the French. He resolved to attack Chandenagore,
situated somewhat higher on the river than Calcutta; a place of considerable
strength and the principal settlement of the French in that part of the
East Indies. In this expedition Colonel Clive commanded 700 Europeans and 1600
Black soldiers. The Admirals Watson and Pocock commanded the fleet, if it may
be called a fleet, which consisted of no more than three ships of the line, the
Kent, the Tiger, and the Salisbury. The French prepared in the best manner they
could to receive them, and sunk several large vessels both above and below
their fort; but the Admiral having by carefully sounding found a safe passage
without being driven to the necessity of weighing up any of the ships, made so
severe a fire upon the fort, in which he was seconded by Colonel Clive's
batteries on the shore, that the place capitulated in less than three hours.

The judicious timeing of these several operations, as well as those which
followed, was not less laudable than the gallant spirit with which they were
executed. Before the French were alarmed, cure was taken to re-possess all the
posts we formerly held; to humble the Nabob by some effectual blow; and by a
treaty tie up his hands from acting against us. This Prince had showed himself
from the moment of his signing that treaty, very little inclined to abide by
the stipulations he had made. He indeed promised abundantly, but always
deferred the performance upon such frivolous pretenses, as evidently
demonstrated his ill intentions. The English commanders understood this
proceeding perfectly well; but they resolved to dissemble their sense of it,
until they had broken the French power in this province, which they had greater
reason to dread, small as it was, than all the armies of the Nabob. When they
had fully accomplished this by the taking of Chandenagore, they deliberated
whether they ought not to re-commence hostilities with the Indians. A
resolution in the affirmative had been attended with great difficulty and
danger, if a most fortunate incident had not helped to ensure success.

The Nabob Suraja Doula, the same who had the last (...) taken Calcutta, had
shown to his own subjects the s^^e ^lent and perfidous spirit, which formerly
and still distressed the English. His Generals were mostly discontented, and
some of them entered into a conspiracy against him. Jaffier Ali Cawn one of his
principal officers, a man of great power and interest, was at the head of this
conspiracy. As soon as their designs were ripened, they communicated them to
the English government in Calcutta, praying their assistance. The chiefs there
did not hesitate long what party they should take; they entered into a treaty
with Jeffier Ali Cawn and the conspirators; and in consequence of this treaty,
our troops immediately took the field uner Colonel Clive. The Admiral undertook
to garrison the fort of Chandenagore with his seamen, in order to leave the
greater number of land forces for the expedition. A detachmnnt of fifty seamen
with their officers were added to serve as gunners. A twenty gun ship was
stationed above Hugly, in order to preserve a communication between Colonel
Clive and the Admiral.

Their preliminary measures being thus judiciously taken, they advanced up the
river, and in a few days brought the Nabob's army of about 20,000 men exclusive
of those who favored the conspirators, to an action, which was decisive in
favor of the English.

Jaffier Ali Cawn now declared himself openly; and entering Muxadavat the
capital of the province with an army of his friends and victorious allies, by
the conqueror. In about thirteen days this great revolution was accomplished;
and with less force and trouble than is often required to take a petty village
in Germany, was transferred the government of a vast kingdom, yielding in its
dimensions to few in Europe, but to none in the fertility of its soil, the
number of its inhabitants, and the richness of its commerce. By the alliance
with the new Nabob, and by the reduction of Chandenagore, the French were
entirely driven out of Bengal and all its dependencies. This was one of the
articles of the treaty. By the other articles, a perpetual alliance offensive
and defensive was made between the parties. The territories of the company were
enlarged, and upwards of two millions sterling was stipulated to be paid as an
indemnification to the East India company, and the sufferers in the taking of
Calcutta. The new Nabob, full of gratitude to those to whom he owed his
dignity, gave, besides the above large sums, about 600,0000 pounds, as a
gratuity to the sea squadron and the troops. However short of expectation our
enterprises in America fell this year, those in the East Indies greatly
exceeded every thing we could hope from the forces which were employed. And it
may be doubted whether all the great powers engaged in the present bloody wars
in Europe, in which such torrents of blood were spilled, and so many millions
of treasure are wasted, will in the conclusion reap amongst them so much solid
profit as the English East India company did with a handful of men in a short
campaign. The joy of the nation at these signal successes, was not a little
damped by the death of Admiral Watson, who lost his life by the unwholesomness
of the country,

CHAP. VIII.
French retire out of Hanover. The taking of Hoya. Minden taken. Distress of
the French. Generosity of the Duke de Randan. The French retire beyond the
Rhine. Recovery of Emden by Commodore Holmes.

ALL the bloodshed of the last campaign in Germany, overtures toward peace
from any of the powers at war. And perhaps nothing so singular ever happened,
as that so many states, united, if not against their real interests, yet
against all their former habits of connection, full of so many occasions of
jealousy, abounding with matter of complaint against each other, and even
involved in misfortunes which usually destroy a mutual confidence, that not one
of these powers either from fear, or hope, or weariness, or levity, desisted
from their hostilities against the King of Prussia; nor did that monarch
acquire one ally more by the admiration of his successes, than he had formerly
gained through compassion to his misfortunes. All the confederates preserved
the same attachment to each other, to him the same animosity. It is equally a
matter of great admiration, how the resources even of these great states, could
keep pace with their ambition, and in a very few months supply the place of
great armies almost wholly destroyed. The King of Prussia by his victories had
added to his natural resources. These resources were more considerable than is
commonly imagined; and the possession of Saxony which yielded him great
supplies, saved his own revenue. He was indeed not quite so fresh as at the
beginning of the war; but then the condition of the enemy was in many respects
far worse than his. His troops had besides acquired a high reputation and a
clear superiority over all others. The consideration, however, of an army
greatly harrassed, and a most severe winter, obliged him to restrain his ardor,
and to attempt nothing against the Austrians in the months of January, February
and March. The same inaction owing to much the same causes, prevailed amongst
the Hanoverians for a little time: but having been reinforced about the middle
of February by a body of Prussian horse, they put their whole army once more in
motion.

The Duke de Richlieu had been recalled, and the Count of Clermont now
commanded the French troops. This was their third commander in chief within the
space of a year; a circumstance alone sufficient to show the unsteadiness of
their councils, and the irregularity of their operations. In effect, they every
where retreated before the Hanoverians, whose main body marched on the right to
the country of Bremen; whilst a second body under General Zastrow kept on the
left toward Gifforn. They pushed the French from post to post. They abliged
them to evacuate Ottersberg, Bremen and Werden. The castle of Rotterberg was
taken in six hours. A considerable detachment under Count Chabot was posted at
Hoya, a strong fort upon the Weser, and a place of such consequence that prince
Ferdinand resolved to dislodge the enemy from it. He appointed for that service
the hereditary Prince of Brunswick, with four batalions of foot and some light
horse. This Prince, not twenty year of age, had already entered into the course
of glory under the auspices of his uncle, and full of ardor to signalize
himself, with joy embraced the occasion; and here he gave an earnest of his
fame, in one of the most lively and best conducted actions in the war. The
first fruits of this young hero were such as would have done honor to the
maturity of the most experienced soldier.

The Prince had a broad and deep river to pass. He had no means of transporting
his men, but a single float; town, and encountered the enemy at the bridge; a
fierce fire, well supported on either side, ensued. The ground was such, that
the Prince could not bring up his whole detatchment equally. Sensible of this
disadvantage, he formed a design to overcome it, as judicious, as it was
resolute, which was to turn the enemy by attacking them in the rear; to execute
this design, it was necessary to make a circuit about the town. Every thing
succeeded: The attack on the enemy's rear was made with bayonnets fixed, a
terrible slaughter ensued. The French abondoned the bridge, and fled in
confusion: The Prince having cleared the town of the enemy, joined the party he
had left. The Count de Chabot threw himself, with two batallions into the
castle, with a resolution to maintain himself there; but in a little time he
capitulated, surrendering the place, his stores, and magazines, his troops
being permitted to march out. The Prince, who had no artillery, and who, on
account of the badness of the roads, despaired of bringing up heavy cannon,
suffered them to depart. Six hundred and seventy men were made prisoners in the
action, and a place of much importance, and which opened a passage over the
Weser, secured to the Hanoverians, with the loss of less than 1000 men killed
and wounded. I have dwelt on this action, and described it as particularly as I
could, though nothing decisive in itself, because it is not in pitched battles
between great armies, where the most masterly strokes of conduct are always
displayed; these lesser affairs frequently call for as much or more of
sagacity, resolution, and presence of mind, in the commander; yet are they
often slighly passed by, as matters of no consequence, by the generality of
people, who rather consider the greatness of the event, than the spirit of the
action.

Prince Ferdinand continued to advance, with his right on one side of the
Weser, and his left on the other; the French continued to retire, and
successively abandoned all the places they had occupied in the electorate,
except Minden. A garrison of 4000 men defended that place; but it was closely
invested, and in nine days the whole garrison surrendered prisoners of war.
officers and soldiers involved in one common distress; the officers forgot
their rank, and the soldiers their obedience; full hospitals, and empty
magazines; a rigorous season and bad covering; their baggage seized or
abandoned, and the hussars and hunters of the allied army continually
harassing, pillaging, and cutting them off. It was no alleviation to their
misery, that the inhabitants of the country, which they abandoned, were reduced
to the same extremities. The savage behavior of some of their troops at their
departure, took away all compassion for their sufferings; but this was not
universal. The Duke de Randan, who commanded in Hanover, quitted the place with
the same virtue, that he had so long held it. Resentment had no power to
persuade him to act with rigor, in the adverse turn of the French affairs,
than the pride of conquest had in their prosperity. When he had orders to
evacuate the place, there were very considerable magazines of corn and forage,
amassed for the use of the army; he had full time to burn them, and he had
precedents enough to have justified the action: but he left the whole in the
hands of the magistrates, to be gratuitously distributed to the poor: he
employed all his vigilance to prevent the least disorder amongst his troops,
and was himself the last man that marched out of the town. This behavior,
which did such honor to his name and country, has made his memory for ever
dear to the Hanoverians, drew tears of love and gratitude from his enemies, and
acknowledgments from the generous Prince against whom he served.

The French, through extreme difficulties, marched toward the Rhine in three
columns. The several scattered bodies, which had united at Munster, formed the
right. The body, which came from Paderborn; and which was commanded by the
prince of Clermont in person, marched in the middle. The forces which had
occupied Hesse were on the left. In this order they reached the Rhine, which
they all passed, except a body under Count Clermont, who still remained at
Wesel, and resolved to maintain that post. The French army, which about four
months before had passed the Rhine in numbers, and in a condition to make the
most powerful enemies tremble, without any adverse stroke of war whatsoever, by
a fate almost unparalleled, now repassed it like fugitives, in a condition the
most deplorable, reduced to less than half their original number, and closely
pursued by the enemy, which they had obliged to lay down their arms.

The same ill fortune, and the same despair of their affairs followed them
every where. On the arrival of a small English squadron, commanded by commodore
Holmes before Embden, and their taking an advantageous situation,

CHAP. IX.
Alterations in the French ministry. The state of the English affairs in the
year 1758. Subsidy treaty with the King of Prussia. Affairs of Sweden and
Russia. Schweidnitz taken. King of Prussia enters Moravia and invests Olmutz.
Conduct of Count Daun. Attacks the Prussian convoy. Siege of Olmutz raised.
King of Prussia marches into Bohemia.

WHILST the French arms suffered such disgraces abroad, they endeavored by an
alteration of their councils at home, to restore their credit. Their ministers
had been long the sport of female caprice; it was their power of pleasing a
mistress who governed their King, that alone qualified them to serve their
country. Some of the most able men were turned out of their employments with
disgrace; others retired from the public service with indignation; a certain
low character had for a long time appeared in all the proceedings of France,
both within and without. Even in their domestic disputes, and where something
of a free and manly spirit appeared, this spirit evaporated, and spent itself
upon unworthy and despicable objects. These contests which involved the church,
the law and the crown, weakened them all; and the state felt all the ill
effects of disunion of its orders, without seeing an augmentation of power
thrown into the scale of any. But now taught by their misfortunes and
disgraces, they were obliged to an alteration in their conduct: they were
obliged to call men to the public service upon public principles: at a time
indeed, when in many respects things could only be altered, not mended: and
wise and able ministers could do little more by their penetration and public
spirit, than to see and lament the ruin, caused by the want of those virtues in
their predecessors. The duke de Belleisle, known to all Europe for his great
abilities, and his great exploits, was at length placed at the head of the
military department, as secretary at war.

There appeared in the common prints a speech, said to be made by that nobleman
in council; which, if it be not authentic, contains at least such sentiments,
as would come not unnaturally from a French patriot, and one who had served his
King and country with honor during better times.

I know, said he, the state of our armies. It gives me great grief, and no less
indignation: for besides the real evil of the disorder in itself, the disgrace
and infamy which it reflects on our government, and on the whole nation, is
still more to be apprehended. The choice of officers ought to be made with
mature deliberation. I know but too well to what length the want of discipline,
pillaging and robbing have been carried on by the officers and common men,
after the example set them by their generals. It mortifies me to think I am a
Frenchman; my principals are known to be very different from those which are
now followed. I had the satisfaction to retain the esteem, the friendship and
the consideration, of all the princes, noblemen, and even all the common people
in all parts of Germany where I commanded the king's forces. They lived there
in the midst of abundance; every one was pleased; it fills my soul with
anguish, to find that at present the French are held in execration; that every
body is dispirited, and that many officers publicly say things that are
criminal and highly punishable. The evil is so great that it demands immediate
redress. I can easily judge, by what passes in my own breast, of what our
generals feel from the speeches they must daily hear in Germany, concerning our
conduct; which indeed would lose much to be compared with that of our allies. I
must particularly complain of the delays and irregularity of the posts; a
service which is very ill provided for. I am likewise displeased with the
negligence of our generals returning answers; which is a manifest breach of
their duty. Had I commanded the army, a thousand things which are done, would
not have been done; and others, which are neglected, would have been executed.
I would have multiplied my communications; I would have had strong posts on the
right, on the left, and in the center lined with troops. I would have had
magazines in every place. The quiet and satisfaction of the country should have
been equal to their present disaffection, at being harrassed and plundered; and
we should have been as much beloved, as we are at present abhorred. The
consequences are too apparent to need being mentioned. I must insist o^ these
things, because late redress is better than the continuation of the evil.

M. de Belleisle being established in his office, turned all his attention to
the cure of the evils, which he lamented; and exerted all the power that
remained in the nation, to put their army in Germany once more upon a
respectable footing. The expedition into Germany was originally a measure as
contrary to the true interests of France, as it was of justice and equity; but
having adopted that measure, the consequences which arose seemed to demand that
it should be pursued with vigor. Therefore the connection with the Empress
Queen was drawn closer than ever, and nothing was omitted to give a greater
strength, and a better order to the army on the Rhine. But these endeavors
which strained all the sinews of France, already too much weakened by the
almost total ruin of several essential branches of their trade, drew away all
the resources necessary to support their navy. It was then in a sufficiently
bad condition, from a want of seamen and stores; and there were no means found,
or little attention used, to restore it: so that from a deficiency in the
marine, it seemed to be equally impracticable to feed the war in America, or to
preserve the coast of France itself from insults. Such was the condition of our
enemies, at the opening of the campaign of 1758.

As to England, far from being exhausted by the war, or dispirited by our ill
success, our hopes rose from our disappointments, and our resources seemed to
be augmented by our expenses; with such ease and alacrity were the necessary
supplies granted and raised. Many errors and many abuses which the war
discovered without making fatal, were corrected. The spirit of our officers was
revived by fear or by shame. Our trade was well protected by the superiority,
and prudent distribution of our naval force. The revenue was frugally managed,
and the whole state well cemented and bound together in all its parts, by the
union of the administration, by the patriotism which animated it, and by the
entire confidence which the people had in the presiding abilities and
intentions. As France persisted in her attachment to the enemies of his
Prussian majesty, Great Britain entered into still closer engagements with that
monarch, the luster of whose virtues, set off by his late wonderful successes,
quite turned our eyes from the objections which were raised against the
consistency of that alliance with our interests. How far it is consistent with
them, is I think, a much more difficult point to settle, than the adherents to
either party seem willing to allow. But it ought to be considered, that the
circumstances of affairs in the beginning of the war, hardly admitted of any
other choice; it had been the height of madness, to have been on ill terms with
his Prussian majesty at that time; and it was impossible to have kept good
terms with him, without being on very bad ones with Vienna. Things were in an
ill situation; and the balance of Germany was in danger of being overset, what
party soever should prevail. It was impossible that England could have stood
neuter in this contest: if she had, France would not have imitated her
moderation; she would gladly have joined with the King of Prussia to distress
Hanover, and reduce Austria. These two powers so exerted, would doubtless
compass their end, unless we interposed to prevent it; and we must sooner or
later have interposed, unless we were resolved tamely to see France and her
allies giving laws to the continent. In a word, France would certainly have
joined with one party or the other, and the party which she joined, would
certainly, by that union, prove dangerous to the common liberty, and must
therefore be opposed by us; we must have been in spite of us engaged in the
troubles of Germany, as we ever have been, and ever shall be, as long as we are
a people of consideration in Europe. The alliance with Prussia was pointed out
to us by the circumstance of his acting on the defensive. The King of Prussia
meditated no conquests. But her imperial majesty indisputably aimed at the
recovery of Silesia, which was to disturb the settled order of things; and this
design was the only cause of the troubles in that part of the world. I am
sensible that this is notwithstanding all that may be said, a question of some
intricacy, and requires a consideration of many more particulars, than the
brevity of our design will allow. But whether we chose our party in this
alliance judiciously or not, we have, I imagine, very great reason to be
pleased with a measure, which has induced France to engage so deeply in the
affairs of Germany, at so ruinous an expense of her blood and treasure. Our
ministry was at this time fully convinced of the prudence of the choice that
had been made, and resolved to support his Prussian majesty, and the army under
Prince Ferdinand, in the most effectual manner; 100,000 l. were voted for the
Hanoverian and Hessian forces; and a convention between the King of Prussia,

The northern courts made no alteration in their system. In Sweden, some real
plots to disturb the established constitution ended in the ruin of their
contrivers; some fictitious plots were set on foot to give a sanction to
measures against the crown party, which answered their ends; and, as the ruling
power continued the same and the internal dissensions the same, the hostilities
against the King of Prussia were resolved with the former animosity, but
promised to be pursued with the former languor. In Russia, the Empress did not
think her intentions well seconded by her ministers. The great delays, and the
unaccountable retreat in the last campaign, gave ground to suspect, that she
had been betrayed by her ministers, or her generals. M. Apraxin was moved from
the command, and was put under arrest. He justified his conduct by express
orders from Count Bestuchef. Bestuchef was removed from his office, and put
under arrest also. Count Woronzoff succeeded Bestuchef in his employment, and
the generals Brown and Fermor took the command of the army in the place of
Apraxin.

As soon as the season permitted the King of Prussia to re-commence his
operations, he laid siege to Schweidnitz, and pushed it with so much vigor,

The King resolved to make Moravia the theater of the war this year. Moravia
was fresh ground; a country, as yet untouched by the ravages of war. If he
should succeed in his operations in this country, his successes by opening to
him the nearest road to Vienna, must prove more decisive than they could any
where else. If he should fail, the Austrians were at a distance from the center
of his affairs, and would find it difficult to improve their advantages to his
ruin. After the reduction of Schweidnitz, the King ordered two bodies of his
troops to post themselves in such a manner, as to make it appear that he
intended to carry the war into Bohemia. Whilst he drew away the enemies
attention from the real objects by these dispositions, the main of his army by
a very rapid march,

M. Daun was no sooner apprised of the King's march toward Moravia, than he
took his route through Bohemia to that province. Notwithstanding that the
Empress Queen omitted no possible endeavors to assemble a large army against
the King of Prussia, though she had for that purpose exhausted the Milanese and
Tuscany, and swept up the last recruits in her Danubian territories, M. Daun
was not yet in a condition to give the King of Prussia battle; neither did his
character lead him to trust that to fortune, which he might ensure, though more
slowly, by conduct. This wise general took his posts from Gewics to Littau, in
a mountainous country, in a situation where it was impossible to attack him. He
had the fertile country of Bohemia, from whence he readily and certainly drew
supplies, at his rear. He was from his position at the same time enabled to
harass the Prussian army before Olmutz, and to intercept the convoys which were
brought to them from Silesia.

Olmutz, by the extent of its works, and other advantageous circumstances, is a
city which it is very difficult completely to invest. So that some of the
King's posts being necessarily weakened by occupying so great an extent of
country, were attacked by Daun's detachments from time to time, with such
success, that abundant succors both of men and ammunition were thrown into the
place. These attacks were always made by night, and very few nights passed
without some attack. The success was various. But the operations of the siege
were greatly disturbed by these continual alarms. Besides it is said that the
Austrians, before the King's invasion of this province, had destroyed all the
forage in the neighborhood of Olmutz. The horse were obliged to forage at a
great distance, which harrassed them extremely. M. Daun took advantage of all
these circumstances. It was in vain that the King of Prussia endeavored by all
the arts of a great commander to provoke or entice him to an engagement. He
profited of the advantages he had made, without being tempted by them to throw
out of his hands the secure game he was playing.

The great object of M. Daun was the Prussian convoys. On receiving advice that
a large and important one was to leave Troppau on the 25th of June, he took
measures to intercept it. He ordered general Jahnus, who was at Muglitz on the
left, to advance toward Bahrn, and a detachment which was at Prerau at a
considerable distance to the right, to march to Stadt-Leibe; so that these two
corpse should on different sides attack the convoy at one and the same time. To
further the execution of this project, M. Daun himself approached the Prussian
army, and directed all his motions as if he intended to give them battle.
However, the King was too great a master in the game of generalship, which was
now playing, to be deceived by this feint. He detached a considerable party
under general Ziethen, to support his convoy, which was already about 7000
strong. Before this detachment could come up, the convoy was attacked, but the
Austrians were repulsed. But M. Daun, who provided for every thing, quickly
reinforced his parties who renewed the engagement the next day. They first
suffered the head of the convoy to go unmolested; but as the center was still
embarrassed in a dangerous defile, they easily cut off the head from the rest,
and then they attacked the center with the greatest fury. The Prussians made as
good a resistance as the nature of the ground would suffer. General Ziethen did
every thing which could be expected from an accomplished officer; but in the
end they were entirely routed; all the wagons in that division were taken; the
rear was pushed back toward Troppau; the head alone with great difficulty
arrived at the Prussian camp.

This was a fatal stroke, because it came at a time when it was impossible to
repair it. The siege of Olmutz had been all along attended with great
difficulties: and now the news which every day arrived of the nearer and nearer
approach of the Russians, called the King loudly to the defense of his own
dominions. Already the Cossacks and Calmucks made incursions into Silesia, and
by their ravages and cruelties, announced the approach of the great army. The
siege must be raised: Moravia must be abandoned; Marshal Daun must have the
Honor of freeing his country, and driving away such an Adversary as the King
of Prussia, from a conquest deemed certain; all was performed without a battle,
by a series of the most refined and vigorous maneuvers that ever were put in
practice.

When the King of Prussia saw that the unprosperous situation of his affairs
obliged him to retreat; he took a resolution, such as a victory inspires in
other. He took advantage even of the excellent movement of M. Daun, by which
that able general had advanced his quarters to Poznitz, and placed himself so
as to support Olmutz in the most effectual manner; by this movement, however,
he was obliged to uncover the frontiers of Bohemia. The King of Prussia, whom
nothing could escape, was sensible of this advantage, and therefore, instead of
falling back upon Silesia, which step would immediately have drawn the Austrian
army into his dominions, he determined to retreat from one part of the enemies
territories into another. The day before the siege was raised the firing of the
Prussians continued as brisk as ever, and showed no sort of sign of an
intention to depart; but in the night the whole army took the road to Bohemia
in two columns, to Cu^trin. The reduction of this place could leave them but a
(...) ^ys march to Berlin; Count Dohna was not in a condition to oppose their
progress, the King was still at a great distance. But it is necessary to break
our narrative of his affairs, however interesting, to take a view of the
operations of the armies on the Rhine. We leave the King of Prussia in full
march, do give one body of his enemies battle, after executing a retreat from
the other, in a manner that did his military genius the greatest honor. So
that on the whole, it is difficult to say, which gained the greatest glory, the
King of Prussia by his retreat, or M. Daun by the measure which obliged him to
it.

CHAP. X.
Allies pass the Rhine. Battle of Crevelt. Action at Sangershausen. Action at
Mere. Allies repass the Rhine.

PRINCE Ferdinand had it not in his power to cut off the retreat of the French
over the Rhine; but he pressed them closely, and prepared himself to cross that
river in pursuit of them. His design was to carry the war beyond the Maese, and
thereby oblige the Prince de Soubise to abandon the enterprise he was preparing
against Hesse Cassel. His Highness executed the passage of the Rhine at Herven
with the corpse immediately under his command;

The French army retired as the Prince advanced, and took an advantageous camp
which threatened to retard the operations of the allies: their right was under
Rheinberg; but the Prince by his well-judged motions turned their left flank
toward the convent of Camp, by which the French found themselves obliged to
quit their advantageous post, and to retire into Meurs: they still kept toward
the Rhine: the Prince advanced on the side of the Maese.

It was evident, that whilst the French continued only to retire, it would
prove impossible for them to hinder the allies from executing the plan they
proposed: they therefore thought it advisable to change their countenance.
They had falled back as far as Nuys; they now returned on their steps, and
advanced as far as Crevelt, within a few miles of Prince Ferdinand's camp. The
Prince made the dispositions for a battle, with his usual vigor and prudence.
He carefully reconnoitred the situation of the enemy. He found that their right
was at a village called Vischelon; their left extended toward Anrath, where it
was covered with a wood: Crevelt, which was in the front of their right was
occupied by a party of their troops. His highness resolved upon three attacks:
the first and real attack was on the flank of the enemy's left wing; the other
two were designed to divert their attention, and prevent their succouring the
object of his principal attack; for which purpose he recommended to his
generals to make the best use of their heavy artillery, and not to advance too
far unless they were perfectly assured of the success of the main operation.

Having made these wise dispositions, and perfectly learned the best routes by
which the enemy might be approached, kept the best countenance possible, in
spite of the terrible fire of the Hanoverian artillery, and in spite of the
vigo^ous attempts of the Hanoverian horse, who had by this time ^and means to
gain the plain, covered the retreat of their scattered infantry, and saved them
from utter ruin: the right wing and the center, though they suffered grievously
by the cannonading, were no where broken, but retreated toward Nuys in the
most perfect order.

Seven thousand of their best troops were killed, wounded, and taken prisoners;
but there was nothing in this battle so grievous to France, and so affecting
even to the enemy, as the fate of the count de Gisors. This young nobleman, the
only son of the duke de Belleisle, not above twenty-five years of age, newly
married to the heiress of an illustrious house; himself the last hope of a most
noble family, was mortally wounded at the head of his regiment, which be
brought up with the most heroic courage, and inspired by his example to make
incredible efforts. He had been educated with all the care an excellent father
could bestow on a son of an uncommon genius, who was alone able to support the
reputation of his family. To the purest morals he had united the politest
manners; he had made a great proficiency in learning; he knew many branches of
it, and loved all; he had seen every part of Europe, and read courts and
nations with a discerning eye; and wanted nothing to fulfill all hope, and to
make him a perfect and lasting ornament and support to his country, but a
knowledge in the military art; he entered that course of glory and danger, and
fell in his first campaign. The unhappy father and minister saw his private
misfortunes keep pace with the public calamities, and the tears of his family
mingled with those of his country.

Prince Ferdinand gained a victory at Crevelt, which did the greatest honor to
his military capacity, and to the bravery of his troops. But it was a victory
neither entire nor decisive: the French army on their own frontiers was quickly
and strongly reinforced; so that they were not only in a condition in some sort
to make head against the allies, but were enabled to detach a considerable
reinforcement to the army of the Prince de Soubise on the other side of the
Rhine.

Although the Prince had reason to imagine that he should not be able to keep his
ground on this side of the Rhine for any considerable time, this did not hinder
him from improving to the utmost, the advantage he had obtained. Whilst the
French, disabled by their late defeat, were in no condition to oppose him, he
passed the Rhine with a large detachment, and appeared on the 28th of June
before Dusseldorp, a city advantageously situated on the river, and belonging
to the Elector Palatine. A severe bombardment obliged it to capitulate on the
7th of July: the garrison, consisting of 2000 men, marched out with the honors
of war. Prince Ferdinand placed here three battalions of Hanoverians, and threw
a bridge of boats across the river; by that means he multiplied his posts and
communications on both sides of the Rhine; and threw a new and no small
impediment in the way of the French, to retard their progress, in case he
should find himself compelled to retire. After this, the army of the allies and
that of France, spent several days in making various marches and
countermarches, as if they both proposed to bring on an action, to which,
however, it does not appear that either party was very strongly inclined.

Prince Ferdinand still retained his hopes that the Prince of Ysenburg who
commanded the Hessian troops, would find the Prince of Soubise employment for
some time. He had originally laid his plan in such a manner, that by passing
the Maese, and transferring the seat of war into the enemies country, he might
draw the French from the Rhine, and perhaps oblige the Prince of Soubise to
come to the assistance of the main army under M. de Contades, who commanded in
the room of count Clermont, being now the fourth commander of the French troops
since they entered Germany. But whilst Prince Ferdinand pleased himself with
those hopes, and still continued to act as far as circumstances would admit, in
pursuance of this plan, he received an account which disconcerted all his
measures.

The duke de Broglio, supported by the corpse of the prince de Soubise, march
under the command of the duke of Marlborough to reinforce the allied army. The
prince in this situation of affairs, had no option left but an engagement with
the French army, or a retreat over the Rhine: the former was not easy to
compass, as the French industriously declined a battle, and it became extremely
dangerous to remain long in a position with the enemies army on his left, and
the strong fortress of Gueldre on his right. In this situation his subsistence
became every day more difficult. To repass the Rhine had its difficulties too;
the roads which led to that river were rendered almost impassable by the heavy
rains; the river itself was so swelled with them, that the bridge at Rees had
been for some time useless.

These disagreeable circumstances of the allied army did not escape the
penetration of Mons. de Chevert, one of the ablest commanders among the French.
He formed a plan upon them, which, if it had succeeded, must have put the
allies into the greatest perplexity. This general had some time before passed
the Rhine, with an intention of making himself master of Dusseldorp, and he had
prepared all things with great ability for that enterprise: the rains usually
heavy for that season, and some other cross accidents, had frustrated his
intentions. But perceiving that the same accidents which defeated his design
proved also unfavourable to the enemy, he resolved to turn his disappointment
into an advantage, and from the ruins of his first project to build another of
yet greater importance. Baron Imhoff was posted to the right of the Rhine in a
strong situation near Mere. He was to cover the bridge at Rees; to secure a
considerable magazine; and to keep open communication between the English
reinforcements and the main army. The plan of Mons. Chevert was to dislodge
Imhoff, to burn the bridge at Rees, to make himself master of the magazine, and
to render the junction of the English troops with the Hanoverians
impracticable. To execute this judicious scheme, he united several detachments
from the garrison of Wesel, to a considerable corpse which he intended to have
employed in the siege of Dusseldorp. The whole made near 12,000 men: the troops
under Imhoff were but six batallions, and four squadrons, hardly 3000 in all.

When that General was apprised of the designs and motions of the French, he
saw it was in vain to expect succors from the army of Prince Ferdinand: the
swell of the river had rendered all relief impossible; all his hopes were
therefore in his genius and the bravery of his troops. He considered that
though the post he occupied was sufficiently strong, the enemy might make
themselves masters of Rees, by turning his camp, and thus execute one of the
principal parts of their design; he considered the great difference between
attacking and being attacked; he considered the effect of an attempt altogether
unexpected by the enemy; he therefore took the resolution of abandoning his
post, and going out to meet them. Perceiving that the French were marching into
difficult ground, he did not lose a moment to begin the action. He ordered a
small party,

This signal advantage over such a prodigious superiority was not more
gallantly obtained than well pursued and improved. Imhoff saw that the rains
had increased to such a degree, as to leave no hopes for the allied army to
pass by the bridge of Rees. Having taken proper care of his magazines, he
quitted his post at Mere, and being reinforced by some parties, who passed the
river in boats, he marched with the utmost diligence toward the route of the
English forces, and happily effected a junction, which had hitherto been
attended with so many difficulties.

Prince Ferdinand in his retreat met with no obstruction, but just what was
sufficient to display more fully the gallantry of his officers, and the spirit
of his troops. A town called Wachtendonck was on his left, as he retreated;
this place, though not fortified, is a post of much importance, and being an
inland surrounded by the river Niers, is extremely difficult of access: the
French had thrown a body of troops into this place. The hereditary prince, the
first in every active service, was employed to force it. The bridge on his
approach had been drawn up. The prince seeing that if he attempted to get down
this bridge, the enemy would gain time to recollect themselves, threw himself
into the river; his grenadiers, animated by so gallant an example, plunged in
after him, and furiously attacking the enemy with their bayonets, in a few
minutes drove them from that post; this advantage, joined to that gained by
general Imhoff, and the uncommon resolution which appeared in both these
actions, awed the French. They found that their troops, raw, undisciplined and
little fit for hard service, were not to be relied upon; and they feared to
bring on an action, which by being decisive against them might draw on the most
fatal consequences. So that the prince repassed the Rhine in a most excellent
order, even with less trouble than he had at first passed it; and indeed with
little molestation, but what he met with from the weather. Such excessive rains
had fallen, that he in vain attempted a passage at Rhineberg or at his bridge
of Rees;

Although Prince Ferdinand was obliged to pass the Rhine, and to act more upon
the defensive for the future; yet his vigorous conduct in the beginning was
very glorious to him, and very advantageous to the common cause. The French
suffered greatly in their military reputation; the Hanoverians had gained a
superiority over them, and now so much of the campaign was wasted, that
notwithstanding the greatness of their numbers, it was not probable that they
would find themselves able to make any considerable progress in their designs
against the King's electoral dominions for this year. The advantage gained by
Broglio and Soubise was not attended with the consequences, which might have
been apprehended. Prince Ysenburg kept so good a countenance in a strong post
he had chosen, that the French did not choose to attack him again; and since
Prince Ferdinand had repassed the Rhine, he might always be well supported.

CHAP. XI.
Retreat from Bohemia. Measures of Count Daun. Battle of Custrin. King of
Prussia marches into Saxony, and joins Prince Henry.

BY the retreat of the Prussians from Moravia, the war had assumed a new face.
The Generals who conducted it had changed hands. The King of Prussia was
obliged to act upon the defensive; M. Daun was now in a condition of displaying
his talents in an offensive war. The affairs of the King of Prussia were scarce
ever in a more critical situation than at that time. The Russians seemed at
first disposed to enter into Silesia; but now they had united their several
disjointed corpse, penetrated into the New March of Brandenburgh, and having
commenced the siege of Custrin, a place that threatened them with no great
opposition, they were arrived within a few days march of Berlin Count Dohna
posted with a greatly inferior force at Frankfort on the Oder, watched without
being able to obstruct their progress. In Pomerania, the Generals Weedel and
Manteufel opposed almost the same ineffectual efforts to the arms of Sweden.
The army of the Empire, and a considerable body of Austrians under General
Haddick, advanced into Saxony, and possessing themselves by degrees of those
strong posts, which compose the frontiers of Misnia, they continually
streightened the quarters of Prince Henry. That Prince was strongly encamped at
Dippolswalde, with about 20,000 men, in order to cover Dresden, and command the
course of the Elbe. Thus circumstanced, the King could not find his account in
remaining long in Bohemia, where it was impossible to effect any thing
decisive. Every thing depended upon his being able to drive the Russians out o^
his territories, who with a mighty forced ruined every place they arrived at,
and seemed not only to make war against him, but against human nature itself.

M. Daun was soon apprised of the King of Prussia's intentions: but he
considered that if he was to pursue the King into Silesia, he most encounter
with difficulties almost insuperable; several strong places stood in his way,
and i^ would prove easy for the Prussian troops left for the defense of that
duchy, to take an advantageous camp under one of those places, and thus oblige
them to waste unprofitably the time, which might be employed in the execution
of more judicious projects. Besides that in this manner of proceeding he could
never act in concert, nor preserve any effectual communication with the several
bodies of his allies. To push forward with his whole force directly to Berlin,
could at best be regarded as a coup de main, which could prove nothing decisive
in the campaign, even supposing the project should succeed, but it was rather
probable that it would not succeed, as the King of Prussia might clear his
hands of the Russians before the army of M. Daun could, for want of subsistence
arrive in the Lower Lusatia. Every consideration therefore pointed out the
relief of Saxony as the great object of the Austrian operations. It was an
object apparently to be compassed with greater ease, and if compassed,
productive of more solid advantages than any other. The army of the Empire
already superior to that of Prince Henry could cooperate in the design, and
the recovery of Saxony once effected, the King of Prussia would see himself
entirely divested of one of the principal resources he had to rely upon in the
war, for money, provisions, and forage; whilst his hereditary dominions
stripped of this strong barrier defenseless in themselves, and assaulted on
three sides by powerful armies, could scarce find them employment to the end of
the campaign.

M. Daun having resolved upon his plan of operations suffered the King of
Prussia to continue his march toward the Russians, without any molestation: he
contented himself with leaving a considerable body of Troops under the Generals
Harsch and de Ville, on the southern frontiers of Silesia, in order to form
some enterprise on that side, which might draw the attention and forces of the
Prussians as far as possible from the great object of his operations. When he
had made these dispositions he marched toward Saxony, through the country of
Lusatia, by Zittau, Gorlitz, and Bautzen. His first project was bold. He
proposed to cross the Elbe at Meissen; by which the communication between
Dresden and Leipsic would be cut of at one stroke. Then he proposed to attack
Prince Henry in his camp at Seidlitz, whilst the army of the Empire fell upon
him in another quarter. Thus the Prince was to be put between two fires, and
his retreat into Dresden to be rendered impracticable; but upon mature
consideration, this project was laid aside. M. Daun reflected that the fortress
of Sonnestein, of which he was not yet in possession, would prove no small
impediment to his designs.

About that time the imperial court elated with their recent success, began to
show with what moderation they were likely to behave if it continued and
increased. They entirely threw of all the little appearance of respect they had
hitherto retained for the King of Great Britain, and several others of the most
respectable Princes and persons of the Empire. They made the abuse of their
authority go hand in hand with the success of their arms. On the 21st of August
a conclusum of the Aulic council was issued against the King of Great Britain,
as Elector of Hanover, against the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, against Prince
Ferdinand of Brunswick, the Count of Lip Buckebourg, and in general against
all the Adherence to the King of Prussia, threatening them with Penalties
indignity, person and estate. In consequence of this decree, letters avocatory
were issued, notifying to the sovereign Princes, that if they did not within a
limited time disperse their armies, break off their connection with the King of
Prussia, pay their quota of Roman months, and send their contingents to the
army of execution, they were to be put under the ban of the Empire. To all
other persons who held any dignity in the Empire, orders were given and
penalties were threatened suitable to their condition. They in short went all
lengths, but that of actually and formally putting them under the ban, which
they would not have failed to do, if their success had answered its beginnings.
So little regard had the court of Vienna to former services of the most
interesting nature; and so entirely did she seem to forget that she owed to the
King of Great Britain, not only that power which she now unjustly and
ungratefully turned against him, but almost the very being of the House of
Austria. So entirely did she forget that this Monarch had expended his
treasures, employed his armies, and even exposed his person in her cause, when
it was not only abandoned, but attacked by almost all the rest of Europe.
However the violent proceedings of the Aulic council, drew no one State or
person from the Kings of Great Britain and Prussia; they rather had a contrary
effect, in rousing the whole Evangelic body to a sense of their own danger.
Much less were they able to stop the progress of the allied arms.

The King of Prussia conducted his retreat out of Bohemia in admirable order.
The Generals Jahnus and Laudohn for several days hung upon his rear with two
strong bodies. They took advantageous posts, sometimes on one side, sometimes
on the other, sometimes together, sometimes separately, and threw all possibly
impediments in his way. But the vigor of the Prussians drove them with loss
from every post. So that by the 6th of August, they were obliged entirely to
desist from their pursuit. The King of Prussia freed from all molestation,
marched with the utmost diligence by Wisoca, Politz, Landshut, and arrived on
the 20th at Franckfort on the Oder. Here he joined the troops under Count
Dohna. The army was now in a condition to act, his courage and fidelity, did
every thing for the defense of the walls and ruins of the place; but the walls
built in the old manner did not promise a successful defense; the enemy had
posted themselves in the suburbs, and in the firing of the town, the principal
magazine of the besieged was blown up.

The protector and avenger of his dominions, was now however at hand. On the
23th, the King of Prussia's whole army passed the Oder at Glustebissel, about
twenty English miles to the north-east of Custrin. The Russians on the first
notice of his approach, broke up the siege of that place, and marched toward
the villages of Zwicker and Zorndorff. It was the King's intention to wind
round the left flank of their army, and to take them in the rear, by which he
hoped to throw them into confusion. But in this he found himself disappointed.
The Russian Generals had foreseen his purpose and made excellent dispositions.
As the ground did not admit them to extend greatly in length, they threw
themselves into a square body composed of four lines, forming a front almost
equal on every side, and on every side surrounded by cannon and chevaux de
frize. In this formidable disposition they waited the attack of the Prussians.

It was on the 25th of August that the King of Prussia, after a march of 56
days, from the midst of Moravia, brought his army in presence of the Russians.
The King had never been personally engaged with that enemy before. His troops
had never obtained any advantage over them. The whole fortune of the war
depended upon the event of this day. The Prussians were now in the closest
sense to fight for their country, which was ready to fall under one of the
severest scourges with which Providence has chastised a nation. Nothing was
wanting which could inspire the soldiers with revenge. Every where the marks of
the enemies cruelty were before their eyes; the country desolated on every
side, and the villages in flames all round the field of battle.

At nine o'clock in the morning the battle began by a fire of cannon and
mortars which rained on the right wing of the Russians without the least
intermission for near two hours. Nothing could exceed the havoc made by this
terrible fire, nor the constancy with which the Muscovite foot, raw and
unexperienced, sustained a slaughter that would have confounded and dispersed
the compleatest veterans. They fell in their ranks; new regiments still pressed
forward to fill their places, and to supply new slaughter. When the first line
had fired away all their charges, they rushed forward on the Prussians. That
firm body of the Prussian infantry which had often stood, and often given so
many terrible shocks, by one of those unaccountable movements of the human
mind, that render every thing in war so precarious, gave way in the presence of
their Sovereign, and when they had in a manner secured the victory, retired in
disorder before the half broken battalions of the Muscovites. Had the Russian
officers known how to profit of this disorder; had they immediately thrown in
their horse with vigor to complete it, and entirely break that body; this had
probably been the last day of the Prussian greatness. The King was not so
negligent. For just in this anxious moment, whilst the battle was yet in
suspense, by a very rapid and masterly motion, he brought all the cavalry of
his right to the center, with which General Sedlitz at their head, bursting in
upon the Russian foot, uncovered by their horse, and disordered even by their
advantage, they pushed them back, with a most miserable slaughter. The repulsed
battalions of Prussia had time to recollect, and to form themselves; and now
returning to the onset with a rage exasperated by their late disgrace, they
entirely turned the balance of the fight. The Russians were thrown into the
most horrid confusion. The wind blew the dust and smoke full in their faces.
They no longer distinguished friends or enemies. They fired upon each other. In
this distraction they plundered their own baggage which stood between the
lines, and intoxicated themselves with brandy. Orders were now no more heard
nor obeyed. The ranks fell in upon one another; and being crammed together in a
narrow space, every shot discharged by the Prussians had its full effect:
whilst the Russians kept up only a scattered fire, without direction or effect,
and quite over the heads of their enemies. It was now no longer battle, but a
horrid and undistinguished carnage. Yet still, (which is a wonderful
circumstance) the Russians thus distracted and slaughtered, kept their ground.
The action continued without intermission from nine in the morning until seven
at night. At last the night itself, the fatigue of the Prussians, and a
judicious attack on their right wing, which drew their attention on that side,
gave the Russian army some respite to recover their order, and an opportunity
of retiring a little from the scene of their disaster. On their side near
10,000 fell upon the spot, they had more than 10,000 wounded, most of them
mortally: 939 officers, not including the inferior, were killed, wounded, and
taken prisoners; of two particular regiments consisting before the battle of
4595 effective men, only 1475 were left; their whole loss on this bloody day
way 21,529 men. That of the Prussians in every way did not amount to 2000.

The Gazettes of both parties warmly disputed the vain honor of the field of
battle. On the most diligent enquiry, it appears that both parties spent the
night on or very near the place of action. But this is an affair of little
consequence. The Prussians had all the fruits, and most of the proofs of a
victory the most complete and decisive. A vast train of artillery taken, the
military chest, a number of prisoners, many of them officers of high rank; the
retreat of the Russian army, the next and the following days; their General
Fermor's request for leave to bury the dead; their incapacity to advance or
form any new enterprise; the King of Prussia's unmolested operations against
his other enemies; all these form the most clear and certain demonstration of a
victory in all the points, for which a victory is desirable.

Nothing less indeed, than a very complete victory could have done any
essential service to the King's affair at that time, when four armies of his
enemies were making their way to one common center, and threatened to unite in
the heart of Brandenburg. The King renewed the attack on the Russians the next
morning. The event of the last day had showed them, that there was no way of
safety but in a retreat, and in effect they retreated before the Prussians as
far as Landsperg on the frontiers of Poland. The King of Prussia was convinced
that their late check must wholly disable them from attempting any thing
material against his dominions on that side; and he saw clearly that whatever
he might hope to gain by improving his advantage against the Russians, he must
lose far, more by allowing his other enemies to make a progress on the side of
Saxony. He satisfied himself therefore with leaving a small body of troops
under Count Dohna, to observe the motions of the Muscovite army; and marched
with the greatest part of his forces and the utmost expedition to the relief of
Prince Henry.

M. Daun having laid aside his first project for passing the Elbe at Meissen,
enterprised nothing new on the side of Saxony for some days; he contented
himself with taking a position at Stolpen to the Eastward of the Elbe, by
which, whilst he preserved to himself an easy communication with the army of
the Empire, he interrupted the communication between Bautzen and Dresden; he
favored the operations of General Laudohn, who had advanced through the Lower
Lusatia to the confines of Brandenburgh; and by drawing the attention of the
Prussian forces which were left in Silesia to the northward of that duchy, he
facilitated the progress of the Generals Harach and de Ville in the southern
parts. Admirable dispositions without question, if the time had not called for
more vigorous measures, and if the rescue of Saxony from the King of Prussia
had not been the great object of the campaign! It is not impossible that the
court of Vienna had still such an hankering after Silesia, as induced them to
slaken their efforts on the side of Saxony, in hopes, that if M. Daun could
protract the operations there, so as to find full employment for the King of
Prussia, their other forces might reduce Silesia with great facility; and thus
perhaps by aiming at two such difficult objects at once, as it generally
happens, they lost them both. Upon any other supposition, it is not very easy
to account for the seeming inactivity of M. Daun, whilst he had so fair a game
in his hands. However advantageously Prince Henry might have chosen his post,
or however strongly he might have secured it, yet the prodigious superiority of
the combined armies seems to have more than over-balanced that advantage, and
to have justified, nay to have demanded some bold and decisive attempt.

In fact, this appeared at length to be the Marshal's own opinion. For when the
strong Fortress of Sonnestein most unaccountably surrendered, with a garrison
of 1400 men, to the Austrian General Mac-Guire after the resistance of no more
than a single day; toward Dresden. This was to bring matters to a speedy
decision. But now the King of Prussia by the most rapid marches had reached the
frontiers of Saxony. The whole design was disconcerted; and far from being able
to dislodge Prince Henry, they found themselves utterly unable to prevent the
King his brother from joining him, with his whole army.

These advantages, glorious as they were, were not the only ones which followed
the victory at Zorndorf. The Swedes who directed their motions by those of
their Russian allies, hastened their operations when that army had advanced
into Brandenburgh. General Wedel was detached from Saxony, to stop their
progress; and the Prince of Bevern, now Governor of Stettin, gave them some
opposition. All this, however, had proved ineffectual, if the news of the
defeat of the Russians had not alarmed the Swedes in such a manner, as to make
them return with more expedition than they had advanced. Though the King of
Prussia's affairs began to put on a better appearance by these efforts, the
fortune of the war still hung in a very dubious scale. The enemy was still
superior. The Swedes and Russians had still some footing in his dominions. The
Austrians and Imperialists were yet in Saxony; and if the King's armies had it
in their power to take strong situations; the enemy had the same advantages.
The condition of things was extremely critical, and the least error or
misfortune threatened still to plunge the King of Prussia into an abyss of
calamities.

CHAP. XII.
General Oberg defeated at Lanwerenhagen. King of Prussia surprised at
Hochkirchen. M. Keith and Prince Francis of Brunswich killed. Affair at
Gorlitz. King of Prussia marches into Silesia. M. Daun invests Dresden. The
suburbs burned. King of Prussia raises the siege of Neiss and Cosel. He returns
into Saxony. The Austrians retire into Bohemia. Dispositions for the winter.

THE operations of the armies in Westphalia, seemed for a long time to
languish. The grand army of the French under M. de Contades, was wholly unable
to drive Prince Ferdinand from the posts which he had chosen so judiciously
along the Lip. The other division of the French forces under the Prince de
Soubise, had made no great progress on the side of Hesse-Castle, against the
Prince Isenburg, who still kept his ground in that principality, in order to
protect the course of the Weser, and to cover the electorate. The French were
sensible that an attack on the principal army of the allies, would prove a very
dangerous attempt, in which even if they should have some success, their
progress into the King's electoral dominions must be very slow and difficult.
But as the Body of the allies employed in Hesse-Castle was far the weakest, and
as an advantage on that side promised them the command of the Weser, and a
better passage into the heart of the enemies country, they determined to make
an attempt there. To further this design, a considerable detachment was made
from the army of M. de Contades, which increased the Prince of Soubise's corpse
to at least 30,000 men. Prince Ferdinand, who was sufficiently aware of the
enemies plan, had some time before sent General Oberg with a strong
reinforcement to join the Prince Isenburg; but notwithstanding this
reinforcement, the whole force of the allies in Hesse did not exceed 15000.
This body was attacked by the French at Lanwerenhagen, and their great
superiority, especially in point of cavalry,

Great consequences might have been apprehended from this affair. But the
vigilance of Prince Ferdinand, who had established the most ready
communications all along the Lip, suffered the victorious army to reap but
little advantage from their victory. That accomplished General advanced with
the ^^most expedition toward Rheda, and the P. Isenburgh having fallen back
upon him, they joined in such a manner as perfectly to secure the Weser,
without losing any thing on the side of the Rhine. And although these necessary
motions, in some sort uncovered the electorate, so as to lay it open to the
incursions of the enemies light troops, who penetrated even to the gates of
Hanover; yet the French were not in a condition to establish any considerable
body, or to take any post of moment in that part.

During this time, the armies of the King of Prussia and M. Daun, made no very
remarkable movements. The Marshal kept his advantageous camp at Stolpen, by
which he preserved a communication with the army of the Empire. The army was
secured by its inaccessible situation, but it enterprised nothing of
consequence. The King of Prussia on the other hand, having taken possession of
the important post of Bautzen, which lies so opportunely for commanding at once
both Misnia and Lusatia, extended his right wing to Hochkirchen. By this
position he preserved a communication with the army of his brother prince
Henry, he protected Brandenburg from the incursions of the Austrians, and at
the same time that he secured these interesting objects, he was better situated
for throwing succors into Silesia, than he could be any where else
consistently with his general plan. The two armies kept the most watchful eye
upon each others motions. The principal aim of the King of Prussia, seemed to
have been the preventing M. Daun from communicating with Bohemia. The great
intention of M. Daun was to cut off the King from Silesia. Things were so
balanced, that it did not seem possible by mere skill in marches and positions
to answer these ends very fully: therefore a battle seemed inevitable. But it
seemed too that considering the situation of both armies, a battle could not be
attempted without extreme danger to the party who should begin the attack.

M. Daun saw that if any more time was lost without action, the very season
must oblige him to evacuate Saxony, and thus give up all the fruits of the
campaign. He came to a resolution of giving the King of Prussia Battle. But
even in the vigor of this resolution, appeared the extreme caution which
characterises that able General. Having communicated his design to the prince
of Deux-Ponts, and settled measures with him, he marched in the dead of a very
dark night, in three columns, toward the right of the King of Prussia's camp.
Notwithstanding the darkness of the night, notwithstanding the necessary
division of the Austrian army,

How the King's out-guards were kept so as to make such a surprise practicable,
is hard to say. It is hard to accuse the vigilance of so able a commander, or
the attention of so many finished officers as served under him. To speak of
treachery is a way of accounting for misfortunes, more common than reasonable.
However it was, the Prussians had not time to strike their tents, when they
found the enemy in the midst of the camp, and an impetuous attack already
begun. Scarce had the battle begun, when a defeat seemed certain; not so much
from the confusion of the troops, as the irreparable loss of two officers in
the highest command, and of the greatest merit. M. Keith received two musket
balls, and fell dead upon the spot. Prince Francis of Brunswick had his head
shot off by a cannon ball as he mounted his horse. The King of Prussia had then
the whole of affairs to sustain alone, at the time when he most wanted
assistance. But his presence of mind, his firmness, his activity, remedied in
some measure the effects of this unforseen attack, and the losses and disorders
it had occasioned; he was every where present, and inspired his troops with an
a^dor like his own. The King ordered some detachments from his left, to
reinforce his right wing; but in the moment the orders were received, the left
itself was furiously attacked. General Retzow who commanded in that quarter,
with difficulty repulsed the Austrians, and was not able to afford any
considerable assistance to the right, which was alone obliged to support the
whole weight of the grand attack.

The Austrians in the beginning of the engagement had beaten them out of the
village of Hochkirchen; as the fate of the day depended upon that post, the
hottest of the dispute was there. The Prussians made three bloody and
unsuccessful attacks on the village; on the fourth they carried it; but the
Austrians pouring continually fresh troops upon that spot, drove them out at
length after reiterated efforts, and a prodigious slaughter on all sides. Then
the King despairing of the fortune of that field, ordered a retreat: his
troops, which had been suddenly attacked in a dark night by superior numbers,
and had run to arms some half naked, and all in the utmost confusion, had,
notwithstanding, made a most vigorous resistance; and maintained the fight for
near five hours. They made their retreat in good order without being pursued,
supported by the good countenance of their cavalry, and the fire of the
numerous and well served artillery, which was placed in the center of their
camp. They lost in this bloody action at least 7000 men, killed, wounded and
prisoners, together with many cannon. The Austrian account allowed their own
loss in killed and wounded to amount to near 5000.

The King of Prussia, in retiring from Hochkirchen, in fact only altered the
position of his right wing, which fell back as far as Weissenberg. His left
still remained at Bautzen. This position was nearly as good as the former. The
great loss was the loss of reputation, which always attends a defeat, and the
loss of two great generals which attended this in particular. M. Keith was a
Scochman born. He engaged with his brother the Lord Marshal in the Rebellion of
1715. Being obliged to relinquish his country on this occasion, he entered into
the troops of Spain, and afterward passing into Russia, he obtained a
considerable command, and performed many signal services in their wars with
Turkey and Sweden; and served them also in peace by several embassies. But
finding the honors of that country no better than a splendid servitude, and
not meeting with those rewards, which his long and faithful services deserved,
he left that court for one where merit is better known and better rewarded: and
having been employed since the beginning of the war in a distinguished command
in the King of Prussia's armies, he fell at last in a service that was worthy
of him.

If the King of Prussia lost some reputation in suffering himself to be
surprised in this affair; he fully retrieved it by his extraordinary conduct in
the course of the action, and his admirable efforts after it. On the whole,
perhaps, when all circumstances are considered, the King of Prussia will appear
greater in this defeat, than in any victory he ever yet obtained. The wing of
his army that was attacked, was surprised at a distance from him, the two
Generals that commanded it slain in the first onset, his other principal
Generals wounded, the whole wing in confusion without a leader; to come, in
these desperate circumstances, in haste from another quarter; to recover all;
twice to repulse the enemy, and at last to retire, overborne only by numbers
and fatigue, without being pursued, is such an instance of great Generalship,
as perhaps has never been exceeded.

Whilst these things were doing in Saxony, the Russians made no farther
attempts on the Side of Brandenburgh; they remained in their camp near
Landsperg, until the 21st of September; when after several feigned motions,
made to cover their real design, they began their retreat toward Pomerania,
where they arrived on the 26th.

It was impossible that they should keep their ground in that province during
the winter, unless they could secure some seaport, from whence they might be
supplied with provisions. The little town of Colberg was very opportune for
that purpose, as it is a seaport on the Baltic, and so meanly fortified, that
the reduction of it appeared to be as easy as expedient. On the third of
October, they formed the siege of this inconsiderable place, with a body of
15000 men. But such was the bravery of Major Heydon the Governor; and such the
incapacity of the Russians for operations of this nature, that this little
town, defended only by a rampart, without any outwork, and lined with a very
feeble garrison, held out against the repeated attacks of the enemy twenty-six
days, with the most savage barbarity both the open towns and defenseless
villages; leaving as strong impressions of contempt for their incapacity, as of
horror for their cruelty.

After the defeat which the King received at Hochkirchen, he omitted no
measures to prevent the enemy from making any material advantage of it. He
perceived clearly, that the advantage they proposed to derive from it, was to
cover the operations of their armies in Silesia; and that they had no longer
any serious design upon Saxony during this campaign. The King therefore, made
no scruple to reinforce his army by considerable detachments from that of
Prince Henry, which were brought up by that Prince himself. And as he saw that
Neiss, the siege of which had been already formed and prosecuted with great
vigor, must certainly surrender if it were not speedily succored, he resolved
to march into Silesia.

To the execution of this design, the greatest difficulties started up on all
sides. The army of M. Daun, lately victorious, had no other business than to
intercept him. To fight was dubious; to avoid it hard. If he could even avoid a
battle, he had much to apprehend from the efforts of the enemy to harrass him
on his march. If he should be so happy as to escape or conquer these
difficulties, yet his march entirely uncovered Saxony, and abandoned that most
interesting possession, very poorly defended, to all the force of two powerful
armies.

On the other hand, if the consideration of Saxony should detain him in his
present situation, Silesia ran the same risque, and the same or greater
disadvantages must ensue to his affairs, by suffering the Austrians to obtain a
footing there. This dilemma, which would have rendered a meaner genius entirely
inactive* and hindered him from taking any resolution, only obliged the King of
Prussia to take his resolution with the greater speed, and to execute it with
the greater vigor.

On the 24th of November at night, he quitted his camp at Dobreschutz, and
making a great compass he arrived, without any obstruction from the enemy, in
the plain of Gorlitz. A body of the Austrians had in vain endeavored to secure
this post before him; those that arrived were defeated, with the loss of 800
men. By this happy march, all the advantages of M. Daun's studied position, of
all the fruits his boasted victory at Hochkirchen, were lost in a moment, and
an open passage to Silesia lay before the King. He pursued his march with the
greatest diligence. General Laudohn, with 24,000 men was sent to pursue him.
That active general continually harrassed his rear guard; but the King
continued his march without interruption, and suffered him to take many little
advantages, rather than by delaying to contest small matters, to endanger a
design, which might be decisive of the whole campaign.

On the other hand, Daun, not content with the obstacles which General Laudohn
threw in the King's way, sent a large body of horse and foot by another route
to reinforce the army which under the Generals Harsch and De Ville had formed
the siege of Neiss, and the blockade of Cosel. But he perceived that all these
measures would probably prove ineffectual, as his principal project, which was
to cover Silesia, had been defeated. He therefore turned his views toward
Saxony, and satisfying himself with detaching General Laudohn, which might
create an opinion that the whole Austrian army pursued, he followed the King no
further than Gorlitz; which place he immediately quitted, and having by forced
marches gained the Elbe, he passed that river at Pirna,

In the mean time, the King of Prussia drew nearer and nearer to Neiss. The
siege of that fortress was commenced on the 4th of August; on the 3d of October
it was completely invested; and the place was pushed on one side with the
greatest vigor, and on the other maintained with the most consummate skill and
bravery, until the approach of the King of Prussia obliged the Austrians, on
the 1st. of November, to raise the siege, leaving a considerable quantity of
military stores behind them. The same terror obliged the parties employed in
the blockade of Cosel, to leave that place at liberty, and to fall back,
together with the armies of the Generals Harsch and De Ville, into Bohemia, and
the Austrian Silesia.

The King of Prussia, when he had thus by the report of his march, without
fighting, driven his enemies out of Silesia, coup de main, and if they
succeeded in this attempt, the great height of the Houses, being six or seven
stories, and entirely commanding the ramparts, would render the reduction of
the body of the place equally easy and certain. These considerations determined
him to set these suburbs on fire.

It is well known that the suburbs of Dresden compose one of the finest towns
in Europe, and are greatly superior to that which lies within the walls. Here
the most wealthy parts of the Inhabitants reside, and here are carried on those
several curious manufactures for which Dresden is so famous. Count Daun foresaw
this consequence of his attempt. He endeavored to intimidate the Governor from
this measure, to which he knew the cruel reason of war would naturally lead
him, by threatening to make him personally answerable for the steps he should
take; but Count Schmettau answered with the firmness that became a man of
honor and a soldier, that he would answer whatever he should do, and would not
only burn the suburbs, in case M. Daun advanced, but would likewise defend the
city itself street by street, and at last even the castle, which was the royal
residence, if he should be driven to it. When the magistrates were apprised of
this resolution, they fell at the feet of Count Schmettau, and implored him to
change his mind, and to have mercy on that devoted part of their city. The part
of the royal family, who remained in Dresden, joined their supplications to
those of the magistrates; they prayed him to spare that last refuge of
distressed royalty, and to allow at least a secure residence to those, who had
been deprived of every thing else. All entreaties were vain. Schmettau
continued firm in his resolution. He told them that their safety d^ded on
themselves, and on M. Daun; that if he made no attempts, the suburbs should be
still secure; but that if he took any farther steps, the necessity of his
master's service, and his own honor, would compel him to act very disagreeable
to the lenity of his disposition. The magistrates retired in despair.
Combustibles were laid in all the houses.

At three a clock next morning,

M. Daun saw this fire, which, whilst it laid waste the capital of his ally,
made it more difficult for him to force it, he sent in some empty threats to
the Governor. But the Saxon minister at Ratisbon, made grievous complaints to
the Diet, of what he represented as the most unparalleled act of wanton and
unprovoked cruelty, that had ever been committed. The emissaries of the court
of Vienna spread the same complaints; and they made no scruple to invent, and
to alter facts in such a manner as to move the greatest pity toward the
sufferers, and the greatest indignation against the King of Prussia. All these,
however, were in a short time abundantly confuted, by the authentic
certificates of the magistrates of Dresden, and of those officers of the court,
who were perfectly acquainted with the transaction. By these certificates it
appears, that only 250 houses were consumed. Though this was a terrible
calamity; it was nothing to the accounts given in the gazettes of the Austrian
faction. By these certificates it appears also, that the people were not
surprised, but had sufficient notice of the Governor's intentions, to enable
them to provide for their safety. In a word, all the charges of cruelty against
the Prussian commander, and soldiery were fully overthrown.

This fire made a coup de main impracticable; regular operations demanded time,
and the King of Prussia was now in full march toward Saxony. M. Daun retired
from before the place on the 17th. The King, after crossing Lusatia, passing
the Elbe, and joining his troops under Count Dohna and General Wedel, arrived
triumphantly at Dresden on the 20th. The armies of M. Daun and the Empire gave
way toward Bohemia, into which kingdom they soon after finally retreated,
without enterprising any thing further. Six sieges were raised almost at the
same time; that of Colberg, carried on by General Palmbach, under the orders of
Marshal Fermor; that of Neiss by M. de Harsch; that of Cosel; that of Dresden
by M. Daun; the blockade of Torgau by M. Haddick; and that of Leipsick by the
Prince of Deux-Ponts.

About the time that the Austrians retired into winter quarters, the French did
the same; and the Hanoverians permitted them to do it without molestation, the
season being too far advanced, and their army perhaps not of sufficient
strength for offensive operations; and Prince Ferdinand kept the field no
longer. The British troops had no occasion of signalizing their bravery this
year; but without a battle the nation suffered a considerable loss, and was
touched with a very deep and general sorrow. The Duke of Marlborough died in
Munster, the 20th of October, of a fever, contracted by the fatigues of the
Campaign. Never did the nation lose in one man, a temper more candid and
benevolent, manners more amiable and open, a more primitive integrity, a more
exalted generosity, a more warm and feeling heart. He left all the enjoyments,
which an ample fortune and an high rank could bestow in the public eye; and
which every milder virtue, every disposition to make and to be made happy,
could give in a domestic life: he left these for the service of his country,
and died for its defense, as he had lived for its ornament and happiness.

If we compare the events of this year with those of the last, we shall find in
the actions of the present year, perhaps something less of that astonishing
eclat; fewer battles; not so many nor so striking revolutions of fortune; but
we may discover upon all sides far greater management, and a more studied and
refined conduct; more artful movements, a more judicious choice of posts, more
quick and vigorous marches. If in the last year, the King of Prussia was the
hero of the imagination, he is this year the hero of the judgment; and we have,
I think, reason to admire him upon juster principles. Obliged to evacuate
Moravia, he throws himself into Bohemia, and executes a retreat with all the
spirit of an invasion. He marches more than an hundred miles through an enemy's
country, followed and harrassed by large armies, who are unable to obtain any
advantage over him. Gaining at length his own territories, he engages the vast
army of the Russians and defeats it. He is unable to follow his blow, but he
disables them from striking any against that part of his dominions, which he is
obliged to leave. Whilst he is engaged with the Russians on the frontiers of
Poland, the Austrians and Imperialists enter Saxony. Before they can do any
thing decisive, the King is himself suddenly in Saxony, and by his presence, at
once disconcerts all their projects. The scene is again changed, they surprise
him in his camp at Hochkirchen, two of his Generals are killed, his army
defeated, his camp is taken. They attack Silesia with a formidable army.
Notwithstanding his late defeat; notwithstanding the great superiority of his
enemies; notwithstanding the advantage of their posts; he makes an amazing
sweep about all their forces, eludes their vigilance, renders their positions
unprofitable; and marching with an astonishing rapidity into the remotest parts
of Silesia, obliges the Austrian armies to retire with precipitation out of
that province. Then he flies to the relief of Saxony, which his enemies had
again profited of his absence to invade; and again by the same rapid and well
conducted march, he obliges them to abandon their prize. Defeated by the
Austrians he acquired by his conduct all the advantages to the most complete
victory. He guarded all his possessions in such a manner, as to enable them all
the endure his absence for some short time; and he conducted his marches with
such spirit, as did not make it necessary to them to hold out any longer; he
made twice the circuit of his dominions, and in their turn he relieved them all.

Nor was the conduct of Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick less worthy of
admiration. Placed at the Head of a body of troops, who were but lately obliged
to lay down their arms, he found the enemy in possession of the whole open
country, and of all the strong places in it. Commencing the campaign in the
midst of a severe winter, without any place of strength in his hands, he drove
the enemy from all those they held. He obliged them to repass the Rhine, he
followed and defeated them in a pitched battle. Being afterward obliged by the
great force of France on its own frontier, and the numerous armies they had in
different places, to repass the Rhine; he defended Lip against numbers
greatly superior, and though they defeated a part of his army, they were not
able to turn their victory to the least advantage. Prince Ferdinand's campaign
may well pass for a perfect model of defensive operations.

The Austrians, in taking winter quarters, disposed their forces so as to form
a chain of an amazing length, from the frontiers of Moravia passing through
Bohemia, all along the skirts of Silesia and the borders of Saxony. There the
Imperial army joined this chain, and continued it through Thuringia and
Franconia, where it was united to the quarters of the Prince de Soubise. Th^se
troops had fallen back from Hesse Cassel, finding themselves unable to maintain
their ground in the landgraviate. The Prince de Soubise's cantonments extended
westward along the course of the Maine and Lahn, to meet those of the M. de
Contades which stretched to the Rhine, and continued the chain beyond it quite
to the Maese, so as to command the whole course of the Rhine, and both sides
both upwards and downward. Prince Ferdinand was unable to extend himself to
such a length; and especially found it impracticable to establish quarters on
the other side of the Rhine; but he disposed his troops in the most
advantageous manner in the bishoprics of Munster, Paderborn, and Hildesheim,
and in the landgraviate of Hesse Cassel. The several bodies may all unite with
ease, and support each other. To preserve a communication between this and the
Prussian army, as well as to break some part of that formidable chain of the
enemy, the King sent some bodies of his troops into Thuringia, who dispossessed
the army of the Empire of several of their posts there, and they now threaten
to penetrate still farther.

The King of Prussia, when he had a second time driven the Austrians and
Imperialists out of Saxony, resolved to keep no measures with that unhappy
country. He declared that he was resolved no longer to consider it as a
deposit, but as a country which he had twice subdued by his arms. He therefore
ordered those of the King of Poland's privy council, who still remained at
Dresden, to retire at a very short warning. But if the King of Prussia had a
right, as perhaps he had to consider Saxony as a lawful conquest, he certainly
seemed not to consider the people as subjects, when he continued to exact the
most severe contributions; and in a manner too, very little becoming a lawful
sovereign; for he surrounded the exchange with soldiers, and confining the
merchants in narrow lodgings on straw beds, he obliged them by extreme
suffering, to draw bills on their foreign correspondents for very large sums.
This city had been quite exhausted by former payments, and had not long before
suffered military execution. And enemy that acted thus, had acted severely; but
when a country is entirely possessed by any power, and claimed as a conquest,
the rights of war seem to cease; and the people have a claim to be governed in
such a manner as becomes a just Prince; especially when no extreme necessity in
his affairs compels him to these rigorous courses. To retaliate on these
miserable people some part of the cruelties committed by the Russians on his
dominions seems to be very unreasonable, as it is but too obvious, that the
barbarity of that people could not be restrained, however it might be
exasperated by the total destruction of Saxony. Such retaliations are odious
and cruel. We heartily wish we could praise the King of Prussia as much for his
temporate use of his conquest, as for those wonderful and heroic qualities by
which he obtained it. We might be considered as partial in our account, if we
had omitted to take notice of what is alleged against the King of Prussia,
when we have spoken so fully of the outrages committed by his enemies. It is
now time to turn our eyes from this great theater toward lesser events, but
such as will employ us altogether as agreeably; the operations of the British
^leets and armies in Europe and America against the French.

CHAP. XIII.
The burning of the ships at St. Maloes. Taking of Cherburg. Defeat of St. Cas.
Operations in America. Siege and taking of Louisbourg. English army defeated at
Ticonderoga. They take Frontenac. The French abandon Fort du Quesne. Conclusion
of the annals of the year 1758.

IN the beginning of this year, the good condition of our navy and our army;
the spirit and popularity of the ministry; the wise choice of commanders, in
contempt of vulgar and trivial maxims; the prevalence of the contrary to all
these amongst the enemy; gave us the best grounded hopes of a vigorous and
successful campaign. Concerning the theater of our operations there was some
doubt. It was the opinion of some, that our push in Europe should be made on
the side of Germany; and that we ought to strengthen the army of Prince
Ferdinand with such a respectable body of troops, as might enable that finished
commander to exert all his talents, and to improve to the utmost the advantages
he had already obtained over the French. They imagined, that if an early and
considerable reinforcement were sent to the Prince, whilst the French army was
yet in a distressed condition, and if in this condition that should receive any
considerable blow, they would find it extremely difficult to retrieve it: and
receiving this blow, on the frontier of their own territories, the Prince might
carry the war into France itself; and thus very probably bring matters to a
speedy decision. That in pursuing this plan a diversion on the coast of France
was by no means excluded: and that on the contrary it must, on this plan, be
attended with consequences infinitely more important than it could otherwise;
that otherwise, France might laugh at the little desultory efforts of an
handful of men, who were to be embarked and dis-embarked with great difficulty
and hazard, and which would always be obliged to fly at the first approach of
an enemy. That whilst the French had only an army, greatly inferior in number
to engage on the side of Germany, they would always find themselves well able
to act abroad, and defend themselves at home.

On the other hand it was strongly urged, that we ought to make the destruction
of the French marine our great object, and to consider all continental
operations only in a secondary light. That by sending a large body of English
troops to the King's army on the Rhine, we must necessarily weaken our efforts
in America, and on the coast of France; and by drawing away all our forces, we
must shake that internal security, which invigorated all our operations abroad.
That whilst we maintained an army of 50,000 foreigners in Germany, it would be
the greatest imprudence to send also a large body of our own national troops
into the same country, and by that means not only squander away our men, but
employ almost every penny granted for the Land service, out of Great Britain; a
method which could not fail of exhausting us in a very short time. That the
force already in Germany was sufficient to keep the French engaged, and that
the proposed expeditions to France would, be attacking the coast, now in one
part, now in another, and keeping all parts in continual alarms, necessarily
detain a very considerable part of their forces at home, and thus make a
powerful diversion, whilst it was pursuing what ought to be the grand perpetual
object of all our operations, the destruction of the French maritime power.

The latter opinion prevailed; but it was however so far modified by the
arguments on the other side, that after some time a few regiments were sent
into Germany, as we have before related. These and better reasons, no doubt,
determined the operations on the coast of France; but whilst the necessary
preparations were making, their destination was kept an inviolable secret; and
now, as they had the year before, inspired France with no little terror. Two
squadrons, by the latter end of May, were in readiness for sailing. The greater
under Lord Anson, the smaller under Commodore How, which was so designed to
convoy the transports, and to favor the landing and re-imbarkment. The land
forces consisted of sixteen battalions, and nine troops of light horse: they
were commanded by the late Duke of Marlborough. They sailed from Portsmouth:
but as soon as the fleet set sail, widely, and to observe the French squadron
in Breast. The other part of the fleet, which was commanded by Commodore How,
with the transports, arrived without any accident in Cancalle Bay, at a small
distance from the City of St. Maloes. Here the troops landed without
opposition, coup de main; and though for want of outworks, it was ill qualified
to sustain a regular siege; yet our forces were, for want of strength and
artillery sufficient, altogether as ill qualified for such an operation. They
were therefore contented with setting fire to about an hundred sail of shipping
many of them privateers,

Before the fleet returned, they reconnoitred the town of Granville on the
coast of Normandy; but finding that a large body of troops were encamped in the
neighborhood, they made no attempt there. From thence they moved toward
Cherbourg, and made the proper dispositions for landing near that place; but a
hard gale blowing into the shore, and the transports beginning to fall foul on
each other, it became extremely hazardous to attempt landing. Besides, the
provision was near exhausted, and the soldiers by being so long cooped up in
the transports, were grown sickly. It became highly necessary to return home,
and they arrived at St. Helen's on the 29th-of June.

The success of this expedition, by which the French suffered largely, with
scarce any loss on our side, though it sufficiently answered the intention of
the armament, fell somewhat short of the expectations of the public, who had
formed much greater hopes, than it was possible for the nature of such
enterprises to fulfill. However, their hopes were again revived; by seeing that
every thing was prepared for another expedition, and that our armies and fleets
were to be kept in constant action during the summer. The time was now come
when we were to turn the tables upon France, and to retaliate by real attacks,
the terrors which had been raised by her menaces of an invasion. The Duke of
Marlborough had now taken the command of the English forces in Germany; and
General Bligh succeeded him in this command. Prince Edward resolved to go upon
the expedition, and to form himself for the service of his country under so
brave and able a commander as How. It is easy to imagine, how much the spirit,
the presence and example of the gallant young Prince, who went with the utmost
cheerfulness through all the detail of a midshipman's duty, inspired both the
seamen and the troops.

On the first of August, the fleet set sail from St. Helen's. In a few days
they came to anchor before Cherbourg. The French had drawn a line strengthened
by forts, along the most propable places for landing. They had drawn down three
regiments of regular troops, and a considerable body of militia to the shore,
and had in all appearance threatened a very resolute opposition to the descent
of the English forces. But the Commodore disposed the men of war and bomb
ketches so judiciously, and made so sharp a fire upon the enemy, that they
never ventured out of their entrenchments;

Cherbourg is on the land side an open town; neither is it very strongly
defended toward the sea. The harbor is naturally bad. But the place is well
situated, in the midst of the channel, for protecting the French, and annoying
the English commerce in time of war and perhaps for facilitating an invasion on
England itself. Monsieur Belidor the famous engineer, had demonstrated its
importance, and proposed a plan for the improvement and defense of the harbor,
as well as for the fortifications of the town. This plan was approved and
partly put in execution by the building of a mole, digging a basin and making
sluices and flood gates with excellent materials and a vast expense. The work
had been for a considerable time discontinued; but in this expedition, that
work of so great ingenuity, charge, and labor, was totally destroyed. Whilst
our humanity regrets the unhappy necessity of war, we cannot help thinking that
the English nation was freed by the success of this expedition, from what might
one day be cause of no trivial alarms.

When this work of destruction was over, all the vessels in the harbor burned,
and hostages taken for the contributions levied on the town, the forces
reimbarked, with great speed and safety without any interruption from the
enemy,

The Nation exulted greatly in this advantage, especially as it almost
accompanied the news of our glorious successes in America. Nothing was omitted
to give the action its utmost eclat; the brass cannon and mortars taken at
Cherbourg, were drawn from Kensington to the tower, quite through the city, in
great pomp and order, adorned with streamers,

The fleet when it left Cherbourg, was driven to the coast of England; but the
troops were not disembarked; it was resolved, that the coast of France should
have no respite; and accordingly they sailed toward St. Maloes, and landed in
the bay of St. Lunar at a small distance from the town of St. Maloes. This
choice of a place for landing, must necessarily have surprised all those who
remembered upon what reasons the attempt against that place had been so
recently laid aside. There was no other object of sufficient consideration near
it. The town was at least in as good a posture of defense as it had been then;
and the force which was to attack it had since then been considerably lessened.
There is undoubtedly something very unaccountable as well in the choice as in
the whole conduct of this affair. The persons in the principal commands,
shifted the blame from one to another. There is nothing more remote from our
design, than to set up for judges in matters of this nature; or ungenerously to
lean on any officer, who, meaning well to the service of his country, by some
misfortune or mistake fails in such hazardous and intricate enterprises. We
shall be satisfied with relating the facts as they happened.

As soon as the troops were landed in the bay of St. Lunar, it became evident
that the design against St. Maloes was utterly impracticable. Other projects
were then proposed, but they all seemed equally liable to objection. Whilst
they debated concerning a plan for their operations, the fleet was in the
greatest danger. The bay of St. Lunar is extremely rocky; and the experience of
the people of the country, together with what he saw himself, convinced the
Commodore that it was impossible to remain any longer in this road with
tolerable safety. Therefore he moved up to the bay of St. Cas, about three
leagues to the westward.

The fleet was separated from the land forces; but it was still easy to
preserve a communication between them; and as no attack was yet apprehended,
they made no scruple to penetrate farther into the country. In two days they
arrived at the village of Matignon, having had several skirmishes with small
bodies of the enemy, who from time to time appeared on their flanks, and who
always disappeared when they were briskly encountered. By this time the Duke
d'Aiguillon, Governor of Britanny, was advanced within six miles of the English
army, with a body of twelve battalions and six squadrons of regular troops, and
two regiments of militia. This determined the council of war to retreat; they
wanted but three miles to the bay of St. Cas. But in this little march a
considerable time was consumed, and the French army was close upon them before
they could be completely reimbarked. A very steep hill formed a sort of
amphitheatre about the bay of St. Cas, where the embarkation was making; but
before the last division, which consisted of all the grenadiers of the army,
and the first regiment of the guards, could get off, the French had marched
down this hill, through an hollow way, and formed themselves in a long line
against the few English troops that remained. There remained in this exigency
only the expedient of assuming a bold countenance, and attacking them with
vigor. The bravery of our troops on this desperate occasion, was worthy of a
better fortune. The ships and frigates seconded their efforts, and made a
severe fire upon the enemy. All was to no purpose; their ammunition was at last
spent; the enemies numbers prevailed; our little body attempted to retreat, but
they fell into confusion, they broke, an horrible slaughter followed, many ran
into the water and met their fate in that element. The shore was covered with
dead bodies. General Drury was drowned. Sir John Armitage, a young volunteer of
great fortune and hopes, was shot through the head. Several officers, men of
large fortune and consideration fell. At length the firing of the frigates
ceased, and the French immediately gave quarter. About 400 were made prisoners,
600 were killed and wounded.

In the midst of this carnage, in the midst of a fire that staggered the
bravest seamen who managed the boats, Commodore How exhibited a noble example
of intrepidity and fortitude, by ordering himself to be rowed in his own boat
through the thickest of the fire, to encourage all that were engaged in that
service, and to bring off as many men as his vessel could carry.

This affair dispirited the people of England, and elated the people of France
far more than an affair of so little consequence ought to have done. It was in
fact no more than the cutting off a rear guard. There is often more bloodshed
in skirmishes in Germany, which make no figure in the Gazettes. And certainly,
if our expeditions to the coast of France were planned with any judgment, on
our part we had rather reason to congratulate ourselves that we were able to
land three times on that coast, with so inconsiderable a loss. The French
indeed had reason to magnify this loss; and they did greatly magnify it in
order to console their people, who had seen their trade suffer so much, and
their country so long insulted with impunity.

Mayjor General AMHERST.
portrait of Major General Amherst

Whatever our successes were on the coast of France, they did not affect us in
the same manner with those which we had in America. From this part of the world
we had long been strangers to any thing, but delays, misfortunes,
disappointments, and disgraces. But the spirit which had been roused at home,
diffused itself into all parts of the world where we had any concern, and
invigorated all our operations.

Admiral Boscawen with a powerful fleet of men of war and several transports
sailed for Halifax from England. Feb. the 19th. He had the chief command in the
expedition against Louisbourg, and in particular the direction of the naval
operations. General Amherst, from whose character great things were expected,
and who justified these expectations, was to command the land forces. These
amounted to about 14000 men, including some light troops, fitted for the
peculiar service of the country. The whole fleet consisting of 151 ships, set
sail from the harbor of Halifax. On the second of June they appeared before
Louisbourg. They were six days on the coast before a landing was found
practicable; such a prodigious surf swelled all along the shore, that no boat
could possibly live near it. The French not trusting to this obstacle, had
drawn intrenchments in every part where it might be possible to land, supported
them with batteries in convenient places, and lined them with numerous
infantry. At length the surf though violent at best,

When the fire of the frigates continued about a quarter of an hour, General
Wolfe's division moved toward the land; the enemy reserved their shot until
the boats were near in shore, and then directed the whole fire of their cannon
and musquetry upon them. The surf aided their fire. Many of the boats overset,
many were broken to pieces, the men jumped into the water, some were killed,
some drowned; the rest supported and encouraged in all difficulties, by the
example, spirit, and conduct of their truly gallant commander, gained the
shore, took post, fell upon the enemy with such order and resolution, that they
soon obliged them to fly in confusion. As soon as this post was made good, and
center moved toward the left, and the right followed the center, so that the
landing was completed, though not without much time and trouble, in an
excellent order, and with little loss.

The operations of a siege are too minute and interesting to make a detail of
them agreeable to readers, who are not conversant in the art military. The
operations against Louisbourg for several days went on very slowly, owing
entirely to the prodigious surf and the rough weather, which made it extremely
difficult to land the artillery, stores, and instruments to be employed in the
siege; however, the excellent conduct of the Generals Amherst and Wolf, by
degrees overcame all the difficulties of the weather, which was extremely
unfavourable, the ground which was rugged in some places and boggy in others,
and the resistance of the garrison which was considerable. The French had five
men of war of the line in the harbor, who could bring all their guns to bear
upon the approaches of the English troops. The first thing done was to secure a
point called the lighthouse battery, from whence they might play upon these
vessels, and on the batteries on the other side of the harbor. General Wolf
performed this service with his usual vigor and celerity, and took possession
of this and all the other posts in that quarter. which had been displayed
during the course of this siege. The Admiral who had all along done every thing
possible to second the efforts of the land forces, notwithstanding the severity
of the weather, resolved on a stroke, which by being decisive of the possession
of the harbor, might make the reduction of the town a matter of little
difficulty. He resolved to send in a detachment of 600 seamen in boats, to take
or burn the two ships of the line which remained, and if he should succeed in
this, he proposed the next day to send in some of his own great ships, who
might batter the town on the side of the harbor. This was not more wisely
planned by the Admiral, than gallantly and successfully executed by Captain
L^forey. In spite of the fire from the ships and the batteries,

This stroke, in support of the spirited advances of the land forces, was
conclusive. The town surrendered the next day.

The taking of Louisbourg (a) was an event the most desired by all our
colonies; that harbor had always been a receptacle convenient to the enemies
privateers, who infested the English trade in North America. It was the most
effectual blow which France had received from the commencement of the war. By
the taking of Louisbourg, she lost the only place from whence she could carry
on the cod fishery; and the only place she had in a convenient situation for
the reinforcements that were sent to support the war in the other parts of
America; and with Louisbourg fell the island of St. John's, and whatever other
inferior stations they had for carrying on the fishery toward Gaspesie and the
bay de Chaleurs, which our ships soon after this event entirely destroyed. It
is incredible how much this success in America, joined to the spirit of our
other measures, operated to raise our military reputation in Europe, and to
sink that of France, and consequently how much it influenced our most essential
interests and those of our allies.

Major General Amherst Journal of the siege of Louisbourg.
On the 28th of May, I had the good fortune to meet Admiral Boscawen with the
fleet and the troops coming out of the harbor of Halifax. Lieut. Genesis Bragg's
regiment, from the bay of Fundy, joined the fleet this day.

The 29th we had fine weather; the ships kept well together; the whole
consisted of 157 sail. The Dublin went very sickly into Halifax.

The 30th the wind blew hard in the afternoon; the ships were greatly dispersed.

The 31st the wind sometimes contrary, obliged us to tack, and it blew fresh.

The 1st of June Capt. Rous in the Sutherland came from off the harbor of
Louisbourg, said, two ships had got in the 30th; that there were 13 sail in the
harbor. We saw the entrance of Gabarus at night.

The 2d it was foggy in the morning; about twelve saw Louisbourg and the ships
in the harbor. The fleet, with about a third of the troops, anchored in
Gabarus bay; and this evening, with Brigadiers Generals Lawrence and Wolf, I
reconnoitred the shore as near as we could, and made a disposition for landing
in three places the next morning, in case the troops arrived.

The enemy had a chain of posts from Cape Noir to the flat Point, and
irregulars from thence to the bottom of the Bay; some works thrown up at the
places which appeared practicable to land at, and some batteries.

On the 3d most of the transports came in this morning, all well prepared for
landing; but the surf on shore was so great, it was impossible to land. This
day Brigadier General Whitmore arrived from Halifax, at which place I have left
Col. Monckton to command. As one Bay was found to have less surf than the
others, a disposition was made to land the next morning in one place instead of
three.

The 4th the wind and surf were so very high, Admiral Boscawen told me it was
impracticable to land.

The 5th a great swell and fog in the morning, and the Admiral declared it
still impracticable to land.

The 6th an appearance of change of weather, in the morning early: I was
resolved to seize the first opportunity; the signal was made to prepare to land
between five and six o'clock, and at eight all the men were in the boats: The
fog came on again, and the swell increased during the time the men were getting
into the boats, and the Admiral again declared it impracticable to land. I
ordered the troops on board their respective ships, first acquainting them with
the reason for so doing.

The 7th the weather bad in the morning, in the afternoon the swell rather
decreased, and gave us great hopes of landing at daybreak the next morning, for
which orders were given: and Bragg's regiment, who were in a number of sloops,
to sail under convoy, by the mouth of the harbor to Lorembec; sending at the
same time a proportion of artillery destined for the light house Point, with
orders to make all the show they could of landing, but not to land till further
orders, intending to draw the enemy's attention on that side.

From the 2d to this time, the enemy have been reinforcing their posts, adding
to their works, cannonading and throwing shells at the ships, and making all
the preparations they can to oppose our landing. Seven transports were now
missing with troops on board, three of which came in at night. The Admiral gave
all necessary orders for the frigates to cover our landing.

On the 8th the troops were assembled in the boats before break of day, in
three divisions; and Commodore Durell having viewed the coast by order of the
Admiral, and given me his opinion the troops might land, without danger from
the surf, in the bay on our left, the Kennington and Halifax snow began the
fire on the left, followed by the Grammont, Diana and Shannon frigates in the
center, and the Sutherland and Squirrel upon the right. When the fire had
continued about a quarter of an hour, the boats upon the left rowed into the
shore, under the command of Brigadier General Wolf, whose detachment was
composed of the four eldest companies of grenadiers, followed by the light
infantry, (a corpse of 540 men, chosen as marksmen from the different regiments,
serve as irregulars, and are commanded by Major Scott, who was Major of the
Brigade) and the companies of rangers, supported by the Highland regiment, and
those by the eight remaining companies of grenadiers.

The division on the right, under the command of Brigadier Genesis Whitmore,
consisted of the Royal, Lascelles, Monckton, Forbes, Anstruther and Webb, and
rowed to our right by the white Point, as if intending to force a landing there.

The center division, under the command of Brigadier General Lawrence, was
formed of Amherst's, Hopson's, Otway's, Whitmore's, Lawrence's, and
Wharburton's, and made, at the same time, a show of landing at the fresh water
Cove. This drew the enemy's attention to every part, and prevented their
troops, posted along the coast, from joining those on their right.

The enemy acted very wisely, did not throw away a shot, till the boats were
near in shore, and then directed the whole fire of their cannon and musketry
upon them. The surf was so great, that a place could hardly be found to get a
boat on shore. Notwithstanding the fire of the enemy, and the violence of the
surf, Brigadier Wolf pursued his point, and landed just at their left of the
Cove, took post, attacked the enemy, and forced them to retreat. Many boats
overset, several broke to pieces, and all the men jumped into the water to get
on shore.

So soon as the left division was landed, the first detachment of the center
rowed at a proper time to the left, and followed; then the remainder of the
center division, as fast as the boats could fetch them from the ships; and the
right division followed the center in like manner.

It took up a great deal of time to land the troops; the enemy's retreat, or
rather flight, was through the roughest and worst ground I ever saw; and the
pursuit ended with a cannonading from the town, which was so far of use, that
it pointed out how near I could encamp to invest it: On which the regiments
marched to their ground, and lay on their arms. The wind increased, and we
could not get any thing on shore.

The loss of his Majesty's troops at landing is, Capt. Baillie and Lieut.
Cuthbert, of the Highland regiment; Lieut. Nicholson of mine, 4 sergeants, 1
corporal, and 38 men killed, 21 were of my regiment, (the grenadiers) of which
8 were shot, and the rest drowned in trying to get on shore.

Five lieutenants, 2 sergeants, 1 corporal, and 51 men wounded; and of the five
companies of rangers, 1 ensign and 3 private killed, 1 wounded, and 1 missing.

On the enemy's side, 2 captains of grenadiers, and 2 lieutenants, are
prisoners; 1 officer killed, and an Indian chief: Several men likewise killed;
and, I imagine, about 70 men taken prisoners: They were sent on board as fast
as possible. By some of the prisoners I had intelligence, that M. St. Julien,
Colonel, commanded in the Cove: That there were 5 battalions in the town,
namely, Bourgogne, Artois, Royal Marine, Cambise, and Volontaires Etrangers,
with about 700 Canadians. The three first regiments wintered in Louisbourg;
Volontaires Etrangers came there not long since with part of the fleet, and
Cambise the night before we landed.

We took from the enemy three 24 pounders, seven 9 pounders, and seven 6
pounders, two mortars and fourteen swivels; all which were placed along the
shore, to prevent our landing; with ammunition tools, and stores of all kinds.

The 9th. Lieut. Genesis Bragg's regiment returned in their sloops from Lorembec.
The weather continued extremely bad; the surf so great, that we could get only
some of our tents on shore in the afternoon.

The 10th the furf still continued, and it was with great difficulty that we
got any thing on shore.

The 11th the weather grew clear and better, and the light 6 pounders, which I
had ordered on shore immediately after the troops were now only landed, and
some artillery stores with them.

On the 12th, from intelligence I had received, that the enemy had destroyed
the grand battery, and called in their out-posts, I detached Brigadier Wolf
with 1200 men, 4 companies of grenadiers, 3 companies of rangers, and some
light infantry round the N. E. harbor to the Light House Point, with an
intention to silence the Island battery, and, at the same time, to attempt to
destroy the ships in the Harbor; sending, at the same time by sea, the
proportion of artillery, tools, etc. that had been ordered for this service.

I received, this day, a report from Brigadier Wolf, that he had taken
possession of the Light House Point, and all the posts on that side the
harbor, which the enemy had abandoned, leaving several cannon, which were
rendered useless, tools, etc. and a great quantity of fish at Lorembec. The
weather continued extremely bad; but we got some tools on shore this night, so
that, on the 13th. we began to make a communication from the right to the left
in front of the camp; and I ordered three redoubts on the most advantageous
ground in the front. A party of the enemy came out this day toward our camp,
but were soon beat back by the light Infantry, before two picquets could well
get up to their assistance. We worked at three redoubts in front all night.

The 14th the enemy cannonaded us a great part of the day. The surf still
continued so great, that it was with the greatest difficulty we could land any
thing. The fleet, under the command of Sir Charles Hardy, which appeared
yesterday for the first time, was in the night blown off to sea.

The 15th I sent four more mortars in a sloop to the Light House, but we could
not get any artillery landed on this shore. At night two deserters from the
Volontares Etrangers came in; said they had 5 killed and 40 wounded in the
skirmish on the 13th.

The 16th, the first fine weather, we landed 12 days provision, and got many
things on shore, but could not land any artillery.

The 17th I got Colonel Bastide on horseback, and, with Col. Williamson and
Major M' Kellar, we reconnoitred the whole ground as far as we could; and
Colonel Bastide was determined in his opinion of making approaches by the Green
Hill, and confining the destruction of the ships in the harbor, to the Light
House Point, and the batteries on that side. I added two 8 inch mortars and
three royals to the Light House batteries.

The 18th we had fine weather. Some Indians took three of the transports men at
the bottom of Gabarus bay who landed there contrary to orders. The road for the
artillery was pushed on as fast as possible. We got three 23 pounders on shore,
though the surf was great the beginning of the day.

The 19th the batteries on the Light House were intended to have been opened
this night, but could not be got ready so soon. L'Echo, a French frigate of 32
guns, was brought in today; had got out of the harbor the 13th at night, and
was bound to Quebec: By her we have intelligence, that the Bizane got out the
day we landed, and the Comette since our arrival off the harbor.

The 20th the Island Battery and ships fired at the batteries on the shore, who
began their fire this last night. The enemy burnt an old ship at the bottom of
the harbor.

The 21st very bad weather, and the surf high. The enemy discovered us making
the road for the artillery, and cannonaded us; threw some shot into the left of
the camp, but did not oblige me to decamp any part. An advanced redoubt toward
Green Hill was thrown up this night.

The 22d the bad weather continued; we were employed on the road, and getting
up a Block House on the left by the Miray road, to secure the communication to
the N. E. harbor and Light House, and to hinder any parties from going into
the town.

The 23d the Admiral assured me there were above a hundred boats lost in
landing the troops and provisions. This day fine weather; and we now have on
shore twelve 24 pounders, and six 12 pounders. The enemy fired a great deal
from their shipping and Island Battery, and threw some shot into the left of
the camp. Colonel Messervey, and most of his carpenters, taken ill of the
smallpox, which is a very great loss to the army. Gabions and fascines are
landed, and carried forward as fast as possible, to make an epaulement to Green
Hill. The batteries at the Light House fire with success against the Island
Battery, and I hope will soon silence it.

On the 24th the enemy fired on the Light House Batteries from the town and
shipping, and on our advanced redoubt, which was finished, they fired from the
town. Colonel Bastide remained fixed in his opinion of advancing by Green Hill.
We had this day in the park of artillery thirteen 24 pounders, and seven 12
pounders.

The 25th the cannonading continued night and day: In the evening the Island
Battery was silenced; their own fire had helped to break down part of their
works: Fascines and gabions were forwarded to Green Hill as fast as possible.
All the men employed at work, and making the necessary communications. The
enemy fired a good deal at our advanced redoubt.

The 26th a small alarm on the left of a party that had advanced from the town;
had got up to the Block House, which was not quite finished. They had with them
a barrel of pitch to set it on fire: The guard on it was not sufficient to
oppose a large party; but a detachment was sent out so quick, that they were
forced to retreat without effecting their design, though two of the men had
been in the Block House, and they were drove back into the town very fast.
Three hundred pioneers ordered to Green Hill. Admiral Boscawen landed 200
marines, and took the post at Kennington Cove, which is a great ease to the
army. I desired of the Admiral four 32 pounders and two 24 pounders to leave at
the Light House, to keep the Island Battery in ruin, that with a proper number
of men entrenched there, Brigadier Wolf, with his detachment, might be able to
come round the harbor, bringing his artillery with him; and to try to destroy
the shipping, and to advance toward the West Gate.

The 27th one brass 24 pounder was lost in 12 fathom water, by slipping off the
catamaran A kind of raft much used at sea.
, as they were coming from the ship to land it. The cannon I asked of the
Admiral were landed this night at the Light House.

The 28th a great many popping shots and cannonading. As the post at Green Hill
was covered, we began the road over the bog, and throwing up an epaulement.
Colonel Messervey and his son both died this day; and of his company of
carpenters of 108 men, all but 16 in the smallpox, who are nurses to the sick.
This is particularly unlucky at this time.

The 29th cannonading continued; the frigate fired constantly at the
epaulement; we pursued working at the road which cost a great deal of labor:
At night the enemy sunk 4 ships in the harbour's mouth; Apollo, a two decked
one, la Fidelle of 36 guns, la Chevre, and la Biche, of 16 guns each, and they
cut off most of their masts. Remain in the harbor five of the line of battle,
and a frigate of 36 guns.

The 30th, at night, some firing at Kennington Cove: The marines thought they
saw Indians: The frigate fired all night at the epaulement, as the men worked
in the night time.

The 1st of July, the enemy creeped out in the morning to get some old
palisades and wood. Brig. Wolf and Major Scott's light infantry pushed them in
with a very brisk fire; and the Brigadier took post on the hills, from whence
it was intended to try to demolish the shipping; we marched forward on the
right; forced the enemy back to Cape Noir with a smart fire.

The 2d. the epaulement and road went on heavily, from the extreme badness of
the ground: The enemy continued their cannonading, and threw some shells: We
skirmished all day with parties out of the town.

The 3d, a great cannonading from the town and shipping on the batteries. Brig.
Wolf was making an advanced work on the right, thrown up at 650 yards from the
covered way, with an intention of erecting a battery to destroy the defenses of
the place, it being pretty well on the capital of the Citadel Bastion; and the
falling of the ground from this place, toward the works, would hinder
discovering as much of the works, as would be necessary to do them any
considerable damage. In the evening the sea officers thought some of the ships
would try to get out of the harbor. The batteries on the left immediately
played on them, but it grew so dark they could not continue.

The 4th a great fog; when there were glares of light, the cannonading began;
500 men kept continually making fascines.

The 5th very bad weather; the epaulement was hastened on as much as possible,
it swallowed up an immense number of fascines, cost some men, as the frigate
cannonaded on it without ceasing.

The 6th a sloop sailed out of the harbor with a flag of truce to Sir Charles
Hardy, to carry some things to their wounded officers and prisoners.

The many difficulties of landing every thing in almost a continual surf, the
making of roads, draining and passing of bogs, and putting ourselves under
cover, render our approach to the place much longer than I could wish.

On the 7th we had very foggy weather; cannonading continued all day, and a
good deal of popping shots from the advanced posts.

The 8th I intended an attack on some advanced posts at Cape Noir, but it did
not take place. Col Bastide got a contusion by a musket ball on his boot, which
laid him up in the gout.

The 9th, in the night, the enemy made a Sortie where Brigadier Lawrence
commanded: they came from Cape Noir, and though drunk, I am afraid rather
surprised a company of grenadiers of Forbs's, commanded by Lord Dundonald, who
were posted in a Fleecke on the right. Major Murray, who cammanded three
companies of grenadiers immediately detached one, and drove the enemy back very
easily. Whitmore's and Bragg's grenadiers behaved very well on this occasion.
Lord Dundonald was killed, Lieut. Tew wounded and taken prisoner, Capt. Bontein
of the engineers taken prisoner: 1 corporal, 3 men killed; 1 sergeant, 11 men
missing; 17 men wounded: The Sortie was of five picquets, supported by 600 men;
a Captain, Chevalier de Chauvelin was killed, a Lieutenant wounded and taken
prisoner: 17 men killed, 4 wounded and brought off prisoners, besides what
wounded they carried into the town, one of which, a Captain, died immediately.
The enemy sent out a flag of truce to bury their dead, which when over, the
cannonading began again. The frigate was so hurt, she hauled close to the town;
the ships fired very much against Brig. Wolfe's batteries.

The 10th, the road at the epaulement went on a little better; the enemy fired
a great deal, and threw many shells.

The 11th, a waggoner was taken off by some Indians between the block-house and
the left of the N. E. harbor.

The 12th it rained very hard all night; not a man in the detachment could have
a dry thread on; we made an advanced work to Green Hill; at night the waggoner
who had been taken, luckily made his escape, said, they were 250 Canadians. The
Citadel Bastion fired very smartly.

The 13th, the enemy threw a great many shells; we perfected our works as fast
as we could; bad rainy weather; the enemy was at work at Cape Noir to hinder us
taking possession near that point, which is of no consequence; some deserters
came in, said a sloop of Miray got in three days ago.

The 14th, the batteries were traced out last night, with an intention to place
twenty 24 pounders, divided in four different batteries, to destroy the
defenses, and a battery of 7 mortars, with some 12 pounders to ricochet Is half
charging a gun, by which the bullet skips upon the ground like stones when
skimm'd upon the water.
the works and the town.

The 15th, the cannonading and firing continued; the enemy tried to throw some
shells into camp, supposed to be intended against our powder magazine: At ten
at night the Light House battery fired some rockets as a signal of ships
sailing out of the harbor This was probably the ship which brought news to
France of the English landing, and escaped notwithstanding the vigilance of so
great a fleet.
; Sir Charles Hardy answered it; the frigate got out, and Sir Charles Hardy's
fleet got under sail and went to sea. Before day break, Capt. Sutherland,
posted at the end of the N.E. harbor, was attacked, and there was a great deal
of firing; the grenadiers of Brig. Wolfe's corpse marched to sustain him, and
all the light infantry; it was over before they could get up, and by a deserter
from the enemy, they were only 100 men come from Miray, where they left Mons.
de Bosbiere, who had, on the other side the water, 300 men with boats to pass.
Major Scott, with the light infantry, pursued, but could not get up with them.
I encamped a corpse forward.

The 16th, toward night, Brig. Wolf pushed on a corpse and took possession of
the hills in the front of the Barasoy, where we made a lodgment; the enemy
fired very briskly from the town and shipping.

The 17th, a great fire continued from the town and shipping; we resolved to
extend the parallel from the right to the left. The fleet returned.

The 18th, all last night the enemy fired musketry from the covert way, and
tried to throw shells into the camp.

The 19th, I relieved the trenches by battalions, the 14 battalions forming 3
brigades; a smart fire from the covert way, the batteries on the left fired
against the bastion Dauphine with great success.

The 21st, one of the ships in the harbor, that had some powder blown up in
her, made a great explosion, and set the ship on fire, which soon caught the
sails of two more; they burned very fast, and we kept firing on them the whole
time, to try to hinder the boats and people from the town to get to their
assistance; the Of 74 guns.
Entreprennant, Capricieux*, and Superb* Of 64 guns each
, were the three burned ships; the Prudent and Bienfaisant remained.

The 22d, two batteries on the right opened with thirteen 24 pounders, and
another of 7 mortars, and fired with great success; the enemy fired very well
from the town for some time, and threw their shells into our works. Our shells
put the citadel in flames. I ordered Col. Williamson to confine his fire as
much as he could to the defenses of the place, that we might not destroy the
houses. A Lt. of the Royal Americans, going his rounds on an anvanced post,
lost his way, and was taken prisoner near Cape Noir. A battery was begun on the
left for four 24 pounders.

23d, the cohorns were used at night, and the French mortars sent to throw
stones from the trenches. The enemy fired all sorts of old iron, and any stuff
they could pick up. Col. Bastide was out today for the first time since he
received the contusion. Our batteries fired with great success. This night the
shells set fire to the barracks, and they burnt with great violence.

On the 24th, the fire was very brisk on our side, and the enemy's decreased.
The Admiral gave me 400 seamen to help to work at the batteries, etc. and 200
miners added to a corpse of 100 already established, that we might make quick
work of it, and they were immediately employed. The 4 gun battery opened, and
another of 5 erecting. One of the men of war in the harbor, the Bienfaisant,
fired at our trenches at high water, and the Citadel and Bafiion Dauphine fired
against the 4 gun battery; but our men firing small arms into the embrazures,
beat the enemy off their guns.

The 25th, the batteries fired with great success. The Admiral sent me word, he
intended to send in boats with 600 men, to take or destroy the Prudent and the
Bienfaisant in the harbor. I ordered all the batteries at night to fire into
the works as much as possible, to keep the enemy's attention to the land. The
miners and workmen went on very well with their approaches to the covered way,
though they had a continued and very smart fire from it, and grape shot, and
all sorts of old iron from the guns of the ramparts. We continued our fire
without ceasing, and a Ricochet: The boats got to the ships at one in the
morning, and took them both: they were obliged to burn the Prudent as she was
aground, and they towed off the Bienfaisant to the N. E. harbor.

The 26th, the Admiral came on shore, and told me he proposed sending 6 ships
into the harbor the next day. Just at this time I received a letter from the
governor, offering to capitulate, and the articles were agreed upon.

Articles of capitulation between their excellencies Adm. Boscawen and Major
General Amherst; and his excellency the Chevalier Draco^, governor of the
island of Cape Breton, of Louisbourg, the island of St. John, and their
appurtenances.
I. The garrison of Louisbourg shall be prisoners of war, and shall be carried
to England in the ships of his Britannic Majesty.

II. All the artillery, ammunition, provisions, as well as the arms of any kind
whatsoever, which are at present in the town of Louisbourg, the islands of Cape
Breton and St. John, and their appurtenances, shall be delivered without the
least damage, to such commissaries as shall be appointed to receive them, for
the use of his Britannick Majesty.

III. The governor shall give his orders that the troops which are in the
island of St. John and its appurtenances, shall go on board such ship of war,
as the Admiral shall send to receive them.

IV. The gate, called Port Dauphine, shall be given up to the troops of his
Britannick Majesty, tomorrow at eight o'clock in the morning, and the
garrison, including all those that carried arms, drawn up at noon, on the
Esplanade, where they shall lay down their arms, colors, implements, and
ornaments of war. And the garrison shall go on board, in order to be carried to
England in a convenient time,

V. The same care shall be taken of the sick and wounded that are in the
hospitals, as of those belonging to his Britannick Majesty.

VI. The merchants and their clerks, that have not carried arm^ shall be sent
to France, in such manner as the Admiral shall think proper.

Louisbourgh, 26th July, 1758. (Signed) Le Chevalier de DRUCOUR.

A Description of the Town and Harbor of Louisbourg, with References pointing
out the approaches of his Majesty's Forces.
A. The Town of Louisbourgh. B. The citadel C. A. lake, where the fishing-barks
winter. D. Stages for drying fish. E. A. battery of 20 guns, erected since
1748. F. The Dauphin battery of 30 guns, which defends the West-Gate, being
that which was first delivered to the English. G. The Island-battery of 40
guns, silenced the 24th of June, by the Light-house battery at I, under the
direction of Major General Wolf. H. A small battery of 8 guns. I. The
Light-house battery taken by Major Genesis Wolf, June 12th, from whence the ships
in the harbor were destroyed, at X. K. A battery of 15 guns, used for the
destruction of the shipping. L. The grand battery of 40 guns destroyed by the
French the 12th, when all the out parties were ordered into the works of the
town. M. A battery of 15 guns, destroyed the same time. N. Houses inhabited by
fishermen. O. A lake. P. Rivers, from whence the inhabitants have their fresh
water. Q. A pond, which defends part of the works, and makes this part very
difficult of access. R. The grand beach. S. Rocks under water. T. The Careening
place defended from all winds. V. The green hill, from whence the town was
annoyed by a redoubt cast up the 21st of June, under the direction of Col.
Bastide. W. The place where the enemy sunk 4 ships on the 29th, viz. the
Apollo, a two-deck'd ship, la Fidelle of 36 guns, le Chevre and la Biche, of 16
guns each. X. The station of the French men of war that were destroyed from the
Light-house and other batteries, erected for that service. Y. The place where
the Prudent was set on fire, by the boats from the fleet, June 25th. Z. The
north east harbor, to which place the Bienfaisant ship of war was towed by the
boats of the fleet from Y. Aa. Capt. Sutherland's post that was attacked before
Day, on the 15th of July, who made a gallant defense, and cleared himself of
the enemy, without any assistance, the reinforcement coming too late. Bb. Where
the block-house was erected, the 22d of June, near Miray Miray, a lake some way
in land from Louisbourg harbor, lying between the town and the North-east
harbor: here Mons. de Boisbere had on the other side of that lake 302 men,
with boats to pass over.
road, to secure the communication to the North East harbor and Light-house.
Cc. Cape Noir Bastion, where the enemy made a sally of their picquets the 9th
of July, supported by 600 chosen men; by them Ld. Dundonald was unfortunately
surprised. He was posted on the right of the Green-hill, with a command of
Forbes's grenadiers. On this occasion Bragg's and Whitemore's grenadiers
behaved with uncommon intrepidity, (they were detached by Major Murray) and
repulsed the French, who in this expedition lost some able Officers, with many
soldiers. It was after this affair the enemy sent a flag of truce to bury the
dead.
A PLAN of the HARBOR and TOWN of LOUISBOURG in the ISLAND of CAPE BRETON
Drawn on the Spot.
map of Louisbourg

Extract of a Letter from Admiral Boscawen, to the Righ Hon. Mr. Secretary
Pit, dated Namur, Gabreuse Bay, 28th of July, 1758.
I Will not trouble you with a particular detail of the landing and siege, but
cannot help mentioning a particular gallant action in the night between the
25th and 26th instant: The boats of the squadron were in two divisions,
detached under the command of Capt. Laforey and Balfour, to endeavor either to
take or burn the Prudent of 74 guns, and Bienfaisant of 64, the only remaining
French ships in the harbor; in which they succeeded so well, as to burn the
former, she being a ground, and take the latter, and tow her into the N. E.
harbor, notwithstanding they were exposed to the fire of the cannon and
musquetry of the Island battery, point Rochefort, and the Town, being favored
with a dark right. Our loss was inconsiderable, 7 men killed, and 9 wounded.

I have given the command of the Bienfaisant to Capt. Balfour, and the Echo, a
frigate, to Capt. Laforey; Mr. Affleck and Mr. Bickerton, Lieuts. who boarded
the Bienfaisant, succeeded those gentlemen in the Aetna fireship and Hunter
sloop.

I have only farther to assure his Majesty, that all his troops and officers,
both sea and land, have supported the fatigue of this siege, with great
firmness and alacrity.

The plan of our operations in America were, however, by no means confined
solely to this object, important as it was. Two other attempts were proposed:
the first attempt was with a great force to drive the French from Ticonderoga
and Crown Point; in which, if we could succeed, the enemy would lose those
posts from which they were in the best condition to molest our colonies, and by
losing them, would lay open an easy road into the very heart of their
settlements in Canada. The second attempt was to be made with a considerable,
though an interior force, from Pensylvania against Fort du Quesne: the success
of this attempt would establish us in the possession of the Ohio, ( See the map
of America at the latter end) and break off the connection between Canada and
Louisiana.

Genesis Abercrombie, commander in chief of our forces in America, conducted the
first of those expeditions. He embarked upon Lake George with near 16,000
troops, regulars and provincials, and a numerous artillery on the 5th of July;
and after a prosperous navigation, arrived the next day at the place where it
had been proposed to make the landing. They landed without opposition. The
enemies advanced guards fled at their appearance. The English army proceeded in
four columns to Ticonderoga. As the country through which their march lay was
difficult and woody, and the guides which conducted the march to this unknown
country, were extremely unskilful, the troops were bewildered, the columns
broke and fell in upon one another. Whilst they marched on in this alarming
disorder, the advanced guard of the French, who had lately fled before them,
was bewildered in the same manner; and in the same disorder fell in with our
forces. A skirmish ensued, in which this party was quickly defeated with the
loss of near 300 killed, and 148 prisoners. The loss on the English side was
inconsiderable in numbers; but great in consequence. Lord How was killed. This
gallant man, from the moment he landed in America, had wisely conformed and
made his regiment conform to the kind of service which the country required. He
did not suffer any under him to encumber themselves with superfluous baggage;
he himself set the example, and fared like a common soldier. The first to
encounter danger, to endure hunger, to support fatigue; rigid in his
discipline, but easy in his manners, his officers and soldiers readily obeyed
the commander, because they loved the man; and now at the moment when such
abilities, and such an example were the most wanted, was fatally lost, a life
which was long enough for his honor but not for his country. It adds indeed to
the glory of such a death, and to the consolation of his country, that we still
possess the heir of his titles, his fortunes and his virtues, whilst we tremble
to see the same virtues exposing themselves to the same dangers. Soon after the
news of Lord Howe's death arrived, the following advertisement appeared in the
public papers; an application worthy of a Roman matron, in the virtuous times
of the republic, and which could not fail of success, where the least spark of
virtue existed.

To the Gentlemen, Clergy, Freeholders, and Burgesses, of the Town and Country
of the Town of Nottingham.
As Lord How is now absent upon the public service, and Lieut. Col. How is
with his regiment at Louisbourg, it rests upon me to beg the favor of your
votes and interest, that Lieut. Col. How may supply the place of his late
brother, as your representative in parliament.

Permit me therefore to implore the protection of every one of you, as the
mother of him, whose life has been lost in the service of his country.

Albemarle Street, Sept. 14, 1758. CHARLOTTE HOW.





Excepting this loss, the army had hitherto proceeded successfully. In a little
time they appeared before Ticonderoga. This is a very important post, and as
strongly secured.

The General caused the ground to be reconnoitred; and the engineer made so
favorable a report of the weakness of the entrenchment, that it appeared
practicable to force it by musquetry alone. A fatal resolution was taken, in
consequence of this report, not to wait the arrival of the artillery, which on
account of the badness of the ground, could not be easily brought up, but to
attack the enemy without loss of time. They were confirmed in this precipitate
resolution, by a rumor that a body of 3000 men were on their march to join the
French at Ticonderoga, and very shortly expected to arrive.

When the attack began, the difficulty of the ground, and the strength of the
enemies lines which had been so little foreseen, was but too severely felt.
Although the troops behaved with the utmost spirit and gallantry, they suffered
so terribly in their approaches, and made so little impression on the
entrenchment, that the General seeing their reiterated and obstinate efforts
fail of success, being upwards of four hours exposed to a most terrible fire,
thought it necessary to order a retreat, to save the remains of the army. Near
2000 of our men were killed, wounded and taken prisoners; the number of the
taken being very inconsiderable. This precipitate attack, was followed by a
retreat as precipitate; insomuch that our army gained their former camp to the
southward of Lake George,

General Abercrombie's Account of his Expedition against Ticonderoga.
Camp at Lake George, July 12, 1758.
THE embarkation of the artillery, stores and provisions being completed on
the evening of the 4th instant; next morning at break of day the tents were
struck, and all the troops, amounting to 6367 regulars, officers, light
infantry, and rangers included, and 9024 provincials, including officers and
batteau men, embarked in about 900 ba^^eaux, and 135 whale boats, the artillery
to cover our landing, being mounted on rafts.

At five in the evening, reached Sabbath Day Points (25 miles down the Lake)
where we halted till ten, then got under way again, and proceeded to the
landing place (a cove leading to the French advanced guard) which we reached
early next morning the 6th.

Upon our arrival, sent out a reconnoitring party; and having met with no
opposition, landed the troops, formed them in four columns, regulars in the
center, and provincials on the flanks, and marched toward the enemy's advanced
guard, composed of one battalion, posted on a logged camp, which, upon our
approach they deserted, first setting fire to their tents, and destroying every
thing they could; but as their retreat was very precipitate, they left several
things behind, which they had not time either to burn or carry off. In this
camp we likewise found one prisoner and a dead man.

The army in the foregoing order continued their march through the wood on the
west side, with a design to invest Ticonderoga, but the wood being very thick,
impassable with any regularity to such a body of men, and the guides unskilful,
the troops were bewildered, and the columns broke, falling in one upon another.

Lord How, at the head of the right center colum^, supported by the light
infantry, being advanced, fell in with a French party, supposed to consist of
about 400 regulars, and a few Indians, who had likewise lost themselves in the
retreat from the advanced guard; of these our flankers killed a great many, and
took 148 prisoners, among whom were five officers and three cadets.

But this small success cost us very dear, not as to the loss, of numbers, for
we had only two officers killed, but as to consequence, his lordship being the
first man that fell in this skirmish; and as he was, very deservedly,
universally beloved and respected throughout the whole army, it is easy to
conceive the grief and consternation his untimely fall occasioned; for my part,
I cannot help owning that I felt it most heavily, and lament him as sincerely.

The 7th, the troops being greatly fatigued, by having been one whole night on
the water, the following day constantly on foot, and the next day under arms,
added to their being in want of provision, having dropped what they had brought
with them, in order to lighten themselves, it was thought advisable to return
to the landing place, which we accordingly did about eight that morning.

About eleven in the forenoon, sent off Lieut. Col. Bradstreet, with the 44th
regiment, six companies of the first battalion of the royal Americans, the
batteau men, and a body of rangers and provincials, to take possession of the
Saw-mill, within two miles of Ticonderoga A fort built about two years ago on
the narrow passage or communication between Lake George and Champlain. It has
all the advantages that nature or art can give it, being defended on three
sides by water, which is surrounded by rocks, and o^ the half of the fourth
side by a swamp, and where h^^ fa^ls, there the French had erected an
entrenchment and breast wo^t about 9 feet high. It is in the way to Crown
Point, and must be taken by our forces before they can march thither. (See the
Plate.)
, which he soon effected: as the enemy who were posted there, after destroying
the mill and breaking down their bridge, had retired some time before.

Lieut. Col. Bradstreet having laid another bridge a cross, and having sent me
notice of his being in possession of that ground, I accordingly marched thither
with the troops, and we took up our quarters there that night.

The prisoners we had taken being unanimous in their reports, that the French
had eight battalions, some Canadians and colony troops, in all about 6000,
encamped before their fort, who were intrenching themselves, and throwing up a
breast-work, and that they expected a reinforcement of 3000 Canadians, besides
Indians, who had been detached under the command of Mons. de Levy, to make a
diversion on the side of the Mohawk river; but upon intelligence of our
preparations and near approach, had been repeatedly recalled, and was hourly
expected; it was thought most advisable to lose no time in making the attack;
wherefore early in the morning of the 8th, I sent Mr. Clerk, the engineer,
across the river on the opposite side of the fort, in order to reconnoitre the
enemy's intrenchments.

Upon his return, and favorable report of the practicability of carrying those
works, if attacked before they were finished, it was agreed to storm them that
very day: Accordingly the rangers, light infantry, and the right wing of
Provincials, were ordered immediately to march and post themselves in a line,
out of cannon shot of the intrenchments; the right extending to Lake George,
and the left to Lake Champlain, in order that the regular troops, destined for
the attack of the intrenchments, might form on their rear.

The Piquets were to begin the attack, sustained by the grenadiers, and by the
battalions: the whole were ordered to march up briskly, rush upon the enemy's
fire, and not give theirs, until they were within the enemy's breast-work.

After these orders issued, the whole army, except what had been left at the
landing-place to cover and guard the batteaux and whale boats, and a Provincial
regiment at the Saw-mill, were put in motion, and advanced to Ticonderoga,
where they unfortunately found the intrenchments, not only much stronger than
had been represented, and the breast-work at least eight or nine feet high; but
likewise the ground before it covered with felled trees, the branches pointed
outward, which so fatigued and retarded the advancing of the troops, that
notwithstanding all their intrepidity and bravery, which I cannot too much
commend, we sustained so considerable a loss, without any prospect of better
success, that it was no longer prudent to remain before it; and it was
therefore judged necessary, for the preservation of the remainder of so many
brave men, to prevent a total defeat, that we should make the best retreat
possible: Accordingly, after several repeated attacks, which lasted upwards of
four hours, under the most disadvantageous circumstances, and with the loss of
464 regulars k^lled, 29 missing, 1117 wounded; and 87 Provincials killed, 8
m^ssing, and 239 wounded, officers of both included, I retired to the camp we
occupied the night before, with the broken remains of several corpse, sending
away all the wounded to the bat^eaux, about three miles distance; and early the
next morning we arrived there ourselves, embarked, and reached this place the
evening of the 9th. Immediately after my return here, I sent the wounded
officers and men that could be moved, to Fort Edward and Albany.

To repair the misfortune of this bloody defeat, General Abercrombie detached
Col. Bradstreet with about 3000 provincials against Fort Frontenac. The Colonel
with great prudence and vigor, surmounted great difficulties, brought his army
to Oswego, where he embarked on the Lake Ontario, and arrived at Frontenac the
25th of August. This fort stands at the communication of Lake Ontario with the
river St. Lawrence, the entrance into which river it in some manner commands.
However, for a post of such moment, it was poorly fortified, and poorly
garrisoned. It was taken without the loss of a man on our side,

Colonel Bradstreet's Letter to General Amherst, on the Reduction of Fort
Frontenac.
Oswego, Aug. 31, 1758.
I Landed with the troops within a mile of fort Frontenac without opposition,
the 25th. The garrison surrendered prisoners of war the 27th, between 7 and 8
in the morning -- It was a square fort of 100 yards the exterior side, and had
in it 110 men, some women, children, and Indians, 60 pieces of cannon, (half of
which were mounted) sixteen small mortars, with an immense quantity of
provisions and goods, to be sent to the troops gone to oppose Brig. Genesis
Forbes, their western garrisons, Indians, and to support the army under the
command of M. Levy, on his intended enterprise against the Mohawk river, valued
by the French at 800,000 livres. -- We have likewise taken 9 vessels from 8 to
18 guns, which are all they have upon the lake, two of which I have brought
here; one richly laden; and the rest and the provisions I have burnt and
destroyed, together with the fort, artillery, stores, etc. agreeable to your
excellency's instructions, should I succeed. The garrison made no scruple of
saying, that their troops to the southward and western garrisons will suffer
greatly, if not entirely starve, for want of the provisions and vessels we have
destroyed, as they have not any left to bring them home from Niagara. -- The
terms on which the garrison surrendered were prisoners of war, until exchanged
for equal numbers and rank.


It is very possible, that the success of Col. Bradstreet greatly facilitated
that of the expedition under Genesis Forbes. The General had had a very tedious
and troublesome march, through a country almost impassable, very little known,
and continually harassed on his route by the enemies Indians. An advanced guard
of this army, consisting of about 800 men under Major Grant, had most
unaccountably advanced to Fort du Quesne, with a design as it should seem of
reducing the place by a coup de main; but the garrison suddenly sallying out
and attacking them warmly on all sides, killed and made prisoners many of this
party, and dispersed the rest. This was, however, their last success; for the
body of the army being conducted with greater skill and circumspection, baffled
all their attempts; so that the French being convinced by several skirmishes
that all their efforts to surprise the troops, or interrupt their communication
were to no purpose, and being conscious that their fort was not tenable against
a regular attack, they wisely abandoned the place after destroying their works;
masters in the third year after the commencement of hostilities, of that
fortress, the contention for which had kindled up the flames of so general and
destructive a war. This place with its masters has changed its name, and is
called Pittsburg, with a propriety which does not need to be pointed out. (d)

(d) Brigadier General Forbes's Letter on his taking of Fort du Quesne.
"I Have the pleasure of acquainting you with the singal success of his
majesty's arms over all his enemies on the Ohio, by having obliged them to
burn, and abandon their Fort du Quesne, which they effected upon the 24th inst.
and of which I took possession with my light troops the same evening, and with
my little army the next day. -- The enemy made their escape down the river,
part in boats, and part by land, to their forts and settlements upon the
Missisippi, having been abandoned, or, at least, not seconded, by their friends
the Indians, whom we had previously engaged to act a neutral part, after
thoroughly convincing them, in several skirmishes, that all their attempts upon
our advanced posts, in order to cut of our communication, were vain, and to no
purpose; so they now seem all willing, and well disposed to embrace his
majesty's most gracious protection.

Give me leave, therefore, to congratulate you upon this important event, of
having expelled the French from Fort du Quesne, and this prodigious tract of
fine rich country; and of having, in a manner, reconciled the various tribes,
and nations of Indians, inhabiting it, to his majesty's government.

So far I had wrote you the 26th, but being seized with an inflammation in my
stomach, and liver, the sharpest and most severe of all distempers, I could
proceed no farther; and, as I have a thousand things to say, have ordered Major
Halkett down the country, in order to explain the motives upon which I
proceeded, and the various, and almost insurmountable difficulties I had to
grapple with.

I shall leave this as soon as I am able to stand; but God knows when, or if
ever I reach Philadelphia.

I expect the heads of all the Indians in here to morrow, when I hope very soon
to finish with them.


Notwithstanding the unhappy affair at Ticonderoga, the campaign of 1758 in
America was very advantageous, and very honorable to the English interest.
Louisbourg, St. John's, Frontenac, and du Quesne reduced, remove from our
colonies all terror of the Indian incursions, draw from the French those useful
allies, free our frontiers from the yoke of their enemies forts, make their
supplies difficult, their communications precarious, and all their defensive or
offensive operations uneffective; whilst their country uncovered of its
principal bulwarks, lies open to the heart, and affords the most pleasing
prospects of success to the vigorous measures which we may be assured will be
taken in the next campaign. Genesis Amherst is now commander.

It would be doing great injustice to the spirit and conduct of the ministry,
not to observe, that they omitted to distress the enemy in no part, and that
their plans of operation were as extensive as they were vigorous.

Two ships of the line with some frigates, were sent early in the spring to the
coast of Africa, taken from the enemy one of the most valuable branches of
their commerce, and one of the most capable of abundant improvement.

(e) Commodore Keppel's Letter to Mr. Secretary Pit, on his taking the Island
of Goree.
SIR,
I Arrived here with the squadron under my command the 28th of December past in
the evening; and the next morning, agreeable to his majesty's instructions, I
attacked with the ships, the fort and batteries on the island of Goree, which
were soon reduced to ask to capitulate; and the Governor's demands were, to be
allowed to march the French troops out of the garrison with the honors of war.
His terms I absolutely rejected and began a fresh attack; it was, however, but
of a very short duration, when the island, forts, garrison, etc. surrendered at
discretion to his majesty's squadron.

Lieut. Col. Worge had his troops embarked in the flat-bottomed boats, in good
order and readiness, at a proper distance, with the transports, to attempt a
descent, when it should be found practicable or requisite.

Two days after the surrender of the island, I ordered it to be delivered up,
with the cannon, artillery, stores, and provisions, etc. to the officer and
troops Lieutenant Colonel Worge thought fit to garrison the place with; and the
colonel is taking all imaginable pains to settle and regulate the garrison in
the best manner, and as fast as things will admit of.

The enclosed, Sir, is the state of the island, with the artillery, ammunition,
and provisions, found in the place at its surrender.

French, made prisoners of war, 300,

Blacks, in arms, a great number; but I am not well enough informed as yet to
say precisely.

The loss the enemy sustained, as to men, is so very differently stated to me
by those that have been asked, that I must defer saying the number till another
opportunity.

Iron ordnance of different boxes, 93; one brass 12-pounder; iron swivels
mounted on carriages, 11; brass mortars mounted on beds, two of 13 inches;
ditto, one of 10 inches; iron, one of 10 inches. In the magazine, powder, 100
barrels. Provisions of all species for 400 men for four months.

Explanation of the Plan of the Island of Goree.
A. The negroe village. B. The company's gardens, etc. C. The slavery. D. The
negroes fountain. E. The company's fountain. F. The gov^rnor's fountain. G. The
hospital. H. The chapel. I. The officers house unfinished. K. Hutts for
laborers. L. The barracks for carpenters. M. The apartment for bombardiers. N.
Officers, storehouses, and barracks for soldiers. O. The pharmacy and
engineer's laboratory. P. The armourer's apartment and forge. Q The governor's
apartment and garden, etc. R. A cistern. R. R. A cistern unfinished. S. A
powder magazine. T. Shades for water casks, W. The landing beach, and entry
into the parade. V. The court of the fort of St. Francis. X. The shambles. Y.
The burying place. Z. Ditto for the negroes. and. A rain water cistern.
map of the Isle of Goree (Senegal)

Explanation of the Batteries.
1. The grand battery 9 guns. 2. The salute battery (small) 10 guns. 3. St.
Philip's battery 5 guns. 4. St. Peter's battery 5 guns. 5. Citadel of St.
Michael, en barbet 6 guns. 6. North point battery 9 guns. 1 split. 7. Mortar
battery 8 guns. 8. West point battery 5 guns. 9. A battery unfinished 3 guns.
10. Negroe batteries 10 guns. 11 Four half moon batteries en barbet on the
hill. 13 guns. 12. Two flanking batteries for the bay 4 guns. 13. Three passage
batteries 7 guns. 14. Three brass one iron mortars 4 mortars 1 damag. 15. On
St. Francis fort 12 guns. 1 split. Total 110 pieces.
* The river Senga, or Senegal, is in one of those channels of the river Niger,
by which it is supposed to discharge its waters into the Atlantic ocean: The
river Niger, according to the best maps, rises in the east of Africa; and after
a course of 300 miles, nearly due west, divides into three branches, the most
northerly of which is the Senegal, as above; the middle is the Gambia, or
Gambra; and the most southern, Rio Grande. Senegal empties itself into the
Atlantic ocean in 16 north lat. The entrance of it is guarded by several forts,
the principal of which is Fort Lewis, built on an island of the same name. It
is a quadrangular fort, with two bastions, and of no inconsiderable strength.
At the mouth of the river is a bar; the best season for passing it, is from
March to August, or September, or rather from April to July, because the tides
are then highest. The English had formerly settlements here, out of which they
were driven by the French, who have engrossed the whole trade from Cape Blanco
to the river Gambia, which is near 500 miles. The Dutch were the first who
settled Senegal, and built two forts. The French made themselves masters of
them in 1678. In 1692 the English seized them; but next year the French retook
them, and have kept them ever since. They built Fort Lewis in 1692, and have
beyond it a multitude of other settlements, extending 200 leagues up the river.
The principal commodities which the French import from this settlement are,
that valuable article gum senega, hides, beeswax, elephants teeth, cotton,
gold dust, negroe slaves, ostrich feathers, ambergris, indigo, and civet.

At present we are obliged to buy all our gum senega of the Dutch, who purchase
it from the French; and they set what price they please on it. But as the trade
to Africa is now open, by this important acquisition, the price of this
valuable drug, which is so much used in several of our manufactures, will be
much reduced.

From the East Indies we have this year heard nothing remarkable. It does not
seem that the French, notwithstanding the great struggle they made to send out
a strong armament under Genesis Lally, have been in a condition to enterprise any
thing. It is said, and probably with good foundation, that the greatest part of
that force was dwindled away with sickness during the voyage. Our naval force
was exerted with spirit and effect in the Mediterranean. The French found that
the possession of Minorca could not drive us from the dominion of the
Mediterranean, where Admiral Osborn gave the enemies maritime strength such
blows, as they must long feel, and which merited him the greatest of all
honors, to be joined with the conquerors of Louisbourg, in the thanks of the
representative body of their country.

The coming year seems big with great events. In Germany the affairs of the
rival powers of Prussia and Austria, appear to be more nearly balanced than at
any time since the beginning of the war. This force is as great as ever, and
their animosity is no way lessened. Great steps are taken to assemble powerful
armies on the Rhine; whilst Great Britain has sent out two considerable
armaments, one to the West Indies, the other to Africa; the success of which
must go a great way toward determining the issue of the war. Other great
preparations are also making on the part of Great Britain. In the mean time,
the Dutch enraged at the captures of their ships, make complaints, and threaten
armaments. The death of the Princess of Orange, which happened at a most
critical juncture, adds more perplexity to affairs in that quarter. If we look
to the southward, the clouds seem gathering there also. The imminent death of
the King of Spain, will be an event fruitful of troubles. In this affair the
King of Sardinia, the house of Austria, and the house of Bourbon, will find
themselves concerned; to say nothing of the maritime powers. In a word, the
flame of war threatens to spread in every part of Europe.

THE ANNUAL REGISTER: OR HISTORY OF THE WAR. For the YEAR 1759.
CHAP. I.
The inclinations of the Powers at war at the closing the last campaign. The
King of Spain's death apprehended. Condition of the King of Prussia, Empress
Queen, Russia, Sweden, Holland, France, and England.

WHOEVER reflects upon the conclusion of the several campaigns since the year
1755, will easily perceive that at the end of the last, the fortune of the
several powers at war seemed more nearly upon a balance, than it had been at
the close of any of the former. The campaign was rather less bloody, than that
which immediately preceeded it; and it was not concluded with any action of
such an eclat, as could greatly raise, or depress the hopes of any of the
contending parties. All parties became more cautious; because it became every
day more evident, that the fortune of war was not to be decided by any single
stroke, however considerable. The prize was reserved for the player of the
skilful game; for the most attentive patience: for the greatest depth of
resources. An equality of this kind seemed at last to promise Europe some
repose. All sides might now give and receive honorable and equitable terms;
and peace might be settled on that footing, on which it has been usually made,
for some time past, in our part of the world. But the great designs entertained
by each power; revenge imbittered by the blows which all had felt in their
turns, the consideration of the vast expenses that fell upon all, and which a
peace at that time would have made fruitless; even the hopes arising from the
equivocal appearances of the last campaign, estranged every court from the
disposition to peace. Insomuch that there were no terms directly offered by any
of the belligerent power; nor did any of the neutral interpose their mediation.
Besides these, another cause operated powerfully; a great event was hourly
expected about this time; an event which threatened to involve the Southern
parts of Europe in the calamities of that war, that had so long wasted the
Northern; and which, whenever it should take place, threatened to render the
political system infinitely more intricate, and probably to give the war quite
a new turn.

The late King of Spain, by the force of a conjugal affection, rarely seen in
that dignity, since the death of his Queen had been given up to a melancholy,
which preyed upon his health, and affected his understanding. His death, or
incapacity, appeared inevitable within a short time. The King of Naples, Don
Carloss, was next in the order of succession. In the treaty of Aix la Chapelle,
it had been agreed, that the dutchies of Parma, Placentia and Guastalla, should
be restored to the house of Austria, in case Don Carlos should ever come to the
crown of Spain. These countries were at the end of that war, in the hands of
the Empress Queen, or her allies. Her imperial Majesty had set up a claim to
the reversion of these dutchies, on the extinction of issue male in the house
of Farnese. But the ambition of the Queen of Spain to make all her children
Sovereigns, put powerful bars in her way to it. This ambition was one of the
causes which made the last so general a war. The peace of Aix la Chapelle,
which put a period to that war, after settling these contested dutchies as an
establishment for Don Philip, second son to the King of Spain, provided, that
whenever the event, which we have mentioned above, should take place, that is
to say, the accession of Don Carlos to the crown of Spain, then the Kingdom of
Naples and Sicily should pass to the infant Don Philip, and the dutchies which
formed his establishment should refer to the house of Austria.

The King of Naples, not without reason, looked upon this article of the treaty
of Aix la Chapelle, as injurious to his rights; accordingly he never acceded to
it. No method in this case could be seen, which might prevent matters from
coming to extremities, except the situation of the Empress, engaged as she was
with a powerful adversary, who kept her forces strained to the utmost pitch.
She was in no condition to engage in a new war, however interesting the object
might be. Her ally France, who so ineffectually assisted her in Germany, could
not probably assist her with more effect in Italy; she therefore seemed to have
no other part left, than to acquiesce for the present, and wait in silence a
more favorable opportunity to assert her claims. The event of the King of
Spain's death has since happened. It has produced none of these immediate
effects which were apprehended; and this probably proceeded from the cause
which we have just now hinted. A dead calm at present broods over Italy. But in
this tranquillity and silence there are materials gathering, which may in no
very distant period burst in a terrible tempest over that delightful country.
They are very nearly the same that produced the last troubles there, and may
not only revive them, but spread the horrors of war once more over all Europe.

Such were the inclinations of the powers at war at the opening of this year;
their strength seemed also very entire; in particular, the resources of the
King of Prussia appeared astonishing, after the great blows he had suffered;
and after the advantages he had gained, but gained at so high a price. He was
still able to show himself the father and benefactor, as well as the protector
of his people. In the midst of the devouring waste of such an expensive war,
from the funds of his oecomony he was enabled to remit the taxes to those parts
of his dominions, which had suffered from the Russian barbarity; he even
advanced money to those which had suffered the most considerably.

To take a nearer view of his situation, we must observe, that the whole
kingdom of Prussia still remained in the hands of the Muscovites. The duchy of
Cleves, together with his other possessions on the Rhine, could yield him
nothing; they were held by the French; but in these respects, his situation was
not worse than it had been, almost from the beginning of the war. He had to
balance these losses, the rich country of Saxony, which he had twice in one
campaign wrested from the hands of the Austrians. Add to this, the renewal of
the subsidy treaty with Great Britain, on the advantageous terms of the former
year. These were undoubtedly great supports; and the King seemed as entire in
power, and more advanced in reputation than ever.

But to a more critical examination, things had an aspect not quite so
favorable. This appearance was rather specious than entirely solid; and whilst
all without looked full and fair, within there was a decay of substance, and an
hollowness that rung at the slightest touch. That incomparable body of troops,
which at the beginning of the war had given him so great a superiority, no
longer existed in the same persons. If his troops derived advantages from a
long series of active service, these advantages were equally on the side of the
enemy. His army had known what it is to be beaten; and it is no wonder, if a
sort of weariness and despair began to creep upon them, after such an infinite
train of unrewarded fatigues, when they saw that so many wonderful exploits had
not yet ended the war in their favor. Many of his best generals had been
killed in battle, or died, or had retired, or were disgraced. The hoards which
he had amassed before the war, by this time must have been entirely spent; his
dominions must have been greatly exhausted, both of men and money. Saxony could
no longer yield such supplies as formerly. The indigence of the subdued
inhabitants, set bounds to the rapacity of the conqueror. The subsidy of Great
Britain did a great deal; but it could not supply the deficiencies on this, and
on every other side. These circumstances, probably, made the King of Prussia
more cautious and dilatory than usual.

The court of Vienna had as great burdens to sustain as the King of Prussia,
and she had suffered much greater blows. That power has a strength, somewhat
unaccountable and peculiar to herself. More deficient in pecuniary funds, than
any other great power in Europe, she is better able to subsist, and to do
considerable things without them. For by a long habit, the whole state is
formed to its necessities; and the subject is more ready to supply free
quarter, and to endure military license than any other. The country is
abundantly fruitful in all its parts. And whilst the war is carried on near
home, an arbitrary government, operating on so extensive an object, can hardly
fail of such resources, as must serve an Austrian army; which is still paid in
a great measure, as Tacitus describes the troops of the ancient Germans to have
been; they have a plentiful table in lieu of pay. Nam epulae, et quanquam
incompti, largi tamen apparatus pro stipendio cedunt. Tacit. de moribus Germ..
14.


And indeed it must be owned, that there is no Sovereign, who is more highly
honored in his dominions, or obeyed with a greater mixture of love and
reverence, by all his subjects, than her Imperial Majesty. So that having a
very ample power, very willing obedience, a large territory and many men, not
sufficiently employed in the arts of peace, it perhaps may be guessed, in what
manner she has been able to supply her many and great losses, and to continue a
war, like the present, better than states more abundant in money. She is
besides, and this is a matter of no small consequence, supported by the
countenance, the authority, and the forces of the Empire. And she has for her
allies the first, and most formidable names in Europe. In the wars which this
power carried on in the last, and in this century, though usually not very
successful, she has always been the last to desire a peace; though frequently
slow in her operations, she makes amends by an extraordinary perseverance.

This slowness could not escape general observation, in the actions of the last
year. That the Austrians did not play with sufficient spirit, the great game
which was in their hands, after the battle of Hochkirchen, and the entry of the
Russians into the New March of Brandenburgh, seems hardly disputable. Perhaps
it was that the court of Vienna, by an error common to many courts, but
particularly so to this, and often fatal to it, interfered too much and too
minutely, in the operations of the campaign.

It is not impossible that the character of Marshal Daun himself, might have
had some share in this inactivity; a character almost in all things the direct
reverse of that of his Prussian Majesty. He saw that the King, active, resolute
and advantageous, wasted himself even by that activity and spirit, to which he
owed his most brilliant successes. Should the Austrians carry on the war in the
same spirit, they might suffer in the same manner, without being ever able to
equal, much less to exceed that great Monarch, in a style of action peculiarly
his own. Daun therefore by principle, seems to have kept his army from coming
to action, in order to oppose a strength entire, and recruited by a long rest,
to that of the King of Prussia, wasted by the efforts it was obliged to make
incessantly, and on every side. His design seemed to be, that the issue of the
war should rather arise from the general result and concurrence of all the
operations, gradually producing a solid though a slow advantage, than from the
effects of a bold, quick, and masterly stroke. In fact, the Austrians felt all
the benefits, and all the inconveniences which usually attend this sort of
conduct, a conduct which probably lost them Saxony in the last campaign, and
which has secured them the possession of what they now hold in that country.
The Austrians and Prussians watched the time and one another, and came very
late to action.

The court of Petersburg still adhered to its old system, in spite of the late
ill success of her arms, and all the efforts of the British minister, to
withdraw her from her alliance. If she had some loss of men, it was the least
loss she could feel: and she thought that whilst the war was carried on at the
expense of others, the reduction of so near, so dreaded, and so hated a rival
as the King of Prussia, and the opportunity of the forming her troops to
service, and perfecting her officers, were objects of consequence enough to
keep her closely attached to her first sentiments.

The Swedes preserved likewise the same connection; but they continued as
before, an inconsiderable, and inglorious part of the war.

Holland preserved her neutrality; but it was a neutrality little respected,
and indeed in itself little respectable. Divided in her councils, attentive
only to private interests, she disgusted the English, and neither pleased nor
served the French. For some of the subjects of that republic had carried on the
trade of France in their bottoms, which subjected them to frequent captures
from the English men of war and privateers. This prodoced loud complaints in
Holland, and warm remonstrances to the court of London. These complaints met
with little attention, being in many respects but indifferently founded. The
affair was drawn out in length, until the dispute was extinguished by the
destruction of its object; some of the French colonies were reduced, and the
trade in the others, grown too small and too hazardous to be continued longer
with any hope of advantage.

The affairs of France and England were partly connected with the general
system, and partly distinct and independent. France perceived that the strength
of the English, and the exertion of that strength, increased continually in
America; she knew from the natural inferiority of her colonies, and the feeble
state of her navy, that she could not in reason hope for great success in that
quarter; for which reason, although she sent a fleet under Mons. B^mpart into
the West Indies, and some men of war, with as many store and transport ships as
she could steal out of the river St. Lawrence, her great efforts were to be
made in Europe; she had two objects, the recovery of Hanover, and the invasion
of these islands; in either of which if she succeeded, there could be no doubt,
but that it would prove a sufficient balance for all that she had suffered, or
had to apprehend in any other part of the world.

With regard to the first object, though it was difficult to attain it, and
though if it should be attained, it did not promise to answer her purposes so
well as the latter, yet it was upon that she chiefly depended. Hitherto indeed
the success which France had in Germany, was not at all proportioned to the
prodigious efforts which she made; she began to find herself much exhausted.
The wants of the French obliged them to pay little respect to neutral, or even
to friendly powers; so that the esteem and assistance which they had in
Germany, diminished continually. They eat up the country, and seized on such
towns as were convenient to them, without any ceremony: yet freed from all
these restraints, their army had made very little progress; their generals had
not displayed any great abilities, and their army, in itself very badly
composed, was deficient in discipline, to a degree which is scarcely credible.
They kept neither guards nor posts, nor sentinels; a great part of their troops
wandered from the camp into the neighboring towns, and retu^ned drunk. Their
councils of war were held in a tumultuous and disorderly manner; and all their
designs were perfectly known in the camp of the allies, where a very different
picture was exhibited, with regard to regularity and caution.

The French troops have several essential defects in their constitution, which
prevent them from equalling those of Germany, and other nations. Several
regiments are in a manner hereditary in great families, who placed at their
first outset at a very high point of military rank, think it unnecessary to
attain the qualifications, which lead others to it step by step. As to the rest
of the officers, as their pay is small and their hopes little, few study the
art military, as a profession: they serve because it is the fashion to do so,
and that it is thought necessary to be a gentleman. Thus they dispatch their
business as a disagreeable task; and having little to lose in the service, it
is almost impossible to preserve a due subordination. The common m^n are little
more than abject vassals, and therefore want that high spirit which in their
gentry makes some amends for the want of knowledge and assiduity. And as they
are corrupted by the example of their superiors, so by their negligence they
are left without any restraint. The officers do not choose to incur the ill will
of their men, or to give themselves trouble, by exercising that wholesome
severity in which the health and vigor of military discipline consist.

The German common people are indeed in a still lower state of vassalage than
the French, and might therefore be supposed naturally, no better soldiers; but
their bodies are more robust and hardy; their treatment is severe and rigorous,
their subordination is most exact, which makes their discipline perfect; and
Germany is so habituated to war, that all the people may be said to be born
soldiers. These things give the Germans a great superiority over the French; a
superiority which was more visible in this, than in any former war.

These defects in their army were increased by the low state of their finances,
which caused their troops to be very ill paid. The French court made some
attempts to keep up their credit, by changing their former methods of raising
money. Mr. Silhoute was made comptroller of the finances, and the farmers
general were removed from their former employment of finding the supplies. New
methods were divised, which might stave off the entire ruin of their finances,
until their armies in Germany could strike some effectual blow, or their
project of an invasion, which quieted the minds of the people in some degree,
should be put in execution.

With regard to the latter project, France had formerly found that the bare
report of such a design had served many material purposes; but in England
things had since then, been greatly changed. The threats of an invasion
increased our internal strength, without raising any apprehensions; they in a
great measure executed the militia act, which hardly any thing else could have
put in execution; they increased the regular troops, both in their number and
their species. England for the first time saw light horse and light foot. There
reigned in both houses the most perfect and unprecedented union. Among the
great men there was no difference that could in the least affect the conduct of
the war. The dispute concerning the preference of the continental and the
marine system, was entirely silenced; because a system took place which
comprehended both, and operated in both as fully as the warmest advocates of
either could desire. Never did England keep a greater number of land forces on
foot, on the continent of Europe, in England, in America, when she turned all
her power to her land forces only. Never did she cover the seas with such
formidable fleets, when her navy alone engaged her attention. Such is the
effect when power and patriotism unite; when liberty and order kiss; and when a
nation sits with a happy security under the shade of abilities which she has
tried, and virtues in which she dares to confide.

CHAP. II.
The allied army moves. Successful skirmishes on the side of the allies. Battle
of Bergen. Prince Ferdinand retir^s to Windeken. Plan of the campaign. General
Wobersnow's expedition into Poland. Prince Henry's into Bohemia and Franconia.
General Macguire defeated. Bamberg pillaged. Prince Henry returns to Saxony.
Hesse abandoned by the allies.

THE seizing of Francfort in the last year, by a most flagrant violation of the
liberties of the Empire, had given the French and their allies the most
material advantage they had acquired in the campaign; for it secured to them
the course of the Maine, and the Rhine, and made it easy to them to receive
every kind of reinforcement and supply. It secured likewise that communication
between them, the Imperial, and the Austrian armies, and formed that chain,
from which they derived no small benefit of mutual succor and concurrence in
their operations. Much depended upon their being dislodged from that post; as
well with regard to the fortune of his Britannic Majesty's army, as to that of
the King of Prussia. Such a stroke must necessarily have the greatest influence
on the events of the whole ensuing campaign. Prince Ferdinand, sensible of
this, as soon as the season permitted him to enter upon action, drew his troops
out of their cantonments; and at the head of thirty thousand men, prepared to
dislodge them, before they could receive the supplies, of which they were in
daily expectation. The rest of his army, consisting of about ten or twelve
thousand men, were left to guard the electorate, and to watch the bishopric of
Munster. Some detachments of Hanoverians and Prussians had, in the latter end
of February, driven the Imperialists and Austrians from the posts, which they
occupied at Erfurth and Eisinach, and some places in the country of Hesse; this
drew a strong body of the enemy into that part, which pushed them back; but the
hereditary prince of Brunswick, who led the army of the allies through ways,
before deemed impassable to an army, defeated them in some severe skirmishes;
several places of importance were taken; several whole battalions were made
prisoners, with their officers. The French, alarmed at the vivacity of this
beginning, judged it but the prelude to something more decisive. Accordingly
the Duke of Broglio took an advantageous post, near Bergen, at a village
between Francfort and Hanau, which it was necessary the Allies should master,
before they could penetrate to his line. This place he had made his right, and
secured his flanks and center in such a manner, that the attack could only be
made at that village.

In this disposition was the French army when the Allies approached; they
formed themselves under an eminence, and began the attack on the village of
Bergen, between nine and ten in the morning with great intrepidity. They were
received with a very severe fire, which the enemy had prepared for them; they
made three attacks in the space of about two hours, and were every time
repulsed.

Prince Ferdinand now observed that the enemy still kept a good countenance in
their post, and that his own troops began to fall into some disorder. This able
general, who never risques his fortune on a single throw, began to think of a
retreat, whilst his loss was yet inconsiderable, and the disorder of his men
easily to be repaired. But a retreat in the face of a victorious enemy, was
hazardous; and the day was not yet above half spent. In this exigence he made
such movements, as strongly indicated a design of falling once more upon the
village, in the enemy's right, and of making at the same time a new attack upon
their left. These appearances were farther countenanced by a cannonode, on both
these posts, supported with an uncommon fury. The French deceived by these
maneuvers, kept close in their posts; they expected a new and a lively attack
every moment; they returned the cannonade as briskly as they could; and in this
posture things continued until night came on, when the prince made an easy
retreat, without disorder, or molestation, and halted at Windeken.

In this action the loss of the allies was about two thousand in every way:
that of the French was by no means less considerable. The allies indeed
suffered nothing in their reputation; their countenance through the whole
action having been excellent. Prince Ferdinand gained as much honor, and
displayed as much skill, as could have been obtained, or shown upon a more
fortunate occasion. The event however was, in its consequences, far from
indifferent; for the allies having missed this blow, the French still kept
Francfort, and all advantages which they drew from that situation; they had
time and means to receive their reinforcements; and they acquired in a short
space such a superiority, as obliged prince Ferdinand to content himself with
acting on the defensive, for a long time after.

The advantages which would have arisen from another issue of that battle
appeared more fully, from the operations which were carrying on the side of
Bohemia, and which probably were designed to concur with those of the prince,
in some grand and comprehensive scheme. There is no doubt, that the army of the
allies, and those of his Prussian Majesty, had determined to act in concert,
and had settled some plan for that purpose; and though it should not be
discovered with equal certainty, what that plan was, it may not however be
unpleasant to trace it; as far at least as a reasonable conjecture, guided by
the lights derived from the tendency of each operation, may lead us. For if we
succeed at all, in such an attempt, it diffuses at wonderful clearness over the
whole narrative.

It is not impossible then, that it was designed in the first place, to keep
the Russians at a distance, until the latter end of the summer, by the
destruction of their magazines in Poland. That on the other side prince
Ferdinand should attempt to drive the French toward the Rhine, and to get
between them and the army of the Empire; which having thus lost its
communication with the French, prince Henry should rush out of Saxony, and fall
upon them in Bohemia and Franconia, and cut off also their communication with
the great body of the Austrians. Then the Imperialists, would find themselves
situated between two hostile and superior armies; whilst in Bohemia, Marshal
Daun would be either obliged to try his fortune single handed, with the King of
Prussia, or totally to abandon that kingdom, into which it was in the power of
the Prussians to enter, in opposite parts at once.

The first part of this plan was executed with great spirit and success. So
early as the 23d of February the Prussian general Wobersnow marched into Poland
from Glogau in Silesia, with forty-six squadrons, and twenty-nine battalions,
where they routed some bodies of Cossacks; and after having destroyed several
immense magazines, particularly one at Posen, said to be sufficient for the
subsistence of fifty thousand men for three months, they retured without any
loss into Silesia, on the 18th of April.

As for the second Act of this military drama, it was executed with as great
success, and with some advantages more striking than the first. Prince Henry
commanded the Prussian troops in Saxony, which the public accounts called forty
thousand men. He had certain intelligence, that some movements, which had
purposely been made by the King of Prussia, had drawn the greatest part of the
Austrian troops, which had been posted as a watch upon Saxony, toward the
frontiers of Silesia, He immediately took advadtage of this opening, and
entered Bohemia in two columns: one marched toward Peterswade: first
penetrated as far as Loboschutz, and Leitmeritz, the enemy flying before them,
and every where abandoning or burning the vast magazines which they had amassed
in all those parts.

The body under General Hulsen did as much service, and it had a more active
employment. The pass of Pasberg, strong in itself, was defended by a
considerable body of Austrians. General Hulsen having conducted his cavalry by
another way, so as to fall directly on their rear, attacked them with his
infantry in front, and drove them out of all their intrenchments; one general,
fifty-one officers, and no less than two thousand private men, were made
prisoners on this occasion.

After this fatiguing expedition, the prince gave his troops a few days to
rest, and then led them once more to action. He directed his march through the
Voigtland, toward the army of the Empire; they entered Franconia by the way of
Hoff; they attacked General Macguire, who commanded a body of Austrians and
Imperialists. Here they were bravely resisted for the whole day; but the
numbers and spirit of the Prussians prevailing, Macguire gladly took advantage
of the night to make a retreat, having lost about five hundred men. A few
skirmishes more decided the fate of Franconia. The army of the Empire
retreated, as the Prussians advanced, and abandoned the rich bishoprics of
Bamberg and Wurtzburg to contribution. The town of Bamberg surrendered upon
terms; that part of the plan, which Prince Ferdinand was to have executed, had
ailed, it was impossible on one hand to hinder the French army from succouring
that of the Empire, or on the other, to prevent a body of Austrians from
availing themselves of his absence, to penetrate into Saxony. In these
circumstances any farther stay in Franconia was useless, and might be
dangerous. His army, loaded with booty and contribution, returned to their old
situation. The Austrians retired into Bohemia at their approach.

Appearances were hitherto favorable enough to the Prussians: however none of
the great ends proposed by the general plan were fully answered. The Russians,
notwithstanding the destruction of their magazines, continued their march
toward Silesia. Count Dohna, who had raised great contributions and levies in
the duchy of Mecklenburg, was preparing to oppose them on the side of
Brandenburgh; other parties under other commanders, were posted at those places
where their irruption was the most apprehended. The approach of this army
brought things nearer and nearer to a crisis. The eyes of all Europe were fixed
with anxiety and expectation on their progress. It appeared the more
formidable, because the progress of the French arms was very rapid after the
battle of Bergen.

Prince Ferdinand finding that another attack was not advisable, retreated
continually. The French possessed themselves of Hesse without opposition; they
met as little in making their way through the bishopric of Paderborn; and
whilst their grand army, under Marshal de Contades, pushed the allies in that
quarter and on the side of Hesse, M. d'Armentieres was posted by Wesel, to
advance on that side as occasion should require. The condition of the allied
army was extremely dubious; whilst the French increased in their numbers and
spirit. Their new success gave them reason to hope for a campaign as fortunate
as that of 1757.

CHAP. III.
Expedition to the West Indies under Hopsen and Moore. Account of Martinico.
Failure there. The Causes of it. Guadaloupe invaded. Description of that
island. Basse Terre attacked and burned. Genesis Hopson dies. Operations against
Grand Terre. Several passes forced. The inhabitants capitulate. Bravery of a
French lady, Marygalante taken.

GREAT Britain was not content with the efforts which she had made in Germany:
America, the interests of which had given rise to the war, was the object which
principally engaged her attention. This was indeed the proper object of her
natural strength, and by her success in this quarter, she most effectually laid
the axe to the root of the enemy's naval power, and cut away one great part of
the resources which fed the war. A squadron of nine ships of the line,

Their first object was Martinico, the first in reputation of the French
Caribbees, the seat of government, the center of all the trade which France
carries on with those islands; strong both by nature and art. This island lies
in the 15th degree N. lat. The shore is on every side indented with very deep
bays, which they call Cul de Sacs, and the sands, only discoverable at low
water, form in many places a hidden, and almost insurmountable barrier. A lofty
ridge of almost impassable mountains, runs north west and south east quite
through the island; all the space on both sides is intersected at
inconsiderable distances with deep gullies, through which the water pours down
in the rainy seasons, with great impetuosity. In other respects, the island is
pleasant and fruitful; well watered, and well cultivated, abounding with
plantations and villages all along the sea coast. The two principal places are
St. Pierre, and Port Royal; both town considerable in this part of the world,
for their magnitude, trade and strength.

By this short description may be discerned, how desirable such a conquest was,
and the difficulties which naturally opposed themselves to it. They were the
greater, because at this time there was in the island a considerable number of
regular troops. They have at all times a numerous and well armed militia, not
contemptible for their discipline, and well suited to the service of the
country; add to this, that they can bring into the field a large body of
negroes, habituated to arms, and in general well affected to the interests of
their masters.

The English forces landed without opposition, on the west side of Port Royal
harbor, aften the men,

Very little was done at Port Royal; but it was hoped, that more would be done
at St. Pierre. They accordingly set sail for that place; but when they had
arrived before it, and examined the coast, resolved not to return with the
disgrace of having done nothing worthy of the greatness of the armament, and
the expectation of their country. They considered, that the island of
Guadaloupe was an object, though not of such an eclat, of full as much real
consequence as Martinico; and they knew, that it was neither so strong in
troops or fortifications. Their first failure might lead to an advantage, as
considerable as that which they had missed. In pursuance of these resolutions,
they set sail for Guadaloupe.

The island is called Guadaloupe, from a resemblance which it bears to a chain
of mountains of the same name in Old Spain. To speak with exactness, Guadaloupe
is rather to be considered as two islands, divided from each other by a small
arm of the sea, or salt water river, not above three hundred feet over where it
is widest. One of these islands is called the Grand Terre; the other more
particularly and by distinction, Guadaloupe; they are together in a circle
about ninety leagues. The first is nearly destitute of fresh water, and not
perfectly cultivated; but it is otherwise with Guadaloupe. No part of the world
is furnished with more or better. No less than fifty rivers, in that small
circuit, throw themselves into the sea; many navigable by boats, for two, some
even for three leagues into the country. Not to mention the numberless springs
which rise among the rocks, and, after a thousand beautiful meanders, lose
themselves in the larger streams. The first accounts which we have of that
country, are lavish in the description of its beauties; and the latest agree
with them, that no part of the West Indies, perhaps of the world, affords more
agreeable and romantic scenes. It is full of high mountains; one of which
towers far above the rest, and is a volcano, continually emitting smoke and
fire. From hence they have considerable quantities of sulphur. They have also
hot baths, fit for all the medicinal purposes in which such waters are used.
The land in the valleys is extremely fertile; it produces the usual West India
commodities, sugar, indigo, coffee, cotton, and ginger: the mountains abound
with game: so that there is nothing in the island wanting, for the convenience
and delight of life, in an air more temperate and salubrious than is commonly
breathed between the tropics.

The French began to plant colonies in this island as early as the year 1632.
But for a long time this, together with all their other colonies, continued in
a languishing condition. It was in the beginning of the present century, that
they began to emerge. After the peace of Utrecht had given France time to
breathe, she turned her attention strongly to these islands; Guadaloupe partook
however less of this care than Martinico, and yet, by its natural advantages,
it does not fall short of that island, neither in the quantity, or the goodness
of its produce; if it does not greatly exceed it in both; as it certainly does
in its capacity to receive all sorts of improvement. The importance of this
island, until its late conquest, was very little known in England. The reason
was this. By an old regulation, the people of Guadaloupe were forbid to trade
directly with Europe, but were obliged to send all their produce to Martinico,
from whence they had all their European commodities. A strange regulation, to
be continued in an age so enlightened as this, by a nation so enlightened as
France.

The English made attempts upon this island in 1691, and 1703; but they were
neither powerful enough, nor conducted with sufficient ability to produce any
permanent effect; the troops wasted the country, and retired with their booty.
But on the occasion, of which we are going to speak, they were more able,
strong, and fortunate.

On the 23d of January the fleet came before the town of Basse Terre, the
capital of the island, a place of considerable extent, large trade, and
defended by a strong fortress. This fortress, in the opinion of the chief
engineer, was not to be reduced by the shipping. But Commodore Moore,
notwithstanding this opinion, brought four men of war to bear upon the citadel;
the rest were disposed against the town, and the batteries which obstructed the
landing. About nine in the morning a fire from all sides began, which continued
with the utmost fury until night, when the citadel, and all the batteries, were
effectually silenced. During this cannonade the bombs, that were continually
showered upon the town, set it on fire in several places. It burned without
interruption the whole of this and the following day; when it was almost
totally reduced to ashes. The loss was prodigious from the number of warehouses
in the town, full of rich, but combustible materials. Nothing could be more
striking, than the horror of the spectacle, from the mutual and unremitted fire
of so many great ships and batteries, heightened with a long line of flames,
which extended along the shore, and formed the back ground of this terrible
picture.

In this lively engagement, our loss was very inconsiderable. The next day the
forces landed without opposition,

General Hopson died on the 27th of February, and General Barrington succeeded
him. He embarked part of his forces for the Grand Terre, where Colonel Crump
attacked and reduced the towns of St. Anne, and St. Francois; whilst this
attack diverted the enemy's attention, the General fell upon the strong post of
Gosier, and possessed himself of it; and thus the Grand Terre was in a manner
reduced, and disabled from sending any relief to the other part.

There is a considerable mountain, not far from the town of Basse Terre, called
Dos d'Asne, or the Asse's Back; thither a great part of the enemy had retired.
It is a post of great strength, and great importance, as it keeps a watch upon
the town, and at the same time forms the only communication there is between
that town, and the Capes Terre, the plainest, pleasantest, and most fruitful
part of the whole island. It was not judged practicable to break into it by
this way; and all the rest of Guadaloupe was in the enemy's possession.
Therefore a plan was formed for another operation, by which it was proposed to
surprise Petit Bourg, Goyave, and St. Mary's, and by that way to march into
Capes Terre, which might be easily reduced. But this design failing, it was
necessary to attempt those places by main force. Col. Clavering and Col. Crump
landed near Arnonville, and attacked the enemy, strongly entrenched at a post,
strong by nature, called Le Corn. This was forced; another intrenchment at
Petit Bourg had the same fate; a third near St. Mary's yielded in the same
manner. An opening being at last made into the Capes Terre, the inhabitants
saw, that the best part of the country was on the point of being given up to
fire and sword; they came in and capitulated; their possessions,

Three small islands, near Guadaloupe, Deseada, Santos and Petite Terre,

This capitulation was hardly signed, when the French squadron under M. Bompart
appeared before the island, and landed at St. Anne's, in the Grand Terre, the
General of the French Caribbees, with six hundred regular troops, two thousand
buccaneers, and a large quantity of arms and ammunition. The capitulation was
made at the most critical time; for had this reinforcement arrived but a day
sooner, the whole expedition had probably been lost.

Thus came into the possession of Great Britain, this valuable island, after a
campaign of near three months, in which the English troops behaved with a
firmness, courage and perseverance, that ought never to be forgotten,
Intolerable heat, continual fatigue, the air of an unaccustomed climate, a
country full of lofty mountains and steep precipices, posts strong by nature
and by art, defended by men who fought for every thing that was dear to them;
all these difficulties only increased the ardour of our forces, who thought
nothing impossible under commanders, who were not more distinguished for their
intrepidity and skill, than their zeal for the service of their country, and
the perfect harmony and good understanding that subsisted between them. There
is nothing perhaps so necessary to inspire confidence into the soldier, as to
observe that the officers have a perfect confidence in one another (a).

It must not be omitted, that many of the inhabitants exerted themselves very
gallantly in the defense of their country. A woman, a considerable planter in
the island, particularly distinguished herself; she was called Madam Ducharmey:
this amazon put herself at the head of her servants and slaves, and acquitted
herself in a manner not inferior to the bravest men.

(a) The Hon. Genesis Barrington's Letter to the Right Hon. Mr. Secretary Pit,
particularising his proceedings at Guadaloupe, May 9, 1759.
IN my last letter of the 6th of March, I had the honor to acquaint you, that
the troops under my command at Guadaloupe, (except the garrison of Fort Royal)
were all embarked, with their baggage, etc. without the loss of a man. The
fleet sailed the next morning for Fort Louis, but from the very great
difficulty of turning to windward, were not able to reach it till the 11th, at
four in the afternoon, when all the ships of war, but only 25 of the
transports, came to an anchor; the others were either driven much to leeward,
or prevented by the winds and strong currents from weathering the point of
Saints.

I went on shore at Fort Louis that evening to see the Fort, and the works
carrying on by the detachment that had already been sent thither from
Basseterre.

On the 12th, I went in a boat to reconnoitre the two coasts of this Bay, as
well the Grand Terre side, as that of Guadaloupe, to find a proper place for
making a descent; but Commodore Moore having acquainted me in the evening of
that day, that he had received certain intelligence of a French squadron of
skips of war, consisting of nine sail of the line and two frigates, being seen
to the northward of Barbados, and that it was therefore necessary for him to
quit this place, with all the ships of war under his command, and go into
Prince Rupert's Bay, in the island of Dominico, as a situation more
advantageous for the protection of Basseterre, and this place, as well as the
English islands; I thought it advisable the next day to call together the
General Officers to consider what, in our present situation, was best to be
done, and it was determined; notwithstanding the divided state of the troops by
the separation of the transports, the weak state of Fort Louis, and the
impossibility of supplying it with water but from the ships, and the many
difficulties which then appeared, that it would be most for his Majesty's
service, and the honor of his arms, to do the utmost to keep possession of the
Fort, and to wait some further intelligence of the motions of the enemy.

Commodore Moore sailed the next morning for Prince Rupert's Bay, with all the
ships of war, except the Roebuck of 40 guns, which he left, as some protection
to the transports.

From this time to the 17th, I continued to direct works to be made for the
security of the camp, and for the finishing, as well as strengthening the
lines, when, the chief engineer, who was on board one of the transports that
could not before get up, being arrived, and having made to me a report of the
weakness of the Fort, I thought it necessary to call a council of war to
consider the state thereof; and it being debated whether the Fort might not be
made tenable, and kept as a garrison for his Majesty's service, on a more
circumscribed plan, though it appeared impossible to keep it in the present
extent of out-posts; it was determined, after much consideration, that from its
weakness and bad construction, its being commanded by several heights very
contiguous to it, as well as the great difficulty (I may indeed say the
impossibility) of procuring for the present, and establishing a constant supply
of water, and other more necessary things for the support and defense of a
garrison in this part of the world, not to be tenable. However, Sir, I was,
determined to hold it, until some future event might convince me what was best
to be done for his Majesty's service.

I reflected on the state of the army under my command, and of the little
probability there was of succeeding in any attempt of reducing the country by
the troops I had, without the assistance of the ships of war to cover them in
landing. But however I determined to make a descent on the coast of Grand
Terre; and for that purpose I ordered Col. Crump, with a detachment consisting
of 600 men, to go in some of the transports that carried most guns, and
endeavor to land between the towns of St. Anne and St. Francois, and destroy
the batteries and cannon, which was happily executed with very little loss.

As I imagined by my sending Col. Crump to attack the towns of St. Anne and St.
Francois, the enemy would be obliged to detach some of their troops from the
post of Gosier, I ordered, two days after he sailed, the only 300 men I had
left to be put on board transports, and lie off that town; and in the morning
of the 29th, I went to reconnoitre the battery and intrenchments, and
perceiving that the enemy appeared less numerous than for some time before, I
made a disposition for forcing them by two different attacks. This was executed
the next morning at sunrising, with great spirit and resolution by the troops;
and notwithstanding the fire of the enemy from their intrenchments and battery,
both were soon carried with little loss, and the enemy drove into the woods.
The troops immediately destroyed the cannon and battery, with the town.

This being happily effected, I ordered the detachment to force its way to Fort
Louis; and, at the same time, sent orders for the garrison to make two sallies,
one to the right, in order to put the enemy between two fires, and the other to
attack their lines, as I knew that which I had just made would oblige them to
send troops to oppose our passage on that side. The first was made, but the
latter, by some mistake, was not executed; which, had it been done, we must
have inevitably been in possession of their lines. The detachment from Gosier
forced their passage with some loss, notwithstanding a very strong pass that
the enemy were possessed of, and took possession of a battery of three
24-pounders, which would, the next day, have played upon our camp.

Governor Desbrisay, whom I had left at Fort Royal in Basseterre, having been
killed by the blowing up of some cartridges that took fire from the wadding of
a 24-pounder that was discharged from the upper bastion of Fort Royal, at a
body of the enemy, on the 23d of March, I appointed Major Melvill, who
commanded the detachment of the 38th regiment from the Leeward Islands, to be
governor in his room. Major Trollone, a lieut. of the 63d regiment, and two
private men, were likewise killed by this accident; and a capt. another lieut.
and 3 men wounded: And the parapet of that bastion levelled with the ground by
the explosion.

At the same time that I was acquainted with this accident, I was told, that
the enemy had erected a bomb-battery, and thrown several shells into the fort;
and that they had, for some time past, been working, as the garrison suspected,
upon another battery; I therefore ordered Governor Melvill to cause a sortie
(sally) to be made from the garrison in order to destroy it. Accordingly a
detachment of 300 men sallied out under the command of Capt. Blomer, on the 1st
of April, and without much difficulty forced the enemy's intrenchments, and got
into the work, which proved to be a battery of one 18-pounder, and one 12
nearly completed. Our people spiked the guns, and returned to the garrison
with the loss of only six men killed, and six wounded.

As I thought the fort, by this accident, might want the assistance of the
chief engineer, I sent him thither immediately, as well as the commanding
officer of the artillery, that no time might be lost in putting it again in a
proper state of defense.

The remaining part of the transports, with the troops, being now arrived; nine
having come on the 23d of March, and the others by one or two in a day; as I
had long intended, so soon as it was in my power to make an attack on the
Gaudaloupe side, as the enemy had there some posts of infinite consequence, I
formed, upon the information of some Negroes, who promised to conduct the
troops in flat-bottom boats by night, a design of surprising Petit Bourg.
Guoyave, and St. Marie's, at the same time. The first was to be effected by
Brig. Crump, who, the moment he had made himself master of it, was to march to
bay Mahaut, and destroy the batteries there, as well as a large magazine of
provisions that the enemy had collected from the Dutch, and to hinder any more
arriving: The latter, under Brig. Clavering, after he had surprised St. Marie's
and Guoyave, was to march into the Capesterre, and reduce that fine country.
The success of this appeared not only to me, but to the gentlemen who were to
execute it, almost infallible: But the night proved so bad, and the Negroe
conductors were so frightened, that they run several of the boats on the
shoals, of which that coast is full; so that though Brig. Clavering did land with
about 80 men, yet the place was so full of mangroves, and so deep in mud, that
he was obliged to return, but not without the enemy's discovering our design.

This obliged me to attempt by force, what could not be effected upon a safer
plan: But as I then was laid up in a most severe fit of the gout in my feet,
head, and stomach, I sent Brigadiers Clavering and Crump to reconnoitre the
coast near Arnoville; and upon their report, I ordered 1300 regulars, and 150
of the Antigua volunteers, to land under the protection of the Woolwich man of
war: What happened afterward, you will see by the following letter which I
received at Petit Bourg from Brig. Clavering, on the 25th of April.

At M. Poyen's, Capesterre, Gaudaloupe, April 24, 1759.
SIR,
ON Thursday the 12th of April, at daybreak, I landed with the troops which
you put under my orders, consisting of 1300 men, exclusive of the Antigua
volunteers, at a Bay not far distant from Arnoville. The enemy made no
opposition to our landing, but retired, as our troops advanced, to very strong
intrenchments behind the river Le Corn. This post was to them of the greatest
importance, as it covered the whole country to the bay Mahaut, where the
provisions and supplies of all sorts were landed from St. Eustatia, and
therefore they had very early taken possession of it, and had spared no pains
to strengthen it, though the situation was such as required very little
assistance from art. The river was only accessible at two narrow passes, on
account of a morass covered with mangroves, and those places they had occupied
with a redoubt and well pallisaded intrenchments, defended with cannon, and all
the militia of that part of the country. We could only approach them in a very
contracted front, which was at least reduced to the breadth of the roads,
intersected with deep and wide ditches. Our artillery, which consisted of four
field pieces and two hawbitzers, were ordered to keep a constant fire on the
top of the intrenchments, to cover the attack made by Duroure's regiment and
the Highlanders, who, on this occasion, behaved with the greatest coolness and
resolution, keeping up, as they advanced, a regular platoon firing. This
behavior so intimidated the enemy, that they abandoned the first intrenchment
on the left, into which the Highlanders threw themselves, sword in hand, and
pursued the enemy, with part of Duroure's regiment, into the redoubt.

The enemy still kept their ground at their intrenchments on the right, from
whence they annoyed our people very much, both with musquetry and cannon; and
though those who had carried the first intrenchments had got into their rear,
yet, till a bridge could be made to pass the river, they could not get round to
attack this post. This took us up near half an hour; but however we got up time
enough to take near 70 of the enemy prisoners, as they were endeavoring to
make their escape, amongst whom were some of the most considerable inhabitants
of the island.

We found in both the intrenchments six pieces of cannon. Our loss was one
officer and 13 men killed, and two officers and 52 men wounded.

So soon as the ditches could be filled up for the passage of the artillery, we
proceeded on our march toward Petit Bourg. A considerable number of the enemy
had lined an intrenchment about half a mile on the left of the road, but when
they perceived we were endeavoring to surround them, they abandoned it,
keeping always about 200 yards in our front, setting fire to the sugarcanes,
which obliged us more than once to leave the road, to avoid any accident to our
powder.

The troops arrived late on the banks of the river Lezard, behind which, at the
only ford, the enemy had thrown up very strong intrenchments, protected with
four pieces of cannon on the hill behind them.

Having reconnoitred the side of the river, and finding it might cost us very
dear to force the passage at the ford, I therefore kept up their attention all
the night by firing into their lines, during which time I got two Canoes
conveyed about a mile and a half down the river, where being launched, we
ferryed over, before break of day in the morning, a sufficient number of men to
attack them in flank, whilst we should do the same in front: The enemy soon
perceived their danger, and left their intrenchments with the greatest
precipitation.

Thus we passed without the loss of a man, still pursuing them to Petit Bourg,
which place they had fortified with lines, and a redoubt filled with cannon.

We found Capt. Uvedale there, in the Granada bomb, throwing shells into the
Fort. The enemy did not remain in it long, when they saw our intention of
occupying the heights round them, but left us masters of that, and the Port,
with all the cannon round the place.

We halted here the 14th, to get provisions for the troops.

On the 15th, at day break, Brig. Crump was detached with 700 men to the bay
Mahaut, and at the same time Capt. Steel with 100 to Guoyave, about 7 miles in
our front, to destroy a battery there. The panick of the enemy was such, that
they only discharged their cannon at him, and abandoned a post that might have
been defended against an army. He nailed up 7 pieces of cannon, and returned
the same evening to Petit Bourg, Brig. Crump returned likewise the next day
with his detachment from the bay Mahaut, where he found the town and batteries
abandoned. These he burnt, with an immense quantity of provisions, that had
been landed there by the Dutch, and reduced the whole country, as far as Petit
Bourg.

The heavy rains on the succeeding days had so swelled the rivers, that it was
impossible for the troops to advance; however, this delay gave us an
opportunity of strengthening the post a Petit Bourg.

On the 18th in the evening, the Antigua volunteers took possession again of
Guoyave; they were supported early the next morning by a detachment commanded
by Lieut. Col. Barlow, who had orders to repair the road for the passage of the
cannon.

On the 20th, after leavin 250 men to guard Petit Bourg, the remaining part of
the detachment, with the cannon, moved on to Guoyave, in order to proceed
afterward to St. Marie's, where we were informed the enemy were collecting
their whole force to oppose us, and had likewise thrown up intrenchments, and
made barricadoes on the road to prevent our approach to it. We were not long
before we perceived them; but, at the same time, we found, as well by our own
observation, as by the information of the guides, that it was not impossible to
get into their rear by roads the enemy thought impracticable, and consequently
had guarded with very little care.

A detachment was immediately formed under Col. Barlow, for this service, and
orders were sent to hasten the march of the artillery, which, from the badness
of the roads, had not been able to get up. The first shot from our cannon,
placed very near their intrenchment, with the alarm that was given by our
detachment in the rear, made the enemy very soon sensible of the dangerous
situation they were in, and indeed their precipitate flight only saved them
from being all taken prisoners.

We pursued them as far as the heights of St. Marie's, where we again formed
our men, for a fresh attack on the lines and batteries there.

Whilst the barricadoes were levelling for the artillery, we attempted a second
time to pass the woods and precipices that covered the flanks of the enemy's
lines; but, before we could get up our cannon, they perceived our movement, and
began to quit their lines to oppose it, which made us resolve, without any
further delay, to attack them immediately in front; and it was accordingly
executed with the greatest vivacity, notwithstanding the constant firing of
both their cannon and musquetry. They abandoned here all their artillery, and
went off in so much confusion, that they never afterward appeared before us.

We took up our quarters at St. Marie's that night, and the next day entered
the Capesterre, which is the richest and most beautiful part of this or any
other country in the West Indies. Eight hundred and seventy Negroes, belonging
to one man only surrendered this day.

Here Mess. de Glainvilliers and Duqueruy, deputed by the principal inhabitants
of the Island, met me to know the terms you would grant them; and, as I
accompanied them to Petit Bourg the next day, and there presented them to you,
it is not necessary for me to mention any transaction since that time.

I cannot, however, conclude, without doing justice to those, to whose merit is
due the success that has attended the King's arms on this occasion; I mean the
spirit and constancy of the troops: To Brig. Crump, without whose concurrence,
I never undertook any thing, but chiefly to yourself, Sir, who planned the
whole enterprise, and who furnished me with all these means, without which,
neither bravery or prudence can little avail.

I have the honor to be, etc. J. CLAVERING.


The Hon. General Barrington's Letter to the Right. Hon. Mr. Secretary Pit,
dated, Head Quarters, in the Capesterre, Guadaloupe, May 9, 1759.
I Have the satisfaction to inform you, that by great perseverance, and
changing entirely the nature of the war, by carrying it on by detachments, I
have at length made myself master of Guadaloupe and Grand Terre. This is a
work, Sir, that, I believe, the most sanguine (considering our total separation
from the fleet) could not expect to have been performed by so small a body of
men.

I shall not in this trouble you with a detail, as I have done myself the
honor of sending it to you in my other letter. I shall only say in general,
that the great good conduct and zeal of Brigadiers Clavering and Crump, and the
bravery of the troops, got the better of every obstacle; forced the enemy in
all their intrenchments, and strong passes; took 50 pieces of cannon, and
advanced as far as the Capesterre, the only remaining unreduced part of the
country. This at last brought the enemy to terms. My situation was such, that
it was absolutely necessary, that what was done should not be procrastinated,
as I was determined to grant no truce for time enough for the inhabitants to
recover from their fears. Mr. Moore was absent, the thing pressed, and some
resolution was to be taken immediately. That, which I took, was according to
the best of my understanding, and I hope, Sir, you will approve of it.

I believe, Sir, the infinite consequence and value of Guadaloupe, and Grand
Terre, is not perfectly known in England, as (if I am rightly informed) there
is more ^ugar grown here than in all the Leeward Islands put together; besides
great quantities of cotton and coffee. The country, especially the Capesterre,
the finest I ever saw, watered with good rivers every mile or two; and a port
belonging to it, where all the navy of England may ride safe from hurricanes.
All this can be explained much better, than I can by letter, by Brig.
Clavering, whose infinite zeal for his Majesty's service, and talents as a
soldier, I hope will recommend him to protection. Such men are rare; and I
think I may venture to assure you, there are few things in our profession, that
he is not equal to, if it should be thought fit to honor him with the
execution of any future commands.

I have appointed Col. Crump to the government, who, since governor Haldane
left us, I have made act as Brigadier: His merit is very great, both as a
soldier, and a man of judgment; He is of this part of the world; understands
the trade, customs, and genius of the people; and as he thinks nobly and
desinterestedly, he would not have accepted of the government, but in hopes of
advancing himself in the army by that means. I cannot say, how very useful, and
how much our successes are owing to his good conduct, and great zeal.

As I have now nothing to fear from the land, I am repairing, as well as I can,
Fort Louis, and fortifying the isle of Cochon, for the greater security of the
harbor. The poor people here are in a miserable condition, but I shall do
every thing in my power to procure them the things they want.

I have the honor to send you enclosed the capitulation of the governor, as
well as that of the inhabitants. The latter have behaved, in all their
dealings, with great candor; and it is a justice I owe them, to acquaint you
with it.

It has not as yet been possible for me to go round ths island to see the
different posts that must be occupied, I therefore cannot yet determine the
exact number of troops that will be necessary to be left for their defense.

The great assistance I have received from Capt. Lynn, of his Majesty's ship
the ^oebuck, in the different services I have been carrying on for the
reduction of these islands, ought not to be forgot by me, as well as his first
Lieutenant, Mr. Keating; both whom I beg leave to recommend to your favor.

I find it is impossible (from the different parts of the Islands where they
are to be received) for me to procure a return of the artillery and stores
(which have been delivered up, in consequence of the capitulation) to send by
this opportunity; but I hope to be able to have the Honor of sending it very
soon.

I cannot help congratulating myself, that I had just signed the capitulation
with the inhabitants of the Grand Terre, when a messenger arrived in their camp
to acquaint them, that M. Beauharnois, the general of these islands, had landed
at St. Anne's, on the windward part of that island, with a reinforcement from
Martinico, of 600 regulars, 2000 buccaneers, and 2000 stand of spare arms for
the inhabitants, with artillery and mortars, under the convoy of M. Bompart's
squadron. This support, had it arrived there an hour sooner, must have made the
conquest of that island very difficult, if not impossible. As soon as he heard
the capitulation was signed, he reimbarked again.

Commodore Moore's Letter to the Right Hon. Mr. Secretary Pit, dated
Cambridge, in Prince Rupert's Bay, Dominique, May 11, 1759.
BY the Griffin, which arrived here on 17th of April, I was honored with your
letter, signifying his Majesty's most gracious approbation of my conduct, and
of the behavior of those under my command, which I took the liberty to
communicate to those gentlemen: And give me leave to say, Sir, nothing can
contribute so much to our happiness, as being honored with, and executing
orders to the honor of his Majesty's arms.

Give me leave, Sir, to congratulate you on the capitulation of the island of
Guadaloupe and Grand Terre, which Major Genesis Barrington sends to you by this
express; in gaining which, great honor is due to the troops. The strong hold,
the enemy had, could not be conquered but by great conduct and resolution.

I hope the conquest will prove as great an acquisition as it appears to me.

It is with great pleasure, I think I may say, Sir, that on this expedition,
great unanimity has been kept up between the two corpse, as well in obedience to
his Majesty's commands, as from our own inclinations. It has ever been my wish
to have such harmony subsist, and I flatter myself I have always succeeded.

I beg leave to acquaint you, Sir, that, on the 2d inst. being informed, the
French squadron, under the command of M. Bompart, was to windward of
Marigalante, I put to sea in the night, and endeavored to get up with them;
but, after beating five days, and having gained very little, two of our
cruizers, that I had sent different ways, to watch the enemy's motions, saw
them, the 6th inst. return betwixt the two islands into Fort Royal. From the
almost constant lee currents, it being very difficult for ships to get to
windward, it must always be in the enemy's choice, whether they will come to a
general action or not. Their squadron consists of nine sail of the line and
three frigates.

I shall, in conjunction with Genesis Barrington, give every assistance in my
power to any other services.

Soon after the reduction of Guadaloupe, former island. This is a small place,
but the conquest is of consequence, as the French by this are left no footing
in the Leeward islands: Martinico is one of those to the windward. These
beginnings were happy omens of the success of the more important undertaking,
which was to be carried on in another part of America. The reputation of our
arms there, except in the reduction of Louisburg, had hitherto not been very
great. But other commanders were now appointed, and other maxims prevailed.
However, we postpone the narrative of these very interesting events, to
consider those which intervened on the continent of Europe, in which too we are
to see our arms no less distinguished; and to behold England emerging from the
rubbish of low principles and timid conduct, once more become the pride and
terror of Europe, and acting in a manner not unworthy the most illustrious
periods of her history.

CHAP. IV.
Progress of the French after the battle of Bergen. Munster and other places
taken. Situation of the French, and of the Allies. Motions of Prince Ferdinand.
Battle of Minden. Hereditary Prince of Brunswick defeats the Duke of Brisac.
The French pass the Weser. L. G. S. resigns the command of the British forces;
Marquis of Granby succeeds him. The French driven to Marpurg. Siege of Munster.
M. d'Etrees arrives at the French camp. Project of France for an invasion.
Havre bombarded. Action off Cape Lagos. French fleet defeated.

WE left the army of Prince Ferdinand upon the retreat, ever since the battle
of Bergen. The French advanced with great vivacity; their light troops made
incursions almost to the gates of Hanover. The Prince still continued to
retire, but he left garrisons in Lipstadt, Ritberg, Munster and Minden, in
order to retard the enemy's progress: their principal design seemed to be be to
cut off his retreat to the Weser, to which he kept very close, as he knew the
infinite consequence of that communication. However, if the enemy sailed to
compass that object, all the His Serene Highness Prince FERDINAND.
portrait of Prince Ferdinand Maxima res effecta timor om^^^ abesto Virg L.9.
precautions of the Prince proved also ineffectual to retard the progress of
their arms. Ritberg was surprised, Lipstadt was blockaded, Minden was taken by
assault, where a garrison of 1500 men were made prisoners, and where immense
magazines fell into their hands. D'Armentieres advanced against Munster; he
attempted to take the place by a coup de main. Though foiled in his attempt
with considerable loss, he did not desist; he drew up his cannon from Wesel,
and after a short siege,

In this general gloom that overspread the fortune of the allies, the Prince
kept himself unmoved and attentive to his designs. He did not suffer himself to
be disconcerted by blows, which he had probably foreseen, and the ill
consequences of which he knew how to prevent. The body of the French army after
the taking of Minden, had posted themselves near the city, to which the right
of their army extended; their left was protected by a very steep hill; in their
front was a large morass; and a rivulet covered their rear. Nothing could be
more advantageous than this situation; and whilst they continued in it, nothing
could be enterprised against them. The army of the allies, after a continued
retreat, began at last to advance, and fixed their camp altogether as
advantageously at Petershagen, a place about three leagues from the enemy.

Things were brought to that pass, that nothing but a battle could hinder the
French from taking winter quarters in the electorate. There was no possibility
of attacking them with any hope of success in the camp which they then
occupied. The point was to draw them from that post into the plain; but the
movements necessary to effect this were extremely hazardous to an inferior
army, in sight of the enemy. The operations of Prince Ferdinand, on this
occasion, displayed so penetrating and uncommon a genius, such a guarded
boldness, such a certainty of the grounds he went upon, such a perfect
possession of himself, that perhaps there is no instance in history of
generalship so complete and finished; for which reason we shall endeavor from
the best lights we have, to draw out at length the several parts that concurred
to form this remarkable piece; we could indeed wish that the authentic
accounts of so very memorable an event, had been more clear and explicit; but
we must content ourselves with the materials we have.

On the 29th of July, Prince Ferdinand forsook his camp on the Weser, and
marched toward Hillen, a village considerably to his right, with the greatest
part of his army: However he took care to leave on the brink of that river, a
body under General Wangenheim; which extended to the town of Thornhausen, where
they were entrenched, and supported by a considerable artillery. He had the day
before detached the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick,

The French were not inattentive to these movements; their Generals immediately
held a council of war; and the result was, that they gave completely into the
snare that was laid for them. They saw, as they imagined, the allied army
divided and disjointed; and now the happy moment presented itself, for the
attack of General Wangenheim, who they knew was not strong, and who seemed at a
great distance from the rest of the army, so that it appeared impossible that
he could be relieved. This body being routed, as it easily might, it was
obvious that they should then be able to place themselves between Prince
Ferdinand's army and the Weser, and cut off his communication with that river;
the great object at which they aimed, through the whole campaign, and in which
was involved the certain destruction of the allies.

Full of these ideas they left their advantageous post, and in eight columns
passed the morass in their front,

The allies, finding the French slower than they expected, began to advance,
and threatened the enemy's center. This was composed almost wholly of horse;
but it was the flower of their cavalry, who anticipated the shock of the
allies, and began the engagement. The brunt of the battle was almost wholly
sustained by the English infantry, and some corpse of Hanoverians, which stood
the re-iterated charges of so many bodies of horse, the strength and glory of
the French armies, with a resolution, steadiness, and expertness in their
maneuver, which was never exceeded, perhaps never equalled. They cut to pieces
or entirely routed these bodies. Two brigades of foot attempted to support
them, but they vanished before the English infantry. Waldegrave's and
Kingsley's regiments distinguished themselves in a particular manner this day;
nor were their commanders less di^tinguished. The enemy's horse, which composed
their center, being entirely discomfited, and their right, which attacked
Wangenheim, having made no sort of impression, they thought of nothing but a
retreat.

At this point of time the Prince sent orders to Ld. George Sackville, who
commanded the whole British, and several brigades of the German cavalry, to
advance. That cavalry formed the right wing of the allies, extended to the
morass, and if it could have charged at the instance of the enemy's retreat,
such a shock at that time, and in that situation, would in all probability have
left the French without an army in Germany. But the orders were not
sufficiently precise, or they were not sufficiently understood by the English
commander; so that there was some delay in waiting for an explanation. The
critical minute passed away; the British cavalry lost their share in the glory
of the action; and the French retreated in some order, favored by the spirited
and well-judged efforts of the Duke of Broglio, and the advantages which the
possession of Minden gave them.

What is remarkable, the French attributed their misfortune in this battle to
the same error in their disposition, which lost them the battle of Blenheim;
that of composing their center almost wholly of cavalry, without any proper
support of foot.

The battle was over; but then it was that the effects of Prince Ferdinand's
admirable dispositions appeared in their full luster. The French not having
been molested by the British cavalry in their retreat, had an opportunity of
regaining their former advantageous post. They had, indeed, lost the honor of
the day, and missed the stroke which they had meditated. They had likewise lost
a great number of men. But all these losses and disgraces might be repaired,
and there seemed nothing decisive in the day of the Minden. It had certainly
happened, as it then appeared, if the Prince who foreseeing this, and
neglecting nothing which could be provided, had not formed the plan of
detaching away the Hereditary Prince in the manner already related. At five in
the morning of that day, this young hero attacked a large body of the French
under the Duke de Brisac; this body, though posted in a most advantageous
manner, he entirely defeated, and obliged them to take refuge in Minden. The
news of this blow came with an ill omen to M. de Contades, in the instant when
the English infantry began to engage his center. The enemy himself could not
help admiring the dexterity of the stroke under which he sunk: and full of
astonishment at a conduct at once so daring and judicious, paid the just
applause to a General, who could detach with security so large a body from his
army, when he was going to attack an enemy already much superior to him in
numbers.

This happy stroke decided the affair, all the passes through which the French
could draw succor or provision, were seized. They relinquished their strong
post; they fled through Minden, and passing the Weser, retreated to the
eastward of that river; thus losing all the advantages which they had made in
the campaign, and forced to retreat through a country different from that through
which they had advanced, and in which they had taken no measures to procure
subsistence.

The loss of the French in this action amounted to about seven thousand men
killed, wounded and prisoners; among whom were many officers of considerable
rank. The loss of the allies was not more than two thousand. The English, as
they gained the greatest glory, so they were the greatest sufferers. Twelve
hundred of the killed and wounded were of that nation. The Prince on the day
after the battle paid the due honors to these illustrious corpse, as well as to
several of the Hanoverians who had behaved in the same gallant manner. He did
justice to the merit of the officers; he distinguished their names; and even
particularised so low as captains. To some in the most obliging manner he sent
considerable presents; and he omitted nothing to show that he knew what it is
to be well served, and how to encourage the troops and officers to do their
duty with spirit and cheerfulness.

Although the English had the greatest share in the honor of this signal day,
and that the Prince acknowledged their merit in the strongest terms, (a) yet a
cloud was cast over their triumph. There were some expressions in the orders
for the rejoicing, which were supposed to convey a very severe reflection on
Lord G. S. commander in chief of the English forces. The Prince required with
an emphasis, which seemed particularly pointed, that his orders by his aids de
camps for the future should be more exactly obeyed. In a manner still less to
be misunderstood, he expressed his concern that the Marquis of Granby had not
had the command of the British cavalry. Had he commanded, his highness made no
doubt that the success of the day had been much more complete and brilliant.
The severe insinuation concerning the disobedience to orders, and the invidious
compliment to a subordinate officer, were clear declarations.

(a) Prince Ferdinand's Orders the Day after the Battle of Minden.
HIS Serene Highness orders his greatest thanks to be given to the whole army
for their bravery and good behavior yesterday, particularly to the British
infantry, and two battalions of Hanoverian guards; to all the cavalry of the
left wing, and to Genesis Wangeinheim's corpse, particularly the regiment of
Holstein, the Hessian cavalry, the Hanoverian regiment du Corpse and
Hamerstin's; the same to all the brigades of heavy artillery. His Serene
Highness declares publicly, that next to God he attributes the glory of the day
to the intrepidity and extraordinary good behavior of these troops, which he
assures them he shall retain the strongest sense of as long as he lives; and if
ever upon any occasion he shall be able to serve these brave troops, or any of
them in particular, it will give him the utmost pleasure. His Serene Highness
orders his particular thanks to be likewise given to Genesis Spor^ken, the Duke of
Holstein, Lieutenant Generals Imhoff and Urff. His Serene Highness is extremely
obliged to the Count de Buckeburg, for his extraordinary care and trouble in
the management of the artillery, which was served with great effect; likewise
to the commanding officers of the several brigades of artillery, viz, Col.
Brown, Lieut. Col. Hutte, Major Hasse, and the three English Captains,
Phillips, Drummond, and Foy. His Serene Highness thinks himself infinitely
obliged to Major Generals Waldegrave and Kingsly, for their great courage and
good order, in which they conducted their brigades. His Serene Highness further
orders it to be declared to Lieut. Genesis the Marquess of Granby, that he is
persuaded, that if he had had the good fortune to have had him at the head of
the cavalry of the right wing, his presence would have greatly contributed to
make the decision of that day more complete and more brilliant. In short, his
Serene Highness orders, that those of his Suite whose behavior he most admired
be named, as the Duke of Richmond, Col. Fitzrey, Cap. Ligonier, Col. Watson,
Capt. Wilson, aid de camp to Major-Gen. Waldegrave, Adjutant Generals Erstoff,
Bulow, Durendolle, the Count Tobe and Malerti; his Serene Highness having much
reason to be satisfied with their conduct. And his Serene Highness desires and
orders the generals of the army, that upon all occasions when orders are
brought to them by his aid de camps, that they be obeyed punctually, and
without delay.

Prince Ferdinand, in the orders of the 2d of August, having omitted Captain
Machean, sent the following, wrote in his own hand.
SIR,
IT is from a sense of your merit, and a regard to justice, that I do in this
manner declare I have reason to be infinitely satisfied with your behavior,
activity, and zeal, which in so conspicuous a manner you made appear at the
battle of Thornhausen on the first of August. The talents you possess in your
profession did not a little contribute to render our fire superior to that of
the enemy; and it is to you and your brigade that I am indebted for having
silenced the fire of a battery of the enemy, which extremely galled the troops,
and particularly the British infantry.

Accept then, sir, from me, the just tribute of my most perfect
acknowledgments, accompanied with my sincere thanks. I shall be happy in every
opportunity of obliging you, desiring only occasions of proving it; being with
the most distinguished esteem,

Your devoted and entirely affectionate servant, FERDINAND.

The news of a victory so glorious to our troops, and of a censure so
disgraceful to their commander, came at once to England. In proportion to the
joy which filled all hearts, in proportion to their opinion of the great
general to whom they owed so seasonable an an advantage, was their indignation
against the unfortunate commander to whom it was attributed that this advantage
was not greater. The public, as usual, judged definitively upon the first
charge. They never pardon a general whose error it is to fall short. In vain
they are prayed to suspend their judgment, and to wait for a full discussion;
the matter is already decided; they have a fact against an officer, and they
look upon all reasoning in his favor, not so much a defense of his conduct, as
the exertion of eloquence and artifice to palliate a neglect of duty. This
indeed makes the case of officers particularly hard; but then it always shows
them what they have to do.

The merits of the matter are still regarded in the same light by the public.
But the heat, the eagerness, and curiosity of the first movements being over,
the matter will be heard, whenever it comes to be again discussed with less
attention, but with less passion too. It is not for us to deliver any opinion
in so nice a controversy. We have in points of less moment hitherto declined
it; and we shall always decline it until the proper judges before whom it
probably will come, shall have taught us what to think. There is indeed no
doubt that if the cavalry of the allies right wing, situated as it was, had
been brought to act at the critical time when it had orders to move, the battle
of Minden had proved as decisive as that of Hocsted. But whether it was a fault
in the giving or the delivering of the orders, or whether it was some
misapprehension in him who received them, we cannot but sincerely pity a
commander of such admirable talents, who by the error or the misfortune of a
moment, lost an opportunity that would have ranked him for ever with the
Marlboroughs and the Brunswicks.

A few days after the battle his lordship resigned his command and returned to
London. He was but a few days in London when he was deprived of all his
military employments. The Marquis of Granby, whom the opinion of Prince
Ferdinand, and the desires of the whole army had pointed out, succeeded him in
his command. A generous and ardent courage, an affability of manners that
flowed from no artifice, a manly freedom and openness of soul, a cheerful and
unreserved conversation, a munificence that knew no bounds, so many qualities
of the man and of the soldier, endeared him to the whole army, and rendered
English and foreigners, his inferiors, his equals and his superior in command,
unanimous in his favor.

Whilst these changes were making, Prince Ferdinand lost no time to improve his
victory, by the pursuit of the French, who retired in the utmost distress. The
allies were not indeed able to overtake the main body of their army, but they
nara^ed them extreme^y, and the French were obliged to sac^ifice a great part
of their army piecemeal to preserve the rest entire. The necessity of
providing subsistence drove them toward Cassel. The Prince pursued THE MARQUIS
OF GRANBY
portrait of the Marquis of Granby them, obliged them to evacuate that place,
and once more freed that poor distressed country from the French tyranny. The
castle of Ziegenhayn, after an hour's defense, gave the allies about 400
prisoners. After this the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick,

Here a bound was set to the progress of the allied arms. Not that they were
stopped by any considerable obstruction from the main body of the French in
that quarter, but from some effects in another quarter of the unsuccessful
beginning of the campaign, from which the battle of Minden had not yet
perfectly disengaged them. Munster was still behind them, and still in the
hands of the enemy, who had a powerful garrison in that city. M. de Contades,
who even after his defeat exceeded the allies in numbers, and had now no
further view of an offensive campaign, sent a strong body under d'Armentieres,
which was reinforced by some troops from the Lower Rhine, to near 15,000 men,
to cover that place. Prince Ferdinand had before detached General Imhoff from
Cassel in order to reduce it. On the approach of d'Armentieres, Imhoff was
obliged to raise the siege. But being soon after reinforced, sanguine hopes of
conquest, set them down just where they had begun it.

The event of the battle of Minden, and the subsequent misfortunes of the
French arms, threw Versailles into the utmost confusion. Ths news of that
defeat arrived just as the King was taking horse to hunt. He retired silent and
dejected into the apartment of Madam de Pompadour, and for some time saw none
of his ministers. The Duke of Broglio and M. de Contades mutually accused each
other, for the ill conduct of that day. The public acquitted Broglio. Belleisle
and his General Contades lost all reputation: but the duke still preserved his
employment and a considerable part of his influence at court.

As soon as the first confusion and surprise of so unexpected an event was a
little abated; it was resolved to send reinforcements to their army in Germany,
and at the same time to send thither some officer of experience and authority,
who might judge, and compose, if possible, the differences which subsisted
between the commanders; as well as to assist in the deliberations for
retrieving their affairs. Public misfortunes call great men from their
obscurity. M. de Etrees was chosen on this occasion, and invested with an
authority which he unwillingly accepted. When he arrived at the French camp,

Whilst the French endeavor to piece up their broken fortune in Germany, they
made some show of pushing the other part of their scheme with vigor. All their
ports were full of the preparations for an invasion of the British dominions.
Men of war, trasports and flat-bottomed boats, now almost a word of ridicule,
were prepared with great diligence. They talked of a triple embarkation. M.
Thurot was to command a small squadron and several transports from Dunkirk,
which it was believed were intended for Scotland. This man from a master of a
merchant ship became a captain of a privateer, in which capacity he greatly
annoyed the English trade, and acquired a reputation. At a time when France
does not abound with great men, his services in this way and his daring spirit,
recommended him to a command in the King's service.

The design against England, as the voyage hither is the shortest, was to be
attempted from Havre, and some other ports of Normandy, in flat-bottomed boats.
The third embarkation, which was supposed against Ireland, was to be made from
Vannes in the Lower Brittany, where a large body of troops was assembled,
commanded by the Duke d'Aiguillon governor of that province. This embarkation
was to be covered by the fleet under M. de Conflans, which was preparing with
great diligence in Breast. Had this design been such as it was represented, and
had it been put into execution, there is no doubt but such an attempt upon both
kingdoms, at three different places at once, must have thrown the whole into no
small confusion. But excellent measures were taken on the part of England to
frustrate their designs, whatever they might have been.

A squadron under Commodore Boys was stationed before Dunkirk. Admiral Rodney
was sent to bombard Havre, which service he performed with success. Admiral
Hawke blocked up the harbor of Breast with a strong squadron, whilst a lesser
kept a watch upon that of Vannes. These precautions were continued the whole
summer, during which time the French proceeded rather slowly, but after the
battle of Minden had destroyed their hopes in Germany, they turned to this
object with the greater attention. What issue it had we shall relate in its
proper place. But their first attempts on the ocean proved as unsuccessful as
their arms on land.

A great fleet was equipped at Toulon, which some destined for America, whilst
others believed it was designed to unite itself with that of Breast to favor
the invasion. Admiral Boscawen who commanded in the Mediterranean, blocked up
this squadron, until some unfavourable weather and the foulness of his ships
obliged him to return to Gibraltar to refit. The French took this opportunity
to sail out,

They had arrived very near Gibraltar before the admiral had notice of their
approach; but notwithstanding that our ships were not perfectly prepared to
sail, the admiral used such great expedition that in two hours after the
account arrived the English fleet was out at sea.

The English fleet was composed of fourteen ships of the line besides frigates.
The enemy had twelve of the line. They were superior in the bulk of their ships
and in the number of men, if they were inferior in the number of vessels; and
it is the opinion of many persons of judgment* that if they had formed a line
of battle, and fought Mr. Boscawen in order, they might very well have hoped
for a better issue of this matter than they found. But the evil genius of
France operating on the cowardice or incapacity of their commander, induced
them to separate their fleet and fly. The English ships were newly refitted;
they proved better sailors; and the men, animated with the spirited example of
their admiral, engaged the French ships as they could overtake them; and they
overtook some of them off Cape Lagos in Portugal. A brisk engagement ensued.
Two of the enemy's ships, the Ocean and the Redoubtable, were run on shore and
burned. The first was the ship of M. de la Clue, the French admiral, who
escaped to land; but being grievously wounded, and, as it is said, having lost
both his legs, he died soon after. Two other capital ships, the Centaure and
Modeste, were taken.

The scattered remains of their fleet with difficulty got into the harbor of
Cadiz, where they were soon after blocked up, and where they still remain. This
action happened on the 18th of August; and it gave a great eclat to the British
arms, which, in the same month, had triumphed so signally both by sea and land
(b).

(b) Admiral Boscawen's Letter to Mr. Clevland, Secretary to the Admiralty,
dated, Namure, off Cape St. Vincent, August 20, 1759.
"I Acquainted you in my last of my return to Gibraltar to refit. As soon as
the ships were near ready, I ordered the Lime and Gibraltar frigates, the first
to cruize off Malaga, and the last from Estepona to Ceuta Point, to look out,
and give me timely notice of the enemy's approach.

On the 17th, at eight in the evening, the Gibraltar made the signal of their
appearance; 14 sail on the Barbary shore to the eastward of Ceuta.

I got under sail as fast as possible, and was out of the bay before ten, with
14 sail of the line, the Shannon and Aetna fireship. At day light I saw the
Gibraltar, and soon after seven sail of large ships lying to; but on our not
answering their signals, they made sail from us. We had a fresh gale, and came
up with them fast, till about noon, when it fell little wind. About half an
hour past two, some of the headmost ships began to engage; but I could not get
up to the Ocean till near four. In about half an hour, the Namur's mizen mast
and both top-sail yards were shot away; the enemy then made all the sail they
could. I shifted my flag to the Newark, and soon after the Centaur of 74 guns
struck. I pursued all night, and in the morning of the 19th, saw only four sail
of the line standing in for the land, (two of the best sailors having altered
their course in the night). We were not above three miles from them, and not
above five leagues from the shore, but very little wind. About nine the Ocean
ran amongst the breakers, and the three others anchored. I sent the Intrepid
and America to destroy the Ocean. Capt. Pratten having anchored, could not get
in; but Capt. Kirk performed that service alone. On his first firing at the
Ocean she struck. Capt. Kirk sent his officers on board. M. de la Clue having
one leg broke, and the other wounded, had been landed about half an hour; but
they found the Capt. M. Le Comte de Carne, and several officers and men on
board. Capt. Kirk, after taking them out, finding it impossible to bring the
ship off, set her on fire. Capt. Bentley, of the Warspight, was ordered against
the Temeraire of 74 guns; and brought her off with little damage, the officers
and men all on board. At the same time Vice Admiral Broderick with his division
burnt the Redoubtable, her officers and men having quitted her, being bulged;
and brought the Modeste, of 64 guns, off very little damaged.

I have the pleasure to acquaint their lordships, that most of his majesty's
ships under my command sailed better than those of the enemy.

Enclosed I send you a list of the French squadron, found on board the Modeste.

Herewith you will also receive the number of the killed and wounded on board
his majesty's ships, referring their lordships for further particulars to Capt.
Buckle.

List of the French Squadron under the command of M. de la Clue.
Ships. Guns. L'Ocean 80 burnt. Le Redoutable 74 burnt. Le Centaure 74 taken.
Le Souverain 74 escaped. Le Guerrier 74 escaped. Le Temeraire 74 taken. Le
Fantasque 64 lost comp. Le Modeste 64 taken. Le Lion 64 lost company coming
through the Streights. Le Triton 64 lost company coming through the Streights. Le
Fire 50 lost company coming through the Streights. L' Oriflamme 50 lost company
coming through the Streights. La Chimere 26 lost company coming through the
Streights. La Minerve 24 lost company coming through the Streights. La Gracieuse
24 lost company coming through the Streights.
In this engagement the English had 36 men killed, and 196 wounded.


CHAP. V.
Count Dohna disgraced. Wedel succeeds him. The Russians enter Silesia. Battle
of Zulichau. Russians take Frankfort on the Oder. Genesis Laudohn joins them. King
of Prussia joins Wedel. Battle of Cunnersdorf. King of Prussia repasses the
Oder. Soltikoff and Daun communicate. King of Prussia detaches General Wunsch
into Saxony. Parallel of the King of Prussia and Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick.

AS the King of Prussia's victory at Rosbach had given the Hanoverians an
opportunity to free their country, it might be expected that the affair at
Minden would have served to free his Prussian majesty from some of the numerous
armies that oppressed him. But as this battle was fought in the middle of the
season for action, and as Munster still continued in the possession of the
French, Prince Ferdinand could not venture at that time, to make any detachment
from his army in the King's favor, without risquing all the advantages which
he had obtained from his victory. The King of Prussia was therefore left alone
to struggle with the Austrians, Russians, Imperialists, and Swedes.

The Russians, whose motions governed those of all the other armies, left their
camp at Posna in Poland, and quitting the Vistula, drew near to the banks of
the Oder. They were under the command of a Russian nobleman, Count Soltikoff.
Count Dohna, who had been ordered to oppose them, saw that their numbers were
too considerable, and their posts too strong to be attacked with any prospect
of advantage, so that he contented himself with observing their motions, and
harassing their march. This conduct seemed more dilatory and timid than the
circumstances, or the inclinations of the King could bear. He is said to have
reproached that General in so severe a manner, for a conduct in which he was in
all probability very justifiable, that he took the first opportunity to resign
his command, and, under the pretense of recovering his health, retired to
Berlin. The King immediately put General Wedel into his place, with positive
orders to engage the Russian army at all events. To enable him to obey his
commands, he reinforced him with several detachments from his own army. The
positiveness of the King's orders on this occasion may perhaps be censured; but
it must be owned, that the time required a course next to desperate. His
hereditary dominions were in the utmost danger, and nothing but some great and
fortunate stroke could effectually prevent the junction of the Austrian and
Russians armies, an event which, of all others, he had the greatest reason to
dread.

Fortified in some measure by the reinforcements he had received, and in
consequence of his orders, Genesis Wedel resolved to attack the Russians on their
march. Manteuffel was wounded. The Prussians were obliged to retire, but they
were not pursued, and they passed the Oder without molestation. The Russians
seized upon the towns of Crossen and Frankfort on the Oder.

The King of Prussia, since the beginning of the war, had never hitherto
obtained an advantage where he was not personally present. His presence now
became more necessary than ever. Since the action at Zulichau, the Russians had
penetrated a considerable way into his territories, and had taken possession of
the important city of Frankfort upon the Oder. He therefore marched with 10,000
of his best troops, to join the broken army of Wedel, in order to drive this
formidable and determined enemy from his country. Prince Henry commanded the
remainder of his army, which was too well posted to fear any insult during his
absence. The eyes of all were fixed upon his march, and his soldiers, who
remembered Zorndorf, eagerly longed to try their strength once more with the
same antagonists.

M. Daun was not unapprised of the motions of the Russians, or the designs of
the King of Prussia. He knew that the great fault of the Russian troops, was
the want of a regular and firm cavalry, which might be depended upon in a day
of action. This defect was a principal cause of their misfortune at Zorndorf in
the last year; a misfortune which disconcerted all the operations of that
campaign. As this was the only want which the Russians were under, so it was
that which Daun was best able to supply at a short warning. With this view he
selected about 12,000 of his horse, and there is no better horse than that of
the Austrians, which with about 8000 foot, he placed under the command of Genesis
Laudohn, one of the ablest officers in that service. This body was divided into
two columns, one of which marched through Silesia, and the other through
Lusatia. By extreme good fortune and conduct, with little loss or opposition,
they both joined the Russian army, and were received with transports of joy.

In the mean time the King of Prussia, who was unable to prevent this stroke,
joined General Wedel at Muhlrose, before into Saxony with nine thousand men, in
order to oppose the Imperialists in that country. With these reinforcements he
was not able to raise his army to fifty thousand complete. That of the Russians
since the junction of Laudohn, was upwards of ninety thousand. They had
besides, taken a post, which they had so strongly entrenched, and defended with
such a prodigious number of cannon, that it was extremely difficult and
hazardous to attempt them, yet under these accumulated disadvantages, it was
absolutely necessary that he should fight. The detachments from Count Daun's
army already menaced Berlin; Saxony, which he was obliged to leave exposed, had
become a prey to the Imperialists; and the Russians united with the Austrians,
encamped before his eyes in Silesia, the best and richest part of his
dominions. In short, his former reputation, his present difficulties, his
future hopes, every motive of honor and of safety demanded an engagement; the
campaign hasted to a decision, and it was evident that nothing farther could be
done by marches and choice of posts. The sanguine temper of other generals has
often obliged them to fight under disadvantages; but the King of Prussia's
circumstances were such, that from the multitude of his enemies, he was neither
able to consult times nor situations. Rashness could hardly dictate, any thing
which in his condition, would not have been recommended by prudence.

When the attack was resolved, the King's troops put themselves in motion at
two in the morning, and having formed themselves in a wood,

The Russian entrenchments were forced with great slaughter. Seventy-two pieces
of cannon were taken. But still there was a defile to be passed, and several
redoubts to be mastered, which covered the village of Cunnersdorf. These were
attacked with the same resolution, and taken one after another. The enemy made
another stand at the village, and endeavored to preserve their ground there,
by pushing forward several battalions of horse and foot; but their resistance
there, proved not more effectual than it had done every where else; they were
driven from post to post, quite to the last redoubts. For upwards of six hours
Fortune favored the Prussians, who every where broke the enemy, with an
unparallelled slaughter. They had driven them from almost all the ground which
they had occupied before the battle, they had taken more than half their
artillery; scarce any thing seemed wanting to the most complete decision.

The King in those circumstances wrote a billet to the Queen to this effect;
Madam, we have beat the Russians from their entrenchments. In two hours expect
to hear of a glorious victory. This news arrived at Berlin, just as the post
was going out, and the friends of the King of Prussia throughout Europe,
exulted in a certain conclusive victory. Mean time, Fortune was preparing for
him a terrible reverse.

The enemy, defeated in almost every quarter, found their left wing, shattered
as it was, to be more entire than any other part of the army. Count Soltikoff
therefore assembled the remains of his right, and gathering as many as he could
from the center, reinforced that wing, and made a stand at a redoubt which had
been erected on an advantageous eminence, in a place called The Jew^ burying
ground. Nothing was wanting to finish matters in favor of the King, but to
drive the Russians from this their last hope. But this enterprise was
difficult. It is confidently said, that the Prussian generals were unanimous in
opinion, that they should not endeavor at that time to push any further the
advantages they had obtained. They represented to the King, that the enemy was
still very numerous, their artillery considerable, and the post which they
occupied of great strength; that his brave troops, who had been engaged for so
long a time, in the severest action, perhaps, ever known, and in one of the
hottest days ever felt, were too much exhausted for a new attempt; an attempt
of such extreme difficulty, as might daunt even troops that were quite fresh.
That the advantage he gained would be as decisive in its consequences as that
at Zorndorf; and whilst the enemy filled the gazettes of their party, with
frivolous disputes of the field of battle, he would be reaping, as he did then,
all the effects of an unquestioned victory. That the enemy would be obliged to
retire immediately into Poland, and to leave him at liberty to act in other
quarters, where his presence was full as necessary.

These reasons were very cogent; and for a few moments they seemed to ha^ some
weight with the King. But his character soon determined him to a contrary
resolution. He could not bear to be a conqueror by halves. One effort more was
alone wanting to that victory, which would free him for ever from the
adversary, which had leaned heaviest on him during the whole war.

Once more he put all to the hazard. His infantry, still resolute, and
supported by their late success, were readily brought to act again. They drew
on their bodies fainting with heat and labor to a new attack. But the
enterprise was beyond their strength. The situation of the enemy was
impregnable; and their artillery, which began to be superior to that of the
Prussians, on account of the difficulty of the ground, which made it impossible
for the latter to bring up any other than a few small pieces, repulsed these
feeble battalions with a great slaughter. With an astonishing, perhaps, with a
blameable perseverance, the Prussian infantry was brought to a second attack,
and were a second time repulsed, and with a loss greater than at first. These
efforts being unsuccessful, the affair was put to the cavalry. They made
redoubled but useless attacks; the horses were spent, as well as those they
carried.

It was just at that time, when the Prussian horse was wasted by these
unsuccessful efforts, that the greatest part of the Russian, and the whole body
of the Austrian cavalry, which had been hitherto quite inactive, and which was
therefore quite fresh, rushed down upon them, broke them to pieces, forced them
back upon their foot, and threw the whole into irreparable disorder. The whole
army was seized with a panic; and in a few minutes those troops, so lately
victorious and irresistible, were totally dispersed and defeated. The King did
every thing to restore the field, hazarding his person, even beyond his former
daring, and prodigal of a life, which he seemed to think, ought not to be
separated from conquest. Thrice he led on his troops to the charge; two horses
were killed under him; several balls were in his clothes. The efforts of skill,
courage, and despair, were made, and proved ineffectual; a single error
outweighed them all. Scarcely a general, hardly an inferior officer in the army
was without some wound. That of General Seidlitz was particularly unfortunate;
for to that wound, the failure of the horse which he commanded, was principally
attributed. It was to the spirit and conduct of this able officer, that a great
part of the success at Zorndorf was owing, and the last campaign. It is known,
that if it had not been for a seasonable movement of the horse, the whole
Prussian army had then been in great danger of a defeat.

The night, and the prudent use of some eminences, which were defended as well
as circumstances would admit, preserved the Prussian army from total
destruction. However, this loss was far greater than any which they had
sustained from the beginning of the war. All their cannon was taken, the
killed, wounded, and prisoners, by the most favorable accounts, were near
twenty thousands. General Putkammer was killed on the spot. These generals
whose names are so distinguished in this war, Itzenplitz, Hulsen, Finck, Wedel,
and Seidlitz, were among the wounded; as was the Prince of Wurtenburg, and five
major generals. The enemy could not have fewer than ten thousand killed on
their side. For hardly ever was a more bloody battle.

When the King of Prussia found himself obliged to quit the field, he sent
another dispatch to the Queen, expressed in this manner, Remove from Berlin
with the royal family. Let the archives be carried to Potzdam. The town may
make conditions with the enemy. We should in vain attempt to draw the picture
of the court and city, on the receipt of such news in the midst of the joy,
which they indulged for that which they had received but a few hours before.
The terror was increased by the indistinct relation that soon followed, which
gave them only to understand, that their army was totally routed; that there
was no account of the King, and that a Russian army was advancing to take
possession of their city.

The day after the battle, the King of Prussia repassed the Oder, and encamped
at Retwein. From thence he moved to Fustenwalde, and placed himself in such a
manner, that the Russians did not venture to make any attempt upon Berlin. He
continually watched their army; a part of which, instead of turning toward
Brandenburgh, marched into Lusatia, where it joined that of the Austrians. Here
the victorious General Soltikoff, for the first time, met M. Daun, and amidst
rejoicings and congratulations, consulted about the measures for improving
their success.

The Russian and Austrian armies thus united, scarce seemed from their strength
and their victories, to have any other deliberation left, than of what part of
the Prussian dominions they should take possession. The King was twice defeated
with a vast loss. He was cut off from all communication with the army of his
brother Prince Henry; yet to the astonishment of all the world, the superior,
the victorious and united army acted upon the defensive, and were curbed in all
their motions, and frustrated in all their designs, by the inferior, the beated
and divided. Nothing ever showed the genius of the King of Prussia more fully,
than his conduct after the battle of Cunnersdorf. In a few days after so
terrible a defeat, every thing was in order in his camp. He supplied the loss
of his artillery from his stores in Berlin. He recalled General Kleist, with
about five thousand men from Pomerania; in presence of two such armies as
those, of M. Daun and Count Soltikoff, he detached six thousand men from his
small body, to the relief of Saxony, where the army of the Empire had availed
itself of his absence, to reduce the whole country. Hall, Wittemberg, Leipsic,
Torgau, and at last Dresden itself, had opened their gates to the Imperialists.
With the remainder of his troops, he put himself between the Russians and Great
Glogau, covered that city, which was the object of the enemy's designs, and saw
them soon after, notwithstanding their two victories, obliged to return again
into Poland; and to leave him free for the rest of the campaign.

What was done by the King of Prussia since that time, will be the subject of
another chapter; after we have related the proceedings of the English and
French in America, to which the order of time directs our present attention.
But we cannot dismiss the affairs of Germany, in which two such battles as
those of Minden and Cunnersdorf were fought, with events so different for the
common cause, without observing something concerning the two generals who
conducted them.

They are certainly in reputation the first in Europe, which probably never
produced two greater men; though they differ as much in their characters, and
in the kind of talents they possess, as they agree in the greatness of their
abilities for war. The King of Prussia, rapid, vehement, impatient, often gives
decisive blows; but he often misses his stroke, and wounds himself. Prince
Ferdinand is cool, deliberate, exact, and guarded; he sees every possible
advantage, he takes it at the moment, pursues it as far as it will go; but
never attempts to push it farther. Nothing in the man disturbs the commander.
In him, we do not see a person who is a great soldier; it is the idea of a
perfect General; it is a general in the abstract. Ferdinand suffers his temper
to be guided by his business. He never precipitates matters; he takes them in
their order and their course, and trusts nothing to fortune. The King on the
other hand, leads, and even forces circumstances; he does not endeavor to
remove but to over-leap obstacles; he puts all to the risque; and by suffering
Fortune to play her part in his designs, he acquires a splendour and eclat in
his actions, which mere wisdom could never give him. Prince Ferdinand is famous
for never committing a fault. The King of Prussia is above all the world, in
repairing those he has committed. Like some of the great masters in writing,
when ever he makes, or seems to make a mistake, it is a signal to the observer,
to prepare for some great and admirable stroke of spirit and conduct. His
errors seem to be spurs to his abilities. He commits an error, he repairs it;
he errs again; and again astonishes us by his manner of escaping. We should
often condemn the commander, but that we are always forced to admire the hero.

CHAP. VI.
Plan of the campaign in North America. Three expeditions. Ticonderoga and
Crown Point abandoned. Colonel Townshend killed. Expedition to Niagara. Colonel
Prideaux killed. Sir William Johnson defeats the French. Takes Fort Niagara.
Consequences of this.

THE theater of our operations in America, is of such a vast extent, that if we
had persevered in the course we pursued for some time, in attacking but one
place at once, the war would inevitably be spun out to an extreme length,
without bringing on any thing decisive; and it would have rendered our natural
superiority of little use, by suffering the French to collect, as they had
hitherto done, their strength into one single point, which enabled them to
contend with us, with a force sufficient for the service in that country. This
year another method was followed. It was proposed to attack the French in all
their strong posts at once; to fall as nearly as possible at the same time upon
Crown Points, Niagara, and the forts to the south of Lake Erie, whilst a great
naval armament, and a considerable body of land forces should attempt Quebec,
by the River St. Lawrence.

This plan was very advisable, as it tended to weaken, by distracting the
resistance of the enemy, and whilst we adhered to it, it was clearly impossible
for the French to maintain their ground in any of those places which were
attacked, without very weakly defending, or even deserting some of the others;
and if, by the means of such diversions, any of those places should fall into
our hands, the campaign could not be said to be spent to no purpose. But
besides the end in distracting the enemy's defense, there was another proposed
of no less consequence; which was to make a concurrence in all the various
operations, so that whilst they divided the enemy, they might mutually support
one another.

General Amherst, who commanded the American forces in chief, with the most
considerable body, amounting, in regulars and provincials, to about twelve
thousand men, was to attack Ticonderoga and Crown Point by Lake-George; the
reduction of those forts would naturally lay open the Lake Champlain, where,
having established a sufficient naval force, he was by the River Sorel, which
forms the communication between this Lake and the great River St. Lawrence, to
proceed directly to Quebec, the capital of Canada. Here he was to make a
junction with General Wolf and Admiral Saunders, who having entered the River
St. Lawrence at the opposite quarter, would probably have commenced the siege
of Quebec, by the time that General Amherst might find it practicable to join
them. It was not doubted, that if this junction could be effected, the
reduction of that city would follow of course.

The third of the grand operations was against the fort, near the Fall of
Niagara; a place of very great consequence both in war and in peace. The
reduction of this was committed to Brigadier General Prideaux, under whom Sir
William Johnson commanded the provincials of New York, and several Indians of
the Five Nations, who were engaged in our service by the credit that gentleman
had obtained among their tribes.

The object of this operation lay too remote from the others, to expect, with
any great confidence, that they could be assisted by its success in any other
manner than by weakening the enemy's forces. However it was hoped, that if they
should be fortunate enough to take Niagara, early in the season, the troops
might be embarked on the Lake Ontario, and finding no longer any obstruction
from Fort Frontenac, which was destroyed last year, might fall down the River
St. Lawrence, and possibly either make themselves masters of Montreal, or by
their approach at least, draw such a force to that part, as greatly to
facilitate our designs upon Quebec and Crown Point. But if this scheme, in
addition to its own end, should not facilitate either of the other two capital
undertakings, it would probably, as it was the most important place the French
had in that part of the world, draw all the troops they had upon the Lakes to
attempt its relief, which would leave the fort, on those Lakes exposed to a
fourth, though inferior expedition, which was made against them, under General
Stanwix. In reality, it afterward had that effect.

The army under General Amherst was the first in motion. The Lake George, or,
as the French call it, Lake Sacrament, is a long, but in proportion, narrow
water, about forty miles in length, and enclosed on either side with marshy
grounds. This communicates by another long and very narrow straight with Lake
Champlain. This straight is secured at each side by a fort; that to the side of
Lake George, is called Ticonderoga; that to the Champlain Lake, is called Fort
Frederick, or Crown Point; both extremely strong in their situation; and the
former of which had repulsed our troops with a very considerable slaughter, as
has been related amongst the events of the last year.

General Amherst, after he had passed Lake George, arrived with very little
opposition from the enemy before Ticonderoga; at first the French made some
appearance, as if they meant to defend the place; but as they knew the strength
of our forces, as they saw that the preparations for the attack were making
with as much judgment as vigor, and as the enterprise which was preparing
against Quebec, did not leave them a force so considerable as they had there in
the preceding campaign, they abandoned their fort in the night,

General Am^^rst immediately set himself about repairing the fortifications of
this post, which effectually secured the Lake George; covered our colonies, and
was of such vast importance, to enable him to push forward his offensive
operations, or to favor his retreat, in case of a reverse of fortune. The only
loss of any consequence which the English army suffered, in making this
valuable acquisition, was the death of Colonel Townsend, who was killed in
reconnoitring, by a shot from the fort. The steady bravery, the promising
genius, and the agreeable manners of this officer, caused this loss to be
considered as a very great one. They compared this melancholy event with the
death of Lord How; they remembered how much these young soldiers resembled
each other, both in their virtues, and in the circumstances of their fate. Both
dear to the troops, and having both lost their lives on an expedition against
this place.

Although the general had reason to imagine, that the same reasons which had
induced the enemy to abandon their fort and lines at Ticonderoga, would
persuade them also to relinquish Crown Point; he took all his measures with the
same care, as if he expected an obstinate defense at the fort, and an attempt
to surprise him on his march. He remembered how fatal security had proved to
us, in that part of the world upon many occasions.

The French abandoned the fort as it had been foreseen. The general retired
with about three thousand five hundred men to the bottom of Lake Champlain, and
posted himself at the island called Isle du Noix. He was still pretty strong on
the lake, having several armed boats and sloops, with which he hoped to prevent
the progress of the English into the interior parts of Canada. General Amherst,
as soon as he had taken possession of Crown Point, used every endeavor to
attain a naval superiority on the lake, agreeable news of the reduction of
Niagara, by the troops under Sir William Johnson; and he had the pleasure and
encouragement of seeing two of the great objects of the campaign accomplished,
whilst he prepared himself to cooperate in the accomplishment of the third,
which was to be decisive of the whole. The body which had been appointed for
Niagara, under General Prideaux, without any accident arrived at the fort,
which lies at the bottom of the lake, toward the south-west (a).

(a) Sir William Johnson's Letter to Major General Amherst, on his Conquest of
the Fort at Niagara, 25th July, 1759.
SIR,
I Have the honor to acquiant you, by lieutenant Monterieff, Niagara
surrendered to his majesty's arms the 25th instant. A detachment of 1200 men,
with a number of Indians, under the command of Messrs. Aubry and de Lignery,
collected from Detroi, Venango, and Presque Isle, made an attempt to reinforce
the garrison, the 24th in the morning; but as I had intelligence of them* I
made a disposition to intercept them. The evening before, I ordered the light
infantry and picquets to take post on the road upon our left, leading from
Niagara Falls to the fort: In the morning, I reinforced these with two
companies of grenadiers, and part of the 46th regiment. The action began about
half an hour after nine; but they were so well received by the troops in front,
and the Indians on their flank, that, in an hour's time, the whole was
completely ruined, and all their officers made prisoners, among whom are Mons.
Aubry, De Lignery, Marin, Repentini, etc. to the number of 17. I cannot
ascertain the number of killed, they are so dispersed among the woods, but
their loss is great.

As this happened under the eyes of the garrison, I thought proper to send my
last summons to the commanding officer for his surrendering, which he listened
to. M. Mon^rieff will inform you of the state of our ammunition and provisions:
I hope care will be taken to forward an immediate supply of both to Oswego. As
the troops that were defeated yesterday were drawn from those posts, which lie
in General Stanwix's route, I am in hopes it will be of the utmost consequence
to the success of this expedition. The public stores of the garrison, that can
be saved from the Indians, I shall order the assistant quarter-master-general,
and the clerk to take an account of, as soon as possible.

As all my attention at present is taken up with the Indians, that the
capitulation I have agreed to may be observed, your Excellency will excuse my
not being more particular.

Permit me to assure you, in the whole progress of the siege, which was severe
and painful, the officers and men behaved with the utmost cheerfulness and
bravery. I have only to regret the loss of General Prideaux and Colonel
Johnson. I endeavored to pursue the late General's vigorous measures, the good
effects of which he deserved to enjoy.

W. JOHNSON.


This is without exception, the most important post in America, and secures the
greatest number of communications. For it is situated at the very entrance of a
straight, by which the Lake Ontario is joined to that of Erie, which is
connected with the other three great seas of fresh water, by the course of the
^^st riv^^ St. Lawrence, which runs through them all, and carries off their
superfluous waters to the ocean. A little above the fort, is the cataract of
Niagara, which is esteemed the most remarkable in the world, for the quantity
of water, and the greatness of the fall. This fall would interrupt the commerce
between the lakes, but for a road which the French have made up the hilly
country that lies up the straight; so that there is here a good carrying-place,
and not very tedious; for after a portage of about eight miles, you reimbark
again, and proceed without any interruption to the Lake Erie.

As the great communication of those who go by water is along this straight,
and carrying place, so those who travel by land, are obliged to cross it. The
lakes are so disposed, that without a somewhat hazardous voyage, the Indians
cannot any otherwise pass from the north-west to the south-east parts of
North America, for many hundred miles. The fort of Niagara, thus naturally
commands all the Five Nations, and all those Indian tribes that lie to the
northward of the lakes, as well as those that are scattered along the banks of
the Ohio, Ouabache, and Missisippi, and according as it is possessed by the
English or the French, connects or disjoints the colonies of Canada and
Lousiana, protects or lays open our own, and is in all respects of so much
consequence, that it was the opinion of persons, the most conversant in
American business, that this attempt ought to have been made much earlier; and,
that if such an attempt, made at such a time, had succeeded, it would have
contributed very much to the security of those parts of our colonies, which
were the most exposed, and would have, at the same time, greatly facilitated
all our offensive measures, and shortened the war.

From the time that the French were acquainted with this place, they were fully
possessed with an opinion of its importance, both with regard to commerce, and
to dominion. They made several attempts to establish themselves here; but the
Indians who seemed more sensible of the consequences than we were, constantly
opposed it. They guarded this spot for a long time, with a very severe and
prudent jealousy.

But whilst we neglected, confiding in our strength, to cultivate the
friendship of the Indians, the French, sensible of their weakness, omitted no
endeavor to gain these savage people to their interests, and they prevailed at
last, under the name of a trading house, to erect a strong fort at the mouth of
the straight, on the very best harbor, not only on this, but on any of the
lakes; an harbor which is safe from every wind, and open for the whole year. A
French officer, an able and enterprising man, had been a prisoner among the
Iroquois for a long time, and having, according to their custom, been
naturalized, he grew extremely popular amongst them, and at last acquired his
liberty. He communicated to the then Governor of Canada, the plan of an
establishment at Niagara, and he himself undertook to execute it. He returned
amongst the Iroquois, and pretending great love for their nation, which was now
his own, told them, that he would gladly come to make frequent visits to his
brethren; but it was proper for that purpose, that they should allow him to
build an house, where he might live at ease, and according to his own manner:
at the same time, he proposed to them, advantages in trade from this
establishment. A request, which seemed a compliment to those to whom it was
made, was readily granted. The house was built. By degrees this house extended
itself; it was strengthened by various additions; and it grew at last to a
regular fortress, which has ever since awed the Five Nations, and checked our
colonies.

The siege of this place had not been long formed, before General Prideaux was
killed in the trenches, by the bursting of a cohorn. an express was sent to
General Amberst, who always attentive to the service, lost no time to send an
officer of character to command in his place. But the command, which in the
interim devolved upon Sir William Johnson, could not have been better bestowed.
He omitted nothing to continue the vigorous measures of the late General, and
added to them, every thing his own genius could suggest. Respected by the
regular troops, dear to the provincials, almost adored by the Indians,
possessed of that genius for acquiring popularity amongst all kinds of men, and
that versatile disposition, which we so seldom see united with
disinterestedness and integrity, he employed those talents solely for the
benefit of his country. The troops, remembering, that it was under that
General, the first advantage had been obtained over the French, pushed on the
siege with so much alacrity, that in a few days they had brought their
approaches within an hundred yards of the covered way

The French were alarmed at the imminent danger of this interesting place. They
therefore collected all the regular troops and provincials, which they could
draw from all their posts about the lakes, and to those joined a large body of
savages, in order to give the English battle, and to raise the siege. The
amounted in all to 1700 men.

When General Johnson was apprized of their approach, he ordered his light
infantry, supported by some grenadiers and regular foot, to take post on the
road to his left, by which the French were to take their route. He placed his
Indians on his flanks. Whilst he took measures to receive the French, who came
to relieve the place, he posted a strong body, in such a manner, as to secure
his trenches from any attempt of the garrison during an engagement.

In this disposition he waited to receive the enemy. their whole army was
ruined. The pursuit was hot and bloody; and it continued for five miles.
Seventeen officers were made prisoners, among whom were the first and second in
command.



This was the second very important service performed by General Johnson in
this war, and a second time he had the good fortune to make the commander in
chief of the enemy his prisoner. It must not be omitted, to the honor of this
gentleman, that though he was not regularly bred a soldier, the most complete
officer could not have made more excellent dispositions for the battle, or have
conducted the siege from the beginning to the end, with a more cool and steady
resolution, or with a more complete knowledge of all the necessary maneuvers
of war. The taking of Niagara broke off effectually that communication, so much
talked off, and so much dreaded, between Canada and Louisiana, and by this
stroke, one of the capital political designs of the French, which gave occasion
to the present war, was defeated in its direct and immediate object.

CHAP. VII.
The expedition against Quebec. The Isle of Orleans occupied. Description of
the town and harbor of Quebec. Situation of the French army. Action at the
Falls of Montmorenci. General Wolf sickens. The camp removed to Point Levi.
The troops go up the river. The battle of Quebec. General Wolf killed. French
defeated. M. de Montcalm killed. Quebec surrenders. Movements of General
Amherst on Lake Champlain.

THE consequences which attended the reduction of the fort of Niagara, as well
as those upon Lake Champlain, were very interesting; but the great and central
operation to which all the rest tended, and to which even those were to be only
subservient, was that against Quebec, the capital of Canada; and as this was to
be the decisive stroke, it was proper that the greatest force should have been
employed against it. If we reckon the maritime force, there is no doubt that we
employed a greater number of men against Quebec, than against the Champlain
forts; but the land forces, from some cause, fell much short of the number
originally proposed, for they did not exceed 7000 men, regulars and
provincials, though the original plan intended 9000 for that expedition,
independent of the junction of those under Genesis Amherst, whose assistance on
the occasion was taken for granted. In this expedition Genesis Wolf commanded the
land forces. The fleet was under Admiral Saunders.



As this island extends quite up to the basin of Quebec, it was necessary to
possess it in order to act against the town; for the most westerly point of
this island advances toward an high point of land on the continent, called
Point Levi. Both of these shut up the view of the northern and southern
channel, which environ the isle of Orleans, so that the harbor of Quebec
appears to be a basin landlocked upon all sides. The possession of both these
points were necessary, as they might be employed either with great advantage
against the town, or much to the annoyance of the besiegers; for whilst the
enemy continued masters of those, it was impossible for a ship to lie in the
harbor of Quebec. When these posts were possessed, which was done with little
difficulty, the harbor and town of Quebec appeared full to the view, at on^e a
tempting and discouraging sight. For no place seems possessed of greater
benefits of nature; nor any of which nature seems more to have consulted the
defense.

Quebec, says F. Charlevoix, can boast of a fresh water harbor, capable of
containing an hundred men of war of the line, at one hundred and twenty leagues
distance from the sea. It lies on the most navigable river in the universe. The
river St. Laurence up to the isle of Orleans, that is for about 112 leagues
from its mouth, is no where less than from four to five leagues broad; but
above that isle it narrows, so that before Quebec it is not above a mile over.
Hence this place got the name of Quebeis or Quebec, which, in the Algonquin
tongue, signifies a strait.

The city is the seat of the governor and the intendant, and the supreme
tribunals of justice for all the French North America; it is also an episcopal
see, and a place of considerable trade. It is large in extent, and elegant in
many of its buildings both public and private. It consists of an upper and
lower town; the lower, which is narrow, is built upon a strand, at the foot of
a lofty rock, upon which the upper town stands. This rock extends itself, and
continues with a bold and steep front, westward along the river St. Laurence
for a considerable way. Another river from the north-west, called St. Charles,
falls here into the former, washing the foot of the rock on which Quebec
stands; the point on which the town is built, thus becomes a sort of peninsula
by the junction of these rivers; so that whoever attacks Quebec, must either
make his approaches above the town, and overcome the precipice which I have
mentioned, or cross the river St. Charles, and attempt it upon that side. The
former of those methods must appear to a prudent commander wholly unadviseable,
and the latter extremely difficult. If the former method should be attempted,
they would have that dangerous precipice to overcome, defended by the enemies
whole force, which the attack would draw to this quarter. On the other hand the
country from the river St. Charles to the northward, for more than five miles,
is extremely rough, broken and difficult, full of rivulets, gullies, and
ravines, and so continues to the river of Montmorenci, which flows by the foot
of a steep and woody hill. On the side of the river St. Laurence is a bank of
sand of great extent, which prevents the approach of any considerable vessel.

In this advantageous situation was the French army posted, upon what was
deemed the only accessible side of Quebec, all along from the river St. Charles
to that of Montmorenci, entrenched at every attackable spot, with the river and
sandbank abovementioned in their front, and thick impenetrable woods upon their
rear. It is impossible to imagine a stronger post; a post at once more
defensible in itself, or better calculated for succouring a city, on which side
soever it should be attacked. Thus posted, they greatly exceeded in number the
besiegers, being about 10,000 men, under an able, and thitherto fortunate
commander, M. de Montcalm, who, though he was superior in number to the
English, resolved to risque nothing, and wisely relied on the natural strength
of the country.

When Wolf saw the situation of the town, the nature of the country, the
number of the troops, and their position, though of a sanguine temper and
highly adventurous, he began to despair; but, however another commander might
have thought inaction in such circumstances justified to himself, or even to
the world, by such strong appearances, Wolf resolved to leave nothing
unattempted, but amidst the choice of difficulties which lay before him, to
pitch upon those where the valor of his troops might be employed with the best
prospect of success.

As soon as he had secured the west point of the isle of Orleans, and that of
Levi, he erected batteries there of cannon and mortars, on the high ground,
from the point of Levi, which looks toward the town; these fired continually
upon the place; Admiral Saunders was stationed below in the north channel of
the isle of Orleans, opposite to Montmorenci; Admiral Holmes was stationed
above the town, at once to distract the enemies attention, and to prevent any
attempts from the enemy against the batteries that played upon the town.

After this wise disposition was made of the fleet, Genesis Wolf caused the
troops to be transported over the north channel of the river St. Laurence, to
the north-east of Montmorenci, with a view of passing that river, and bringing
the enemy to an engagement. Some heights which commanded the enemies
intrenchments, and a ford above, and another below the falls, encouraged him to
this attempt; but upon reconnoitring the ground, the opposite shore was found
so steep and woody, that he could not hope to put his design in execution,
which was by moving toward the enemies flank, to draw them to an engagement.
To bring the French to an action was his single object. He had found that any
attempts to assault the city would prove to no purpose, whilst the fleet could
only batter the lower town, and must suffer greatly by the cannon and bombs of
the upper, whilst they were employed in this ineffectual service; for after the
reduction of the lower town, the passages to the upper were extremely steep,
and moreover so well entrenched, that this advantage would prove little toward
the reduction of the place.

The only point left, therefore, was by every means to entice or force the
enemy to an engagement; and to this end no means were omitted, by sending
detachments up the river, and by every appearance of a design to attack the
town on that side. But the Marquis de Montcalm, in choosing his post, was well
apprised of its importance. He knew sufficiently the nature of the country up
the river, and he trusted to it; and therefore kept himself closely in his
post, disposing his parties of savages, in which he was very strong, in such a
manner, as to make any attempt upon him by surprise absolutely impossible. In
the mean time, from the town, fireships and boats were let down the stream to
destroy the shipping, which, as they almost wholly filled the channel, were
greatly endangered. But by the extraordinary skill and vigilance of Admiral
Saunders, every vessel of this kind sent against them was towed ashore without
doing the least mischief.

The general finding that all his efforts to decoy the enemy to an engagement
had proved unsuccessful, and, sensible that they desired nothing more than to
act defensively, until the season itself should fight for them and oblige the
English to retire, he came at last, in spite of all difficulties, to the
resolution of attacking them in their entrenchments on the side of Montmorenci.
The place where the attack was to be made, was chosen with great judgment, as
the only place thereabouts in which the artillery could be brought into use; as
there, and there only, the greatest part, or even the whole of the troops,
might act at once, and that there the retreat in case of a repulse was secure,
at least for a certain time of the tide. Having determined upon the place where
the attack was to be, which was at the mouth of the river Montmorenci, the best
dispositions for it were made, both on the part of the Admiral and of the
General.

The English grenadiers, who led the attack, had orders, immediately after
their landing, to form themselves on the beach; but instead of forming
themselves as they were directed, from the hurry and noise of their landing, or
from an ill-governed ardor, they rushed impetuously toward the enemies
entrenchments in the utmost disorder and confusion, without waiting for the
corpse which were to sustain them, and join in the attack. In this disorder,
they were met by a violent and steady fire from the entrenchments, by which
they were thrown into more confusion, and obliged them to shelter themselves
behind a redoubt, which the French had abandoned on their appro^ch.

The General perceiving that it was impossible for these grenadiers to form
under so severe a fire, that the night drew on, a violent tempest was
gathering, and the tide began to make, saw clearly that he had nothing further
left, than to order a retreat, with as little disadvantage as possible. He
therefore called off those troops, and having formed behind Brig. Monckton's
corpse, which was on the beach in excellent order, the whole repassed the river
without molestation, the General exposing his person with that intrepidity,
which distinguished him both during the attack, and the retreat.

The loss in this check was not inconsiderable; and the event on the whole was
such, as to discourage any further attempts upon that side. They returned to
the old measures. The General again sent some bodies above the town, and some
men of war sailed up the stream for more than twelve leagues. They received
intelligence that the enemy had amassed some magazines of provisions in the
interior country, and they proposed by getting between them and the town, to
draw the French army from their entrenchments, to the long-desired engagement;
but if they failed to compass this, they might at least destroy the ships of
war which the enemy had in the river, and help to open a communication between
them and Genesis Amherst, on whom their last expectations were fixed, and who,
they flattered themselves, was on his march to their assistance.

But though they succeeded in destroying some of the enemies magazines, there
was nothing of great moment in this. They could not come near the men of war.
However they received intelligence from some prisoners, of the success of Sir
William Johnson against Niagara; they learned likewise, that the French had
soothed the difficulties in the way of Genesis Amherst, by abandoning Crown Point
and Ticonderoga. But this intelligence, otherwise so pleasing, brought them no
prospect of the approach of any assistance from that quarter. The season wasted
apace. The General fell violently ill, consumed by care, watching, and a
fatigue, too great to be supported by a delicate constitution, and a body
unequal to that vigorous and enterprising soul that it lodged. It was not
enough for him to escape from so great an expedition uncondemned and
unapplauded; to be pitied, was he thought but a milder censure; and he knew
that no military conduct can shine, unless it be gilded with success. His own
high notions, the public hope, the good success of other commanders, all turned
inward upon him, oppressed his spirits, and converted disappointment into
disease. As soon as he had a little recovered, he dispatched an express with an
accouns of his proceedings to England (c), written indeed in the style of
despondency, but with such perspicuity, clearness, and elegance, as would have
ranked him amongst our best writers, if his military exploits had not placed
him among our greatest commanders.

(c) Major General Wolfe's Letter, and Admiral Saunders's, to Mr. Secretary
Pit, relative to the Operations at Quebec.
Head Quarters at Montmorenci, in the River Saint Laurence, Sept. 2, 1759. SIR,
I Wish I could, upon this occasion, have the honor of transmitting to you a
more favorable account of the progress of his Majesty's arms; but the
obstacles we have met with, in the operations of the campaign, are much greater
than we had reason to expect, or could foresee; not so much from the number of
the enemy (though superior to us) as from the natural strength of the country,
which the Marquis de Montcalm seems wisely to depend upon.

When I learned that succors of all kinds had been thrown into Quebec; that
five battalions of regular troops, completed from the best of the inhabitants
of the country, some of the troops of the colony, and every Canadian that was
able to bear arms, besides several nations of savages, had taken the field in a
very advantageous situation; I could not flatter myself that I should be able
to reduce the place. I sought however an occasion to attack their army, knowing
well, that with these troops I was able to fight, and hoping that a victory
might disperse them.

We found them encamped along the shore of Beaufort, from the river St. Charles
to the falls of Montmorenci, and entrenched in every accessible part. The 27th
of June we landed upon the isle of Orleans; but receiving a message from the
Admiral, that there was reason to think the enemy had artillery, and a force
upon the point of Levi, I detached Brig. Monckton with four battalions to them
from thence. He passed the river the 29th at night, and marched the next day to
the point; he obliged the enemy's irregulars to retire, and possessed himself
of that post: The advanced parties upon this occasion had two or three
skirmishes with the Canadians and Indians, with little loss on either side.

Colonel Carleton marched with a detachment to the Westermost point of the isle
of Orleans, from whence our operations were likely to begin.

It was absolutely necessary to possess these two points, and fortify them;
because from either the one or the other, the enemy might make it impossible
for any ship to be in the basin of Quebec, or even within two miles of it.

Batteries of cannon and mortars were erected with great dispatch on the point
of Levi, to bombard the town and magazines, and to injure the works and
batteries: The enemy perceiving these works in some forwardness, passed the
river with 1600 men to attack and destroy them. Unluckily they fell into
confusion, fired upon one another, and went back again; by which we lost an
opportunity of defeating this large detachment. The effect of this artillery
has been so great (though across the river) that the upper town is considerably
damaged, and the lower town entirely destroyed.

The works for the security of our hospitals and stores on the isle of Orleans
being finished, on the 9th of July at night, we passed the North channel, and
encamped near the enemy's left, the river Montmorenci between us The next
morning Captain Dank's Company of Rangers, posted in a wood to cover some
workmen, were attacked and defeated by a body of Indians, and had so many
killed and wounded, as to be almost disabled for the rest of the campaign: The
enemy also suffered in this affair, and were in their turn driven off by the
nearest troops.

The ground, to the eastward of the falls, seemed to be (as it really is)
higher than that on the enemy's side, and to command it in a manner which might
be made useful to us. There is besides a ford below the falls, which may be
passed for some hours in the latter part of the ebb and beginning of the flood
tide; and I had hopes, that possibly means might be found of passing the river
above, so as to fight the Marquis de Montcalm, upon terms of less disadvantage
than directly attacking his intrenchments. In reconnoitring the river
Montmorenci, we found it fordable at a place about three miles up; but the
opposite bank was entrenched, and so steep and woody, that it was to no purpose
to attempt a passage there. The Escort was twice attacked by the Indians, who
were as often repulsed; but in these rencounters we had 40 (officers and men)
killed and wounded.

The 18th of July, two men of war, two armed sloops, and two transports with
some troops on board, passed by the town without any loss, and got into the
upper river. This enabled me to reconnoitre the country above, where I found
the same attention on the enemy's side, and great difficulties on ours, arising
from the nature of the ground, and the obstacles to our communication with the
fleet. But what I feared most, was, that if we should land between the town and
the river, Capt. Rouge, the body first landed could not be reinforced before
they were attacked by the enemy's whole army.

Notwithstanding these difficulties, I thought once of attempting it at St.
Michael's, about three miles above the town: but perceiving that the enemy were
jealous of the design, were preparing against it, and had actually brought
artillery and a mortar (which, being so near to Quebec, they could increase as
they pleased) to play upon the shipping; and, as it must have been many hours
before we could attack them, (even supposing a favorable night for the boats
to pass by the town unhurt) it seemed so hazardous, that I thought it best to
desist.

However, to divide the enemy's force, and to draw their attention as high up
the river as possible, and to procure some intelligence, I sent a detachment
under the command of Col. Carleton, to land at the Point de Trempe, to attack
whatever he might find there, bring off some prisoners, and all the useful
papers he could get. I had been informed that a number of the inhabitants of
Quebec, had retired to that place, and that probably we should find a magazine
of provisions there.

The Colonel was fired upon by a body of Indians the moment he landed, but they
were soon dispersed and driven into the woods: he searched for magazines, but
to no purpose, brought off some prisoners, and returned with little loss.

After this business, I came back to Montmorenci, where I found that B^ig.
Townshend had, by a superior fire, prevented the French from erecting a battery
on the bank of the river, from whence they intended to cannonade our camp. I
now resolved to take the first opportunity which presented itself of attacking
the enemy, though posted to great advantage, and every where prepared to
receive us.

As the men of war cannot (for want of a sufficient depth of water) come near
enough to the enemy's intrenchments to annoy them in the least, the Admiral had
prepared two transports (drawing but little water) which upon occasions could
be run a ground, to favor a descent. With the help of these vessels, which I
understood would be carried by the tide close in shore, I proposed to make
myself master of a detached redoubt near to the water's edge, and whose
situation appeared to be out of musket shot of the intrenchment upon the hill:
If the enemy supported this detatched piece, it would necessarily bring on an
engagement, what we most wished for; and if not, I should have it in my power
to examine their situation, so as to be able to determine where we could best
attack them.

Preparations were accordingly made for an engagement. The 31st of July in the
forenoon, the boats of the fleet were filled with grenadiers, and a part of
Brig. Monckton's brigade from the point of Levi: The two brigades under the
Brigadiers Townshend and Murray were ordered to be in readiness to pass the
ford, when it should be thought necessary. To facilitate the passage of this
corpse, the admiral had placed the Centurion in the channel, so that she might
check the fire of the lower battery which commanded the ford: This ship was of
great use, as her fire was very judiciously directed. A great quantity of
artillery was placed upon the eminence, so as to batter and enfilade the left
of their intrenchments.

From the vessel which run a-ground, nearest in. I observed that the redoubt
was too much commanded to be kept without very great loss; and the more, as the
two armed ships could not be brought near enough to cover both with their
artillery and musquetry, which I at first conceived they might. But as the
enemy seemed in some confusion, and we were prepared for an action, I thought
it a proper time to make an attempt upon their intrenchments. Orders were sent
to the Brigadiers Generals to be ready with the corpse under their command.
Brig. Monckton to land, and the Brigadiers Townshend and Murray to pass the
ford.

At a proper time of the tide, the signal was made, but in rowing toward the
shore, many (...) the boats grounded upon a ledge that runs of a considerable
^ance. This accident put us into some disorder, lost a great deal off time, and
obliged me to send an officer to stop Brig. Towshend's march, whom I then
observed to be in motion. While the seamen were getting the boats off, the
enemy fired a number of shells and shot, but did no considerable damage. As
soon as this disorder could be set a little to rights, and the boats were
ranged in a proper manner, some of the officers of the navy went in with me, to
find a better place to land: we took one flat-bottomed boat with us to make the
experiment, and as soon as we had found a fit part of the shore, the troops
were ordered to disembark, thinking it not yet too late for the attempt.

The 13 companies of grenadiers, and 200 of the scond Royal American battalion,
got first on shore. The grenadiers were ordered to form themselves into four
distinct bodies, and to begin the attack, supported by Brig. Monckton's corpse,
as soon as the troops had passed the ford, and were at hand to assist. But
whether from the noise and hurry at landing, or from some other cause, the
grenadiers, instead of forming themselves as they were directed, ran on
impetuously toward the enemy's intrenchments in the utmost disorder and
confusion, without waiting for the corpse which were to sustain them, and join
in the attack. Brig. Monckton was not landed, and Brig. Townshend was still at
a considerable distance, though upon his march to join us, in very great order.
The grenadiers were checked by the enemy's first fire, and obliged to shelter
themselves in or about the redoubt, which the French abandoned upon their
approach. In this situation they continued for some time, unable to form under
so hot a fire, and having many gallant officers wounded, who (careless of their
persons) had been solely intent upon their duty. I saw the absolute necessity
of calling them off, that they might form themselves behind Brig. Monckton's
corpse, which was now landed, and drawn up on the beach, in extreme good order.

By this new accident, and this second delay, it was near night, a sudden storm
came on, and the tide began to make; so that I thought it most advisable, not
to persevere in so difficult an attack, lest (in case of a repulse) the retreat
of Brig. Townshend's corpse might be hazardous and uncertain.

Our artillery had a great effect upon the enemy's left, where Brigadiers
Townshend and Murray were to have attacked; and, it is probable that if those
accidents I have spoken of, had not happened, we should have penetrated there,
whilst our left and center (more remote from our artillery) must have bore all
the violence of their musquetry.

The French did not attempt to interrupt our march. Some of their savages came
down to murder such wounded as could not be brought off, and to scalp the dead,
as their custom is.

The place where the attack was intended, has these advantages over all others
hereabout. Our artillery could be brought into use. The greatest part, or even
the whole of the troops, might act at once. And the retreat (in case of
repulse) was secure, at least for a certain time of the tide. Neither one or
other of these advantages can any where else be found. The enemy were indeed
posted upon a commanding eminence. The beach upon which the troops were drawn
up, was of deep mud, with holes, and cut by several gullies. The hill to be
ascended very steep, and not every where practicable. The enemy numerous in
their intrenchments, and their fire hot. If the attack had succeeded, our loss
must certainly have been great, and their's inconsiderable, from the shelter
which the neighboring woods afforded them. The river St. Charles still
remained to be passed, before the town was inverted. All these circumstances I
considered; but the desire to act in conformity to the King's intentions,
induced me to make this trial, persuaded that a victorious army finds no
difficulties.

The enemy have been fortifying ever since with care, so as to make a second
attempt still more dangerous.

Immediately after this check, I sent Brig. Murray above the town with 1200
men, directing him to assist Rear Admiral Holmes in the destruction of the
French ships (if they could be got at) in order to open a communication with
Genesis Amherst. The Brigadier was to seek every favorable opportunity of
fighting some of the enemy's detachments, provided he could do it upon
tolerable terms, and to use all the means in his power to provoke them to
attack him. He made two different attempts to and upon the North shore without
success; but in a third was more fortunate. He landed unexpectedly at De
Chambaud, and burnt a magazine there, in which were some provisions, some
ammunition, and all the spare stores, clothing, arms, and baggage, of their
army.

Finding that their ships were not to be got at, and little prospect of
bringing the enemy to a battle, he reported his situation to me, and I ordered
him to join the army.

The prisoners he took informed him of the surrender of the fort of Niagara;
and we discovered, by intercepted letters, that the enemy had abandoned
Carillon and Crown Point, were retired to the isle Aux Noix; and that Genesis
Amherst was making preparations to pass the Lake Champlain, to fall upon M. de
Bourlemaque's corpse, which consists of three battalions of foot, and as many
Canadians as make the whole amount to 3000 men.

The Admiral's dispatches and mine would have gone eight or ten days sooner, if
I had not been prevented from writing by a fever. I found myself so ill, and am
still so weak, that I begged the general officers to consult together for the
public utility. They are all of opinion, that (as more ships and provisions
have now got above the town) they should try, by conveying up a corpse of 4 or
5000 men (which is nearly the whole strength of the army, after the points of
Levi and Orleans are left in a proper state of defense) to draw the enemy from
their present situation, and bring them to an action. I have acquiesced in
their proposal, and we are preparing to put it in execution.

The Admiral and I have examined the town, with a view to a general assault;
but, after consulting with the chief engineer, who is well acquainted with the
interior parts of it, and, after viewing it with the utmost attention, we
found, that though the batteries of the Lower Town might be easily silenced by
the men of war, yet the business of an assault would be little advanced by
that, since the few passages that lead from the Lower to the Upper Town, are
carefully entrenched; and the upper batteries cannot be affected by the ships,
which must receive considerable damage from them and from the mortars. The
Admiral would readily join in this, or in any other measure, for the public
service; but I could not propose to him an undertaking of so dangerous a
nature, and promising so little success.

To the uncommon strength of the country, the enemy have added (for the defense
of the river) a great number of floating batteries and boats. By the vigilance
of these and the Indians round our different posts, it has been impossible to
execute any thing by surprise. We have had almost daily skirmishes with these
Savages, in which they are generally defeated, but not without loss on our side.

By the list of disabled officers (many of whom are of rank) you may perceive,
Sir, that the army is much weakened. By the nature of the river, the most
formidable part of this armament is deprived of the power of acting, yet we
have almost the whole force of Canada to oppose. In this situation, there is
such a choice of difficulties, that I own myself at a loss how to determine.
The affairs of Great Britain, I know, require the most vigourous measures; but
then the courage of a handful of brave men should be exerted only where there
is some hope of a favorable event. However, you may be assured, Sir, that the
small part of the campaign which remains, shall be employed (as far as I am
able) for the honor of his Majesty and the interest of the nation, in which I
am sure of being well seconded by the Admiral and by the Generals. Happy if our
efforts here can contribute to the success of his Majesty's arms in any other
parts of America.

I have the Honor to be, With the greatest Respect, Sir, Your most obedient,
and most humble Servant, JAMES WOLF.

Sterling-Castle off Point Levi, in the River St. Lawrence, 5th of September,
1759. SIR,
IN my letter of the 6th of June, I acquainted you I was then off Scutari,
standing for the river St. Laurence. On the 26th, I had got up, with the first
division of the fleet and transports, as far as the middle of the Isle of
Orleans, where I immediately prepared to land the troops, which I did the next
morning. The same day the second and third divisions came up, and the troops
from them were landed likewise.

I got thus far without any loss or accident whatever; but, directly after
landing the troops, a very hard gale of wind came on, by which many anchors and
small boats were lost, and much damage received among the transports, by their
driving on board each other. The ships that lost most anchors I supplied from
the men of war as far as I was able, and in all other respects, gave them the
best assistance in my power.

On the 28th, at midnight, the enemy sent down from Quebec seven fireships; and
though our ships and transports were so numerous, and necessarily spread so
great a part of the channel, we towed them all clear and a-ground, without
receiving the least damage from them. The next night Genesis Monckton crossed the
river, and landed with his Brigade on the South shore, and took post at Point
Levi; and Genesis Wolf took his on the Westmost Point of the Isle of Orleans.

On the 1st of July, I moved up between the Points of Orleans and Levi; and, it
being resolved to land on the North shore, below the falls of Montmorenci, I
placed on the 8th inst. his Majesty's sloop the Porcupine, and the Boscawen
armed vessel, in the channel between Orleans and the North shore, to cover that
landing, which took place at night.

On the 17th, I ordered Capt. Rous of the Sutherland, to proceed, with the
first fair wind and night tide, above the town of Quebec, and to take with him
his majesty's ships Diana and Squirrel, with two armed sloops, and two catts
armed and loaded with provisions.

On the 18th, at night, they all got up, except the Diana, and gave Genesis Wolf
an opportunity of reconnoitring above the town, those ships having carried some
troops with them for that purpose. The Diana ran ashore upon the rocks off
Point Levi, and received so much damage, that I have sent her to Boston with 27
sail of American transports, (those which received most damage in the gale of
the 27th of June) where they are to be discharged; and the Diana, having
repaired her damages, is to proceed to England, taking with her the mast ships,
and what trade may be ready to accompany her.

On the 28th, at mignight, the enemy sent down a raft of fire-stages, of near a
hundred Radeaux, which succeeded no better than the fireships.

On the 31st, Genesis Wolf determined to land a number of troops above the falls
of Montmorenci, in order to attack the enemy's lines; to cover which, I placed
the Centurion in the channel, between the Isle of Orleans and the falls, and
ran on shore, at high water, two catts which I had armed for that purpose,
against two small batteries and two redoubts, where our troops were to land.
About six in the evening they landed, but the Generel not thinking it proper to
persevere in the attack; soon after, part of them re-embarked, and the rest
crossed the Falls with Genesis Wolf; upon which, to prevent the two catts from
falling into the enemy's hands (they being then dry on shore) I gave orders to
take the men out and set them on fire, which was accordingly done.

On the 5th of August, in the night, I sent twenty flat-bottomed boats up the
river, to the Sutherland, to embark 1260 of the troops, with Brig. Genesis Murray,
from a post he had taken on the south shore. I sent Admiral Holmes up to the
Sutherland, to act in concert with him, and give him all the assistance the
ships and boats could afford. At the same time I directed Admiral Holmes to use
his best endeavors to get at, and destroy the enemy's ships above the town;
and for that purpose I ordered the Lowestoffe, and Hunter sloop, with two armed
sloops and two catts, with provisions, to pass Quebec and join the Sutherland;
but the wind holding westerly, it was the 27th of August before they got up,
which was the fourth attempt they had made to gain their passage.

On the 25th, at night, Admiral Holmes and Genesis Murray, with part of the
troops, returned; they had met with, and destroyed a magazine of the enemy's
clothing, some gunpowder, and other things; and Admiral Holmes had been ten or
twelve leagues above the town, but found it impracticable at that time to get
farther up.

Genesis Wolf having resolved to quit the camp at Montmorenci, and go above the
town, in hopes of getting between the enemy and their provisions, (supposed to
be in the ships there) and by that means force them to an action, I sent up, on
the 29th at night, the Seahorse and two armed sloops, with two catts laden with
provisions, to join the rest above Quebec; and having taken off all the
artillery, from the camp at Montmorenci, on the 3d inst. in the afternoon the
troops embarked from thence, and landed at Point Levi. The 4th, at night, I
sent all the flat-bottomed boats up, and this night a part of the troops will
march up the south shore, above the town, to be embarked in the ships and
vessels there, and tomorrow night the rest will follow. Admiral Holmes is also
gone up again to assist in their future operations, and to try, if, with the
assistance of the troops, it is practicable to get at the enemy's ships.

As Genesis Wolf writes by this opportunity, he will give you an account of his
part of the operations, and his thoughts what further may be done for his
Majesty's service. The enemy appear numerous, and seem to be strongly posted;
but let the event be what it will, we shall remain here as long as the season
will permit, in order to prevent their detaching troops from hence against Genesis
Amherst; and I shall leave cruizers at the mouth of the river, to cut off any
supplies that may be sent them, with strict orders to keep that station as long
as possible. The town of Quebec is not habitable, being almost entirely burnt
and destroyed.

I enclose you the present disposition of the ships under my command: twenty of
the victuallers that sailed from England with the Echo, are arrived here, one
unloaded at Louisbourg, having received damage in her passage out, and another
I have heard nothing of. No ships of the enemy have come this way, that I have
had any intelligence of, since my arrival in the river except one, laden with
flour and brandy, which was taken by Capt. Drake of the Lizard.

Before Admiral Durell got into the river, three frigates, and seventeen sail,
with provisions, stores, and a few recruits, got up, and are those we are so
anxious, if possible, to destroy.

Yesterday I received a letter from Gen Amherst (to whom I have had no
opportunity of writing since I have been in the river) dated Camp off Crown
Point, August 17th, wherein, he only desires I would send transports and a
convoy to New York, to carry to England six hundred and seventy prisoners taken
at the surrender of Niagara.

I would have wrote to you sooner from hence, but while my dispatches were
preparing, Genesis Wolf was taken very ill; he has been better since, but is
still greatly out of order.

I shall very soon send home the great ships, and have the honor to be,

With the greatest Respect, SIR, Your most obedient, and most humble Servant,
CHARLES SAUNDERRS.

He resolved, when he sent away his account, to continue the campaign to the
last possible moment; and after a deliberation with his officers, determined,
that any further attempts at Montmorenci were to little purpose, and that their
principal operations should be above the town, in order, if possible, to draw
the enemy to an action. But the design of Wolf was deeper, and more
particularly directed than it had been before. The camp at Montmorenci was
broke up, and the troops were conveyed to the southeast of the river, and
encamped at Point Levi. The squadron under Admiral Holmes made movements up the
river for several days successively, in order to draw the enemies attention as
far from the town as possible. This succeeded in some measure; for, though it
could not persuade the Marquis de Montcalm to quit his post, it induced him to
detach M. de Bougainville with 1500 men to watch their motions, and to proceed
along the western shore of the river, whilst the English army directed its
march the same way on the eastern bank.

When Genesis Wolf saw that matters were ripe for action, he ordered the ships
under Admiral Saunders to make a feint, as if they proposed to attack the
French in their entrenchments, on the Beauport shore below the town, and by
their motions to give this feint all the appearance of a reality which it
possibly could have. This disposition being made below the town, the General
embarked his forces about one in the morning, and with Admiral Holmes's
division went three leagues further up the river than the intended place of his
landing, in order to amuse the enemy, and conceal his real design. Then he put
them into boats, and fell down silently with the tide, unobserved by the French
sentinels posted along the shore. The rapidity of the current carried these
boats a little below the intended place of attack. The ships followed them, and
arrived just at the time which had been concerted to cover their landing.
Considering the darkness of the night, and the rapidity of the current, this
was a very critical operation, and it required excellent heads both on the part
of the marine, and the land service, to preserve a communication, and to
prevent a discovery and confusion.

As the troops could not land at the spot proposed, when they were put on shore
an hill appeared before them extremely high and steep in its ascent; a little
path winded up this ascent, so narrow that two could not go abreast. Even this
path was entrenched, and a captain's guard defended it. These difficulties did
not abate the hopes of the General, or the ardor of the troops. The light
infantry under Colonel How laying hold of stumps and boughs of trees, pulled
themselves up, dislodged the guards, and cleared the path; and then all the
troops surmounting every difficulty, gained the top of the hill, and as fast as
they ascended formed themselves, so that they were all in order of battle at
day break.

Montcalm, when he heard that the English had ascended the hill,

He filled the bushes that were in his front with detachments of Indians, and
his best marksmen, to the number of about 1500; his regular forces formed his
left; his right was composed of the troops of the colony, supported by two
battali^ns of regulars. The rest of the Indians and Canadians extended on that
side, and attempted to out-flank the left of the English, which was formed to
prevent that design, in a manner which the military men call Potence; that is,
in a body which presents two faces to the enemy. Here Brigadier General
Townshend commanded six regiments, and the Louisbourg grenadiers were disposed
in a line to the right of this body, extending to the river. A regiment was
drawn up behind the right for a reserve. It was formed in eight subdivisions,
with large intervals. The light infantry under Colonel How, protected the rear
and the left. The dispositions on both sides were judicious, and the engagement
on both sides began with spirit.

The English troops were exhorted to reserve their fire; and they bore that of
the enemy's light troops in front, which was galling, though irregular, with
the utmost patience and good order, waiting for the main body of the enemy,
which advanced fast upon them. At forty yards distance, our troops gave their
fire, which took place in its full extent, and made a terrible havoc among the
French. It was supported with as much vivacity as it was begun, and the enemy
every where yielded to it; but just in the moment, when the fortune of the
field began to declare itself, General Wolf, in whose life every thing seemed
included, fell: General Monckton, the next to him in command, fell immediately
after, and both were conveyed out of the line; the command now devolved on
General Townshend. It was at a very critical time. For, though the enemy began
to fall back, and were much broken, the loss of the two generals was a very
discouraging circumstance, and it required great temper and great exertions to
support the advantages that had been gained, and to push them to their proper
extent. General Townshend showed himself equal to so arduous a duty; the troops
preserved their spirit, and each corpse seemed to exert itself with a view to
its peculiar character. The grenadiers with their bayonets, the Highlanders
with their broad swords, and the rest of the forces, with a steady and
continued fire, drove the enemy in great disorder from every post, and
completed their defeat. During the whole action, Colonel How with his light
infantry covered the left wing in such a manner, as entirely to frustrate the
attempts of the enemies Indians and Canadians upon that flank.

The field now seemed to be completely decided, when a new enemy appeared,
which threatened to bring on a fresh engagement, and to put all again to the
hazard. M. de Bougainville, whom the feigned movements of the English troops
had drawn up the river, turned back on discovering their real design, and now
appeared on the rear of the army, with a body of 2000 men. But fortunately the
main body of the French was by this time so broken and dispersed, that the
General was able to establish his rear, and to turn such an opposition on that
side that the enemy retired after a very feeble attempt.

In this decisive action our troops lost about 500 men; on the side of the
enemy at least 1500 were killed. But however glorious this victory was, and
however important in its consequences, it must be admitted that it was very
dearly bought. Soldiers may be raised; officers will be formed by experience;
but the loss of a genius in war, is a loss which we know not how to repair. The
death of Wolf was indeed grievous to his country, but to himself the most
happy that can be imagined; and the most to be envied by all those who have a
true relish for military glory. Unindebted to family, or connections,
unsupported by intrigue or faction, he had accomplished the whole business of
life at a time, when others are only beginning to appear; and at the age of
thirty-five, without feeling the weakness of age or the vicissitude of fortune,
having satisfied his honest ambition, having completed his character, having
fulfilled the expectations of his country, he fell at the head of his
conquering troops, and expired in the arms of victory.

The circumstances that attended the death of such a person, are too
interesting to be passed over in silence, and they were indeed such as spoke
the whole tenor of his life. He first received a wound in his head; but, that
he might not discourage his troops, he wrapped it up in his hankerchief, and
encouraged his men to advance: soon after he received another b^ll in his
belly; this also he dissembled, and exerted himself as before; when he received
a third in his breast, under which he at last sunk, and suffered himself,
unwillingly, to be carried behind the ranks. As he lay struggling with the
anguish and weakness of three grievous wounds, he seemed only sollicitous about
the fortune of the battle. He begged one, who attended him, to support him to
view the field; but as he found that the approach of death had dimmed and
confused his sight, he desired an officer, who was by him, to give him an
account of what he saw. The officer answered, that the enemy seemed broken; he
repeated his question a few minutes after with much anxiety, when he was told
that the enemy was totally routed, and that they fled in all parts. Then, said
he, "I am satisfied;" and immediately he expired.

Without the same advantages, the enemy also had an heavy loss in this battle,
which, no doubt, contributed to their defeat. M. de Montcalm, commander in
chief, was killed on the spot; an officer who had done the highest services to
his country throughout the whole American war, and perfectly supported his
reputation in this last seen of it, having made the most perfect dispositions
that human prudence could suggest, both before the battle and in the
engagement. It is something remarkable that in both armies, the first in
command should be killed, and the second dangerously wounded. But General
Monckton happily recovered, the French officer died a little after the battle.

Five days after the action, the enemy seeing that the communication between
the town and the army was cut off,

(a) The Honnurable Genesis Monckton's letter to the Right Honorable Mr.
Secretary Pit, dated, River St. Lawrence, Camp at Point Levi, September, 15,
1759.
SIR,
I Have the pleasure to acquaint you, that, on the 13th instant, his Majesty's
troops gained a very signal victory over the French, a little above the town of
Quebec. General Wolf, exerting himself on the right of our line, received a
wound pretty early of which he died soon after, and I had myself the great
misfortune of receiving one in my right breast by a ball that went through part
of my lungs (and which has been cut out under the blade bone of my shoulder)
just as the French were giving way, which obliged me to quit the field. I have
therefore, Sir, desired General Townshend, who now commands the troops before
the town (and of which I am in hopes he will be soon in possession) to acquaint
you with the particulars of that day, and of the operations carrying on. I have
the honor to be, etc.

ROB. MONCKTON.
P. S. His Majesty's troops behaved with the greatest steadiness and bravery.

As the surgeons tell me that there is no danger in my wound, I am in hopes
that I shall be soon able to join the army before the town.



The Honorable Brigadier General Townshend's letter to the Right Honorable
Mr. Secretary Pit, dated Camp before Quebec, Sept. 20. 1759.
SIR,
I Have the honor to acquaint you with the success of his majesty's arms, on
the 13th inst. in an action with the French, on the heights to the westward of
this town.

It being determined to carry the operations above the town the posts at Point
Levi, and l'Isle d'Orleans, being secured, the General marched with the
remainder of the force, from Point Levi, the 5th and 6th, and embarked them in
transports, which had passed the town for that purpose. On the 7th, 8th, and
9th, a movement of the ships was made up, by Admiral Holmes, in order to amuse
the enemy now posted along the North shore; but the transports being extremely
crowded, and the weather very bad, the General thought proper to cantoon half
his troops on the South shore; where they were refreshed, and reimbarked upon
the 12th at one in the morning. The light infantry, commanded by Col. How, the
regiments of Bragg, Kennedy, Lascelles, and Anstruther, with a detachment of
Highlanders, and the American grenadiers, the whole being under the command of
Brigadiers Monckton and Murray, were put into flat-bottomed boats, and, after
some movements of the ships, made by Admiral Holmes, to draw the attention of
the enemy above, the boats fell down with the tide, and landed on the North
shore, within a league of Cape Diamond, an hour before daybreak: the rapidity
of the tide of ebb carried them a little below the intended place of attack,
which obliged the light infantry to scramble up a woody precipice, in order to
secure the landing the troops by dislodging a captain's post, which defended
the small entrenched path the troops were to ascend. After a little firing, the
light infantry gained the top of the precipice, and dispersed the Captain's
post; by which means, the troops, with a very little loss, from a few Canadians
and Indians in the wood, got up, and were immediately formed. The boats, as
they emptied, were sent back for the second embarkation, which I immediately
made. Brigadier Murray, who had been detached with Anstruther's battalion to
attack the Four Gun Battery upon the left, was recalled by the General, who now
saw the French army crossing the river St. Charles. General Wolf thereupon
begun to form his line, having his right covered by the Louisbourg grenadiers;
on the right of these again he afterward brought Otway's; to the left of the
grenadiers were Bragg's, Kennedy's, Lascelles's, Highlanders, and Anstruther's;
the right of this body was commanded by Brigadier Monckton, and the left by
Brigadier Murray; his rear and left were protected by Col. Howe's
Light-infantry, who was returned from the Four Gun Battery beforementioned,
which was soon abandoned to him. General Montcalm having collected the whole of
his force from the Beauport side, and advancing, showed his intention to flank
our left, where I was immediately ordered with General Amherst's battalion,
which I formed en potence. My numbers were soon after increased by the arrival
of the two battalions of Royal Americans; and Webb's was drawn up by the
General, as a reserve, in eight subdivisions with large intervals. The enemy
lined the bushes in their front with 1500 Indians and Canadians, and I dare say
had placed most of their best marksmen there, who kept up a very galling, though
irregular, fire upon our whole line, who bore it with the greatest patience,
and good order, reserving their fire for the main body now advancing. This fire
of the enemy was however checked by our posts in our front, which protected the
forming our own line. The right of the enemy was composed of half of the troops
of the colony, the battalion of La Sarre Languedoc, and the remainder of the
Canadians and Indians. Their center was a column, and formed by the battalions
of Bearn and Guienne. Their left was composed of the remainder of the troops of
the colony, and the battalion of Royal Rousillon. This was, as near as I can
guess, their line of battle. They brought up two pieces of small artillery
against us, and we had been able to bring up but one gun; which being admirably
well served, galled their column exceedingly. My attention to the left will not
permit me to be very exact with regard to every circumstance which passed in
the center, much less to the right; but it is most certain, that the enemy
formed in good order, and that their attack was very brisk and animated on that
side. Our troops reserved their fire, till within forty yards, which was so
well continued, that the enemy every where gave way. It was then our General
fell at the head of Bragg's, and the Louisbourg grenadiers, advancing with
their bayonets: About the same time Brigadier-general Monckton received his
wound at the head of Lascelles's. In the front of the opposite battalion fell
also M. Montcalm; and his second in command is since dead of his wounds on
board our fleet. Part of the enemy made a second faint attack. Part took to
some thick copse wood, and seemed to make a stand. It was at this moment, that
each corpse seemed in a manner to exert itself, with a view to its own peculiar
character. The grenadiers, Bragg's, and Lascelles's, pressed on with their
bayonets. Brigadier Murray, advancing with the troops under his command,
briskly completed their rout on this side; when the Highlanders, supported by
Arstruther's, took to their broad swords, and drove part into the town, and
part to the works at their bridge on the river St. Charles.

The action, on our left and rear, was not so severe. The houses, into which
the Light Infantry were thrown, were well defended, being supported by Col.
How, who taking post with two companies behind a small copse, and frequently
sallying upon the flanks of the enemy during the attack, drove them often into
heaps, against the front of which body I advanced platoons of Amherst's
regiment, which totally prevented the right wing from executing their first
intention. Before this, one of the Royal American battalions had been detached
to preserve our communication with our boats, and the other being sent to
occupy the ground which Brigadier Murray's movement had left open, I remained
with Amherst's to support this disposition, and to keep the enemy's right, and
a body of their savages, which waited still more toward our rear, opposite the
posts of our Light Infantry, waiting for an opportunity to fall upon our rear.

This, Sir, was the situation of things, when I was told, in the action, that I
commanded: I immediately repaired to the center, and finding the pursuit had
put part of the troops in disorder, I formed them as soon as possible. Scarce
was this effected, when M. de Bougainville, with his corpse from Cape Rouge of
2000 men, appeared in our rear. I advanced two pieces of artillery, and two
battalions toward him; upon which he retired. You will not, I flatter myself,
blame me for not quitting such advantageous ground, and risking the fate of so
decisive a day, by seeking a fresh enemy, posted perhaps in the very kind of
ground he could wish for, viz. woods and swamps.

We took a great number of French officers upon the field of battle, and one
piece of cannon. Their loss is computed to be about 1500 men, which fell
chiefly upon their regulars.

I have been employed, from the day of action to that of the capitulation, in
redoubting our camp beyond insult, in making a road up the precipice for our
cannon, in getting up the artillery, preparing the batteries, and cutting off
their communication with the country. The 17th, at noon, before we had any
battery erected, or could have any for two or three days, a flag of truce came
out with proposals of capitulation, which I sent back again to the town,
allowing them four hours to capitulate, or no farther treaty. The Admiral had,
at this time, brought up his large ships as intending to attack the town. The
French officer returned at night with terms of capitulation, which, with the
Admiral, were considered, agreed to, and signed at eight in the morning, the
18th instant. The terms we granted, will I flatter myself, be approved of by
his Majesty, considering the enemy assembling in our rear, and what is far more
formidable, the very wet and cold season, which threatened our troops with
sickness, and the fleet with some accident; it had made our road so bad, we
could not bring up a gun for some time; add to this, the advantage of entering
the town, with the walls in a defensible state, and the being able to put a
garrison there strong enough to prevent all surprise. These, I hope, will be
deemed sufficient considerations for granting them the terms I have the honor
to transmit to you. The inhabitants of the country came in to us fast, bring^ng
in their arms, and taking the oaths of fidelity, until a general peace
determines their situation.

I have the honor to enclose herewith a list of the killed and wounded; a list
of the prisoners as perfect as I have yet been able to get it; and a list of
the artillery and stores in the town as well as those fallen into our hands at
Beauport in consequence of the victory. By deserters we learn, that the enemy
are re-assembling what troops they can, behind the Cape Rouge; that M. de Levy
is come down from the Montreal side to command them; some say, he has brought
two battalions with him; if so, this blow has already assisted General Amherst.
By other deserters, we learn, that M. de Bougainville, with 800 men, and
provisions, was on his march to fling himself into the town the 18th, the very
morning it capitulated, on which day we had not completed the investiture of
the place, as they had broke their bridge of boats, and had detachments in very
strong works on the other side the river St. Charles.

I should not do justice to the Admiral, and the naval service, if I neglected
this occasion of acknowledging how much we are indebted for our success to the
constant assistance and support received from there, and the perfect harmony
and correspondence, which has prevailed throughout all our operations, in the
uncommon difficulties, which the nature of this country, in particular,
presents to military operations of a great extent, and which no army can itself
solely supply; the immense labor in artillery, stores and provisions; the long
watchings and attendance in boats; the drawing up our artillery by the seamen
even in the heat of action; it is my duty, short as my command has been, to
acknowledge, for that time, how great a share the navy has had in this
successful campaign.

I have the honor to be, etc. GEO. TOWNSHEND.

Vice Admiral Saunder's Letter to the Right Honorable Mr. Secretary Pit.
SIR,
I Have the greatest pleasure in acquainting you that the town and citadel of
Quebec surrendered on the 18th instant, and I enclose you a copy of the
articles of capitulation. The army took possession of the gates on the land
side the same evening, and sent safe guards into the town to p^eserve order,
and to prevent any thing from being destroyed; and Capt. Palliser, with a b^dy
of seamen, landed in the lower town, and did the same. The next day our army
marched in, and near a thousand French officers, soldiers and seamen, were
embarked on board some English catts, who shall soon proceed for France,
agreeable to the capitulation.

I had the honor to write to you the 5th inst by the Rodney cutter. The
troops, mentioned in that letter, embarked on board the ships and vessels above
the town, in the night of the 6th inst. and at four in the morning of the 13th
began to land on the north shore, about a mile and a half above the town.
General Montcalm with his whole army, left their camp at Beauport, and marched
to meet him. A little before ten both armies were formed, and the enemy began
the attack. Our troops received their fire, and reserved their own, advancing
till they were so near as to run in upon them, and push them with their
bayonets; by which, in a very little time, the French gave way, and fled to the
town in the utmost disorder, and with great loss; for our troops pursued them
quite to the walls, and killed many of them upon the glacis, and in the ditch;
and if the town had been further off the whole French army must have been
destroyed. About 250 French prisoners were taken that day, among whom are ten
captains, and six subaltern officers, all of whom will go in the great ships to
England.

I am sorry to acquaint you, that General Wolf was killed in the action; and
General Monckton shot through the body; but he is now supposed to be out of
danger. General Montcalm, and the three next French officers in command, were
killed; but I must refer you to General Townshend (who writes by this
opportunity) for the particulars of this action, the state of the garrison, and
the measures he is taking for keeping possession of it. I am now beginning to
send on shore the stores they will want, and provisions for five thousand men;
of which I can furnish them with a sufficient quantity.

The night of their landing, Admiral Holmes, with the ships and troops, was
about three leagues above the intended landing place: General Wolf, with about
half his troops, set off in boats, and dropped down with the tide, and were by
that means, less liable to be discovered by the French sentinels, posted all
along the coast. The ships followed them about three quarters of an hour
afterward, and got to the landing place just in the time that had been
concerted, to cover their landing; and considering the darkness of the night,
and the rapidity of the current, this was a very critical operation and very
properly and successfully conducted. When General Wolf, and the troops with
him, had landed, the difficulty of gaining the top of the hill is scarce
credible: it was very steep in its ascent, and high, and no path where two
could go abreast: but they were obliged to pull themselves up by the stumps
and boughs of trees, that covered the declivity.

Immediately after our victory over their troops, I sent up all the boats in
the fleet with artillery, and ammunition; and on the 17th went up with the men
of war in a disposition to attack the lower town, as soon as General Townshend
should be ready to attack the upper; but in the evening they sent out to the
camp and offered terms of capitulation.

I have the farther pleasure of acquainting you, that during this tedious
campaign there has continued a perfect good understanding between the army and
the navy. I have received great assistance from Admirals Durell and Holmes, and
from all the captains: Indeed every body has exerted themselves in the
execution of their duty; even the transports have willingly assisted me with
boats and people on the landing the troops, and many other services.

I have the honor to be, etc. CHARLES SAUNDERS

Thus the capital of French America was rendered to the English, after a most
severe campaign of near three months; and perhaps, if the whole be considered,
there never was an enterprise of such difficulty carried on with a more gallant
perseverance, or accomplished with more vigor and ability. A city strong in
situation and fortifications, was to be attacked. An army greatly superior in
number to the besiegers, was posted under the walls of that city in an
impregnable situation. That army was to be forced to a battle against the
inclinations of a wise and cautious commander. A theater of more than five
leagues was to be filled, and operations of that extent to be carried on in the
eye of the superior army, by less than 7000 men. In this contest with so many
difficulties, one may say with nature itself, the genius of the commander
showed itself superior to every thing. Major General; JAMES WOLF.
portrait of Major General James Wolf All the dispositions to that daring but
judicious attempt, near Silery, which at last drew Montcalm from his
entrenchments, were so many masterpieces in the art of war. But it is certain,
that these things, notwithstanding the extraordinary abilities of the general,
could never have been compassed, had not the marine co^operated with an
unanimity, diligence, and skill, which never could have taken place, but from
that perfect love to their country, that animated all those that were concerned
in this expedition. Here was no murmuring nor discontent, nor absurd jealousy;
no mean competition between the land and sea-service; but the most zealous
endeavors to second each others efforts, and the most generous inclinations on
each side, to give a due praise to their mutual services.

When the news of this decisive action arrived in England, we all remember,
though it is very difficult to describe, the various and mixed emotions with
which every one was affected. But two days before this came, was received the
express which General Wolf had sent off after the affair of Montmorenci. When
the general doubted, the public thought they had reason to despair. But whilst
this gloom was fresh and in the midst of the general despondency; a second
express arrives, and brings all at once an account of the victory, the taking
of Quebec, and the death of General Wolf. The effect of so joyful news,
immediately on such a dejection, and then the mixture of grief and pity, which
attended the public congratulations and applauses, was very singular and
affecting. The sort of mourning triumph, that manifested itself on that
occasion, did equal honor to the memory of the General, and to the humanity of
the nation.

A little circumstance was talked of at that time, and it deserves to be
recorded, as it shows a firmness of sentiment, and a justness of thinking, in
the lower kind of people, that is rarely met with even amongst persons of
education. The mother of General Wolf was an object marked out for pity by
great and peculiar distress; the public wound pierced her mind with a
particular affliction, who had experienced the dutiful son, the amiable
domestic character, whilst the world admired the accomplished officer. Within a
few months she had lost her husband; she now lost this son, her only child. The
populace of the village where she lived unanimously agreed to admit no
illuminations or firings, or any other sign of rejoicing whatsoever near her
house, lest they should seem by an ill-timed triumph, to insult over her grief.
There was a justness in this, and who^ver knows the people, knows that they
made no small sacrifice on this occasion.

The ^ation, which never suffers any public service to pass unrew^^ded,
proceeded to honor the merits of the living and o^ the dead. The minister
himself made the motion for this purpose in the house of commons, and all the
force of eloquence was displayed in setting off these services in their proper
light. A magnificent monument was voted for the deceased General in Westminster
Abbey; the living Generals and Admirals received the greatest of honors, the
thanks of their country, by their representatives.

It is not known with certainty in what manner the French disposed of the
remainder of their army after the battle of Quebec. It is probable that they
retired toward Montreal and Trois Rivieres, the only places of any consequence
which they had left in Canada. In order to deprive them of subsistence in any
attempt they might be induced to make toward the recovery of Quebec in the
winter, the country along the river was laid waste for a very considerable
extent. A measure, which for the sake of humanity, we could have wished not to
have been found necessary.

Whilst the operations were thus successfully carried on in the river St.
Laurence, General Amherst was not wanting in his endeavors on the side of Lake
Champlain. Though the retreat of the French from Crown Point and Ticonderoga
had left him entirely master of Lake George, he found that the command of Lake
Champlain was still an object of some difficulty. Mr. Bourlemaque, who
commanded in that part, had retired to the Isle de Noix, at the bottom of the
lake, where he had three thousand five hundred men strongly entrenched; he had
likewise four stout armed sloops, by which he could easily defeat any attempts
by boats.

General Amherst found it necessary to attain a naval superiority upon the
Champlain, before he could hope to push his operations any further; but this
was a work of so much time, that it made it absolutely impossible to attain the
great end of the campaign, the communication with General Wolf, who was left
in the manner we have seen to the exertion of his single strength. The naval
preparations were not perfectly accomplished before the 10th of October. They
consisted of a great radeau, eighty four feet in length, and twenty in breadth,
which carried six twenty-four pounders; the rest consisted of a brigantine and
a sloop.

Covered by these the army was embarked in boats in a most excellent
disposition, and proceeded a considerable way up the lake; were in hopes to
weigh up. The French appearing no where to oppose them, the armed sloops
returned to Crown Point soon after the troops,

The memorable and vigorous campaign of 1759, which made full amends for the
inactivity of the former, was thus happily closed. By the taking of Niagara,
Ticonderago, and above all, Quebec, the French, in the little remaining part of
Canada, are invested upon every side. The troops which they have under Mr. Levy
at Montreal, and those under Mr. Bourlemaque at Isle de Noix, can neither be
recruited with men, nor properly supplied with military stores, all
communication with France being cut off. So that in the opening of the next
campaign, if they are attacked with vigor from the side of Quebec, whilst
General Amherst advances with his body by Lake Champlain, of which he has now
the entire dominion, the resistance will be no more than sufficient to give
reputation to the conquest; and it will depend more upon our own sentiments of
convenience what part of North America we shall leave to France, than to any
efforts they may make in that part of the world; happy if our European system
should so far concur, as to leave us free to conclude a peace in America upon
its own merits.

CHAP. VIII.
Prince Henry's march into Saxony. General Vehla defeated. King of Prussia
enters Saxony. Prussians defeated at Maxen. Again defeated at Meissen. M. Daun
occupies the camp at Pirna. Munster surrenders to the allies. Hereditary Prince
of Brunswick defeats the Duke of Wurtemburg at Fulda. March of the Hereditary
Prince of Brunswick to Saxony.

WE took notice, in the preceding part of our narrative, of that movement of
the king of Prussia, by which he got between the Russians and Great Glogau, and
thereby baffled their design upon that important place. This movement, at once
daring, prudent and necessary, hindered the Russians from taking winter
quarters in his dominions; but at the same time it unavoidably cut off all
communication with the army of Prince Henry.

That Prince, seeing that he could not second the operations of the King, his
brother, on the side of Silesia, contrived another expedient of cooperating
with him, which was immediately to direct his march toward Saxony. There was
no object, the possession of which was more interesting; on that account it was
very proper; but this march answered also another end; for it drew the
attention of M. Daun to the side of Saxony, and disabled him from assisting the
designs of the Russians against Glogau, either with his whole army, or with any
considerable detachment from it. The whole country of Lusatia, through which
this projected march lay, was in a manner overspread with the enemy. M. Daun,
with the main army of the Austrians, lay at a place called Sorau, opposite to
the prince's camp. Five bodies of Russians occupied as many advantageous posts
between the Bober and the Neiss. General Laudohn possessed the whole country
along the Spree, with several Austrian corpse. To get round M. Daun, it was
necessary to make a vast circuit, and to march between the Austrian and Russian
armies for more than sixty English miles.

Before the prince entered upon this arduous design, by several bold movements
he obliged M. Daun to retreat from Sorau to Gorlitz, and from Gorlitz as far as
Bautzen, keeping himself as much as possible between the prince and Saxony. But
his Royal Highness having perceived the direction in which M. Daun was moving,
made a compass to the northward of the Austrians, into the Lower Lusatia,
passed the Neiss at Rothenburg, and marching with the utmost expedition arrived
at Hoyers Werda in two days from his leaving his posts near Zittau. harrased,
continually tossed from hand to hand, the sport of violence and fortune,
suffered equal distresses from its deliverers and its enemies.

The Prussian army, from the beginning of this war, has been particularly
distinguished for its marches; and there is certainly nothing in all the
various operations of war, which more particularly distinguishes good troops,
and able and spirited leaders. But this march of prince Henry over such a tract
of country, almost every where occupied by the enemy, in so short a time, and
with so little loss, is perhaps one of the most extraordinary, and the best
conducted, of the marches, that have been made by the Prussian, or any other
army.

This fortunate stroke, together with the retreat of the Russians, afforded
some hope, that notwithstanding his repeated disasters, the King of Prussia
might still conclude the campaign to his advantage. The detachments under Finck
and Wunsch had no sooner entered Misnia, than they attained a superiority over
the united armies of Austria and the Empire; all the places which in so short a
time they had seized, in as short a time were reduced to the obedience of their
former masters. Wunsch had engaged their army, and defeated one of its wings.
This victory gave them the possession of every thing to the gates of Dresden,
the only town which remained to the enemy of all those they had taken. They
found themselves unable to prevent prince Henry from passing the Elbe; they
found themselves unable to prevent General Hulsen from coming to his relief
with a considerable detachment; they ^ound themselves unable to prevent the
King from joining himself to those; when,

It is true, that M. Daun was superior to him in numbers, and yet more so in
situation. He could at any time take possession of the famous camp at Pirna,
where he could not be attacked with any prospect of success; but then the
freezing of the Elbe, the snow on the mountains which divide Bohemia from
Saxony, and the continual molestations which might be expected from the
Prussian parties, made this situation as dangerous, in some respects, as it was
desirable in others.

It was the opinion of many, that these advantages on the side of the King of
Prussia, well pursued without aiming at more, would in a short time infallibly
have obliged M. Daun to relinquish his strong post, and to retire into Bohemia,
abandoning Dresden, and with it all the fruits of his victorious campaign. But
the King, possessed by an idea of the ill situation of the Austrians, thought
that advantages of greater moment, and more decisive, might he drawn from it.
He knew, that the passes into Bohemia were so difficult, that by some posts
properly chosen and strongly guarded, the subsistence of the Austrians might be
made impracticable, and even their retreat rendered so difficult, that M. Daun
would find himself compelled to fight at a disadvantage, and to put to the
hazard of the field, all that his caution and prudence had been so long and so
painfully procuring.

Upon this plan the King, having obliged M. Daun to retreat as far as Plauen,
advanced himself as far as Kesseldorf; and ordered General Finck, with a strong
corpse, to turn the Austrians, and seize the defiles of Maxen and Ottendorf,
through which alone it seemed possible for the Austrians to communicate with
Bohemia. This was so successfully executed, that there appeared no doubt that
the King had effectually secured one of his principal objects, and had placed
Daun between two fires.

Whilst the Prussians enjoyed this security, M. Daun, who was aware of their
design, had so occupied all the eminences about this rough and dangerous place,
and all the passes into it, that the Prussians were hardly attacked, when their
defeat seemed inevitable. It is probable that they had got too far into these
defiles, and had not taken proper measures to secure a retreat, or any sort of
communication with the grand army. They became too late sensible of their
situation, and they made, for a whole day, the most intrepid efforts to
disengage themselves from it; but they were foiled in every attempt, with
considerable loss of men, and of the most part of their artillery.

Night put a stop to the engagement; the Austrians employed it effectually, to
entangle the Prussians, by guarding with double strength and vigilance, every
avenue through which it was possible for them to escape. So that when the
morning appeared,

It was unquestionably the greatest blow which the Prussians had felt from the
beginning of the war; considering the critical time, the numbers taken, and the
loss of reputation, which arose from the manner in which they were taken. It is
no wonder, that such an extraordinary advantage, thus cheaply obtained, should
greatly have elevated the friends of the house of Austria. They had put the
cheat upon the Prussians, they had caught their enemy in the very trap which
they had laid, as they thought, with such address for them. They had now
received a full indemnification for the capture of the Saxon army, which had
surrendered in much the same manner, and very near this place, in the year 1756.

The King of Prussia had not time to recover from this stroke, under which he
was yet staggering, when he received another blow, and a severe one. General
Durceke was posted at the right of the Elbe, opposite to Meissen;

M. Daun was not so carried away with this flood of success, as to depart in
the least degree from his usual cautious management. Two advantages were now
obtained, which, with a very few efforts, might be improved, to the entire
destruction of the King of Prussia. At least, many Generals would have thought
so; but M. Daun thought that the same conduct, which, with no risque, and with
little loss, had reduced the King so low, was the most likely, if pursued, to
bring on his entire ruin. He resolved to give that monarch no sort of chance to
recover his fortune; Daun, after the two great victories he had himself newly
obtained, retired behind Dresden; and as if he had been beaten, as often as he
was victorious, he took refuge in the impregnable camp at Pirna, having so
disposed matters, that the King of Prussia, now to weak to send out any great
detachments, could not prevent his communication with Bohemia.

Whilst the King of Prussia carried on his unsuccessful campaign in Saxony,
through all the rigours of the severest winter for many years felt in Europe;
the army of the allies kept the field with better fortune. It is true, things
had been so disposed by the obstinate resistance of Munster, and the
reinforcements which arrived in the French army, that Prince Ferdinand did not
find himself in a condition to force them to a decisive action; and therefore
the situation of the two armies had continued much the same for a considerable
time. At length Munster, after a series of operations, sometimes a siege,
sometimes a blockade, now broken off, and now resumed,

Not long after this, the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick, all whose enterprises
are distinguished with a peculiar eclat and splendour, that mark them for his
own, performed a service that curbed the French, even more than the loss of
Munster. Prince Charles of Bevern was also engaged in this design.

The Duke of Wurtemburg had renewed his treaty of subsidy with France, and
having recruited and augmented his troops, he lay at Fulda, a great way to the
right of the French army. The Hereditary Prince formed a design to attack him
at that distance.

On the 28th of November, taking a small, but well chosen corpse of horse and
foot, and disengaging them from their baggage, he arrived in two days at Fulda,
where the Wurtemburgers enjoyed themselves in full security. A feu de joye had
been ordered for that day; the troops were all in their best clothes; the Duke
had invited all the ladies in the town to his table, and to a ball, which he
intended to have given that very day; but the Hereditary prince disconcerted
their measures, both of war and diversion. A large party of the Wurtemburg
troops were posted in a plain before the town. The Hereditary Prince fell upon
them unawares in their front and flank, and drove them into the town, into
which he closely pursued them. Here they made some appearance of maintaining
their ground for some minutes, but they were soon driven out on the other side,
and hotly pursued by the Prince of Brunswick; without the town they were met by
Prince Charles of Bevern, who had made a compass about the place, and attacked
them vigorously as soon as they had got out of it. Four battalions made some
resistance, and were all cut to pieces or made prisoners; the rest, with the
Duke himself, covered by the resistance of these battalions, made a shift to
escape. Above a thousand prisoners were made on this occasion; and the Prince
returned to the camp of the allies, after having effectually disabled this
corpse from performing any thing considerable; and this action was of the
greatest consequence, as, by the disposition of that corpse at Fulda, there was
an appearance as if the French meant to form a communication with the army of
the Empire, for the mutual extension and security of their winter quarters.

This enterprise was only the prelude to another, which promised to be much
more extensive in its consequences. The season was now grown too severe to
suffer the allies to push any further the advantages they had obtained over the
French; at the same time it disabled the French from attempting any thing
considerable against them. Besides these advantages of the season, by
possessing Munster, the allies were no longer obliged to keep so large a body
of men in Westphalia. These were the considerations which suffered Prince
Ferdinand to turn his eyes to the distressed state of the King of Prussia's
affairs. After the two great blows which that monarch had suffered, there was
no hope of dislodging M. Daun with his single force; and he was utterly unable
to avail himself as heretofore, of the rigor of the season, to strike a
decisive blow. Prince Ferdinand, distant as he was from his distressed ally,
and so near to an enemy superior in numbers, did not hesitate to send him
succors, to enable him, if possible, to make a final effort. He detached
therefore 12,000 of his best men, and placed them under the command of the
Hereditary Prince, with whose vigor and diligence he was perfectly acquainted,
and under whom he knew the soldiers would endure any hardship with
cheerfulness. They marched from Korsdorff,

This junction raised for a while the spirits and hopes of the Prussian army,
but, in effect, it did more honor to the abilities of the Hereditary Prince,
than service to the King. The season which fought equally against all sides,
the inaccessible camp at Pirna, and the caution of M. Daun, rendered it
impossible for the King, notwithstanding this reinforcement, to make any
attempt. So that after several movements in hopes of bringing the Austrians to
an engagement, he was obliged at length to desist, and to suffer the shattered
remains of his army to repose in winter quarters, after the fruitless fatigues
of so long, so laborious, and so bloody a campaign.

The King of Prussia did not derive the benefits that were expected from this
detachment; the French had no sooner notice of it, than they attempted to avail
themselves of the weakness it caused in the allied army. The Duke of Broglio
was now at the head of the French troops; he had lately returned from
Versailles, having ruined the character of M. de Contades, established his own,
removed his rival, and, in spite of seniority, had acquired the marshal's
staff, and the command of the army. He thought he had now an opportunity for an
action of eclat to distinguish his entrence into command. He attempted to
attack Prince Ferdinand by surprise. But finding him perfectly prepared,

CHAP. IX.
The preparations at Vannes and Breast. The English fleet driven from their
station. The action near Belleisle. French fleet defeated. War in the East
Indies in 1758. French fleet under M. D'Ache twice beaten. M. de Lally takes
Fort St. David's, and repulsed at Tanjour. Lays siege to Madrass. Obliged to
raise the siege. Conclusion of the annals of 1759.

THE severity of the winter could not put a stop to the operations of the land
armies; it had no more effect upon the operations at sea, which went on with
vigor, in spite of the inclemency of the season. The invasion projected by
France, which the engagement off Cape Lagos had retarded, was by no means laid
aside.

The preparations for a naval equipment in the harbor of Breast, and for
transporting a body of forces from Vannes, went on continually. The winter did
not delay these preparations, because it was hoped that in that season, the
British fleet might be obliged to take refuge in their own harbors; and thus
might afford an opportunity for the French fleet to come out unopposed, and to
execute the object of their destination before the British navy could be in
readiness to encounter them.

In fact, they were not wholly disappointed in their expectations. A violent
storm forced Sir Edward Hawke to quit his station off Breast. He came with his
whole fleet to anchor in Torbay.

The French fleet availed itself of his absence to put to sea.

And now the event of the whole war was put to the issue; for upon the good or
ill success of this stroke every thing depended. Admiral Hawke lost not a
moment's time to put again to sea,

It is impossible here to pass over the gallant behavior of one of our
Admirals, as it helps to mark the genius and spirip of this happy time, and as
this is one of the finest instances of it. Admiral Saunders came into port from
his Quebec expedition immediately after Hawke had sailed. After such a long
voyage and so severe a campaign, unbroken by fatigue, and still insatiated with
glory, he determined immediately to set sail again, and partake the honor and
danger of the coming engagement. For this purpose no time was to be lost, and
he had no orders. But he thought the exigencies of his country sufficient
orders; and he knew that at this time the letter of military discipline would
never be set against its spirit. He therefore set sail without waiting for
orders with ten ships; but fortune did not favor the generosity of his
intentions, and he did not join the British fleet time enough for the
engagement.

As Sir Edward Hawke concluded that the first rendezvous of the enemy's fleet
would be at Quiberon, he directed his course with all diligence for that bay.
But here again fortune for a while seemed to declare for the French; for a
strong wind blown in an easterly point, drove the English fleet a great way to
the westward; but at length it became more favorable, and bore them in
directly to the shore. About eight o'clock the headmost ships discovered the
enemy bearing to the northward, between the island of Belleisle and the main
land of France.

Hawke saw at last what he had so long, and so ardently wished for, (though
hitherto in vain) the enemy in his reach. But yet there were such difficulties
in his way, as would have checked a very cautious commander, or perhaps any
commander in circumstances less critical to the public safety. On the slightest
inspection of the chart it will appear, that all this sea is sown thick with
sands and shoals, and shallows, and rocks; our pilots were by no means well
acquainted with it; and the wind blew little less than a violent storm, and the
waves ran mountain high. In these circumstances they were to attack a very
strong squadron of the enemy on their own coast, with which they were perfectly
acquainted. All these difficulties only animated the English Admiral. In one of
the finest ships in the world, commanding the flower of the British navy, and
seconded by some of the most tried and bravest officers in the service; and
above all not dubious of himself. He ordered the ships nearest the enemy
immediately to chase, and, by engaging them, to give time for the rest of the
fleet to come up.

M. Conflans had two choices, either to fly, or to stand and fight it out. But
he followed neither perfectly; for some time he appeared as if he meant to
fight; but after giving the British ships time to come near him, when it was
too late, he crowded all the sail he could carry; at the same time he showed an
attention to keep his squadron together.

At half an hour after two, the action began with great fury. In two hours the
enemy had lost three ships of the line, one struck, two were sunk outright.
Hawke ordered his ship to reserve her fire, to pass by all the others, and to
be laid along side of the Soleil Royal, the best ship in the French navy, and
commanded by M. de Conflans; the master remonstrated on the almost inevitable
danger of the coast. Hawke answered, You have done your duty in this
remonstrance; now obey my orders, and lay me along side the French admiral. A
French ship of 70 guns generously put himself between them; Hawke was obliged
to bestow here the fire he had reserved for a greater occasion, and at one
broadside sunk her to the bottom. The headmost of the English ships fired on
the enemy as they came up to them, and then passed on to others, leaving those
behind to improve their success, and destroy or take them; and by this method
they had got up quite to the van of the enemy, and would have totally destroyed
their fleet, had not night interposed to save them. Before night came on, the
enemy's fleet was much dispersed; but in the eagerness of the pursuit, two of
the English ships unfortunately run upon a sand, called the Four, and were
lost. The enemy fled in to their own coast. Seven ships of the line threw
overboard all their guns, and escaped into the River Villain; about as many
more got out to sea, and made for other ports.

Nothing could be conceived more dreadful than the night which succeeded this
action. A violent storm blew all night long. It was a pitchy darkness; a
dangerous coast surrounded them on almost all sides. A continual firing of
distress guns was heard, without knowing whether they came from friend or
enemy; and on account of the badness of the coast and the darkness of the
night, our people were equally unable to venture to their assistance.

When morning came on, they found the French Admiral had run his ship, and
another called the Heroes, on shore; the first was set on fire by the enemy, the
other by our seamen. Thus concluded this remarkable action (c), in which the
French had four capital ships destroyed, one taken, and the whole of their
formidable navy, in which consisted the last hope of their marine, shattered,
disarmed, and dispersed. The long threatened invasion which was to repair their
losses in every part of the world, was dissipated, and the credit of their arms
broken along with their forces. The behavior of the English captains and
seamen, on the contrary, added as much to the glory of the British arms, as to
the safety of their country. Perhaps there never was a naval engagement of such
extent, in which no captain was accused, nor even in any degree suspected of
misbehaviour or cowardice; in which those who engaged, and those who did not,
gave proofs that they were equally ardent in the service of their country.

Sir Edward Hawke's Letter to Mr. Clevland, Secretary to the Admiralty.
Royal George, off Penris Point, Nov. 24. SIR,
IN my letter of the 17th, by express, I desired you would acquaint their
lordships with my having received intelligence of 18 sail of the ^ine and three
frigates of the Breast squadron, being discovered about 24 leagues to the N. W.
of Belleisle, steering to the eastward; all the prisoners however agree, that
on the day we chased them, their squadron consisted, according to the
accompanying list, of four ships of 80, six of 74, three of 70, eight of 64,
one frigate of 36, one of 34, and one of 16 guns, with a small vessel to look
out. They sailed from Breast the 24th inst. the same day I sailed from Toybay.

Concluding that their first rendevous should be Quiberon, the instant I
received the intelligence, I directed my course thither with a pressed sail. At
the first wind blowing hard, at S. by E. and S. drove us considerably to the
westward. But on the 18th and 19th, though variable, it proved more favorable.
In the mean time, having been joined by the Maidstone and Coventry frigates, I
directed their commanders to keep a head of the squadron: one on the starboard
and the other on the larboard bow. At half past eight o'clock in the morning of
the 20th, Belleisle, by our reckoning, bearing E. by N. one fourth N. the
Maidstone made the signal for seeing a fleet, I immediately spread abroad the
signal for a line abreast, in order to draw all the ships of the squadron up
with me. I had before sent the Magnanime a head, to make the land. At three
fourths past nine she made signal for an enemy. Observing, on my discovering
them, that they made off, I threw out the signal, for the seven ships nearest
them to chase, and draw into a line of battle ahead of me, and endeavor to
stop them till the rest of the squadron should come up, who were also to form
as they chased, that no time might be lost in the pursuit. That morning there
were in chase the Rochester, Chatham, Portland, Falkland, Minerva, Vengeance
and Venus, all which joined me about eleven o'clock; and, in the evening, the
Sapphire from Quiberon bay. All the day we had very fresh gales, at N. W. and W.
N. W. with heavy squalls.

M. Conflans continued going off under such sail as his squadron could carry,
and at the same time keep together, while we crowded after them with every sail
our ships could bear. At half part two, P. M. the fire beginning ahead, I made
the signal for engaging. We were then to the southward of Belleisle, and the
French admiral headmost, soon after led round the Cardinals Rocks so called.
, while his rear was in action. About four o'clock the Formidable struck, and a
little after, the Thesee and Superb were sunk. About five the Heroes struck, and
came to an anchor, but it blowing hard, no boat could be sent on board her.
Night was now come, and being on a part of the coast, among islands and sho^ls,
of which we were totally ignorant, without a pilot, as was the greatast part of
the squadron, and blowing hard on a ^ee shore, I made the signal to anchor, and
came to in fifteen fathom water, the island of Dumer bearing E. by N. between
two and three miles, the Cardinals W. half S. and the steeples of Crozie S. E.
as we found next morning.

In the night we heard many guns of distress fired, but blowing hard, want of
knowledge of the coast, and whether they were fired by a friend or an enemy,
prevented all means of relief.

By daybreak of the 21st, we discovered one of our ships dismasted ashore on
our Four A Sand Bank
, the French Heroes also, and the Soleil Royal, which under cover of the night
had anchored among us, cut and run ashore to the westward of Crozie. On the
latter's moving, I made the Essex's signal to slip and pursue her, but she
unfortunately got upon the Four, and both she and the Resolution are
irrecoverably lost, notwithstanding we sent them all the assistance that the
weather would permit. About fourscore of the Resolution's company, in spite of
the strongest remonstrahces of their captain, made rafts, and, with several
French prisoners belonging to the Formidable, put off, and I am afraid, drove
out to sea. All the Essex's are saved (with as many of the stores as possible)
except one lieutenant and a boat's crew, who were drove on the French shore,
and have not been heard of: the remains of both ships have been set on fire. We
found the Dorsetshire, Revenge, and Defiance, in the night of the 20th put out
to sea; as I hope the Swiftsure did, for she is still missing. The Dorsetshire
and Defiance returned next day, and the latter saw the Revenge without. Thus,
what loss we have sustained has been owing to the weather not the enemy, seven
or eight of whose line of battle ships got to sea, I believe, the night of the
action.

As soon as it was broad daylight in the morning of the 21st, I discovered
seven or eight of the enemy's line of battle ships at anchor, between Point
Penris, and the river Villain; on which I made the signal to weigh, in order
to work up and attack them; but it blowed so hard from the N. W. that instead
of daring to cast the squadron loose, I was obliged to strike top gallant
masts. Most of those ships appeared to be a-ground at low water; but on the
flood, by lightening them, and the advantage of the wind under the land, all
except two got that night into the river Villain.

The weather being moderate on the 22d, I sent the Portland, Chatham, and
Vengeance to destroy the Soleil Royal and Heroes. The French, on the approach of
our ships, set the first on fire, and soon after the latter met the same fate
from our people. In the mean time I got under way, and worked up within Penris
Point, as well for the sake of its being a safer road, as to destroy, if
possible, the two ships of the enemy which still lay without the Villain; but
before the ships I sent ahead for that purpose could get near them, being
quite light, and with the tide of flood, they got in.

All the 23d we were employed in reconnoitring the entrance of that river,
which is very narrow, and only twelve feet water on the bar, at low water. We
discovered at least seven, if not eight, line of battle ships about half a mile
within, quite light, and two large frigates moored across, to defend the mouth
of the river; only the frigates appeared to have guns in.

By evening I had twelve long boats fitted as fireships, ready to attempt
burning them, under convoy of the Sapphire and Coventry; but the weather being
bad, and the wind contrary, obliged me to defer it, till at least the latter
should be favorable; if they can, by any means be destroyed, it shall be done.

In attacking a flying enemy, it was impossible in the space of a short
winter's day, that all our ships should be able to get into action, or all
those of the enemy brought to it. The commanders and companies of such as did
come up with the rear of the French, on the 20th, behaved with the greatest
intrepidity, and gave the strongest proof of a true British spirit. In the same
manner I am satisfied, would those have acquitted themselves, whose bad going
ships, or the distance they were at in the morning, prevented from getting up.
Our loss by the enemy is not considerable; for in the ships which are now with
me, I find only one lieutenant, and 39 seamen and marines killed, and about 202
wounded. When I consider the season of the year, the hard gales of wind on the
day of action, a flying enemy, the shortness of the day, and the coast we are
on, I can boldly affirm, that all that possibly could be done, has been done.
As to the loss we have sustained, let it be placed to the necessity I was under
of running all risks to break this strong force of the enemy: had we had but
two hours more daylight, the whole had been totally destroyed or taken, for we
were almost up with their van when night overtook us.

Yesterday came in here the Pallas, Fortune sloop, and the Proserpine
fire-ship. On the 16th I had dispatched the Fortune to Quebec, with directions
to captain Duff, to keep directly on his guard. In his way thither he fell in
with the Phebe, a French frigate of 40 guns, under jury-masts, and fought her
several hours. During the engagement lieutenant Stuart, 2d of the Ramilies,
whom I had appointed to command her, was unfortunately killed; the surviving
officers, on consulting together, resolved to leave her, as she proved too
strong for them. I have detached captain Young to Quiberon bay with five ships,
and am making up a flying squadron to scour the coast to the isle of Aix, and
if practicable, to attempt any of the enemy's ships that may be there.

I am, Sir, etc. EDWARD HAWKE.

LIST of Ships with Sir Edward Hawke, Nov. 20, 1759.
Ships. Guns. Men. Commanders. Royal George, 100 880 Sir Edward Hawke, Capt.
Cambell. Union, 90 770 Sir Charles Hardy, Capt. Evans. Duke, 90 750 Capt.
Graves. Namur, 90 780 Capt. Buckle. Mars, 74 600 J. Young, Esquire Commodore
Warspight, 74 600 Sir John Bentley. Hercules, 74 600 Capt. Fortescue. Torbay,
74 700 Hon. Capt. Keppel. Magnanime, 74 700 Right Hon. Lord How. Resolution,
74 600 Capt. Speak. Hero, 74 600 Hon. Capt. Edgcumbe. Swiftsure, 70 520 Sir
Thomas Stanhope. Dorsetshire, 70 520 Capt. Denis. Burford, 70 520 Capt.
Gambier. Chichester, 70 520 Capt. Willet. Temple, 70 520 Capt. Wash. Shirley.
Revenge, 64 480 Capt. Storr. Essex, 64 480 Capt. O'Brien. Kingston, 60 400
Capt. Shirley. Intrepid, 60 420 Capt. Maplesden. Montague, 60 420 Capt. Rowley.
Dunkirk, 60 420 Capt. Digby. Defiance, 60 420 Capt. Baird.

The following Frigates joined Sir Edward Hawke between Ushant and Belleisle.
Rochester 50 350 Capt. Duff. Portland, 50 350 Capt. Arbuthnot. Falkland, 50
350 Capt. Drake. Chatham, 50 350 Capt. Lockhart. Minerva, 32 220 Capt. Hood.
Venus, 36 240 Capt. Harrison. Vengeance, 28 200 Capt. Nightingale. Coventry, 28
200 Capt. Burslem. Maidstone, 28 200 Capt. Diggs. Sapphire, 32 220 Capt.
Strachan.

LIST of the French Squadron which came out of Breast, November 14, 1759.
Le Soleil Royal, 80 1200 M. Conflans, Admiral. Le Tonnant, 80 1000 M.
Beaufremont, Vice Admiral. Le Formidable, 80 1000 M. de St. Andre du Verger,
Rear-Admiral. Le Orient, 80 1000 M. Guebriant, Chef d'Escadre. L'Intrepide, 74
815 Le Glorieux, 74 815 Le Thesee, 74 815 L'Heros, 74 815 Le Robuste, 74 185 Le
Magnifique, 74 815 Le Just, 70 800 Le Superbe, 70 800 Le Dauphin, 70 800 Le
Dragon, 64 750 Le Northumberland, 64 750 Le Sphinx, 64 750 Le Solitaire, 64 750
Le Brilliant, 64 750 L'Eveille, 64 750 Le Bizarre, 64 750 L'Inflexible, 64
L'Hebe, 40 La Vestale, 34 L'Aigrette, 36 Le Calypso, 16 Le Prince Noir, a small
vessel to look out.

The above ships were all in company when the action began, except the Hebe
frigate.

Admiral Saunders was not present at the engagement, which he sought with so
much honor, as he did not join Admiral Hawke until sometime after.

General Townshend came from the fleet with the express, the fate of the enemy
being determined; he refused to be put on shore when the Admiral declared his
intentions of seeking the enemy, but went with him as a volunteer.

Those who think such matters deserving of their notice, have observed, that
this decisive naval engagement, the surrender of the Prussian troops at Maxen,
and the taking of Munster, happened on the same day, the 20th of November.

This was the conclusion of the French affairs in Europe. The issue of the
campaign in America had not been more favorable to them. Although the events
in the East Indies belong properly to the last year, yet, as the accounts did
not arrive until this, and that the actions there were of great importance, and
equally fortunate on our side, it is proper that we should take some notice of
them here.

The English had by no means that superiority over the French in the East
Indies, which they had in America. It was here the French seemed to have made
those efforts, by which they hoped in some degree to balance their losses in
other parts. They had a very strong squadron under M. d'Ache in those seas. M.
de Lally, an officer of credit, and of greater rank than had usually been sent
on that service, commanded a body of 2000 Europeans, a great army, in a country
where the name of an European is itself a strength.

In the beginning, their success seemed proportioned to their forces; they took
the fort and city of St. David's. But in a very short time the ill star of
France, which in no part of the world set well on their affairs, began to
influence them here. M. d'Ache, in two naval engagements, was worsted, and
prevented from cooperating with the land forces for the rest of the campaign.
And had the spirit and conduct of Admiral Pococke been as well seconded by some
of his captains, as it was by others, there is great reason to believe, that
the French naval power had been as effectually destroyed in those seas, as it
had been in those of Europe.

Notwithstanding these checks, it was necessary that M. Lally should act. But
it was not only the disgrace of the French fleet, but an extreme want of money
which delayed his operations. A Prince of the country, the King of Tanjour,
appeared the only resource which was open. To this prince he applied for a
considerable sum of money, which being absolutely refused, he carried the war
into his dominions, and laid siege to his capital city. But after lying several
days before it, and after having even made a practicable breach, the skill of
some English gunners, the want of provisions and ammunition, and the disorders
which reigned in his army, obliged him to return without the money, and with
the mortification of being beaten from a place, only fortified after the Indian
manner.

This failure in their pecuniary expectations, and their repulse from an Indian
town, were bad encouragements to the undertaking of an enterprise against an
European enemy, and a fortification in some degree regular. But having seized
upon a Dutch vessel, as it is thought much with its own consent, which
contained a large treasure, they set out at length to besiege Madrass. But here
their success was no better than at Tanjour, though their strength was greater,
and their efforts much more obstinate.

Colonel Draper and Major Brereton defended the place with the utmost skill and
bravery. Mr. Pigot likewise with equal generosity and prudence, seconded their
endeavors, by the supplies of stores and ammunition, which were admirably
distributed, and co-operated with the military with a firmness and intrepidity,
by which he obtained an honor equal to any in the defense of the place. Whilst
the town was defended with great spirit within; parties were continually sent
out, which so infested the roads through which the enemy's convoys were to
pass, that their army in the trenches were infinitely weakened by the
detachments which they were obliged to send out. After a siege of more than two
months, they were obliged to abandon their enterprise, and by that means
renounce for ever all those sanguine hopes, which they had entertained from the
forces in this part of the world. The English, on the contrary, went on from
success to success. Whilst they defeated the French on the Eastern coast of the
great peninsula of India, on the western they took the great and opulent city
of Surat from the powers of the country, with very little loss.

General Lally left Madrass in the utmost transports of rage and despair, which
a man of honor and ability in his profession can feel, who is ill seconded by
his troops, neglected by those who ought to support him, and cheated by the
villainy of contractors, and of all those who turn war into a low traffic. (a)
Genesis Lally's Letter to M. de Lyrit, dated Madrass, the 14th of February, 1759.
A Good blow might be struck here: There is a ship in the road of 20 guns,
laden with all the riches of Madrass, which it is said will remain there till
the 20th. The Expedition is just arrived, but M. Gorlin is not a man to attack
her: for she has made him run away once before. The Bristol on the other hand
did but just make her appearance before St. Thomas; and on the vague report of
thirteen ships coming from Porto Novo, she took fright; and after landing the
provisions with which she was laden, she would not stay long enough even to
take on board twelve of her own guns, which she had lent us for the siege.

If I was the judge of the point of honor of the company's officers, I would
break him like glass, as well as some others of them.

The Fidelle, or Harlem, or even the aforesaid Bristol, with the twelve guns
restored to her, would be sufficient to make themselves masters of the English
ship, if they could manage so as to get to the windward of her in the night.
Maugendie and Tremillier are said to be good men; and were they employed only
to transport 200 wounded men, that we have here, their service would be of
importance.

We remain still in the same position: the breach made these fifteen days; all
the time within fifteen toises of the wall of the place, and never holding up
our heads to look at it.

I reckon we shall at our arrival at Pondicherry endeavor to learn some other
trade, for this of war requires too much patience.

Of 1500 Cipays which attend our army, I reckon near 800 are employed upon the
road to Pondicherry, laden with sugar, pepper, and other goods; and as for the
Caulis they are all employed for the same purpose, from the first day we came
here.

I am taking my measures from this day to set fire to the Black Town, and to
blow up the powder mills.

You will never imagine, that 50 French deserters, and 100 Swiss, are actually
stopping the progress of 2000 men of the King's and Company's troops, which are
still here existing, notwithstanding the exaggerated accounts that every one
makes here, according to his own fancy, of the slaughter that has been of them;
and you will be still more surprised, if I tell you, that, were it not for the
two combats and four battles we sustained, and for the batteries which failed,
or to speak more properly, which were unskilfully made, we should not have lost
50 men, from the commencement of the siege to this day.

I have wrote to M. de Larche, that if he persists in not coming here, let who
will raise money upon the Paleagers for me, I will not do it: And I renounce
(as I informed you a month ago I would do) meddling directly or indirectly with
any thing whatever, that may have relation to your administration, whether
civil or military. For I had rather go, and command the Caffres of Madagascar,
than remain in this Sodom; which it is impossible but the fire of the English
must destroy, sooner or later, even though that from Heaven should not.

I have the honor to be, etc. etc. Signed, LALLY.
P. S. I think it necessary to apprize you, that, as M. de Soupire has refused
to take upon him the command of this army, which I have offered to him, and
which he is empowered to accept, by having received from the court a duplicate
of my commission, you must of necessity, together with the council, take it
upon you. For my part, I undertake only to bring it back either to Arcotte or
Sadraste. Send therefore your orders, or come yourself to command it; for I
shall quit it upon my arrival there.




His letter is a strong and very striking picture of these agitations; and
certainly it is worthy of remark, that every where there should appear
something more unaccountably wrong and weak in the management of the French,
than has been in the conduct of that or almost any other nation at any time. It
seems to argue an essential and radical fault in some superior part of their
government, more easily indeed visible in its consequences, than discoverable
in its cause.

In Europe they received offers of peace from the Kings of Great Britain and
Prussia. But as they did not expect, from their situation, very advantageous or
honorable terms, they resolved to act, in one instance, the Roman part, and
still hold out, determined to hazard the last extremities; perhaps, hoping
something favorable from the fortune of their allies, since their own had
deserted them; and resolving to contract their plan, and to make one strong
effort in one part, rather than unprofitably to waste their strength upon
severeal inferior objects. This effort could be made with any prospect of
success only in Germany. (a) (a) The Duc de Belleisle's Letter to Marshal
Contades, dated Versailles, July 23, 1759.
J'AI toujours peur que Fischer ne soit parti trop tard: Il est cependant bien
important, et bien essentiel que nous puissions tirer de grosses contributions.
Je ne vois de ressources pour nos Depenses les plus urgentes, et pour les
reparations des Troops, que dans l'Argent que nous pourrous avoir du Pais
enemy; d'ou il faudra egalement tirer des subsistances de toutes Especes,
independamment de l'Argent, c'est a dire des Foins, des Pailles, des Avoines
pour l'Hyver, des Bleds, des Bestiaux, des Chevaux, et meme des Hommes pour
recruter toutes nos Troops Etrangeres. La Guerre ne doit pas etre prolongee,
et peut-etre faudrat-il, suivant les Evenemens qui arriveront d'ici a la Fin de
Septembre, fair un veritable Desert en avaunt de la Ligne des Quartiers, que
l'onjugera a propos de tenir pendant l'Hyver, afin que l'Ennemi se trouve dans
une Impossibilite reelle d'en pouvoir aprocher en nous reservant de la
Subsistence seulement sur la Route qui pourra nous convenir de prendre dans le
milieu de l'Hyver, pour culbuter ou enlevert nous memes les Quartiers des
Ennemis. C'est pour pouvoir remplir cet Objet, que je fais travailler sans
Ralache a tout ce qu'il faut pour que toutes vos Troops, sans Exception,
soient bien habillees, bien armees, bien equipees, et bien reparees, en tout
Point, avaunt la Fin de Novembre, avec des Tents neuves, pourque si cela
convient aux Affairs Politiques ou Militaires du Roy, vous puissiez assembler
le tout ou party de votre Armee pour agir offensivement et avec Viguer, des le
commencement de Janvier, et que vous ayez la Satisfaction de montrer a nos
Ennemis, et a toute l'Europe, que les Francois scavent agir et fair la Guerre
en toutes Saisons, quand ils ont un general tell que vous, et un Ministre
Militaire qui scait prevoir et se concerter avec le General.

Vous sentez, Mons. le Marechal, que ce que je vous dis peut devenir non
seulment utile et honorable, mais peut-etre meme necessaire relativement a ce
que vous scavez, et don't jevous parlerai encore dans ma Lettre particuliere.

I AM still afraid that Fischer set out too late: It is, however, very
important, and very essential that we should raise large contributions. I see
no other resource for our most urgent expenses, and for refitting the troops,
but in the money we may draw from the enemy's country; from whence we must
likewise procure subsistence of all kinds, (independently of the money) that is
to say, hay, straw, oats for the winter, bread, corn, cattle, horses, and even
men to recruit our foreign troops. The war must not be prolonged, and perhaps
it may be necessary, according to the events which may happen between this time
and the end of September, to make a downright desert before the line of the
quarters, which it may be thought proper to keep during the winter, in order
that the enemy may be under a real impossibility of approaching us: at the same
time reserving for ourselves a bare subsistence on the route, which may be the
most convenient for us to take in the middle of winter to beat up, or seize
upon the enemy's quarters. That this object may be fulfilled, I cause the
greatest assiduity to be used in preparing what is necessary for having all
your troops, without exception, well clothed, well armed, well equipped, and
well refitted in every respect, before the end of November, with new tents, in
order that, if it shall be advisable for the king's political and military
affairs, you may be able to assemble the whole, or part of your army, to act
offensively, and with vigor, from the beginning of January, and that you may
have the satisfaction to show our enemies, and all Europe, that the French know
how to act and carry on war, in all seasons, when they have such a general as
you are, and a minister of the department of war, that can foresee and concert
matters with the general.

You must be sensible, Sir, that what I say to you may become not only useful
and honorable, but perhaps even necessary with respect to what you know, and
of which I shall say more in my private letters.

(Sign) M. Duc. de Belleisle.


But the supplies necessary for this great charge were difficult to a nation,
whose trade was wholly destroyed. On this occasion they did not scruple to
break in upon the public faith, and to find supplies for one year in an
expedient, that struck at the sources of all future credit. They stopped the
payment on many public bills and funds The French court stopped payment of the
following public debts, viz. 1. The three kinds of rents created on the posts.
2. Those constituted upon the chest of redemption. 3. The coupons of bills on
the same chest. 4. Those of the two royal lotteries. 5. The reimbursement of
bills drawn to bearer on the same chest. 6. The bills of the two royal
lotteries. 7. The rents created on the two sols per pound of the tenth penny.
8. The reimbursement of the capitals of rents. 9. The payments of bills
dischargeable in nine years, under the name of annuities. 10. Those of the new
actions on the benefit of the farms. 11. All the bills drawn by the colonies
upon the government, amounting to 1,333,000 l.
. The King threw in his own plate into the public stock as an example, and a
request that others should contribute in the same manner from their private
fortune, to the necessities of the state; though several of the nobility, and
many churches and convents sent in their plate, there was yet a general
backwardness to give into this method of supply, and to trust the public with
so considerable part of their substance at the instant when they saw it so
notoriously break its faith in other particulars.

However, these resources, such as they are, will enable them to keep the war
on foot. They turn their whole attention to Germany, where they have very
greatly augmented their army, and placed it under a general, from whom they
have some hopes, after their repeated disappointments, and the frequent changes
they have made. They propose also another army under the prince de Soubise; if
they can compass this latter project, as it is believed they may, the system of
Germany is still in very imminent danger. For notwithstanding the tried
goodness of our troops, and the admirable commander at the head of them, it is
certain, even with any reinforcements we may be able to send, we shall find it
very difficult to contend with two armies, supposing that we shall have no
other than French armies to contend with, and that the King of Prussia should
be able, as he has hitherto been, to find employment for the many, the
powerful, and the implacable enemies that surround him.

It is certain he is much reduced; and that his resources are nearly exhausted.
These are facts which cannot be concealed; and yet some glimmering of hopes may
be still perceived, when we consider the admirable talents for war and
government, which that monarch possesses; and when we consider even the events
of the last (to him) unfortunate campaign; where after having suffered four
capital defeats, and having obtained no one considerable advantage, he has yet
continued in some sort superior in the field; the enemy has not been able to
make the least impression upon his dominions; and he has, at last, more than
divided Saxony with them; the city of Dresden is all that they possess in that
country, and the acquisition of which has been the only fruit ^f four
campaigns, and four victories in one campaign, and the efforts of the united
forces of Austria, Russia, and the Empire, to say nothing of France and Sweden.

As for Great Britain, she has only to fear from her connections. In no one
year since she was a nation, has she been favored with so many successes, both
by sea and land, and in every quarter of the globe; nor have her officers, both
by sea and land, ever done more honor to their country, by their skill and
bravery. And with regard to the internal administration, it suffices to say,
that whilst France became bankrupt, without delay or murmuring there have been
more than six millions borrowed in England at a very easy rate; and that the
interest on this immense sum has been made good by a single tax upon malt,
which will scarce be felt by the people. By this the resources of England may
be imagined; especially if we consider, that highly as we are taxed for the
necessary charges of the war; we have not been prevented from great and
expensive voluntary exertions of public spirit and beneficence. The cities of
London and Westminster, and after their example other towns made a large
subscription for enlisting soldiers. Subscriptions were also carried on to a
great amount, for clothing the enemies prisoners, abandoned through the
neglect or poverty of their sovereign; and for administering to the relief of
the families of those who had fallen in the battles of Quebec and Minden. Thus
actuated by the warmest patriotism, which far from extinguishing, seemed to
kindle a beneficence toward our enemies in their distress.

The condition of Europe, which all people thought would have been decided in
this campaign, is nearly as dubious as ever; and the difficulties which oppose
themselves to a peace are rather augmented than diminished. Here then we close
the scene, and conclude the events of the present year; in the next we hope,
notwithstanding appearances, after so many scenes of horror, to have the more
pleasing task of relating the steps taken to a general peace, on terms as
particularly advantageous to our own country, as the mixed interests of Europe,
and the various fortunes of the powers embarked in the same cause, will admit.

EARL TEMPLE.
portrait of Earl Temple

A COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE LATE WAR, OR ANNUAL REGISTER OF ITS Rise, Progress,
and Events, IN Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.

AND EXHIBITING THE STATE of the BELLIGERENT POWERS at the Commencement of the
WAR; their Interests and Objects in its Continuance: Interspersed with The
CHARACTERS of the able and disinterested STATESMEN, to whose WISDOM and
INTEGRITY, and of the HEROES, to whose COURAGE and CONDUCT we are indebted for
that NAVAL and MILITARY Success, which is not to be equalled in the ANNALS of
this or any other NATION.

Illustrated with A Variety of HEADS, PLANS, MAPS, and CHARTS.

By J. WRIGHT, Gent.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for DAVID STEEL, Bookseller, at the Bible and Crown,
King Street, Little Tower Hill.

MDCCLXV.

THE ANNUAL REGISTER: OR HISTORY OF THE WAR. For the YEAR 1760.
CHAP. I.
Nothing decided in the war. State of the several powers concerned. Great
Britain and Prussia propose an accommodation. Difficulties in concluding a
peace. The condition and hopes of France. Demands on the King of Prussia.
Treaty said to be between Russia and Austria.

IF all the wars which have harrassed Europe for more than a century had not
proved it, the events of the last campaigns must have satisfied every thinking
man, that victories do not decide the fate of nations. Four most bloody, and to
all appearance most ruinous defeats, which he suffered in that year, had
despoiled the King of Prussia of no more than a single town. After these
accumulated blows he still found himself in a condition to make good his
winter quarters; to cover his dominions; and to tempt the favor of fortune in
another campaign.

To carry our attention a little further back; who could have imagined, that
when the French had compelled the Hanoverian troops to lay down their arms,
when they had thrust them into a defenseless corner, had bound them down with
the yoke of a strict and severe capitulation, and had possessed themselves of
every place which could boast the smallest share of strength in the king's
German dominions, that in a few months they should find themselves compelled to
fly before their captives; and after having suffered a considerable defeat,
should be pushed back almost on their own territories.

On the other hand, it might have been supposed that the effects of these
advantages under the management of a very great commander, who was besides
largely reinforced, could have been frustrated only by the loss of some great
battle. But the fact was otherwise. The Hanoverians, without any adverse stroke
in that campaign, were obliged to repass the Rhine and the Lip; and since
that time, fortune having decided nothing by the events of five years war, has
given to Prince Ferdinand the possession of a great part of Westphalia in the
manner of a conquered country, and yet sees him abandoning Hesse, and with
difficulty covering the borders of Hanover.

In short, the victory of Crevelt could not enable the Duke of Brunswick to
defend the Rhine. The battle of Bergen did not give M. Broglio an entrance into
Hanover. The great victory of Minden did not drive the French from the Maine.
We have seen armies, after complete victory, obliged to act as if they had been
defeated; and after a defeat, taking an offensive part with success, and
reaping all the fruits of victory.

These reflections are still more strongly enforced by the fortune of the King
of Prussia. Covered with the laurels of Lowositz, Prague, Rosbach and Lissa,
when he began after so many complete triumphs, to pursue his advantages, and to
improve success into conquest, the scene was suddenly altered. As soon as he
attempted to penetrate with effect into the enemies country, without having
suffered any very signal blow, without any considerable mistake committed upon
his side, Fortune, who has as it were attached herself to the defensive,
immediately forsook him. He was not able to take a single place. And those
advantages which at other times and situations, would have laid the foundation
of lasting empire, have in his case only protracted a severe destiny, which
some think in the end inevitable; but which as many, as great, and as entire
victories since obtained over his forces, have not been yet able to bring upon
him.

The balance of power, the pride of modern policy, and originally invented to
preserve the general peace as well as freedom of Europe, has openly preserved
its liberty. It has been the original of innumerable and fruitless wars. That
political torture by which powers are to be enlarged or abridged, according to
a standard, perhaps not very accurately imagined, ever has been, and it is to
be feared will always continue a cause of infinite contention and bloodshed.
The foreign ambassadors constantly residing in all courts, the negotiations
incessantly carrying on, spread both confederacies and quarrels so wide, that
whenever hostilities commence, the theater of war is always of a prodigious
extent. All parties in those diffusive operations, have of necessity their
strong and weak sides. What they gain in one part is lost in another; and in
conclusion, their affairs become so balanced, that all the powers concerned
are certain to lose a great deal; the most fortunate acquire little; and what
they do acquire is never in any reasonable proportion to charge and loss.

Frequent experience of this might prove one of the strongest grounds for a
lasting peace in Europe. But that spirit of intrigue, which is the political
distemper of the time, that anxious foresight which forms the character of all
the present courts, prevent the salutary effects which might result from this
experience. These modern treaties of peace, the fruits not of moderation but
necessity; those engagements contracted when all the parties are wearied and
none satisfied, where none can properly be called conquerors or conquered,
where after having sought in vain to compel, they are content to overreach
them in the very moment they are formed, and from the very act of forming them,
with the seeds of new dissentions, more implacable animosities, and more cruel
wars. For if to forward the work of peace, any member in these alliances should
acquire a cession of any importance in its favor, this afterward becomes a
ground for another alliance, and for new intrigues to deprive them of their
acquisition. To settle the peace of Germany, Silesia was yielded in 1745 to the
King of Prussia, and that cession gave occasion for the war of 1756.

The kings of Great Britain and Prussia chose the moment of success, to propose
an accommodation; and they desired that the opposite powers should concur with
them in nominating some place for a congress. Some spoke of Leipsic, as a means
of indemnification to that unfortunate city; the States General would have
given a town of theirs; King Stanislaus offered Nancy, his capital: but the
time of peace was not yet come. The two kings made a display of moderation; and
they had reason to think that if their proposals should be accepted (which
probably they did not then expect) they must naturally take the lead in that
negotiation, and must give the whole a turn to their advantage. But the adverse
alliance unanimously rejected their efforts, and the refusal of some of its
members was couched in terms sufficiently haughty.

To speak impartially, they could not at that time have accepted propositions
for peace. France had suffered in every quarter: in her present condition she
could scarcely look for every favorable terms. As they had now abandoned in
despair all attempts by sea, and consequently all efforts in North America and
both the Indies, all their hopes were centered in Germany. Hitherto their
fortune in that country had not been very encouraging. But still, in that
country lay their best and indeed their only prospect. The strength and
perseverance of the two empresses, the wasted condition of the King of Prussia,
the enormous expense of the German war to England, which must gradually exhaust
the resources of her credit, and with them the patience of an inconstant
people, had inspired with no small hope. All these considerations confirmed
their resolution of hearkening to no terms, until by acquiring superiority, or
at least an equality, they might be assured of procuring such as were not very
disadvantageous or humiliating.

The empress queen upon her part had a moral certainty, that she could not
procure, by a treaty proposed at such a juncture, those objects for which she
had begun, and with such steadiness in every fortune had carried on the war. In
reality, her circumstances then were, and they still continue, very intricate
and embarrassed. It was necessary that she should have allies of great power;
but if they have done her great services, they have formed high pretensions;
indeed so high, that if she and her allies cannot absolutely prescribe the
terms of peace, it is impossible that they should all be in any degree
satisfied.

Her situation in this respect has pushed ad internecionem, the war between her
and the King of Prussia. Even the cession of all Silesia in her favor, cannot
procure a peace for that monarch. The Russians will never let loose their hold
of the ducal Prussia; a country conquered by their own arms, a possession which
rendered the King most formidable to them, and which is their sole
indemnification for what they have expended in a war entered into for other
views than those of glory, or even of revenge. It has been confidently
asserted, that the empress queen of Hungary has actually guarantied the
possession of that country to its conquerors. This is indeed a very
extraordinary step, and the fact is not sufficiently authenticated. But the
report is not altogether improbable. We may be sure that if such a guarantee
has been made, it has been entered into upon some reciprocal engagement of
equal force, and for an object equally important.

Nothing but the last desperate necessity, nothing in short but being conquered
in the most absolute sense, will ever induce the King of Prussia to submit to
both these cessions. By such a submission, beside being despoiled of that
conquest, which is the great glory of his reign, and constitutes the firmest
support of his revenue, he will see his hereditary dominions curtailed of
another province from whence he derives his royal title, and what makes it of
infinitely greater importance in his eyes, the best commercial part of his
territories, and that only part of his territories, by which he could have
hoped to become in any degree a maritime power.

But though it were possible that his Prussian Majesty could be brought to
submit to these humiliating terms, a great deal still remains to be adjusted.
There are other demands, which though not so high in their nature, nor so
strongly enforced, are notwithstanding considerable, and cannot, with any
decency be totally neglected. What is the nature of the bargain between the
Empress and the Senate of Sweden, has not yet been made public. Be it what it
will, this is probably the least perplexing part of the whole.

But some indemnification for the King of Poland, on whose dominions the
greatest calamities of the war have fallen, seems absolutely necessary; and on
what principle can Austria ever expect an ally, if she should secure all the
benefits of the pacification to herself, and leave to her confederates nothing
but the sufferings of a war in which they were involved purely in her quarrel?

This variety of demands, all to be satisfied out of the dominions of a single
Prince, must necessarily perplex the work of peace with almost insurmountable
difficulties. It ought not indeed to be concealed, that there are circumstances
which seem to lead to some solution of this embarrassment. But if they are
attentively concerned, they will, I believe, be rather found to increase it.

Great Britain has had remarkable success against France at sea, in America,
and in the Indies. On the continent of Europe, her fortune is even at this day,
tollerably balanced: the two weak parts, therefore, in the opposite alliances,
(I speak only with regard to the events of the present war) are France and
Prussia. As therefore France will expect some cessions from Great Britain, it
is reasonable that they should be bought by some moderation of the rigorous
terms which otherwise would have been imposed on Prussia.

All the sacrifices to peace must be made out of the advantage acquired by
Austria and Great Britain. But when Great Britain shall have consented to some
concessions, to forward this great work, what return can the Empress Queen
make, but an abatement of her demands upon Silesia? That is, by giving up that
grand, favorite, and indeed to her sole object, for which she has brought upon
herself a heavy war, disgusted her ancient and natural allies, and purchased
the aid of her natural enemy, at the price of places which the best blood of
Europe has been so often shed to preserve in her family. To all who consider
the character of that court, it will appear very plainly that she will hazard
almost any thing, and even risque those consequences to which her imprudent
alliance with France has exposed her, rather than accept a peace which must
deprive her of her hopes of Silesia.

When these things are weighed, it will not appear wonderful that there have
been so few serious overtures for peace; and that the longer the war continues,
the greater difficulties seem to oppose themselves to any conclusion of it.

The only hope that remains of any happy conclusion, is that some of the great
members of the alliance, wearied and exhausted, will at length fly off, and
thereby throw the rest into such confusion, that a peace will be suddenly
huddled up; and all difficulties not removed, but forgotten, by not allowing
time to weigh and study what may be gained or lost. This must produce a system
of pacification, the nature of which it is impossible to foresee; because it
cannot be said upon which side this defection will begin; but principally
because the war still continues, in the event of which, in spite of all that
can be conjectured from the strength and present condition of the powers
concerned, fortune will have so large a share. But we may predict without
rashness, that the first overtures will be between Great Britain and France:
for they never think of peace in Germany.

CHAP. II.
State of the English garrison at Quebec. Designs of Mons-Levi. Preparations
for a siege. French army marches from Montreal. Their strength. Battle of
Sillery. Genesis Murray defeated. Quebec besieged. The English fleet under Lord
Colville arrives. French vessels destroyed. Levi raises the siege.

THIS was the posture of Europe at the close of the campaign of 1759. And all
thoughts of peace being entirely removed, the war was prosecuted in this part
of the world with the utmost vigor as soon as the season permitted them to
recommence operations.

But in America, the severity of winter was not able wholly to interrupt the
progress of the war. Canada had been supposed conquered, by the taking of
Quebec. Indeed without the possession of that place, it had been impossible to
reduce that country; but still a great deal remained to complete the advantage
to which the taking of Quebec had only given an opening. The French troops
after their defeat, had retired into the heart of their country. And the
English navy having provided the town sufficiently with military stores and
provisions, set sail, fearing lest they should be overtaken by the frost. Ten
battalions, two companies of the artillery, one of American wood-rangers, in
all about 7000 men, formed the garrison which was left in Quebec to command
Canada during the winter, and to facilitate the entire reduction of that
province in the ensuing campaign. They were under the orders of General Murray.

As the river St. Laurence is commonly shut up by ice, for the greater part of
the winter, all communication with Europe was cut off. The conquering army was
therefore subject to be invested in Quebec. The French commander, M. Levi, was
sensible of this advantage; and he saw that it was the only resource by which
he could have any chance of preserving Canada. He accordingly prepared to make
use of this last, and only opportunity; and he was not without some prospect of
success.

He knew that the fortifications of Quebec were weak and incomplete, without
any kind of outwork; that the town was almost a general ruin, since the late
siege; and that the English garrison had been much enfeebled, and greatly
reduced in their numbers by the scurvy. He knew also, that by some misfortune,
no provision had been made to prevent his attaining a superiority on the river;
as no vessels had been left, on a supposition, that they could not be useful in
winter.

The winter had passed in skirmishes always terminating in favor of the
English, by which they enlarged the sphere of their subsistence. M. Levi had
indeed proposed, during the rigor of the season, to attempt the place by a
coup de main; and had made preparations for that purpose. But the activity of
the garrison was such; and all the outposts so well secured, that he thought it
more prudent to abandon that design, and to postpone his operations, to the
opening of the spring, when a regular siege might be formed.

The forces which still remained in Canada, were not unequal to the attempt.
Ten battalions of regular troops, amounting to near 5000 men; 6000 of
experienced militia of Canada; about 300 savages. This was the force which M.
Levi had collected at Montreal, and with which he took the field on the 17th of
April, 1760.

His provisions, ammunition, and heavy baggage, fell down the river St.
Laurence, under the convoy of six frigates from 44 to 26 guns. By this
squadron, which there was nothing to oppose, he acquired the undisputed command
of the river, a point of the greatest importance to the whole design. In ten
days march, the French army arrived at the heights of Abraham three miles from
Quebec.

When Genesis Murray perceived the approach of the enemy, he had two parts to
take, either to keep within the town, and confiding in his troops, which though
weak as an army, were strong as a garrison, to sustain the siege to the utmost
extremity; or to march out, and by trying the fortune of the field, to avoid
the tedious hardships of a siege, in a place which seemed to him scarcely
tenable.

He resolved on the latter part. But when he came to review his ability for
this undertaking, he could possibly draw into the field no more than 3000 men.
However he was not frighted by the enemy's great superiority. He determined to
engage; and he grounded his resolution on the following reasons.

First, that his army, notwithstanding its inferiority, was in the habit of
beating the enemy. That they had a fine train of field artillery; that to shut
themselves up at once within the walls, was putting all upon the single chance
of holding out for a considerable time a wretched fortification; a chance which
an action in the field could hardly alter, at the same time that it gave an
additional one, and perhaps a better; and in fine, that if the event was not
prosperous, he might, after holding out to the last extremity, retreat, with
what should remain of the garrison, to the isle of Orleans or Coudres, and
there wait for reinforcements.

It is not easy to comprehend the prudence of engaging in the open field, an
army four times superior; especially when the weaker army had it in their power
to keep upon the defensive in a strong post; and Quebec may well be considered
at least as a strong retrenchment. It is as hard to understand how the chance
of holding out a fortress, should not be lessened after a defeat of the troops,
which compose the garrison, who must necessarily suffer by such an event, both
in numbers and in spirit; it is equally difficult to conceive how the remains
of that garrison, which should be driven from Quebec, could have safely
retreated to the isle of Orleans or Coudress, or have remained in either of
those places, with any tolerable security, whilst the enemy were, as they were,
confessedly masters of the river. These are matters not so easily comprehended
by those who are at a distance from the scene of action; there circumstances
may have given these reasons their due weight; and they had the greater
influence from the character of the general; a man of the most ardent and
intripid courage, passionately desirous of glory, and emulous of the reputation
Wolf had acquired. He knew that a bold and successful stroke, and well
pursued, might so disable the enemy, who were in no likelihood of receiving
speedy or considerable succors from France, that the way to conquest would lie
plain and open before him; and he might expect the honor of the total
reduction of Canada, before the arrival of the rest of the king's forces to his
assistance.

Thus depending on fortune, on the tried goodness of his troops, and his own
courage to animate them, he marched out of the city, and descended from the
heights of Abraham with the army mentioned above, and twenty fieldpieces. The
right and left of the enemy's van possessed themselves of some small woody
eminences; the main army marched by the road of St. Foix; and formed themselves
under the shelter of the woods. Whilst the body of the enemies army was yet
unformed, the English troops attacked their van, both on the right and left,
with the utmost impetuosity, and drove them from the eminences, though they
were well maintained; the advanced posts of the French center gave way, without
a blow, and fell back upon their main army.

Hitherto the fortune of the field was favorable to the English; but now the
advantages they had obtained brought them full on the main army of the French,
which formed in columns, and advanced with great rapidity to support their
broken vanguard. The fire became very hot, and stopped the progress of our
troops; whilst those of the enemy having supported their center, wheeled round
the flanks of the British army to the left and right, and formed a semicircle,
which threatened to close upon our rear. Proper movements were made to protect
the flanks, but it was evident the army was in the greatest danger, not only of
a defeat, but of seeing itself surrounded, and its retreat to Quebec entirely
intercepted. Near one thousand men, soldiers and officers, (a third of the
army) had been, by this time killed and wounded. Nothing could be now thought
of but as speedy a retreat as possible; and in this there were difficulties,
which nothing but the bravery of the soldiery and the skill and spirit of the
officers could overcome. They gained Quebec with little loss in the pursuit;
but they were obliged to leave their cannon, which they could not bring off, on
account of the wreaths of snow, which even in this advanced season, and in the
temperate latitude of 47, still lay upon the ground. The French lost at least
2000 in the action.

When the account of this victory arrived in Europe, the French were for a
while infinitely elated. The blow was sensibly felt in England. Our sanguine
hopes were at once sunk. If Quebec was lost, it was evident that the greatest
difficulties must have arisen to our affairs in America, and the reduction of
Canada must become the work of more than one campaign. Nobody imagined that the
town could hold out longer after such a defeat; and the fleet sent from Europe
to reinforce the place was then at a great distance.

Nevertheless all things were prepared at Quebec for a vigorous defense. The
late check he had received, only roused the governor to more strenuous efforts.
He knew that the loss of the place would be attributed to the temerity of his
councils; he was sensible that in proportion to the honors paid by the public
to those who had conquered Quebec, would their indignation fall upon those by
whom it should happen to be lost; and that in general nothing makes a worse
figure, than a rashness which is not fortunate. These thoughts were perpetual
stings to a mind like his, passionately desirous of glory; and that very
disposition which led him to fight unsuccessfully with a weak army, gave him
activity and success in the defense of a weak fortification.

The French, whose whole hope of success depended on perfecting their work
before a British squadron could arrive, lost not a moment's time to improve
their victory. They opened trenches before the town the very night of the
battle. But it was the 11th of May before they could bring two batteries to
play upon the fortifications. They were greatly deficient in this respect.
Their accounts say, they had no more than twelve pieces of iron artillery,
which carried twelve pound balls. The English train, was without comparison,
superior. Before the French had opened their batteries, 132 pieces of cannon
were placed on the ramparts. The fire of the besiegers was therefore always
slack, interrupted, and of little effect.

Notwithstanding the weakness of the enemies fire, the superiority of the
English artillery, and the resolution of the governor, and garrison, the relief
of the place depended entirely on the early arrival of the British fleet, which
was looked out for every hour with the most anxious expectation. Had any French
ships of force come before the English, it was the general opinion that the
place must inevitably have fallen into their hands.

On the 9th of May to the great joy of the garrison, an English frigate
anchored in the basin and brought them an account that the British squadron
commanded by Lord Colville, was then in the river. On the 16th, a ship of the
line and a frigate arrived; the next morning the two frigates were sent to
attack the French squadron above the town. They executed their commission so
well, that in a moment all the French vessels of whatever kind were dispersed,
and the greatest part destroyed or taken.

M. Levi, who had the mortification to behold from the eminences this action,
which at one stroke put an end to all the hopes he had conceived from the late
victory, was persuaded that these frigates by the boldness of their manner,
must have been the vanguard of a considerable reinforcement; and that too close
at hand: He therefore raised the siege in the utmost hurry and precepitation,
leaving behind all his artillery, and a great part of his ammunition and
baggage, although Lord Colville, with the rest of the squadron, did not arrive
at Quebec until two days after.(a)

The Hon. James Murray's Letter to Mr. Secretary Pit, dated, Quebec, May 25,
1760.
SIR,
HAVING acquainted General Amberst, three weeks ago, that Quebec was besieged,
by an army of 15,000 men, I think it necessary, to do myself the honor of
addressing directly to you, the more agreeable news of the siege being raised,
lest, by your receiving the former intelligence, before the latter, some
inconvenience might arise to his Majesty's service.

By the journal of my proceedings, since I have had the command here, which I
have the honor to transmit to you, you will perceive the superiority we have
maintained over the enemy, during the winter, and that all Lower Canada, from
the Point Au-Tremble, was reduced, and had taken the oath of fidelity to the
King. You will, no doubt, be pleased to observe, that the enemy's attempts upon
our posts, and ours upon theirs, all tended to the honor of his Majesty's
arms, they were always baffled, and we were constantly lucky.

I wish I could say as much within the walls; the excessive coldness of the
climate, and constant living upon salt provisions, without any vegetables,
introduced the scurvy among the troops, which, getting the better of every
precaution of the officer, and every remedy of the surgeon, became as universal
as it was inveterate, insomuch, that, before the end of April, 1000 were dead,
and above 2000 of what remained, totally unsit for service.

In this situation, I received certain intelligence, that the Chevalier de
Levis was assembling his army, which had been cantoned in the neighborhood of
Montreal; that he had completed his eight battallions, and forty companies of
the Troops de Colonie, from the choice of the Montrealists; had formed these
forty companies into four battalions; and was determinad to besiege us, the
moment that St. Laurence was open, of which he was entirely master, by means of
four King's frigates, and other craft, proper for this extraordinary river.

As I had the honor to acquaint you formerly, that Quebec could be looked upon
in no other light, than that of a strong cantonment, and that any works I
should add to it, would be in that style, my plan of defense was, to take the
earliest opportunity of entrenching myself upon the heights of Abraham, which
entirely commanded the ramparts of the place at the distance of 800 yards, and
might have been defended by our numbers against a large army. But the Chevalier
de Levis did not give me time to take the advantage of this situation; the 23d,
24th and 25th of April. I attempted to execute the projected lines, for which a
provision of fascines, and of every necessary material, had been made, but
found it impracticable, as the earth was still covered with snow in many
places, and every where impregnably bound up by the frost.

The night of the 26th, I was informed, the enemy had landed, at Point Au
Tremble, 10,000 men, and 500 barbarians. The post we had taken at the
embouchure of the river Caprouge (the most convenient place for disembarking
their artillery and stores, and for securing their retreat) obliged them to
land where they did, 20 miles higher up.

The 27th, having broke down all the bridges over the Caprouge, and secured the
landing places at Sillery, and the Foulon, I marched with the grenadiers
piquets, Amherst's regiment, and two field pieces, and took post so
advantageously, as to frustrate the schemes they had laid of cutting off our
posts. They had begun to form from the defile they were obliged to pass, but
thought proper to retreat, on reconnoitring our position; and about four this
afternoon we marched back to town, having withdrawn all our posts, with the
loss of two men only, though they did every thing in their power to harrass the
rear.

The enemy was greatly superior in number, it is true; but when I considered
that our little army was in the habit of beating that enemy, and had a very
fine train of field artillery; that shutting ourselves up at once within the
walls, was putting all upon the single chance of holding out for a considerable
time, a wretched fortification; a chance which an action in the field could
hardly alter, at the same time it gave an additional one, perhaps a better, I
resolved to give them battle; and if the event was not prosperous, to hold out
to the last extremity, and then to retreat to the isle of Orleans, or Coudres,
with what was left of the garrison, to wait for reinforcements.

This night the necessary orders were given, and half an hour after six next
morning, we marched with all the force I could muster, viz. three thousand men,
and formed the Army on the heights, in the following order; Amherst's
Anstruther's 2d battalion of Royal Americans, and Webb's, composed the right
Brigade, commanded by Col. Burton: Kenneny's Lascelles's, Highlanders, and
Townshend's, the left brigade, commanded by Col. Fraser: Otway's, and the third
battalion of Royal Americans, were the corpse de reserve. Major Dalling's corpse
of light infantry covered the right flank, and Capt. Hazzen's company of
rangers, with 100 volunteers, under the command of Capt. Donoald Macdonald, a
brave and experienced officer, covered the left. The battalions had each two
field pieces.

While the line was forming, I reconnitred the enemy, and perceived their van
had taken possession of the rising grounds, three quarters of a mile in our
front, but that their army was upon the march, in one column, as far as I could
see. I thought this the lucky moment, and moved with the utmost order to attack
them, before they had formed. We soon beat them from the heights they had
possessed, though they were well disputed; and Major Dalling, who cannot be too
much commended for his behavior this day, and his services during the winter,
forced their corpse of grenadiers from a house and windmill they had taken hold
of, to cover their left flank. Here he, and several of his officers were
wounded; his men, however, pursued the fugitives to the corpse which were now
formed to sustain them. They halted, and dispersed along the front of the
right, which prevented that wing from taking advantage of the first impression
they had made on the enemy's left. They had immediately orders given them to
regain the flank, but, in attempting this, they were charged, thrown into
disorder, retired to the rear, and from the number of officers killed and
wounded, could never again be brought up, during the action. Otway's was
instantly ordered to advance, and sustain the right wing, which the enemy in
vain made two attempts to penetrate. On these occasions, Capt. Ince, with the
grenadiers of Otway's, were distinguished. While this passed there, the left
were not idle; they had dispossessed the enemy of two redoubts, and sustained
with unparallelled firmness the bold united efforts of the enemy's regulars.
Indians and Canadians, till at last fairly fought down, and reduced to a
handful; though sustained by the 3d battalion of Royal Americans from the
reserve, and Kennedy's from the center, where we had nothing to fear, they were
obliged to yield to superior numbers, and a fresh column of Roussillon, which
penetrated.

The disorder of the left was soon communicated to the right; but the whole
retired in such a way, that the enemy did not venture upon a brisk pursuit. We
left most of our cannon, as the roughness of the ground, and the wreaths of
snow, made it impossible to bring them off; what could not be brought off were
nailed up.

Our killed and wounded amounted to one third of those in the field; that of
the enemy, by their own confession, exceeds 2500 men; which may be readily
conceived, as the action lasted an hour and three quarters.

Here I think it my duty to express my gratitude to the officers in general,
and the satisfaction I had in the bravery of all the troops.

On the night of the 28th, the enemy opened trenches against the town; and, at
the same, we set to work within, to fortify it, which we never had in our power
to attempt sooner, from the severity of this climate during the winter, and the
absolute necessity of executing works of more immediate importance last autumn,
before the frost set in. I wanted the assistance of Major Mackeller, the chief
engineer, dangerously wounded in the action; his zeal for, and knowledge in the
service, is well known; but the alacrity of the garrison made up for every
defect.

My journal of the siege which accompanies this, sets forth in full what was
done; and I flatter myself, the extraordinary performances of the handful of
brave men I had left, will please his Majesty, as much as they surprised us who
were eye witnesses to them.

Great praise is due to Commodore Swanton, and the Captains Schomberg and Dean;
I have not words to express the readiness, vivacity, and valor they showed in
attacking and destroying the enemy's squadron. Capt. Dean has lost his ship;
but it was in a good cause, and he has done honor to his country.

The morning of the 27th of May, I had intended a strong forty, to have
penetrated into the enemy's camp, which, from the information of the prisoners
I had taken, and the concurrent account of the deserters, I conceived to be
very practicable.

For this purpose, I had ordered the regiments of Amherst, Townshend,
Lascelles, Anstruther, and Highlanders, with the grenadiers and light infantry
under arms, but was informed by Lieut. M'Alpin, of my battalion (whom I sent
out to amuse the enemy with small allies) that their trenches were abandoned.

I instantly pushed out at the head of these corpse, not doubting but we must
have overtaken and forced their rear, and had ample revenge for the 28th of
April; but I was disappointed, for they had crossed the river Caprouge, before
we could come up with them. However, we took several prisoners, and much
baggage, which would otherwise have escaped. They left their camp standing; all
their baggage, stores, magazines of provisions and ammunition, 34 pieces of
battering cannon, four of which are bra^s 12 pounders, 10 field pieces, 6
mortars, 4 petards, a large quantitg of scaling ladders and entrenching tools
beyond number; and have retired to their former asylum, Jacques Cartier. From
the information of prisoners, deserters and spies, provisions are very scarce:
ammunition does not abound; and the greatest part of the Canadians have
deserted them. At present they do not exceed 5000 men. The minute I am joined
with that part of my garrison, which was sent from hence last autumn, I shall
endeavor to cooperate with Mr. Amherst, toward completing the reduction of
this country; though, if rightly informed, he can hardly act by the lakes
before the month of July, of which I am the more convinced, because from the
intelligence forwarded to him last February, of the enemy's designs, by Lieut.
Montusor, he would certainly have been upon them before now, had it been at all
practicable.

Major Maitland, the bearer of these dispatches, who has acted as Adjutant
General this last winter, is well acquainted with all our transactions here; he
has a thorough knowledge of the country, and can give you the best lights with
regard to the measures farther to be taken, relative to his Majesty's views in
Canada.

I cannot finish this long letter, without observing how much I think myself
obliged to the Lieut. Governor, Col. Burton; his activity and zeal were
conspicuous during the whole course of this winter's campaign, and I flatter
myself, Sir, you will be pleased to lay his services before his Majesty.

P. S. Since I have wrote the above, a nation of Indians has surrendered, and
entered into an alliance with us.

I have the honor to be, With great regard, SIR, yours, etc. JAMES MURRAY,



Admiralty-Office, June 27, 1760.
CAPTAIN Schomberg arrived this morning, with dispatches from Lord Colville,
and Commodore Swanton, dated at Quebec, the 24th of May, giving an Account,
that on the 11th of that month, the latter arrived at the Isle of Bec, in the
river of St. Laurence, with the Vanguard and Diana, where he intended to wait
for such of his squadron as had separated from him in his passage from England;
but having on the 14th, received advice from Brig. Genesis Murray, that the enemy
had besieged Quebec, he got under sail with the utmost dispatch, and anchored
above Point Levi the 15th in the evening, where he found the Leostoffe, one of
his squadron, which arrived a few days before, and whose commander, Capt.
Deane, immediately came off to him with a message from the General, earnestly
recommending the speedy removal of the French naval force above the town,
consisting of two frigates, two armed ships, and many smaller vessels; in
consequence of which he ordered Capt. Schomberg of the Diana, and Capt. Deane
of the Leostoffe, to slip their cables early the next morning, and attack the
enemy; but they were no sooner in motion, than the enemy fled in the greatest
hurry and disorder: the Pomona, one of the frigates, was driven on shore above
Cape Diamond; the Atalanta, the other frigate, run ashore, and was burnt at
Point Au Tremble, about ten leagues above the town; and most of the other ships
and vessels were likewise driven ashore, or effectually destroyed.

The night following, the enemy raised the siege of Quebec very precipitately,
leaving their cannon, small arms, stores, etc. behind them.

The Leostoffe run upon some unknown rocks, in pursuit of the enemy, and was
irrecoverably lost, but the officers and men were saved.

Lord Colville sailed from Halifax, with the squadron under his command, the
22d of April, but did not arrive at Quebec till the 18th of May, having been
much retarded in his passage by thick fogs, great quantities of ice, and
contrary winds.

[Gazette Extraordinary.]
Thus was fortunately preserved from the most imminent danger, the most
considerable place we had taken in the war; and that which gave us the most
decisive advantage, The triumph of the French, and the anxiety of England, were
but short. The account of the siege, and the raising it, followed close on the
heels of each other. And there was nothing now to cloud the prospect of the
certain reduction of Canada, by the united efforts of three English armies, who
by different routs were moving to attack those parts of it which still remained
to France. In the mean time that haughty power was obliged to sit the impotent
spectator of the ruin of her colonies, without being able to send them the
smallest succor. It was then she found what it was to be inferior at sea.

We shall resume the American affairs, when we have reviewed the scenes that
began about this time to open on the theater of Europe.

CHAP. III.
Distress of Saxony. M. Broglio commands the main body of the French army. St.
Germain commands on the Rhine. English army reinforced. King of Prussia's
losses. Theater of the war in the east of Germany. Positions of the Austrian
and Prussian armies. Battle of Landshut. Prussian army under Fouquet destroyed.

A Winter remarkably severe succeeded the bloody campaign of 1758. At Bareith
in the night of the 16th of December, the cold was insupportable. Reamur's
therometer was sunk to 15, which is precisely the same degree it fell to in
1709. A year like this distinguished by the intenseness of the cold, and the
fury of war. Birds dropped dead in their flight. At Leipsic ten sentinels were
froze to death. An infectious disease which began in the armies, diffused
itself among the inhabitants of Saxony, and made a dreadful havoc. A
pestilential contagion raged among the cattle. Famine was soon added to the
rest of their calamities; and every misery that can afflict mankind, was poured
out upon that unfortunate people with the most liberal measure. There was no
prospect of an allevation of these distresses. On the contrary, the sufferings
of the people only made their sovereigns more earnest for revenge; and out of
the general want a resource arose to their armies, who were the more readily
recruited, because the scanty pay and subsistence of a soldier, became an
object of envy to the wretched peasantry in most of these countries; and death
seemed more honorable and less certain by the sword, than by penury and
disease.

France and England vied in their endeavors to augment their forces in
Germany. M. Broglio had now the command of the grand army, and the sole conduct
of the general plan of operations. He had early in this year, been honored
with the staff of a marshal of France. And nothing was omitted to give luster
to his command, and to furnish him with every means of exerting his talents.
His corpse was augmented to near 100,000 effective men. Thirty thousand drawn
out of their quarters in Dusseldorp, Cleves, Cologne and Wesel, and completed
by draughts from France, formed a separate army on the Rhine, under the Count
de St. Germain. This disposition was made not only to divide the attention of
the allied army, but to prevent the ill consequences of the misunderstanding
which was known to subsist between this general and the Duke de Broglio. The
third army proposed at the close of the foregoing campain did not appear.

On the side of England, the preparations were not less considerable in
proportion to her ability for that kind of war. Six regiments of foot commanded
by Major General Griffin, were forthwith sent to reinforce the allied army.
Elliot's regiment of light horse soon followed them. At the opening of this
campaign, we had in Germany twelve regiments of heavy, and one of light horse;
and twelve regiments, with two Highland battalions of foot; the whole amounted
to near 22,000 men. In the course of the summer, they were further reinforced
to near 25,000, Such a number of British troops, serving in one army, had not
been seen on the continent, for two hundred years past. The allied army indeed
fell short of the French in numbers; but they exceeded it in the quality of the
troops. Those newly arrived from England were fresh but not undisciplined; the
old were indeed harrassed, but they had been accustomed to victory.

In the beginning of the year, the death of the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel had
excited some apprehensions;

The king of Prussia was under far greater difficulties; he had felt the
heaviest blows, and was most scanted in the means of healing them.

His losses were not to be reckoned by the men killed and prisoners, but by
armies destroyed or taken. Forty generals had died, or were slain in his
service, since the 1st of October 1756, exclusive of those who had been
wounded, disabled, or made prisoners. And this alone would have been a loss not
to be repaired, if these murdering wars which cut off so many experienced
officers, did not at the same time, form so many more to supply their places.
The king had renewed his alliance on the former terms with Great Britain. By
his indefatigable industry, no gaps were seen in his armies. But they were no
longer the same troops, and if the king of Prussia had formerly the merit of
ably commanding the most excellent armies; he has now to fill up the most
remarkable deficiency on the part of his troops by his own heroism; and to
undertake far more arduous enterprises, than his first, with infinitely weaker
instruments. His affairs wore a bad aspect in the opening of the former year.
In this they seemed altogether desperate.

The Russians had suffered; but they were sufficiently reinforced. The Swedes
who had been generally obliged to give ground in the winter, had in that of
1759 the advantage in several smart skirmishes, and had even taken prisoner the
Prussian general Manteuffel. As to the Austrians, victorious for a whole
campaign almost without fighting, their armies and magazines were full, their
corpse complete, their men fresh, vigorous, and full of resolution. Several
skirmishes of consequence had been fought during the cessation of the great
operations; and they were generally to their advantage.

The King of Prussia was sensible, that in this, as in the former campaigns, he
should be attacked by four armies; and that his dominions would be invested
upon every side. As these operations were very extensive and complicated, to
enable the reader to form an idea of the campaign, it will not be amiss to say
something of the ground the king had to defend, which is circumstanced in this
manner.

To the north is Pomerania. This country is very open; and it is defended on
that part on which the Swedes generally act, with but few, and those mean
fortifications, Anclam, Demmein and Passewalk. But then the Swedish army is not
numerous, and if they should attempt to penetrate far into the country, they
must leave Stetin, in which there is always a strong garrison behind them to
their left, which would render their subsistence difficult, and their retreat
in case of any misfortune, extremely hazardous; and they have not sufficient
strength to master this place by a regular siege. This has always proved a
check to the progress of that army, even when they have been otherwise
successful.

This same country to the eastward of the Oder, is one great object of the
Russian designs. Its chief strength in this quarter is the town of Colberg; a
place they have frequently attempted, but always without success. And their
failure, in this instance, has been the main cause why they have never been
able to take winter quarters in the King of Prussia's dominions, or even during
the campaign, to make any considerable impression upon Pomerania. For they can
have no communication with their own country by sea, for want of this port. On
their rear, lies the extensive and inhospitable desert of Waldow; and this with
the uncertain disposition of the city of Dantzick, renders their supplies of
provision from Poland difficult and precarious. Neither is it possible in these
circumstances, to unite their forces with those of Sweden acting in the same
country. The Oder flows between them; which is so commanded by the city of
Stetin, as to make all communication between these armies in a great measure
impracticable. Insomuch, that on the side of Pomerania, the force of these two
powers is compelled to act separately, without concert, and therefore weakly
and ineffectually.

To the westward, the King of Prussia is sufficiently covered by the city of
Magdebourg, the strongest place in his dominions, and in that part of Germany.
Here are his greatest magazines, and his principal founderies; and this is the
repository of whatever he finds necessary to place out of the reach of sudden
insult.

To the southward he is obliged to defend Saxony and Silesia. Both of these
countries on their frontiers toward Bohemia, rise into very rough, broken, and
mountainous grounds, abounding in advantageous posts and strong situations.
Lusatia lies between them; a level sandy plain, (interspersed with pine-woods,)
extending without any obstacle to the very gates of Berlin. Through this
country the king's communication between Silesia and Saxony must be kept up,
and therefore it has been from the beginning of this war, the great scene of
those remarkable marches and counter-marches, by which his Prussian majesty has
acquired so great a reputation; and also of those bold and sudden attempts
which have distinguished some of the generals of the adverse party. As an army
cannot be advantageously posted in this territory, it has not been usual for a
considerably body to remain there long; and it is particularly unfavourable to
defensive operations. This country may be considered as the curtin, and the
frontiers of Saxony and Silesia as the bastions, that flank the sort of
fortification, which the king is to maintain.

No part of that monarch's territories are naturally more defenseless than the
eastern; at the same time that it is attacked by the most powerful of his
enemies. A country altogether sandy and level, extends along both sides of the
Oder, from the northern frontier of Silesia, until it meets Pomerania, a
country of the same kind. There is no respectable fortification on this side;
and the river Warta that falls here into the Oder, makes the transport of
provisions, and consequently the subsistence of the armies that act against him
more easy.

As to Silesia, it is covered on the Bohemian side with mountains, and it
contains places of such strength as to be above the necessity of yielding to
the first army that appears before them. Indeed it is to be remarked, that such
a degree of strength seems sufficient for the kind of service which has
distinguished this war. Never was a war of such a length and extent, in which
fewer sieges of consequence have been formed; and the late service which
affords so large a field for experience in every other species of military
operations, affords very little matter of improvement in the art of reducing or
defending strong places.

The King of Prussia's design seems to have been to save himself as much as
possible to the end of the campaign; the only time when his success might be
decisive, and his ill-fortune not ruinous. He therefore formed a defensive
plan. In pursuance of this he withdrew his out-posts from Freyberg, and drawing
a chain of cantonments from the forest of Tharandt on his right to the Elbe, he
took a most advantageous camp between that river and the Multa; strongly
intrenching it where it had not been previously fortified by nature; and
furnished it with so numerous an artillery, that they reckoned in their front
only 250 pieces of cannon.

In this situation he covered the most material parts of Saxony, kept the
attention of M. Daun's army engaged, and was enabled to send out reinforcements
to Prince Henry, or elsewhere, as occasion should require, without exposing one
part whilst he defended the other.

Whilst the King's army defended his conquests in Misnia, Prince Henry had
assembled an army about Franckfort on the Oder, and took various positions
about that place and Crossen. In this position, he commanded three principal
communications, in such a manner as to protect at once Silesia, the New March
of Brandenburg, and the avenues to Berlin; all which were threatened by several
bodies of the enemy. General Fouquet had established his quarters near the
county of Glatz, and whilst he covered that side of Silesia, he communicated
with Prince Henry, and was so disposed as to send to or receive succors from
him, as either party should happen to be pressed.

M. Daun, as soon as he saw that the King of Prussia had fortified himself in
his post, he too buried himself in entrenchments, and kept the most attentive
eye upon all hi^ majesty's motions. Whilst he confined himself in this
position, in order to tie down the King of Prussia, genera^ Laudohn, with a
strong but light and disincumbered army, moved from the camp he had occupied
during the winter in Bohemia, and presenting himself alternately on the side o^
Lusatia, and on the frontiers of Silesia, threatened sometimes to penetrate
into Berlin, sometimes by a bold stroke to effect a junction with the Russians,
and attack Prince Henry, sometimes to sit down before Glatz, Schweidnitz, or
Breslau; and thus the alarm was spread upon every side, not knowing where the
storm would fall.

At length he declared himself. Having by several fein^ persuaded general
Fouquet that his intentions were against Schweidnitz, that general marched
thither a considerable body of his troops, and left Glatz uncovered. As soon as
Laudohn perceived this movement, he on his side made another, and possessed
himself of Landshut; and when he had taken Landshut, he pretended a design of
securing this post by leaving a small body of troops there. This feint also
succeeded, and drew general Fouquet from Schweidnitz back again to Landshut. He
drove the Austrians from that place without difficulty; but in the mean time
Laudohn made himself master of several important passes, by which he was in
some sort enabled to surround the corpse of General Fouquet.

The commander finding himself in those dangerous circumstances, had nothing
left but to fortify his post, formerly made a very strong one, with additional
works; which he did with such effect, that it had more the resemblance of a
regular fortification than an entrenchment. However, the army he commanded was
far from numerous; and he was obliged to weaken it still farther by a
detachment of 2000 men, to preserve, if possible, a communication with
Schweidnitz.

Laudohn longed to distinguish himself by some capital stroke; he had now by a
series of very artful movements procured a most favorable opportunity. First,
therefore, he shut up with great dexterity the passes on every side, and
rendered his adversary's retreat impracticable. Then he began an attack on the
Prussian entrenchments in the dead of the night in three different places.

On the side of the vanquished, the slain were about 4000. The prisoners were,
one general of foot, namely general Fouquet; two major generals; two hundred
and thirteen officers of the inferior rank; and upwards of 7000 private
soldiers, 58 pieces of artillery, with a number of colors. Never was a more
entire and decisive victory. The whole army, general, officers, every thing was
destroyed. Scarce three hundred of the body entrenched by Landshut escaped. The
corpse alone which was to preserve the communication, together with some bodies
of cavalry who had not been engaged, with difficulty got into Schweidnitz,
where they expected every moment to be besieged. This advantage cost the
Austrians above 12000 men killed and wounded.

CHAP. IV.
The Austrians take Glatz. Situation of the Prussian armies. King of Prussia
marches toward Silesia and deceives M. Daun. King of Prussia returns to
Saxony. Siege of Dresden. Town burned. Return of Daun. Siege raised. Breslau
besieged by the Austrians. March of Prince Henry. Laudohn retreats.

THIS victory was pursued with as much rapidity as it was obtained with courage
and address. Baron Laudohn immediately returned back from Landshut, fell like a
storm upon Glatz. Glatz consists of two fortresses, the old and the new. The
old was taken by storm; the new surrendered at discretion. Two thousand brave
men and some good works could not defend it against the impetuosity of the
Austrians. One hundred and one pieces of brass cannon were taken. Immense
magazines of provision and military stores piled up in this frontier place to
favor in better times an irruption into Bohemia, fell into the hands of the
conqueror. Every thing gave way. The possession of Glatz laid all Silesia open,
and the Austrians might turn their arms upon any side without the least danger
to the freedom of their retreat. Neither was there any sort of army to give the
least obstruction. The King of Prussia held down by M. Daun, was in Saxony.
Prince Henry was also at a great distance toward Custrin. If that Prince
attempted to move to the relief of Silesia, he laid open Brandenburgh, and even
Berlin itself to the irruptions of the Russians. If he remained in his post,
Silesia was inevitably lost. Even his speediest march seemed by no means a
certain way to relieve it. The King was yet further distant; and any motion of
his threatened to shake and unhinge the whole scheme of his defense; exposing
at once Saxony and Berlin. The loss of his third army, small as that army was,
laid him under difficulties that seemed insuperable.

Favored by these circumstances, Laudohn had only to choose what direction he
should give his arms. Silesia, as has been observed, lay open before him. He
had threatened Schweidnitz; but he saw that Breslaw was a place of greater
consequence, much more easily reduced, and that the possession of it
facilitated a junction with the Russians; a point on which the ultimate
improvement of his victory wholly depended. The place besides is of so great
extent, and the works of so little comparative strength, that he had no small
hopes of mastering it before Prince Henry could come, if he should at all
attempt to come to its relief.

He therefore delayed no longer than the march of his heavy artillery and the
necessary preparatives required, to lay siege to the capital of Silesia, of
whose safety the most sanguine friends of his Prussian majesty began to despair,

But in the interval between the battle of Landshut and the commencement of the
siege of Breslau, the King of Prussia was not idle. His thoughts were
continually employed to repair this disaster; all ordinary resources were
impracticable or ineffectual. His genius alone could enter the lists with his
ill fortune. Placing therefore his hopes in himself, he aimed by a daring and
unexpected stroke, to draw even from so severe a misfortune some new and more
brilliant advantages.

In pursance of the plan he had laid,

The two armies continued their route through Lusatia; that of the King of
Prussia a little to the northward, that of Marshal Daun to the southward; both
apparently pushing toward the same object, and with equal eagerness. But as
the army of the marshal had rather the shorter cut to make, and as he moved
with far greater and more unaffected diligence, he got very considerably the
start of the King.

When his majesty was apprised that M. Daun had gained full two days march upon
him;

Then was this most unfortunate city a third time exposed to the fury of war.
The inhabitants suffered in their habitations for the weakness of the works;
and there were armies both without and within of such mutual and determined
rage, and so careless of all things but their enmity, that they little scrupled
to strike at each other through the bodies of the suffering Saxons. All Europe
had now its eyes turned to the event of this masterly maneuver; and certainly
through the whole course of this eventful war, nothing appeared more worthy of
regard, nor at any time had there been exhibited a piece of generalship more
complete, than the conduct of the King of Prussia's march.

Since Dresden had fallen into the hands of the Austrians, it had been
strengthened with the addition of several new works. The burning of the suburbs
by the Prussians, in order to keep them out, became an advantage to them when
they came to possess the town. In short, the place, was rendered in all
respects more defensible than formerly. It had also a very large garrison under
General Macguire, an officer of courage and experience, who resolved to
maintain it to the last extremity: when he was summoned to surrender, he made
answer, "That it was impossible the king could have been apprised with his
being entrusted with the command of that capital; otherwise so great a captain
as his majesty would not make such a proposal to an officer of his standing:
that he would defend himself to the last man; and wait whatever the king should
think proper to attempt."

Both parties being therefore inspired with the utmost resolution, the one to
attack, the other to defend, the siege was pushed on by every method of force
and address; there was scarce any intermission of assaults, surprises, coups de
mains, sallies, and all kind of actions used on such occasions; and all the
most vigorous in their way. In the mean time three batteries of cannon and
mortars played continually, but with much greater damage to the buildings than
effect on the fortifications.

Marshal Daun was in Silesia when he heard all at once of the deceit put upon
him by the King of Prussia, of his return to Saxony, of the siege, and the
extreme danger of Dresden. His return was as rapid as his march had been. On
the 19th he appeared within a league of Dresden. His approach only caused the
Prussians to redouble their efforts; that day they had received reinforcements
of heavy cannon and mortars, and battered the place with new fury. The
cathedral church, the new square, several principal streets, some palaces, the
noble manufactory of porcelain, were all entirely reduced to ashes.

The siege continued till the 22d. The night of the 21st, M. Daun had thrown
sixteen battalions into Dresden. It was in vain to continue any longer the
pretense of besieging a whole army within the town, whilst at the same time
there was another army to reinforce it without. The king withdrew his forces
without molestation from the suburbs, though there were three considerable
armies of the enemy in the neighborhood, besides that which was within the
walls.

Thus ended, without the success so masterly, a proceeding deserved, the King
of Prussia's famous stratagem. But the want of success can detract nothing from
the merit of the measure. By drawing Marshal Daun from Saxony to Silesia he
gained the use of eight days, free of obstruction from the enemy's grand army;
eight days at a time when hours and even moments were critical. In this time he
had certainly a chance at least of reducing Dresden; and by the possession of
that place he would have found himself infinitely better able to carry his arms
to the defense of every part of his territories for the present, and for the
future would have that great place of retreat in case of any misfortune. If he
failed in this attempt his affairs were precisely in their former condition;
and he could not suffer in reputation by having made it.

As the King of Prussia could not be blamed for the speedy return of Marshal
Daun, and the consequences of that return; so neither in effect could the
Marshal suffer any just imputation in having been deceived by the king's march.
He knew that there were very plausible motives to call, and even to press him
to move that way. He knew that if the king should get into Silesia without any
opposition from him, Laudohn might not only be deprived of all the advantages
he could hope for from his late victory, but by being attacked by the united
armies of the king and his brother, would run the risque of a defeat that might
fully revenge that of Landshut.

Whatever the merit of either of the commanders might be on this occasion, it
is certain that Laudohn met no considerable obstruction.

But Laudohn who saw all things prepared for an obstinate defense, did not
wholly trust to his military maneuvers. He sent a letter to the governor Count
Tavenzien, to intimidate him by the display of his strength. He set forth, that
his forces consisted of 50 battalions and 80 squadrons; that the Russian army
of 75,000 men were within three days march; that it was in vain for the
governor to expect succor from the King of Prussia, who was then at the other
side of the Elbe, that it was still more vain to look for relief from Prince
Henry, who could scarce hope to stand his own ground against the grand army of
the Russians; that in case of obstinacy he could expect no reasonable terms:
and that these were the last that should be offered. Moreover he reminded him
that the place was a mercantile town, not a fortress; and that he could not
defend it without contravening the laws of war.

These rules, by which honor is reduced to act, not by its own feelings, but
according to intrinsical circumstances; rules by which they have attempted to
determine exactly and mechanically that nicest of all lines which discriminates
courage from rashness, form one of the strongest instances of the great
difference between the ancient and modern methods and ideas of war. In the
ancient times, a brave commander would have answered this threatening message in
general terms of defiance. But Count Tavenzien respected these imaginary laws.
He took care to prove that in defending the town, he did not infringe them; and
spoke as Laudohn had done in the character of a military jurisconsult, as well
as a soldier; he gave for reply. That the town of Breslaw being surrounded with
works and wet ditches, was to be considered as a place of strength, and not
simply as a mercantile town. That the Austrians themselves defended it as such
in 1757, after the battle of Lissa. That the king had commanded him to defend
it to the last extremity, that therefore General Laudohn might see it was not
from humor he had refused to listen to his summons. That he was not frighted
with the General's threats to destroy the town; for he was not entrusted with
the care of the houses, but the fortifications.

Laudohn had also sent in a memorial in the same menacing style, where he
thought it might have a greater effect, to the civil magistrates, hoping that
the ruin with which the town was threatened, might induce them join with the
inhabitants, to persuade the governor to a speedy surrender.

All these menacing measures seemed to argue a fear in Baron Laudohn, that the
Russians were not so near as he pretended, and that the town might possibly be
releived before their arrival. However he showed them, at nine of the very
evening of the message, that his threats were not vain, by a terrible discharge
of mortars and red hot balls that fell in an uninterrupted shower upon the city
until midnight. During this fierce bombardment, that made a dreadful havoc in
the town, he attempted the outworks by assault. His Croats attacked the
covered-way in many places at once, with the usual impetuosity of those brave
irregulars; but they were received and repulsed with a resolution equal to
their own, and with more steadiness.

This operation of this dreadful night having made no impression on the
inflexible determination of the governor, Baron Laudohn had once more recourse
to negotiation. He now changed his style, and held out the most flattering
propositions; offering to grant him what capitulations he should think proper
to ask, and even to leave himself to draw up the articles. The governor replied
that the firing the town had made no change in his resolution; and he would
wait with firmness for the enemy upon the ramparts; but that he could not help
observing it was contrary to the laws of arms to begin the siege of a fortress,
by ruining its inhabitants. The messenger made answer, that the trenches would
be soon opened. The governor said, it was what he had long expected.

The Austrians, foiled in their hopes from treaty, continued to batter the
town, and made several attacks upon the outworks for three days successively.
They found every post bravely defended; the Russian army did not appear, but
they now began to perceive the approach of another army less agreeable; that of
Prince Henry; which having marched with the utmost diligence from Great Glogau,
now came fast upon him; and on the 5th of August, reached within a few miles of
the town.

Laudohn did not think it expedient to put the advantage he had gained, and
those which he had yet to expect from the management of time, to the issue of a
battle; he therefore decamped and made his retreat in good order, but with
sufficient quickness; having procured from this enterprise only the wretched
satisfaction of reducing a great part of the city to a heap of rubbish, and of
having revenged upon Breslaw some part of the sufferings of Dresden.

CHAP. V.
Cause of the slowness of the Allies and French. Advantages on the side of the
French. Differences between Broglio and St. Germain. Marburg and Dillenburg
taken by the French. Battle of Corbach. Hereditary Prince wounded. Surprise and
defeat of Monsieur Glaubitz at Ermsdorf. The Allies change their camp. Action
at Warbourg.

THE French and allied armies had been reinforced in the manner we have already
mentioned. But the vigor of their operations did not altogether correspond
with what might have been expected from their strength and mutual animosity.
The campaign, at least in any effective manner, opened late. A country which
had been so long the theater of so ruinous a war, had been too much wasted to
make the subsistence, and consequently the free motion of the armies easy. The
winter had been severe and long; and it was not until the green forage
appeared plentifully above ground, that those great bodies of cavalry, which
make so large a part in our modern armies, were in a condition to act. The
sufferings of the English horse, from a want of dry forage, during a great part
of the winter and the spring had been extreme; this obliged them to fall much
farther back from the French cantonments; and to molest them less than they
otherwise would have done. It was besides a loss, that at the opening of the
campaign, they had so extensive a tract between them and Hanover; which by an
artful choice of posts might have been yielded step by step, and the campaign
so managed and spun out, that the season of action must have expired, before
the French could have reaped any decisive advantage from their superiority.

Although the French were during the winter supplied far better than the allies
with all necessaries by the command of the Maine, the Moselle and the Rhine;
and that the countries at their back had been much less consumed by the war;
yet the same difficulties embarrassed them as soon as they thought of taking
the field, and quitting their advantageous cantonment. Therefore there was a
slowness in the principal armies upon both parts, until the middle of summer.

Not however, but that something was attempted in this interval, by lesser
parties. On the side of the Rhine, some actions happened between the army of
St. Germain, and the corpse of General Sporken, who was posted at Dulmen, to
observe the French in that quarter. Dulmen formed the right flank of the chain
of cantonments made by the allied army, which extended its left to the
south-east frontiers of the country of Hesse, above an hundred and fifty miles
distant. The Hereditary Prince who was on that wing, exerted, as much as
circumstances would permit, his usual activity and enterprise. He threw himself
into the district of Fulda; he laid it under an heavy contribution and broke up
several French corpse that were posted there.

These actions decided nothing. The French army superior in numbers, and in
situation, advanced; and the allies, who seemed to have chosen the defensive,
gradually retired. In effect, if the French had pursued their original plan, it
would have proved almost impossible for the allied army to maintain its ground.
If St. Germain, possessed of Cleves, Wesel, and Dusseldorp, had advanced on the
side of Munster; and M. Broglio moving forward through the country of Hesse,
had made a strong detachment to the eastward of the Weser, whilst with his main
body he engaged the attention of Prince Ferdinand, the allies would shortly
have found themselves enclosed upon three sides; and nothing could have
extricated them but a capital victory obtained under every disadvantage.

The French army was sufficiently numerous for these operations. But it was
suspected that the jealousy which subsisted between M. de St. Germain and the
Duke of Broglio prevented their being carried into execution. This
misunderstanding daily increased. Insomuch, that M. Broglio thought fit to
order the corpse of St. Germain to unite itself with the grand army. The count,
who could not brook obedience to a younger officer, and one besides with whom
he was not on the best terms, retired from the service.

Before this misunderstanding had produced these effects, the affairs of the
French went on with all imaginable prosperity. The principal army not retarding
itself, by consideration of the places of strength which the allies possessed
in their front, the castles of Marburg and Dillenbourg, pushed forward into the
landgraviate of Hesse, leaving detachments to reduce those fortresses. The
first of which surrendered on the 30th of June, the latter held out to the 16th
of July; but the garrisons of both surrendered prisoners of war.

In the mean time whilst M. Broglio advanced on the side of Hesse;

When he had begun the attack, contrary to his expectation he found the enemy
already formed; but it was now impossible to recede. The action grew every
moment more furious and bloody. The French stood their ground with firmness,
and the main army being extremely near, instead of being wasted in the action,
they grew more numerous by the reinforcements that were continually sent.

In this situation it was necessary that the Prince should make as speedy a
retreat as possible; but the difficulty of drawing out of the field in the
middle of the day, before an enemy quite fresh, and every instant reinforced,
may be easily imagined. To complete this difficulty, some bodies of the German
troops both horse and foot fell into great confusion. The enemy saw it at the
first glance, and to increase it to the utmost disorder, pushed forward upon
them with a numerous artillery and a large body of cavalry. The allied army
seemed to be in the way of inevitable ruin.

In this exigence the Hereditary Prince, as his last resource, put himself at
the head of a squadron of Bland's and Howard's regiments of dragroons. By these
the uncommon heroism of their young leader was perfectly seconded. They charged
the enemy with the utmost fury, stopped their career of their victorious horse;
and enabled the alied battalions to make an undisturbed retreat.

The Hereditary Prince was wounded in this action; about 900 men were killed,
wounded, or prisoners, fifteen pieces of cannon, the whole of the artillery,
was left to the enemy, but still in their circumstances to have avoided a total
defeat, was in some sort victory. The well-timed impetuosity of the Hereditary
Prince, and the spirit of the English horse, could not be too highly praised.
The Prince retired to the main army of the allies, who had now possessed
themselves of the strong post of Saxenhausen: whilst the French continued
opposite to them in the no less strong post of Corbach, which they had acquired
by their victory; and here for some time they watched each other.

The Hereditary Prince suffered more by this check than from the wounds he had
received. His mind, forgetful of his pain and weakness, only brooding over his
defeat, seeking out with anxiety an opportunity of revenging his loss by some
bold, signal, and unexpected stroke against the enemy. It was not long before
an opportunity presented itself.

Advice had been received, that among the detachments which the French employed
to reduce those fortresses which the allies had garrisoned on their retreat,
there was one very considerable, formed of French and Saxon, under Mons.
Glaubitz, moving toward Zigenhagen, a place of importance in the landgrave of
Hesse. The Hereditary Prince undertook to relieve it, and for that purpose
selected six battalions of the German troops,

Mons. Glaubitz remained in the most perfect security; he was under no sort of
apprehension of being molested by a detachment of an army sixty miles distance,
under the eye, and as it were, guard of a superior body which demanded all its
attention;

Glaubitz had scarce time to form his troops; and they were only formed to be
immediately broken. They retired with precipitation, leaving their camp and all
it contained to the enemy. The Prince had so disposed his cavalry as to cut off
the retreat of some; but the most considerable part gained ground upon him. On
this occasion he relied entirely on Elliot's horse, as it was altogether
impossible for the infantry, already harassed by the action, and a most
fatiguing forced march of two days, to follow them. A^ the head of this horse
he overtook the fugitives as they came out of a wood, charged and broke them
five different times, separated a body of 500 from the rest, surrounded them,
and obliged them to throw down their arms. Having routed this, with the like
rapidity, he flew to another body who had taken post near a wood, surrounded
them in the same manner; summoned and received them all prisoners of war. A
regiment of the enemy's hussars was entirely cut to pieces. Nothing was wanting
to complete his victory. Elliot's light horse, proud to be led on by the Prince
himself, and worthy of that honor, had the greatest share of the glory and
sufferings of that day. So young a corpse had never so eminently distinguished
itself. No more than 79 of the allies were killed in this action, but of these
71 were of this single regiment.

The numbers of the enemy killed is not known, but for a time the slaughter was
terrible. General Glaubitz himself was made prisoner, together with the Prince
of Anhalt. There were besides 177 officers, and 2482 private men. A greater
number of prisoners could scarely be expected from a victory in a general
engagement. The trophies were nine pair of colors and six pieces of cannon. In
all the Petite Gurre of this campaign, (and the campaign between the French and
the allies was almost wholly made up of such,) this was by far the most
billiant action; and alone might have established the reputation of the
Hereditary Prince, if any thing had been wanting to establish him the first man
of his age, in that species of war. He returned to the camp of Saxenhausen,
without molestation, having fully revenged the affair of Corbach.

Prince Ferdinand did not remain long after this action in his camp at
Saxenhausen. By so advanced a position, the landgraviate, and even Hanover, lay
too open to the enemies incursions. He therefore took his camp at a place
called Kalle, in a situation nearer to Cassel On this M. Broglio formed a plan,
which the greatness of his army in some sort enabled him to execute. The
Chevalier de Muy, who commanded in the room of the Count St. Germain, was
ordered to cross the Dymel at Statbergen, with his reserve, consisting of
35,000 men, in order to cut off the allies from their communication with
Westphalia. Whilst the rest of the French, dividing themselves into two bodies,
moved, the main army under M. Broglio toward Duke Ferdinand's camp at Kalle,
the reserve under Prince Xavier of Saxony toward Cassel.

These important movements obliged Prince Ferdinand to set himself also in
motion; and as he was not in a condition to make detachments of sufficient
strength, he crossed the Dymel with his grand army, in order to fight the
Chevalier de Muy.

His Serene Highness formed his main body on the heights of Corbach,

The French now saw themselves in the most imminent danger of being surrounded.
Already their left, attacked in flank and rear by the Hereditary Prince, began
to give way: his fire became every moment superior; and the earliest retreat
was the safest.

As soon as Prince Ferdinand perceived the enemy to tire, he saw it absolutely
in vain to think of bringing infantry upon their front. The English cavalry
also, up which he chiefly confided, was too distant to give al^ any hope that
they could be made to act. But the Engl^ cavalry out-did his expectations, and
indeed all former ^^amples. They considered themselves as defrauded of the
share of the glory of Minden: and they panted for an ^^casion of signalizing
their courage; and their commande^ Lord Granby and Mostyn, forwarded their
ardour, kno^^ing that great actions are commonly transgressions of or^^nary
rules.

They came up five miles on a full trot, (the Germa^ called it a gallop)
without being blown, without the le^ confusion or disorder, and attacked the
enemies cavalry ^ infantry several times. The greatest part of the enem^ horse
fell back and did not stand the charge. The Eng^ artillery were brought up with
the same surprising quic^^ness, and employed with the same powerful effect.
Capt^ Phillips had done more with artillery than had been thoug^ possible at
Minden; and he exceeded it at Warbou^ The English foot vied with the cavalry
and artillery, a^ made such earnest efforts to come to action, that in
stra^^ing their passage through morassy ground and in burni^ weather, several
soldiers dropped down on their mar^ But they were too late to engage, and
probably in the wasted condition it was well that it so happened.

The French made a precipitate retreat toward Statber^ several were drowned in
passing the Dymel; 1500 were ^ on the field of battle; as many were made
prisoners. T^ pieces of cannon were taken; but they consoled themsel^ in having
lost no colors. The loss of the allied army general has not been, that I can
find, published. That the English in killed, wounded, and missing, was 590,
(...) then the battle lay chiefly on them, and the killed include in that
number were but about 130 (a).

Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick 's Letter to His Majes^^ particularising the
Battle of Warbourg.
SIR, Warbourg, Aug. ^
I Have the honor of acquainting your Majesty with the defe^ of the reserve
under the Chevalier de Muy; who having passe^ ^he Dymel at Stadbergen, extended
his corpse down the banks of that river, in order to cut me off from Westphalia,
whilst M. de Broglio was advancing with his main army toward my camp at ^alle,
and Prince Xavier with his reserve, on our left toward Cassel. Hereupon I
determined to leave General Kielmansegge with a body of troops at Cassel for
the protection of that city, and ^o march myself with the army the night of the
30th, in order to pass the Dymel between Liebenau and Dringelburg; which was
^appily executed. The Hereditary Prince who had passed the Dymel on the 29th,
to go and reinforce General Sporcke (who was posted since the 28th between
Liebenau and Corbeke) reconnitred ^he position of the Chevalier de Muy, who
from the 30th in the morning was in possession of a very advantageous camp
between Warbourg and Ochsendorff. It was agreed, that the Prince and M. Sporcke
should turn the enemy's left, whilst I advanced with the army upon their front;
which was done with all possible success; the enemy being attacked almost in
the same instant by M. Sporcke and the Hereditary Prince in flank and in rear,
As the infantry of the army could not march fast enough, to charge at the same
time, I ordered my Lord Granby to advance with the cavalry of the right. The
English artillery got up on a gallop, and seconded the attack in a surprising
manner. All the troops have done well, and particularly the English. The French
cavalry, though very numerous, retreated, as soon as ours advanced to charge
them, excepting only three squadrons [A squadron of French horse when complete,
is 160 men, of dragoons 180. -- This serves to confirm what Colonel Sloper said
on Lord G.S's trial, That had the front of the cavalry moved fast enough tb
have obliged the regiment he commanded to have galloped, it was his opinion it
would have come up fit for business, and would have beat any three French
squadrons it could have met with.]
, that kept their ground, but were soon broke. A part of the English cavalry
then fell upon the enemy's infantry, which suffered extremely; and particularly
the regiment of Lockmann Swiss. I ordered an attack to be made on the town of
Warbourg by the Legion Britannique; and the enemy finding themselves thus
attacked upon their two flanks, in front and rear, retired with the utmost
precipitation, and with the loss of many men, as well from the fire of our
artillery, as from the attacks of the cavalry. Many were drowned in ^ Dymel in
attempting to ford it. The enemy's loss in men is ^ considerable: I cannot
exactly ascertain it, but it is supposed, t^ they have left fifteen hundred men
upon the field of battle; ^ the amount of the prisoners we have made, probably
exceeds ^ number. We have taken ten pieces of cannon, with some colo^ The loss
on our side is very moderate, and falls chiefly upon brave battalion of
Maxwell's English Grenadiers, which did w^^ders. Colonel Beckwith, who
commanded the brigade, form^ of English Grenadiers and Scotch Highlanders,
distinguished hi^ self greatly, and has been wounded in the head.

My Lord Granby, with the English cavalry, has contribu^^ extremely to the
success of the day. I charge Capt. Faucitt, Lordship's Aid-de-Camp, with this
letter, to be delivered to y^^ Majesty, and to give your Majesty a more
particular account the action from his own mouth, till I can have the honor of
l^ing at your Majesty's feet a more extensive and circumstantial^lation.

I am, with the most profound respect, Sir, Your Majesty's most obedient cousin
and servant, Ferdinand Duc de Brunswic and de Lunebo^^

The Marquis of Granby's Letter to the Earl of Holdernesse.
IT is with the greatest satisfaction, that I have the honor ^ acquainting
your Lordship of the success of the Heredit^ Prince yesterday morning.

General Sporken's corpse marched from the camp at Kalle L^^benau, about four in
the afternoon of the 29th; the Heredit^ Prince followed, the same evening, with
a body of troops, amo^ which were two English battalions of Grenadies, the two
^ Highlanders, and four squadrons of Dragoons, Cope's a Conway's.

The army was under arms all the day on the 30th; a^ about eleven at night,
marched off in six columns to Liebe^ About five the next morning, the whole
army assembled, a^ formed on the heights of Corbeke. The Hereditary Prince ^ at
this time, marching in two columns, in order to turn t^ enemy's left flank;
which he did, by marching to Donhelb^ leaving Klein-Eder on his left, and
forming in two lines, with ^ left toward Dossel, and his right near Grimbeck,
opposite to the left flank of the enemy, whose position was, with the left to
the high hill near Ossendorff, and their right to Warbourg, into which place
they had flung Fischer's corpse. The Hereditary Prince immediately attacked the
enemy's flank; and after a very sharp dispute, obliged them to give way; and,
by a continual fire, kept forcing them to fall back upon Warbourg. The army
was, at this time, marching with the greatest diligence to attack the enemy in
front; but the infantry could not get up in time; General Waldegrave, at the
head of the British, pressed their march as much as possible; no troops could
show more eagerness to get up, than they showed. Many of the men, from the heat
of the weather, and over-straining themselves to get on, through morassy and
very difficult ground, dropped down on their march.

General Most^n, who was at the head of the British cavalry that was formed on
the right of our infantry, on the other side of a large wood, upon receiving
the Duke's orders to come up with the cavalry as fast as possible, made so much
expedition, bringing them up at a full trot, though the distance was near five
miles, that the British cavalry had the happiness to arrive in time, to share
the glory of the day, having successfully charged several times both the
enemy's cavalry and infantry.

I should do injustice to the general officers, to every officer and private
man, of the cavalry, if I did not beg your lordship would assure his majesty,
that nothing could exceed their gallant behavior on that occasion.

Captain Phillips made so much expedition with his cannon, as to have an
opportunity, by a severe cannonade, to oblige those who had passed the Dymel,
and were formed on the other side, to retire with the utmost precipitation.

I received his Serene Highness's orders yesterday in the evening, to pass the
river after them, with 12 British battalion's, and 10 squadrons; and am now
encamped upon the heights of Wilda, about four miles from Warbourg, on the
heights of which their grand army is encamped.

M. de May is now retiring from the heights of Volkmissen, where he lay under
arms last night, toward Wolfshagen. I cannot give your lordship an account of
the loss on either side. Capt. Faucitt, whom I send off with this, shall get
all intelligence he can upon this head before he sets off.

I am, etc. GRANBY.
P.S. Saturday morning six o'clock. I have just joined grand army with my
detachment.

[Capt. Faucitt arrived at London in the afternoon August 8, ^ according to a
short account of this action published in a gaze extraordinary in the afternoon
of the 9th, M. Muy's corpse was^ posed to be upwards of 35,000 men; the
hereditary Prince's co^ when joined to that of Genesis Sporke, consisted of 24
battalions ^ 22 squadrons.]

Total loss sustained in the cavalry in killed, wounded and ^^sing, 164. Total
loss sustained in the Grenadiers and Highla^ in killed, wounding and missing,
415. Bombardiers, gunn^ and matrosses, killed, wounded and missing, 11. Total
590.



His Serene Highness Prince Ferdinand's Orders after the Battl^
Warbourg Camp, Friday, August 1, 17
HIS Serene Highness again renews the compliments of than that he gave in
general terms yesterday to the generals, offic^ regiments, and corpse, who were
then engaged, and who, by the valor and excellent conduct, gained so complete
a victory o^ the enemy; and orders his thanks to be publicly given so I^
Granby, under whose orders the British cavalry performed p^digies of valor,
which they could not fail of doing, having ^ Lordship at their head, and the
other general officers of the Br^ cavalry, who by their examples showed the
troops they led ^ the charge, how much they acted with an astonishing coura^
and a presence of mind not to be equalled. His Serene Highne^^ much oliged to
them, and gives infinite thanks as well to the^ as to all the officers in
general, and in particular to the wa^ British cavalry, and principally to
Lieutenant Colonel Johnson Conway's regiment; the family of Lord Granby, in
particu^ Capt. Vaughan, are hereby desired to receive the same comp^ment of
thanks, as they constantly attended Lord Granby in (...) different attacks of
the cavalry, and executed his Lordship orders in the most punctual manner.

The corpse of brave Grenadiers, who so much contributed ^ the glorious success
of the day receive by this the just pra^ due to them. His Serene Highness
cannot enough acknowledg^ how much esteem and regard he has for them: He orders
his b^ thanks to Lieutenant Colonel Beckwith and Major Maxwell, also to the
three Captains of the British artillery, Phillips, M'Baine and Stevens, who so
well managed their artillery. All the regiments under the command of his Serene
Highness the Hereditary Prince, and Lieut. Genesis Sporcken, from the Generals
down to the private men, are particularly thanked by his Serene Highness, for
the good conduct and courage with which they fought yesterday.

Major General Bredenbeck, at the head of Cope's regiment, who signalized
himself so much, is especially thanked, as is Colonel Hund of the Hessian
artillery by whose care his artillery was so well managed.

Major Bulow, with the British Legion maneuvered the whole day in the face of
the enemy, and who did them infinite damage, his Serene Highness returns him
many thanks, and assures him that he shall, on all occasions, retain a proper
sense thereof. In fine, his Serene Highness gives many thanks to those who
accompanied his person, as well as those of his suite, particularly to the
brave Capt. Winsenrood, who is very much wounded; Capt. Carpenter, greatly
contributed to the taking of several of the enemy's cannon; Count Daunaw, who
was instrumental in making prisoners a great number of Fischer's corpse; Capt.
Sloper, Major of brigade Hordinburg; and Capt. Mallortie; who at all times
executed with alacrity and exactness the orders they received from him.

His Serene Highness desires that on the first occasion the army will return
thanks to the Almighty for the success of yesterday, and flatters himself that
by his assistance and the bravery showed yesterday, we shall in the end
overcome every obstacle that offers.

Warbourg Camp, Saturday, August, 2, 1760, His Serene Highness orders that a
particular complimemnt be made to Lieutenant Colonel Sloper, for his behavior
and bravery in the affair of the 31st of July: he likewise desires his thanks
to be given to Lieutenant Colonel Clinton, acting as aid-de-camp to his Serene
Highness the Hereditary Prince.



So brilliant a success following close on the heels of the ^ormer, raised the
reputation of the allied arms. As con^iderable an advantage might have well
been expected from it; but according to the usual play of fortune in this w^
the first account that followed the defeat of so large a p^ of the French army,
was, that with a rapid and unresist^ tide of success, they had reduced Cassel,
Eimbach, and Ziegenhayn; by which they became masters of the whole landgraviate
of Hesse; that they had pushed into the king's territories, seized upon
Gottingen and Munden, and thre^tened Hanover itself. In short, almost the worst
con^^quences which could have arisen from a defeat followed victory; and whilst
in England we gave loose to our joy on the success of our arms, the French were
taking the most important places of our allies.

The fact was that Prince Ferdinand must have been sensible, that in quitting
his camp at Kalle, and taking post to the northward of the Dymel, he in a great
measure, laid open Cassel and the whole territory of Hesse to the French; nay,
that by this movement nothing was left to hinder their entering the Hanoverian
dominions on the right of the Weser. But notwithstanding these risques, the
step he took was prudent, and even necessary. Had he suffe^ the progress of the
Chevalier de Muy, on the Dymel; h^ he permitted him to strengthen his posts
upon that rive^ his communication with Westphalia had been inevitably ^ off,
and of course his sphere of subsistence greatly streig^^tened. It would have
had a worse effect. For he m^ have entirely lost the command of the Weser,
without which he could not have stood his ground a moment; a^ he would on that
loss have found himself compelled to re^ into the heart of Hanover, where he
must necessarily (...) streightened in his winter cantonments, and where a blo^
of any consequence must be decisive against him.

He therefore fought the battle of Warbourg though ^ lost all Hesse by his
victory; and he would not quit his po^ on the Dymel, though he saw Gottingen
and Munden the hands of the French. He was not to be frighted from his steady
and well chosen plan, by vain rumors or threa^ening appearances. He was by no
means in a condition^ make large detachments; it was therefore necessary to
s^^crifice something; and he made the smallest sacrifice the circumstances
would admit. For he foresaw that the Fren^^ army whilst he kept his position on
the Dymel, could (...) possibly take up their quarters in Hanover, or even act
the in any considerable body, and for any considerable tim^ without subjecting
themselves to the same or greater inco^veniencies than those to which he would
have been hims^^^ liable, had he in defending Hesse suffered them to occu^
those critical posts on the Dymel. He knew farther, the it would prove
extremely dangerous for them to haza^^ themselves beyond Gottingen; and that it
would be mo^^ difficult for the French army to support themselves in the
advanced post, than for him to annoy them there.

It is possible that reasons somewhat like the foregoing together with others
probably far more cogent, might ha^^ determined that great commander to this
conduct. B^ whilst he secured that middle communication and acted upon the
defensive plan, the troops were not idle; his detachments acted in many parts
with spirit and effect. But w^ must defer for a while the narrative of these
actions, being called from this part of the theater to the eastern parts ^
Germany, where about this time scenes of greater ecl^ were opened.

CHAP. VI.
Laudohn blocks up Schweidnitz. Russians enter Silesia. March of the King of
Prussia from Saxony to Lignitz. Junction of the Austrian armies in Silesia. The
Russians pass the Oder. Plan of M. Daun. Laudohn defeated near Lignitz. Daun
forms the blockade of Schweidnitz. Compelled to raise it. Action between
General Hulsen and the army of the Empire. Intercepted letter from the King of
Prussia to the Marquis of Argens.

FROM the time that the King of Prussia found himself compelled to raise the
siege of Dresden, it was evident that he could have no hopes of acting in
Saxony to any good purpose. The busy part of the campaign came on fast. Though
Prince Henry had obliged Laudohn to retire from Breslaw; that general, able,
and lately victorious, was still formidable; he kept Neisse and Schweidnitz
blocked up; and wanted to effect a junction with the Russians, by which he
proposed to give the final blow to the king's power in Silesia, The Russians
had now actually arrived in the frontier parts of that province, and wanted but
a very few days easy march to complete that fatal and long dreaded junction. At
the same time another body of Russians had penetrated into Pomerania; laid all
the defenseless parts under contribution, and threatened the siege of Colberg:
The Swedish army, said to consist of 22,000 men, commenced also, though with less
vigor, their operations. In all that country the King of Prussia had not 5000
men to oppose them.

In these circumstances a plan of mere defense would have proved altogether
without effect. The King of Prussia had but two armies; and it was necessary
that one of them, at least, should make the most rapid and sudden movements to
oppose so many combinations. On the side of Silesia the danger seemed more
pressing, and accordingly he marched to its relief; should pass the Elbe, the
Spree, the Neisse, the Queiss, and the Bober, five considerable rivers; that
they should effect all this, with one army of the enemy on one side of it
flanks, another behind, and with a third in its front (the actual position of
the Austrians in Lusatia) was an actio^ reserved for, and only to be expected
from the King ^ Prussia. The attempt itself could have been justified on^^ by
necessity; and the necessity was urgent. The Russia^ approached. M. Daun
followed toward Silesia; and the king could hardly promise himself success,
but from march of such rapidity, as might enable him to try his fo^^tune with
General Laudohn, before the triple junction ^ apprehended had made his enemies
irresistible. But no^withstanding the hopes conceived from this march, before
the king could come to an action three bodies of Austria^ had joined,
Laudohn's, Daun's, and Lacy's; and extendin^ themselves along the Katsbach, a
river which falls into the Oder, occupied all the ground from Parchwitz to
Cosse^dau, a space of little less than thirty English miles. But this extent
their posts were every where strong, and the communications easy. The king's
camp was at Lignit^ It was in vain that for several days he attempted, by
vario^ devices, to detach one body of the enemy from the rest, to turn their
flanks and attack them at disadvantage. The nature of the ground or the skill
of the opposite gener^^ always disappointed him.

At length Mr. Daun took himself the offensive party. T^^ advantage of his
situation, and the superiority of his num^bers, prevailed over his cautious
nature to risque an atta^ It was therefore resolved, after the situation of
Lignitz h^ been well reconnoitred, all circumstances maturely weighe^ and the
design communicated to the other generals, to a^^tempt the King of Prussia in
his camp, with the unit^ strength of the three armies. To ensure success beyond
doubt, it was determined that this attempt should be man by surprise, and
therefore in the night. M. Daun reme^bered the bad guard which had been kept by
the Prussians and the advantage, which in the year 1758 he derived from a night
attack at the battle of Hochkirchen.

In consequence of this plan the whole army, as soon as should begin to grow
dark, was to march from their seven posts to such situation as were marked out
for each corpse they were to strike their tents, but yet to keep up the fir^ in
their camps, and to have the drums beat the tattoo as usual.

Some time after Marshal Daun had begun to move, to his astonishment the
patroles he had sent out returned with the account, that they had met no
out-posts. As soon as day broke and the army had advanced, their apprehensions
were confirmed. They were disappointed in their design, there was no enemy in
the camp; but when they cast their eyes from thence, they could perceive at a
distance the rising of a thick smoke, which left them no room to doubt that
their fortune was then on the point of decision, by a part of their forces
only, and that the King and Baron Laudohn were at that moment hotly engaged;
Daun could only look on and wait the event.

On the 13th of July the king was in his camp at Lignitz, when he received
advice that the Russian army of 24,000 men, under Count Czernichew, had thrown
bridges over the Oder, at a place called Auras, and that they were to pass the
river on that very day. He suspected also, that the enemy had formed the design
of a general attack. Troops which have been a long time opposed to each other
can reciprocally guess at each other's designs; the method used by the enemies
generals grow familiar, and the least motion they make discloses their designs.

This is the account the Prussians gave of the means by which they came to a
knowledge of M. Daun's projects. The Austrians attributed this discovery, not
to the Prussian sagacity, but to intelligence given by deserters.

Whatever the means were by which the King of Prussia became suspicious of this
design, it is certain, that he took the most early, the most vigorous, and the
most effective measures to defeat it. He was thoroughly sensible of the danger
he ran of being surrounded, if he continued in his post at Lignitz; out of that
very design, which was calculated for his ruin, his genius drew a new means of
safety. He saw at a glance, that the plan which the enemy had formed to
surround him, at the same time, necessarily divided their own armies. And this
division was the great object he had pursued so long, and through such
discouraging disappointments. His only business was to prevent their reuniting
in a general attack upon his quarters. Therefore in the very evening calculated
for the attempt on his camp, he quitted it with as much privacy as the enemy
had proposed to attack it, marched and took an advantageous post on the w^
through which Laudohn was to pass.

And now the decisive hour aproached, in which he w^ to put to the risque as a
great a stake as had been played for since the beginning of the war. No vulgar
advantag^ would suffice in his situation, and that very situation in some sort
disabled him from attaining a great one. After for bloody campaigns, and the
vicissitudes of a success in all i^ changes exhausting, his old corpse was
nearly annihilate^ Those who succeeded to their places, had scarcely seen t^
brilliant times of the kings fortune; and they inherite^ neither the severe
discipline, nor the undaunted spirit of the first companions of his hopes; they
were new to service yet dispirited with defeats. The king himself gave life
(...) the whole, he alone was to rectify a thousand faults, and (...) supply a
thousand deficiencies.

The post which he chose, was such, as whilst it stopp^ the progress of Laudohn
in front, if Daun should attemp^ his rear, would from the nature of the ground
lay him under great difficulties. This rear he further strengthen^ with several
batteries. As soon as his army was drawn up he divided it, leaving his right on
the ground, where it ha^ been formed to observe Marshal Daun and to maintain
the post; whilst with his left he turned in order to fall upon the corpse under
Laudohn. No dispositions could have bee^ made with a more perfect skill.

Mean time Laudohn was advancing fast to the snare which had been laid for him.
Already he had passed the Kat^bach, and was moving toward Lignitz, full of the
hope of no small share in the glory of giving the final blow t^ the King of
Prussia, and had advanced as far as the villag^ of Psaffendorf, when by three
in the morning, the day light began to dawn; a thick fog that had covered all
the adjacent grounds suddenly cleared up, and like the openin^ of a great scene
disclosed at once the whole Prussian army regularly embattled, advantageously
posted, furnished wit^ a dreadful and well-placed artillery.

He was now come full upon his enemy. (...) was impossible to recede; way on
either side, until six. The King of Prussia exerted himself with incredible
diligence to preserve an uniform strength in every part of his line, and
hazarded his own life with a daring, which nothing but his situation could
excuse from temerity. His clothes were shot through in several places, his
horse was killed under him. But all these troubles and dangers were fully
compensated by the efforts of his troops, who maintained so steady a fire, and
pushed the Austrians with so much ardour, that they at last gave ground, and
retreated with precipitation, though not without some order, toward the
Katsbach.

The king pursued them to this river, and no further. His advantage as it was
gained by the most vigorous steps, so bounds were set to the ardour of
improving it with the most guarded caution. He feared if he pursued his success
too far, it might disjoin the part of the army engaged from that which he had
left to observe M. Daun; and perhaps give that general an opportunity of taking
a severe revenge on the right, for the successes of the left. Notwithstanding
this reserve of the king, (a reserve, the want of which was formerly the only
failing in his military character, but which his misfortunes had now perfectly
taught him,) notwithstanding, I say he did not push his good fortune against
Baron Laudohn to the utmost, the victory was complete, glorious, and adorned
with all the trophies. By their own confession, the Austrians lost upwards of
6000 men, killed, wounded and prisoners. The Prussians made it amount, and not
without probability to 10,000. Among the prisoners, were two generals, and 84
officers; 82 pieces of cannon and 23 pair of colors were taken. On the side of
the conquerors, five hundred were killed, and 1200 wounded.

With regard to Silesia, the victory near Lignitz produced some most immediate,
and most useful effects. Although M. Daun, not dispirited with his late
misadventure, and only sollicitous to repair his loss, had detached a strong
corpse under Prince Lowenstein, and Genesis Beck to strengthen the Russians and
encourage them to advance. Count Czernichew was so intimidated with the late
defeat of the Austrians, that he repassed the Oder by the same bridges on which
he had lately crossed it.

Thus one great end of the King of Prussia's march was obtained. He prevented
the dreaded junction of those two powers. In the other part of his design, he
did not s^ perfectly succeed. M. Daun since the action of Psaffendorf could
indeed make no progress in Silesia; but on the othe^hand, the king was not able
entirely to drive him out o^ that province. The Austrians even after their
defeat, fa^ superior to the king, had been besides largely reinforced The
empress exerted all her power, to remove the ill effec^ this late check might
have had on the reputation of her arms at the same time that she augmented her
troops, she comforted and encouraged Baron Laudohn, and by a very generous and
gracious letter let him see, that she was not a sovereign, in whose mind a late
misfortune cancels the memory o^ past services. In the praises which this
letter bestowed o^ Laudohn, several were of opinion, was couched an indire^
censure on the conduct of Count Daun, the slowness o^ whose temper so ill
agreed with the ardour of her ambition* and with these great hopes, which the
number of he forces, and the strength of her alliance had encourage her to
entertain.

The king after this victory joined his brother Prince Henry at Newmarcke. One
part of that Prince's army under General Goltze had passed the Oder to observe
the Russians, who since the repassing that river, seemed to direc^ their
motions northward. The king being strengthened by this junction, and having his
communication with Bresla^ clear, marched against Daun, who had begun to form
the blockade of Schweidnitz, fell upon a corpse under General Beck; made two
battalions of Croats prisoners, dispersed several squadrons, and by this lively
affair obliged the enemy* grand army to raise the blockade, and by a
precipitate retreat, to take refuge in the mountains of Landshut.

Whilst his majesty was thus exerting the most heroic efforts in defense of
Silesia; Genesis Hulsen, who commanded for him in Saxony, seconded his endeavors
in that quarter with uncommon bravery and success. The army of the empire had
formed a design of cutting him off from Torgau. To frustrate their intentions,
that general quitted his camp at Meissen, and marched to Strehla. The enemy
divided into two bodies; one attacked an advanced post about a cannon shot from
his camp upon every side, with the greatest fury from, day break to six in the
morning, attempting any thing for the relief of the advanced post. Gen Hulsen
saw that unless he could speedily do something for its succor, that body must
inevitably perish. He therefore in this exigency, gave orders to his cavalry to
make a circuit round an height; and to charge if possible the enemies flank.
This order was executed with the utmost promptitude and spirit. The
Imperialists were charged on their flanks; their battalions and horse were
thrown upon one another in confusion, and 41 officers and 1200 men were made
prisoners, The loss of the Prussians was inconsiderable. Genesis Hulsen by this
advantage, was enabled to encamp under To^gau, while he retreated through an
apprehension, as the grand army of the Imperialists was coming up, that he
might be cut off from his communication with the Elbe. This retreat made the
Austrians magnify the affair into a victory on their side; but the
circumstances render the Prussian account much more probable.

Fortune seemed once more to have smiled, after a long interval of gloom on the
King of Prussia's affairs; and the reputation of his arms began to revive. But
the victories he obtained, though glorious, were decisive of little more than
the field upon which they were fought. They were far from having lowered the
power of the enemy to an equality with his. And the movements he made to gain
those advantages, and to protect one part of his dominions necessarily exposed
the rest. The enemy was able to detach without end; and whilst bodies of
Russians traversed the Lower Silesia, several corpse of Austrians scoured
Lusatia; and thus together they broke off all regular communication between the
king's army and his hereditary dominions, and of course between him and his
general Hulsen, who with very unequal forces was struggling to secure Saxony; a
country in which there are towns indeed fortified; but fortified for the
greater part in such a manner, as to be little more than snares for increasing
the number of prisoners, by betraying defenseless garrisons into the hands of
an enemy superior in the field.

In this situation, the king is said to have wrote a letter to the celebrated
Author of the Jewish Spy, etc. and now resident at Berlin.
Marq. d'Argens, very pathetick, and very descriptive of his condition, and of
his frame of mind under those pressures. This letter is said to have been
intercepted by a Russian detachment, and industriously spread about in order to
dis-spirit his friends. On that account some have suspected its authenticity.
But the letter is surely highly consonant to his circumstances, and
sufficiently agreeable to his general manner of writing: so that we do not
think ourselves dispensed with inserting it in this place.

Formerly, my dear marquis, the affair of the 5th August would have decided a
campaign. At present tha^ action is no more than a scratch; a great battle mu^
determine our fate. We shall have one, according to all appearances, very soon,
and then, if the event is favorable to us, we may rejoice. It required many
stratagem^ and much address to bring things to this pass. Don't talk to me of
danger; the last action cost me only a su^ of clothes and a horse. This is
buying victory ve^ cheap.

I have not had the letter which you mention. W^ are in a manner blocked up, in
regard to corresponde^ by the Russians on one side the Oder, and by the
Austrians on the other. A small skirmish was necessary to clear the way for
Cocceii The aid-de-camp, who was charged with this letter, and who came to
England with the news of the above mentioned, action: In our papers, it is
translated Stage Coach, from the similitude, probably, of the word Cocher,
; I hope that he will deliver you my letter; I never was, in the course of my
life, in a more embarrassing situation than in this campaign. Believe me,
nothing less than a miracle is still necessary to extricate me from the
difficulties that I foresee. I shall certainly do my duty when occasion offers,
but, my dear marquis, always remember that I pretend not to command fortune,
and that I am obliged, in my projects, to leave too much to chance, for want of
being able to form any thing more solid. I have the labors of a Hercules to
undergo, at a time of life when my strength fails me, my infirmities increase,
and, to speak the truth, when hope, the only consolation of the unhappy, begins
to defert me. You are not sufficiently acquainted with the circumstances of
affairs to have a clear idea of all the dangers which threaten the state; I
know, but conceal them; I keep all my fears to myself, and only communicate to
the public my hopes, or the little good news that I can acquaint them with. If
the blow that I meditate succeeds, then, my dear marquis, it will be time
enough to express our joy: but till then, let us not flatter ourselves, for
fear some unexpected bad news should detect us too much.

I lead here the life of a millitary monk. I have much to think off about my
affairs, and the rest of my time I devote to literature, which is my
consolation, as it was of the consul, the father of his country and of
eloquence. I know not if I shall survive this war, but I am determined, in case
it should happen, to pass the rest of my days in retirement, in the bosom of
philosophy and friendship.

When our correspondence shall be more open, you will oblige me by writing more
frequently. I know not where we shall have our winter quarters. My houses at
Breslaw were destroyed by the bombardment, Our enemies envy us every thing,
even daylight and the air that we breathe. They must however leave us some
place, and if it is safe, it will be a treat to receive you there.

Well, my dear marquis, what is become of the peace with France? Your nation,
you see, is more blind, than you imagined. Those fools lose Canada, and
Pondicherry, to please the Queen and the Czarina. Heaven grant that Prince
Ferdinand may well reward them for their zeal. The officers, innocent of these
evils, and the soldiers, will be made the victims, and the illustrious
offenders will suffer nothing.

These are the subjects which offer themselves to me. I was in a writing vein,
but I see that I must conclude, lest I should tire you and neglect my own
business. Adieu. my dearest marquis. -- I embrace you, etc. To authenticate the
above it may be proper to add 1. That this letter was shown at Bath and London
by M. Conceii himself. And 2. That the copy here printed was sent to the
translator by a friend at Magdeburg belonging to the court.


CHAP. VII.
Situation of the French and English armies. Heredit^ Prince surprises a body
of French in Zierenberg. Gene^ Bulow takes Marburg. Defeated by Monsieur
Stainv^ General Wangenheim passes and is obliged to repass Weser. French retire
from Mulhausen to Cassel. He^ditary Prince marches to the Rhine, passes that
ri^ Cleves taken. Wesel besieged. English Expedition. Castries forms an army on
the Rhine. Battle of Cam^ Allies defeated. Hereditary Prince repasses the Rh^
Siege of Wesel raised. Death and eulogium of George II. Accession of George
III. and his resolution of support his allies.

WE leave the King of Prussia to these thoughts, in ^der to return to the
armies on the Weser. Pri^ Ferdinand was not mistaken, in imagining that Gotting
would prove the utmost bound of the French progress in Hanover. After they had
secured that place with a stro^ garrison, the grand army of M. Broglio moved
toward (...) reserve which had been defeated, and pitched his camp Dierenberg,
a place within a small distance of the alli^ who ever since the battle
continued to occupy Warbou^ the Dymel running between the two armies. In this
sit^ation they continued for about a month.

The Hereditary Prince who was ever in motion, continually hovering now on one
side, now on the other, the French camp, in one of his excursions had perceiv^
that the French, according to their usual negligence, w^ not very exact in
their out-posts and patrols. He had a^ received intelligence, that they had
thrown a corpse of h^ and foot, consisting of something more than two thousa^
men, into the town of Zierenberg, a place surround with some damaged walls.

From these lights, he resolved upon the surprise of the body, and accordingly
made his dispositions for this bo^ attempt, in the manner following; first, he
ordered a bo^ of his light troops to turn the town of Zierenberg, and take post
between it and Darienberg, in order to interce^ any that should attempt passing
to the camp of the enemy Next he posted at proper distances eight squadrons of
d^goons, two battalions of grenadiers, and one regiment of foot, on the road
between his own camp and the place which was to be attacked, with a view to
cover his retreat, in case he should be repulsed and pursued. With the rest of
his foot, consisting for the greater part of English, he marched with the
utmost caution and diligence toward the town.

When they had arrived within two miles,

The column of the English grenadiers having forced the gate, advanced
regularly with their bayonets fixed, and without firing a musket, by the two
streets that led to the churchyard, (which being the only open part of the
town, served the French as a place of arms,) killing or taking a great number
of those who ran from the houses toward this rendezvous; and thus they
advanced with the greatest order and the most profound silence, until they
reached the churchyard. The night was so dark that they formed by the side of
the French, who for a while took them to be their own piquets that had
assembled; but they were soon undeceived; a fierce encounter with bayonets
ensued, in which the French were quickly obliged to give way.

Two regiments of the enemies dragoons endeavored to fly to the gate that led
to their camp; but they found it, occupied by 400 grenadiers, who drove them
back with their bayonets; forced from hence, they fled to another gate; there
they were repulsed with a sharp fire of small arms. Then they were compelled to
separate; and flying at random as fortune and the night directed, made their
escape at the several breaches of the wall. The prince was m^ter of the place
in about an hour; but the nearness of (...) French camp and the approach of day
prevented as long ^ continuance in the place as he wished for reaping the
fruits of his victory; therefore about three o'clock he ^gan his retreat,
carrying off two pieces of cannon, 36 o^cers, and between four and 500 private
men. The slaug^ter of the enemy was considerable. The prince reached camp
without the least molestation in his retreat.

If we consider the difficulty of this attempt, very ^ have been bolder; if we
examine the dispositions, (...) could be conducted with greater wisdom; if we
attend the behavior of the troops, we shall no where find a^ ^ample of more
exact obedience, discipline and coura^ To attack so large a body of the enemy,
so strongly po^ within a small league of their grand camp, to march so fa^ that
critical situation, and in a very dark night, to divide i^ so many parts, yet
to act with so much order and so en^ a concert, was certainly an exploit of the
very first ra^ and though not of any great importance in its consequence is so
admirable in its conduct and execution, that it ^ deserves to be told at the
length we have given it. ^ added greatly to the reputation of the British
soldie^ troops, and no less to their honor as men, by the hu^nity they showed
to their prisoners, and the generous ^timents of the common sort with regard to
money; there were several noble instances that night of their re^sing to take
any thing from their prisoners, who had of^ed them their purses. They lost but
ten men.

From this time the operations of the two armies, w^ for a time seemed to
languish, were renewed with fresh gour. Prince Ferdinand perceived, that whilst
the Fre^ communication with the Rhine and with Frankfort on (...) Maine
continued open, it must prove to little purpose attempt any thing either for
the relief of Gottingen or ^sel. Their progress indeed into Hanover had been
che^ed; but whilst ever they continued in so advanced a p^on, it was evidently
impossible to prevent their making ^ry ruinous inroads into that country. To
force them ^ battle against their inclination, would be difficult, and attempt
itself dangerous. There remained but one me^ which was to make frequent and
strong detachments i^ the southern parts of Hesse and Wetteravia, and thus ^der
precarious the French communication with the Rhine and Maine, from whence they
drew the greatest part of their supplies of all kinds.

With this intention, he detached general Bulow at the head of a strong corpse,
who pushed forward toward Marpurg, surprised the town, destroyed the French
ovens, with several hundred wagons of flour, and carried off a considerable
quantity of clothing and military stores. In the mean time, his light troops
scoured the country in such a manner as for a while answered the great end of
the expedition in breaking the French communication with Frankfort. Proceeding
on this plan he made a further movement toward Frankenau, which, at length,
necessitated the French general Stainville, who commanded in those parts, to
quit his position, and endeavor to stop the progress of this detachment. He
came up with their rear as they were passing the river Orche,

It was to be apprehended that he might have pursued this advantage, to the
entire ruin of M. Bulow's detachment; if the Hereditary Prince by a forced
march of five German miles had not arrived time enough to support him. On the
prince's arrival M. Stainville fell back, and took possession of a strong post
in which it was in vain to attack him.

Whilst these measures were taking with mixed success for disquieting the
French, and interrupting their communication to the southward of their
quarters, like movements were made to the northward, to oblige them, if
possible, to relinquish their hold on Gottingen. But General Wangenheim, who
with that design had crossed the Weser, and in the beginning had proceeded with
no small expectations; but at length he received a severe check, which forced
him to repass the river with some precipitation.

But whilst the grand armies thus watched each other, the Eyes of Europe were
drawn to a different quarter, by a movement equally astonishing for its
rapidity and mysterious for its design. The Hereditary Prince of Brunswick,
whom we have seen but a few days before in the further part of Hesse, suddenly
appeared on the frontiers of the United Provinces, with an army of twenty
battalions and ten squadrons, One detachment of his troops which ha^ proceeded
on the side of Dusseldorp, passes the Rhine above Roeroot; another which had
marched through Munster, passes it nearly about the same time, but a great
distance below, at Rhees; these two detachments moved t^ meet each other, and
as they proceed, seize all the French posts along the Rhine; the enemy's guards
are every when taken or abandon their redoubts. This puts into the^ possession
a number of boats, by which they are enable to transport all the rest of the
troops, which are intended t^ act upon the left of the Rhine. Then they proceed
without delay or opposition, directly to Cleves; the garrison takes refuge in
the castle,

The secrecy, and the rapidity of the march, togethe^ with the vigor of the
subsequent operations, were such ^ might be expected from the character of the
Heredita^ Prince; but on what design this rapid march was mad^ and these
vigorous steps taken at that particular time, ga^ room for a great deal of
reasoning. During a good part (...) the summer, very great preparations had
been made i^ England for a conjunct expedition; a powerful fleet was i^
readiness; and they had embarked a large train of fi^ and battering artillery,
a considerable body of foot, and regiment of light horse.

As this armament was supposed in readiness to sail abo^ the time of the
Hereditary Prince's march to the Rhine^ conjecture united these two designs
together, and suppose the fleet at Portsmouth and the army in Westphalia, we^
to act on the same plan. On this supposition it was judge that the storm would
probably fall on the Austrian Netherlands; and that Ostend, which the Empress
so unpolitically for herself, and so ungratefully to her former friends, had
given into the hands of France, would be the first object of those forces which
were to unite from such a distance.

This design of the expedition from Portsmouth has, we understand, been
formerly disavowed. Whether in strictness, not being a principal in the war,
with her imperial majesty, England ought to have made such an attempt, though
Ostend was defended by a French garrison, we shall not take upon us to
determine; but without the aid of such considerations, it is evident there were
sufficient objections to it from the side of mere prudence. Almost insuperable
difficulties occurred in such a scheme; and it would scarcely appear to most
men advisable to add a Flemish to our German war.

But we think it possible to give some reasonable account of the expedition of
the Hereditary Prince, independent of any connection with the British armament.
For a considerable time the French had seemed resolved to resume their former
plan of an army on the Lower Rhine; such motions were made as strongly
indicated that this design would shortly be put in execution; and the allied
army had every thing to fear from it. For as the French were checked from
proceeding to the complete conquest of the electorate by the allied, army on
the Dymel, if this army should itself be so checked, by one of the enemy
advancing from the Lower Rhine, there would be then nothing to hinder M.
Broglio from sending forward so strong a reserve as might finally reduce
Hanover. In these circumstances nothing but a very decisive victory could
possibly save the allied army, thus surrounded and deprived of its subsistence,
from perishing in the most miserable, or surrendering in the most shameful
manner.

There was one step only which might with certainty prevent this design, and
even in some measure turn it upon the enemy; the taking Cleves and Wesel into
the hands of the allies. This would not only defeat the scheme of the French
for acting on the Lower Rhine, but greatly embarrass their operations in every
other quarter. Even the attempt, though it should not be attempted with
success, would necessarily draw the attention of the French that way, and thus
save Hanover at least for one campaign. This alone had been a sufficient reason
for the march. But had the British armament at the same time been intende^ for
some part of the coast of France, or had England politically kept up such a
rumor, when she had in reality (...) more remote object for her armament; in
either of these cases it would undoubtedly have co-operated with the Hereditary
Prince's designs, by detaining a greater body o^ the French troops at home to
defend their own coasts.

We do not pretend to penetrate into all the motives But it is evident, that in
the German enterprise every thing depended on the celerity of the operations.
The siege o^ Wesel was carried on with great vigor, by that part o^ the
prince's army which was on the right of the Rhine ^ whilst the prince covered
it on the left. But before the enemy could disturb him, nature declared against
his success by the fall of immense rains, which swelled the Rhine and Lip to
such a degree as greatly interrupted the progress of the siege, having rendered
the roads of Westphalia impassable, and therefore prevented the arrival of
these reinforcements which were intended to push the siege with the greater
effect. These rains also made it very difficult for the prince to preserve his
communication with the besiegers, which however he made a shift to keep open by
one bridge above and another below the town,

In the mean time, the French with all the expedition they could use, had
collected an army under M. de Castrie^ of thirty battalions and thirty-eight
squadrons, partly from the great army in Hesse, partly from the Low Countries.
This body advanced as far as Rheinberg, and after a strenuous resistance drove
out a detachment of the allies which had been posted there. From thence they
marched by their left, and encamped behind the convent of Campen. The
Hereditary Prince now saw at the same time the season and a superior army
acting against him, to fight this enemy, fully prepared to receive him, with
the troops which he could spare from the siege, might be a desperate attempt.
To break up the siege would have of itself answered the intention of the
enemies march. There was no ^ medium but a surprise; which was resolved, and
all the dispositions for it made with the judgment by which the great prince
who commanded is distinguished upon such difficult occasions. This attempt
became the more necessary, and the less time was to be lost in making it, as
intelligence had been received that the French army was shortly to be augmented
by powerful reinforcements. The prince began his march at ten in the evening.

To reach the enemy's camp, it was necessary to dislodge Fischer's corpse of
irregulars, who had occupied the convent of Campen in their front. This
produced some shot,

On this occasion, the English nation regretted the loss of one of its most
shining ornaments in the death of Lord Down, who whilst his grateful sovereign
was distining him to higher honors, received a mortal wound in this battle. He
was a person of free and pleasurable life: but of an excellent understanding,
amiable manners, and the most intrepid courage. In the beginning of this war he
had a considerable share in rousing a martial spirit amongst the young people
of rank in England, and having long showed them by a gallant example how to
fight, he at last by a melancholy one, showed them how to die for their country.

As the british troops had been the greatest sufferers in this as well as in
most other actions of the campaign, great murmers were raised against the
commander of the allied army, as if upon all occasions, even the most trivial,
he had wantonly exposed the lives of the British, in order to preserve those of
the German soldiery. Some carried this complaint to a ridiculous length. But
could it with reason have been expected, that where 25,000 English had served
for a whole campaign, were engaged in five sharp encounters (some of them a
sort of pitched battles) in all which they acquired the whole glory, that they
should lose a sma^ number than 265 killed and 870 wounded, which is whole of
their loss in all the encounters of this campai^ It is true, the life of a man
is a sacred thing, and of val^ his country. But in some circumstances it is
ridiculous a nation to think of sparing even a greater effusion of (...) to
acquire reputation to their arms, and experience to ^ troops and the officers.
The English desired the po^ honor with equal spirit and wisdom, they were
entitle^ it, they had it, and they purchased it more cheaply, on the whole
might have been expected. Neither their blood lavished on every trivial
occasion, as had (...) falsely suggested. The only affairs in which they suff^
any thing worth notice, were those of Warbourg^ Campen; both actions of the
highest consequence.

After the disappointment and loss the Hereditary P^ had suffered in the late
engagement, he was sensible the siege could no longer be carried on with any
prospec^ success, in sight of an army so much superior; the R^ every day
swelled more and more, and his communica^ with the troops before Wesel became
every hour more ^ficult. Besides, as the whole country was by this (...)
overflowed, his men must have been exposed to the gr^est hardships and the most
fatal distempers. These c^derations determined to repass the Rhine without
(...) Notwithstanding the extreme nearness of the French a^ the late repulse
the Prince had met, and the great swel^ the waters, such was the impression he
had left on (...) enemy and the excellence of his dispositions, that they not
even attempt to distress his rear; and he passed Rhine without the least
molestation, not only under the^ but as it were within the grasp of a superior
French a^

From this the operations of the armies became grad^ more languid; for as
nothing decisive happened on e^ side during the whole campaign, it was
impossible to thin^ this advanced season of undertaking any very signal enterp^
As if by common consent they began to move tow^ winter quarters. So that
whatever happened after (...) was not connected with the general plan of the
campai^ and were the sudden acts of detached parties, who atte^ tempted some
advantages of surprise. Of these we shall (...) some notice before we conclude,
but we pass them by present; the attention of all men being at this time (...)
engaged by an event of the greatest importance, and which many were of opinion
would make no small change in the nature of the war, and above all in the
general system of pacification. This was the death of George II. king of Great
Britain.

He died suddenly in his palace at Kensington in the 77th year of his age and
33d of his reign. The immediate cause of his death was the rupture of the
substance of the right ventricle of his heart, by which the circulation was
stopped in an instant. This was preceded by no sort of apparent illness. His
majesty enjoyed an uncommon degree of health and strength for that age; but it
was believed that he had suffered, by exposing himself too much to the cold, in
reviewing some troops that were to be embarked for the expedition. He had been
extremely solicitous about the fortune of this expedition. He had been no less
anxious for the fate of the enterprise under the Hereditary Prince, an account
of the ill success of which he had received, though it was not at that time made
public. This was believed to have touched him deeply, and to have been one of
the causes of a death so afflicting to all his people.

When future historians come to speak of his late majesty, they will find both
in his fortune and his virtue, abundant matter for just and unsuspected
panegyric. None of his predessors in the throne of England lived to so great an
age; few of them enjoyed so long a reign. And this long course was
distinguished by circumstances of peculiar felicity, whether we consider him in
the public or the private character. His subjects, allowing for one short and
as it were momentary cloud, enjoyed perpetual peace at home, and abroad on many
occasions accquired great glory There was to the last a considerable increase
in their agriculture, their commerce, and their manufactures, which were daily
improving under the internal tranquillity they enjoyed, and the wise regulations
that were made in every session of his parliaments. By a wonderful happiness,
he left these emprovements no way checked, but rather forwarded, in one of the
most general and wasteful wars that has raged in the world for many centuries.

He lived entirely to extinguish party and the spirit of party in his kingdoms;
it was not till the close of his reign, that his family might have been
considered as firmly and immoveably seated on the throne; but he, having
baffled all the private machinations of his enemies policy, ^dued at length the
utmost effort of their force: and the ^ on that menacing occasion, he
experienced in the f^ measure the affection of his people, yet the completion
this great service to his family, he owed solely to the (...) city and bravery
of his own son.

He lived with his queen in that kind of harmony confidence, that is seen
between the best suited couple^ private life. He had a numerous issue, in which
he^ great cause of satisfaction, and very little of disquiet, what was the
almost necessary consequence of a life ^tracted to a late period. He survived
seven of his child. He had the satisfaction to see in his successor, what is
rare, the most effectionate obedience, the most dutiful^ quiescence in his
will; and what is no less rare, cont^ to the fortune of most old kings, he
never possessed (...) perfectly the love of his subjects than in the last year^
his life. And he died at the very point of time when ^ terror of his arms, the
power of his kingdoms and the^ ^dom of his government, were all raised to
almost as (...) a pitch as they could possibly arrive at; they were in^ at that
height of prosperity and glory, as never had (...) exceeded in the reign of the
most fortunate of his p^cessors.

His parts were not lively or brilliant; but the whol^ his conduct demonstrates
that he had a judgment both ^ lid and comprehensive. He understood the
interests of ^ other sovereigns of Europe; and was particularly ski^ in all the
recesses of that political labyrinth, the system ^ Germany; of the liberties of
which he was through whole life a most zealous asserter. In the year 1741, took
up arms, and even risqued his own person, when the projected dismemberment of
the house of Austria, (...) were in danger of falling a sacrifice to a French
fact^ He afterward resisted with equal firmness that very ho^ of Austria,
which he had exposed his life to defend, w^ the liberties of the empire were
threatened from t^ quarter.

The acquisitions of his father, were by him confirm^ improved and enlarged. He
was enabled by his oecono^ always to keep up a considerable body of troops in
Ha^ver; by which means, when the war broke out, there (...) a disciplined force
ready to oppose the common enem^ and we do not hazard any thing in asserting,
that if it had not been for the prudent foresight of that measure, the army
which has since been formed, and the great things which have since been done,
could never have had existence. So that if we only examine what he has done in
Germany, when we reflect what enemies secret and declared he had at different
times to manage and to fight in that country, he must in every fair judgment be
allowed the greatest prince of his family.

He was in his temper sudden and violent; but this, though it influenced his
behavior, made no impression on his conduct, which was always sufficiently
deliberate and attentive to his own interests and those of his subjects.

He was plain and direct in his intentions; true to his word; steady in his
favor and protection to his servants, and never changed them willingly; this
appeared clearly in those who served more immediately on his person, whom he
scarce ever removed; but they grew old along with him, or died in their places.
But having been in a sort compelled by a violent faction, to relinquish a
minister for whom he had great affection, and in whom he reposed an unlimited
confidence, it afterward became a matter of more indifference to him by whom
he was served in the affairs of his government.

He was merciful in his disposition, but not to such a degree as in any sort to
encourage offenses against his government. On the suppression of the rebellion
in 1746, he behaved without any remarkable display either of severity or
clemency. Many were pardoned, many punished; and this perhaps, is the most
proper conduct on such occasions, where offended majesty requires victims,
justice examples, and humanity pardons. But though the law in many instances
had its free course, the excesses committed in the rage of war, were by him
neither commanded nor approved. After that rebellion had been suppressed, he
retained no bitter remembrance of it, either to the country in which it
unfortunately began, or even to many of the persons who were actually concerned
in it.

As he came into England in a riper age, and of consequence never had been able
to attain a perfect knowledge of the force and beauties of our language, he
never showed a sufficient regard to the English literature, which in his reign
did not flourish: and this must be considered as the greatest, or rather the
only blemish that lay upon his g^vernment.

He has been censured, as a little too attentive to mone^ and perhaps in some
minute things this censure was (...) wholly without foundation. But there are
two consider^tions which greatly enervate this objection to his charact^ First,
that this disposition never showed itself in one ^pacious act; and 2dly, that
it never influenced his c^duct on any important occasion. For it is now well
kno^ that he showed no improper parsimony, when this (...) broke out. In fact,
he expended so much on that oc^sion, that on his decease, his private wealth
was found (...) be far inferior to what had commonly been imagined.

Though it is true, that during his whole life, he (...) shown a remarkable
affection to his Hanoverian subjec^ yet the last act of it demonstrated that
they were (...) from engrossing the whole of his regard; and that (...) reality
his German possessions held no other place in (...) consideration than what
their relative importance to t^ rest of his dominions naturally claimed. For
when t^ truly severe trial came, in which the interests of Engla^ and Hanover
were separated, when a war began for an ^ject wholly foreign to that country, a
war in which Ha^ver must suffer much, and could hope no advantage, en^ there
his majesty did not hesitate a moment to expose (...) German dominions to
almost inevitable ruin, rather the make or even propose the smallest abatement
from the i^mensity of the English rights in America. A conduct the more than
wipes of every suspicion of an improper pa^tiality; and which surely ought
never to be mention^ without the highest gratitude to the memory of that
ma^animous monarch.

If the authors of these sheets were equal to such a design, it would perhaps
be impossible to exhibit a mo^ pleasing picture than that which might be formed
from (...) just view of his late majesty's conduct, to these two (...)
differently constituted parts of his dominions. His virtu^ was proved by two of
the greatest trials to which the nature of man is liable; the trust of absolute
and unbounded power; and the most exalted station limited by the strictest
laws. For these two so very different situations, very different and almost
opposite tempers and talents have been always thought necessary. But that king
had a mind perfectly adapted to both; for whilst in England he kept the
liberties of his people inviolate, and like a wise magistrate, was satisfied to
make his authority cooperate with law, and his will freely subservient to the
wisdom of ages, in Hanover like an indulgent father, acting only from the
sentiments of a paternal heart, his affection and his equity supplied the want
of law and constitution. He has indeed left to his illustrious successor, an
admirable example; which he not only promises to follow, but in many respects
to exceed; and his subjects take the greater interest in his virtues, as they
look upon them as more peculiarly their own; and they now boast of a prince,
who neither has, nor can have any partiality but the best, and who is in birth
as well as inclination British.

As soon as his present majesty came to the throne, and had met his parliament,

CHAP. VIII.
Russians and Austrians enter Brandenburg. General Hulsen retreats from Saxony
to Berlin. Evacuates it. The city capitulates. Berlin described. King's palaces
plundered. Enemy retires out of Brandenburg after having pillaged it.

THE King of Prussia's letter, with which we closed the 6th chapter, exhibited
a true picture of that monarch's apprehensions; the events which immediately
followed proved that these apprehensions were but too well grounded. The
victory near Lignitz, indeed, gave so^ relief to Silesia; but whilst the enemy
had so many and ^ numerous armies in the field, even shame independent ^ their
interest exacted from them some stroke of co^quence.

The late maneuvers had necessarily drawn the king (...) Prussia into the
southern parts of Silesia, and consequen^ to a great distance from Brandenburg,
with which coun^ his communication was much interrupted, or rather who^ cut
off. The Russian army, which after it had repa^ the Oder at Auras, began to
move out of Silesia, push^ forward a powerful detachment under Count Czerniche^
toward the March of Brandenburg. A body of 15^ Austrians under the Generals
Lacy and Brentano from the army of Count Daun, and the whole united corpse (...)
Austrians and Imperialists which acted in Saxony, beg^ their march in concert
with the Russians, and proposed (...) unite at the gates of Berlin. These
armies amounted (...) forty thousand men.

General Hulsen, who was altogether too weak to o^pose the Imperialists in
Misnia, sell back upon Berli^ General Wernef who had lately been sent into
Pomeran^ returned with incredible speed and joined the troops und^ Hulsen; but
when they viewed their combined strengt^ they found it consisted of no more
than 15 or 16000 me^ a force far too weak to oppose to those powerful armi^
that were marching against them. Wholly unable to protect a place of such
immense extent, and such imperfect fortifications, they saw that to attempt a
defense, would be only to involve the troops in the inevitable fate the waited
the city, without being able to add any thing effectual to its security;
therefore after having defended it against the advanced guard of the Russians
under Tottleben, who attacked the gates and bombarded the town, when they found
the grand armies advancing; they made their retreat; leaving only three weak
battalions in the place, to enable it to make some sort of capitulation with
the enemy.

Berlin is composed of five towns, which have stretched to each other and grown
into one vast city upon the banks of the river Spree. It has been augmented to
this grandeur, by having long been the residence of the electors of Brandenburg
and kings of Prussia, who as they have enlarged their dominions by inheritance,
force, or policy, have all contributed something to the grandeur and
magnificence of this their capital. The situation of the town on so noble and
navigable a river as the Spree, communicating on one side with the Oder, by a
canal (the most princely work of her sovereigns) and on the other falling into
the Elbe, has added not a little to its extent and opulence; but that which has
contributed most of all, has been the reception of the French refugees, to
which this city has always been a most assured and favorable asylum, as it has
also been to those protestants who have been persecuted in any part of Germany;
and the present king by enlarging his plan, and imparting an extent of
toleration unknown to his predecessors, has also introduced Roman Catholics,
whom he has encouraged by suffering them to build a most magnificent church in
the heart of Berlin. By this means he has brought the most opposite factions to
concur in promoting the grandeur of his royal residence. From these causes
Berlin is become one of the most considerable cities in Europe; vast in its
extent; considerable in its commerce, and magnificent beyond most others in its
public and private buildings, and the regular distribution of the streets in
the new town. It had long been the seat of the greatest military arrangements
in the world; and it was made by the present king the seat of arts and
sciences, and the place of resort of ingenious men, in every science, in every
art, and from every quarter.

Such is Berlin, which at this time being deserted by the greatest part of its
garrison, was abandoned to the mercy of a mighty army of Austrians, Russians,
Saxons and Imperialists, animated by revenge; exasperated by injuries; and
instigated by avarice. Nothing could exceed the terror and consternation of the
inhabitants on this occasion. They were acquainted with the savage character of
one part of the enemy, and with the violent animosity of the rest; and they
knew that they did not want pretenses for coloring their severities, with the
appearance of a just retaliation.

In these dispositions of the inhabitants, the enemy appoached. The garrison
immediately proposed to capitulate. With respect to them, the terms were short;
they were made prisoners of war. But with regard to the inhabitants, where the
great danger lay, the conditions were more tolerable than they expected; they
were promised the free exercise of their religion; and an immunity violence to
their goods and persons. It was also agreed the Russian irregulars should not
enter the town; and the king's palace should be inviolable. These on the w^
were favorable terms; and they were granted princip^ on the mediation of the
foreign ministers residing Berlin, who interposed their good offices with great
and humanity. The difficulty was, how to secure the servance of them.

These conditions being made, the army of allied powers entered the town;

But though their behavior was tolerable, with regard^ the private
inhabitants, there was something shocking a^ ungenerous in their treatment of
the king's palaces. (...) apartments of the royal castle of Charlottenburgh w^
entirely plundered, the precious furniture spoiled, the p^tures defaced,
without even sparing the antique sta^ collected by Cardinal Polignac, which had
been purcha^ by the house of Brandenburg. The castle of Schonhou^ belonging to
the queen, and those of Fredericksfeld, (...) longing to the margrave Charles,
were also plundered.

The palace of Potsdam, the famous Sans-souci, ha^ better fate; Prince
Esterhasi commanded there; it was p^served from the smallest violation. The
Prince on view^ the palace only asked which picture of the king resembl^ him
most, and being informed, desired that he might h^ leave to take it, together
with two German flutes which t^ king used, to keep them, he said, in memory of
his majest^ This was a sort of taking very different from pillage.

They staid in the city four days, but hearing that t^ king, apprehensive of
this stroke * was moving to the rel^ of his capital, they quitted it on the
13th of October; and having wasted the whole country round for a vast extent,
and driven away all the cattle and horses they could find, retreated by
different routs out of Brandenburgh, leaving the people still trembling under
the alarm, and hardly yet certain of their safety.

We do by no means undertake to authenticate the ravages which the Prussian
accounts charged upon the Austrians and their allies, in this incursion; nor
whether they may not have been in general much exaggerated, or in some cases
absolutely feigned. We have abundant reason to suspect the exact veracity of
many pieces of that nature which have been published on all sides; and which
are but too frequently a sort of state libels* where the powers at war, not
content to destroy each other in the field, pursue their adversaries
reputation, and endeavor mutually to paint each other as monsters equally
devoid of justice and compassion. Indeed if we were to give credit to all the
writings of this kind that have appeared, it were hard to say which of the
parties have by their conduct brought the greatest disgrace upon human nature.
It is, however, certain, that the country of Brandenburg suffered more severely
on this occasion than the city of Berlin. An ill disciplined army is always
most furious in its retreat, and the country had made no conditions.

CHAP. IX.
Imperialists make themselves masters of Misnia. M. Stainville enters
Halberstadt. Russians besiege Colbert. Laudohn besieges Cosel. King of Prussia
and M. Daun march into Saxony. Battle of Torgau. M. Daun wounded. The towns in
Misnia retaken. Siege of Colberg raised. Swedes driven back.

THE King of Prussia at last saw his capital taken by his most cruel enemies,
and put to ransom; his native country was wasted; they took up their quarters
in his palaces: but this was far from the whole of his misfortunes. When Genesis
Hulsen marched to cover Brandenburg, there remained no Prussian army in Saxony.
So that the Imperial army on their return from Berlin, within a short time, and
with little opposition, made themselves masters of Leipsick, Torgau, Meissen,
and at last of Wittemberg; in w^ city they took the grand magazine of the
P^sians immensely stored.

M. Stainville with a detachment of Broglio's arm^ soon as Wangenheim had been
obliged to repass the W^ (as we have related in the seventh chapter) pushed
into (...) King of Prussia's dominions on that side, and laid the (...) and
duchy of Halberstadt under contribution. In the ^ern Pomerania, the Russians
had invested Colberg, bo^ land and sea, and pressed that city with a close and
unre^ted siege. The king could scarcely hope to relieve it* the western
Pomerania, the Swedes urged forward with common vigor, hoping to partake in
the Plunder of ^in; and they advanced with success. In Silesia, the (...) had
no sooner began his march to the northward, t^ Baron Laudohn profited of his
absence to rush again that country, and to invest, the strong and important for
of Cosel. Whilst the king's dominions were thus atta^ in so many parts, he was
himself attended every step of march by the superior army of Count Daun, who m^
along with him and watched him with the most atte^ vigilance. His condition
seemed extremely to resemble^ to which he had been reduced in the autumn
immedia^ preceding the battle of Rosbach. In Silesia, his condi^ was at that
time worse; but he was then in the posses^ of Saxony, of which in this campaign
he was wholly prived.

Saxony was, however, still his great object, and know that the enemy had
evacuated Brandenburgh on his appro^ he left that country on his right, and
continued his m^ to the Elbe, which he passed on the 25th of October. Daun
passed it the same day. The two champions were engage once more for the so
often contended prize: now every disadvantage was on the side of the King
Prussia, who had no longer any place of strength in country, and all the
magazines he had amassed were in hands of the enemy. But being joined by his
gen^ Hulsen and P. Eugene of Wirtemberg, with the corpse ^der their command, he
advanced up the Elbe, whilst Daun fell back to cover Leipsic and Torgau; but
find the Prussians directed their march toward the Elbe, encamped within reach
of Torgau, one part of his army extending to the Elbe, by which he was covered
on that side, and whilst he was protected on every other quarter by ponds,
hills, and woods, it was impossible to choose a more advantageous situation, in
which above 80,000 men were posted with every precaution that could be taken by
a weak army in the most unlucky position.

The King of Prussia was extremely sensible of the strength, the advantageous
posture, and the precautions of M. Daun; he could have no hope of drawing that
wary commander from his post; and yet he saw a necessity of fighting him even
there. The winter was now far advanced. His troops were extremely harrassed by
such long and rapid marches: and he had no place for their winter quarters but
his own country; already wasted by the enemies incursions: and here
streightened for subsistence, cut off from all power of recruiting, he was to
expect to be attacked, as it were, in a narrow corner by the combined force of
so many powerful and exasperated enemies.

In these circumstances he was resolved to come to a battle. He caused his army
to be informed that he was to lead them to a most desperate attempt, that his
affairs required it, and that he was determined to conquer or die in the
expected engagement. They unanimously answered, that they would die along with
him.

Animated by this declaration he began his march;

M. Daun as soon as he perceived that the King of Prussia was serious in his
resolution of fighting, to prevent confusion, sent all his baggage over the
Elbe, across which he threw three bridges to be ready in case a retreat should
found necessary. At the same time he caused Torgau to evacuated. And then
extending his first line to a villa called Zinne on the left, he stretched it
to another cal^ Groswitz on the right; supporting the right of his seco^ line,
upon the Elbe.

In this disposition he was found, when about two o'clo^ in the afternoon the
king began his attack, and was recei^ed with the fire of two hundred pieces of
cannon, wh^ were disposed along the Austrian front. Three times (...) Prussians
were led on; they persevered in their atta^ with uncommon resolution, but were
every time repul^ and broken with a most terrible slaughter. The king length
ordered a fresh body of his cavalry to advance, wh^ at first compelled the
Austrians to give way; but as f^ reinforcements were continually poured on that
part, (...) cavalry was in its turn obliged to fall back, and the ba^ still
remained at least dubious, or rather inclined against King of Prussia, whose
troops, as they had made astonishi^ efforts, so they suffered beyond all
description. But w^ the Prussians sustained themselves in that quarter with su^
extreme difficulty, General Ziethen, with the right w^ took the enemy in the
rear, repulsed them and posse^ himself of some eminences which commanded the
wh^ Austrian army. Encouraged by this success the Pru^ infantry once more
advanced, mastered several of (...) enemy's intrenchments, and made way for a
new attack their cavalry, which broke in with irresistible impetuo^ upon the
Austrians, and threw several bodies of them i^ irreparable disorder. It was now
about nine o'clock, t^ two armies were involved in a pitched darkness; yet the^
continued without intermission, and the battalions with blind rage discharged
at each other without distinguishin^ friend or foe.

M. Daun did every thing in the disposition and the action that became his high
character. But he was obliged t^ yield to the miraculous fortune of the King of
Prussia. H^ received a dangerous wound on the thigh, and was carri^ from the
field, which probably disheartened the troops, a^ hastened the defeat. The
command then fell on the Cour^ O'Donnel, who finding a great part of his troops
in diso^der, the night advanced, and the enemy possessed of eminences which
commanded his camp, and of which it wa^ vain to think of dispossessing them,
ordered a retreat, which was conducted in this darkness and across the Elbe
with wonderful order; none were lost in passing the bridges, and far the
greater part of their artillery was preserved. The Prussians remained masters
of this well-fought and bloody field. The darkness hindered them from molesting
the enemies retreat or improving their victory, which they bought at the
expense of ten thousand killed and wounded, and about three thousand prisoners.
But even with this loss, the advantage was well purchased: it was a necessary
and a glorious victory. It re-established the reputation of their arms; it
secured their winter quarters; and gave them again the possession of a great
part of Saxony.

Probably of all the King of Prussia's battles, this was the most important;
and it was that in the conduct of which he showed the greatest skill,
intrepidity, and perseverance. His troops behaved with a firmness which would
have done honor to those which he formerly led into Bohemia. In this action
where they were to surmount every obstacle and encounter every difficulty and
danger in order to attack so great and excellent an army as the Austrian, under
such an accomplished commander as M. Daun, their number did not exceed fifty
thousand men.

The loss of the Austrians was very great; the number killed and wounded is not
indeed accurately known. Probably it did not much, if at all exceed the loss on
the side of the victorious army; but the prisoners were far more numerous, two
hundred and sixteen officers of the Austrians were taken, among whom were four
generals, together with eight thousand of the common sort. The king in this
battle, in which he every moment exposed his life to the greatest dangers,
received a slight contusion in his breast by a musket shot.

The Austrians disputed the victory in the Gazettes. But the King of Prussia
reaped all the fruits of it; he recovered all Saxony except Dresden; it had
been the extremity of rashness to have commenced the siege of that place in the
depth of winter, and in the sight of an army strongly posted, and which though
it had been beaten continued after its defeat, more numerous than his own. His
troops had already sustained fatigues almost beyond human strength; and the
most prudent part now left was to permit them to enjoy a little repose; and in
the interval of action to prepare, by employing the means his victory had put
into his ha^^ for the arduous work of the ensuing campaign.

Indeed the face of the Prussian affairs had been pr^^^giously changed since
the day in which their enemies (...) entered Berlin. It was observed that the
taking of that (...) had been before this ominous to the Austrian cause: that
General Haddick's expedition against it in 1757, (...) been followed by the
victories of Rosbach and Lissa, as ^^^irruption was by that of Torgau. There
was some dif^^^ence between the former victories and the latter. But (...)
Prussians drew motives of consolation and hope from (...) coincidences. There
was also something solid in the adv^^tages they had acquired. After the King of
Prussia's (...) had delivered Berlin, General Werner marched into Po^^rania;
and on his approach, together with that of Wi^^^ the Russians raised the siege
of Colberg, (which they (...) kept so long blocked up by sea and land) and then
(...) into Poland, not having been able to effect in Pomerania the operations
of the whole year, more than the devastat^^^ of the open country. Then Werner
having freed (...) Eastern, flew to the relief of the Western Pomerania, wh^^^
the success was as rapid, and more brilliant. He defea^^^ a body of Swedes
which was posted near Passewalk, c^^pelled them to retire with the loss of a
thousand men, (...) killed and prisoners; and pursuing his advantage with (...)
the Swedes were at length compelled to evacuate the P^^^sian Pomerania, and to
fall back upon Stralsund.

All the armies of the Russians at length quitted the ki^^^ territories.
General Laudohn abruptly raised the blockade (...) Cosel; and afterward
abandoning Landshut, he retired i^ the Austrian Silesia, and left all the
Prussian part in q^^^^ M. Daun after the battle of Torgau, seeing the King
(...) Prussia attempt nothing against Dresden, placed one part (...) his army
in that city, and cantoned the rest in those stro^^ posts which lie to the
south and west of it, by which (...) commanded the Elbe and kept open his
communication wi^^ Bohemia. The army of the empire retired into Franconi^ and
placed its head quarters at Bamberg.

The King of Prussia omitted nothing to re-establish (...) affairs; and the
recovery of Saxony gave him great opportunities for that purpose. We may judge
of the importanc^ of that possession by the resources he was able to draw from
it. He demanded of the circle of Leipsick for the contributions of the ensuing
year, two millions of crowns, exclusive of the ordinary revenue, together with
a vast quantity of forage and provision. From all the other parts of Misnia
which he held he exacted in the same proportion. He compelled them also to
supply a vast number of recruits; his demand was twenty thousand; and though it
be certain that they could not supply so many, yet he was enabled by the
recruits furnished by Saxony alone, entirely to fill up the breaches which the
battle of Torgau had made in his battalions. He drew also vast resources from
the duchy of Mecklenburgh, which he taxed at some millions of crowns, an
immense quantity of provision, and a great number of recruits. These he
insisted either on receiving immediately, or that the duke should enter his
troops into the Prussian service. It is said that his majesty then made some
sort of treaty or composition with the duke, whose condition has been from the
beginuing of the war, the worst that can be imagined. For his situation is
such, just behind the Prussian dominions, and out of all possibility of
communication with the grand armies of his allies, that he cannot be benefited
by any advantages which they acquire; on the contrary, he suffers almost
equally, whether the King of Prussia be victorious or defeated; and his
dominions must furnish the means of improving the king's victories, and
repairing his losses. If the King of Prussia has made a treaty with this
Prince, there is no doubt that it is almost wholly in his majesty's favor, and
that he has taken care that he shall not draw much less profit from the Duke of
Mecklenburgh as an ally, than he had derived from him as an enemy.

In short, with regard to extent of possession, the King of Prussia is much in
the same situation in which he was left at the closing the foregoing campaign;
but in all other respects his condition is infinitely preferable. He had then
indeed the same possessions in Saxony; but he closed that campaign with the
loss of two battles, destructive in themselves, and disgraceful in their
circumstances: he closed this by a most beneficial and most glorious victory,
by which the reputation of his arms, greatly tarnished, was restored to its
former brightness, and which in its consequences has given him as fair a
prospect of success as he can have, whilst the alliance against him is not in
the least degree weakened by the falling off of the most inconsiderable member,
or the abatement of the smallest degree Of their animosity.

CHAP. X.
The Allies raise the siege of Gottingen. Winter qu^ and sufferings of the
British troops. Popular debates England concerning the German War.

THE allied army in Westphalia after their failure the lower Rhine, turned
their attention to the ward of the Wefer, and made a vigorous attempt
Gottingen. which from the 22d of November, until 12th of the following month,
they kept blockaded. the French made a brave defense, and having taken a post
of the allies in a sally, they compelled them to raise blockade. They were
before heartily weary of it, ha^ suffered incredible hardships, both in this
and all the services of the campaign, in which they had so often versed that
great tract of country which lies between Maine, the Wefer, and the Rhine: and
though the w^ continued very temperate and open, such unusual had fallen, that
the waters were every where out, and roads so damaged, that their provisions
could scarcely a^ or their communication be preserved.

At length therefore, they submitted to go into quarters, leaving the French in
possession of Hesse, and whole country eastward of the Wefer to the frontier
the electorate: by which they communicated with Austrians and Imperialists, and
prevented the fuccours^ which the King of Prussia, after the battle of Torgau,
intended to reinforce the allied army. The English were cantoned for the
winter, in the bishopric of P^ born; and Lord Granby established his head
quarter^ the city of that name. But these quarters proved a indifferent place
of repose for the British troops, worn with the fatigues of so laborious a
campaign, partly the natural penury of the country; and partly from vast
numbers to be supported, at a time when the sphere their subsistence was
extremely streightened; and even^ narrow sphere exhausted by having been four
years the of war. This scarcity was increased by the difficulty of roads, and
probably in some degree by the avarice of tractors, over whom, several were of
opinion, as watch had not been kept, as is at all times necessary for sort of
people

But whatever were the causes of this scarcity: it was bitterly felt by the
troops, and was accompanied by diseases which thinned them extremely. This
raised a general discontent in the army, which was speedily communicated to
England, where the people during the preceding year, not having been struck
with those brilliant advantages which distinguish an offensive campaign, did
not confine their complaints to the conduct of the war, but began to fall into
an almost general dislike of the very system upon which it was pursued.

Much of the old dispute between the naval and continental schemes was renewed;
and enforced with many additional topics. The alliances of the war in Gerrnany
were severely criticized. We are pursuing, said they, a system, by which we
must certainly lose all the advantages which we acquired for the short time we
followed one that was more national, and suitable to our circumstances; a
system of fall others the most absurd; a system in which defeats are Attended
with their usual fatal effects, and in which even victory itself cannot save us
from ruin. We will not enter, said they, into that long and vainly agitated
question, Whether we ought to take any part in the differences which may arise
between the powers on the continent? This disquisition is foreign to the
present purpose; and it is be^ides of too vague and general a nature to admit
any precise determination; but this undoubtedly may be asserted, that we never
can consistently with common prudence, engage ^n a continental war against
France, without a concurrence in our favor of the other powers on the
continent. This was the continental scheme of the great King William; and ^his
principle the foundation of the grand alliance which he projected, and at the
head of which, in defense of the liberties of Europe, he made the most august
appearance to which human nature can be raised. It was on this principle, that
in conjunction with half Europe, we carried on the war with so much honor and
success against France, under the Duke of Marlborough. But to engage in a
continental war with that power, not only unassisted but opposed by the
greatest part of those states with whom we were then combined, is an attempt
never to be justified by any Comparative calculation of the populousness, the
revenues, or the general strength of the two nations. It is a desperate
struggle, which must finally end in our ruin.

But what is the scene which we have chosen for (...) struggle? We have chosen
Germany; the very spot of^ others which the French, if they had their choice,
w^ have pointed out to us. By making Germany the the^ of war, they see that
country wasted and destroyed, (...) strength of which has always proved the
greatest bul^ against there overbearing ambition. They see the sw^ of the
Germans, from one end to the other of that vast (...) populous country, turned
against each other; and they (...) with joy the English, whose interest it is
to save the^ (...) much as possible, co-oporating with her blood and ^sures, to
complete the disunion, and consequently the ^solation of Germany. In a war in
that country France (...) many advantages: she supports her armies in a great
de^ by pillaging those whom in every respect it is her intere^ weaken. She is
not very remote from her own from from whence she is easily provided, easily
recruited; an^ means of which a great part of the public money is exp^ed in the
country where it is raised. Is she unsucce^ she is brought thereby but the
nearer to her frontiers, ports her troops with still the greater facility, and
exh^ still less the natural wealth of her people. Even sup^ the French army
driven into France; even then these ^vantages on her side are increased; and
very obvious ^cumstances render it impossible for the allied army to (...)
their success on the German frontiers of France to any ^cisive consequence.

But to the English, every thing is unfavourable in (...) a war; their greatest
successes will only carry them (...) greater distance from their resources, and
every step their progress must make the transport of provision, artill^
ammunition, and the infinite impediments of a large a^ more difficult, and in
the end altogether impracticable. (...) is not speculation; the events which
followed the battl^ Crevelt have proved it. Prince Ferdinand, victoriou^ that
action, was obliged, rather from the difficulty of ^sisting, than the
superiority of the enemy, to repass (...) Rhine, and to bring back to Germany
that war with w^ he threatened France. It is thus, that upon this plan, ^tory
itself cannot save us, and that all our successes serve (...) to accumulate new
distresses, new difficulties, new cha^ Whilst France, who has only contracted
her expenses the loss of her navy, encourages us to enter deeper deeper into
the inextricable toils of a German war, in which we waste our strength only to
entangle ourselves further. She holds the strings, and can never be tired out
at this game. From all this arises an expense unknown even in thought to our
forefathers, and which the single revenue of England is by no means able to
bear. The allies, if they deserve the name, supply not the smallest part of it.
The Hanoverians and Hessians contribute to our service only by enabling us to
protract still longer our efforts in a system, in which nothing can so
effectually serve us as being defeated as early as possible.

As to the King of Prussia, what we pay to that monarch, may rather be
considered as tribute than subsidy; since we receive nothing in return: and
that far from being able to afford any relief to our armies, he is scarcely in
a condition to support himself. So that this alliance is worse than the former,
as it is an heavy charge compensated not only with no real, but even with no
apparent or shewy advantage. Indeed, he is an ally the last in the world we
ought to have chosen, on account of his long connection with our worst enemies,
the mean and the hostile sentiments he has always entertained toward us, the
injuries he has done us, and the general lightness of his faith with regard to
his former allies. We regard him, it is true, as the protector of the
Protestant religion; but how lightly he thinks of all religion his writings
testify; and what mischiefs he has done the Protestant cause in particular,
this war will be a lasting memorial. When he entered Saxony, a Protestant
country, he found that religion no ways molested in those places, where it had
been established or tolerated by the treaty of Westphalia. Even in the Popish
dominions the persecution began to lose something of its edge, when he under
the name of its protector, brought upon it as great a calamity as its most
determined enemies could have wished; by dividing the reformed states of the
empire, and setting Protestants to cut the throats of Protestants, whilst all
the Popish powers have been forced into a strict confederacy,

Had we kept ourselves clear of this runious system, and instead of engaging
France on her strong side, attacked and vanquished her colonies, one after
another, we might without exhausting our own strength have gradually wasted
away the principal resources of her trade, and whilst we continued this method,
have as little reason to grow tired of a war (the whole funds of which would be
spent at hom^ France has to grow weary in the present manner of ^ing it on. If
the powers on the continent were left (...) out our interposition to do their
own business they w^ probably better understand and better defend (...) their
rights. At worst let France enter, let them conque^ them possess Hanover; there
is no mischief they can do^ country greater than it suffers by the present war;
an^ not exhausting ourselves by a fruitless defense, should i^ end by the
entire possession of the French colonies, be (...) besides the security of our
own just claims, to restore Hanoverian dominions to their lawful sovereign, and
to procure some indemnification for what they might suffered in our quarrel."

This is pretty nearly the substance of what was (...) against the German
system; and the argument was ^ducted with great management and address, and
interspe^ with a number of topics well calculated to spread discon^ and to
place in an odious light every step taken in tho^ ^liances and in that war.
Many, however, strongly adh^ to that method, and they answered "That the best
^sons on the other side were more specious than solid; that the chief writings
against our German connections^ declamations rather than arguments. That the
compl^ of the expense of this war was in some measure just; if the advantage
was in any degree equivalent, the expe^ was incurred to good purpose. That
France by enga^ so heartily as she has done in the German war, has d^ away so
much of her attention and her revenue from navy, that it enabled us to give
such a blow to her man strength, as possibly she may never be able to recover.
(...) engagement in the German war, has likewise drawn from the defense of her
colonies, by which means we h^ conquered some of the most considerable she
possessed* has withdrawn her from the protection of her trade, (...) which it
is entirely destroyed, whilst that of England (...) never in the profoundest
peace been in so flourishing a c^dition. So that by embarking in this German
war, Fra^ has suffered herself to be undone, so far as regards her p^ticular
and immediate quarrel with England. But has (...) had in Germany such successes
as will counterballance (...) loss? Far from it. At this moment she is
infinitely less ^vanced than she was the year she entered Germany, (...) ^aving
spent such immense sums of money, and lost by the ^word, by disease, and by
desertion, at least 100,000 of her people.

On the other hand, the account stands thus with regard to England; deeply
embarked as she has been in this German war, in her particular quarrel with
France, she has been carried along with an almost uninterrupted tide of
success. She has taken many of the French colonies; she has destroyed their
navy and their trade, and having insulted the enemies coasts, has ruined an
harbor which might one day prove very obnoxious to us. Then how stands the
account in Germany? The French have been there frequently defeated: Hanover has
been recovered and protected: The King of Prussia has been preserved so long at
least from the rage of his enemies, and in general the liberty of Germany has
been hitherto secured. So that if we have incurred a great expense, we have
done by it infinitely more than France has done at an expense much greater than
ours. For the advocates who declaim against the King of Prussia, seem to have
forgot that the charge of the French army must exceed ours, as the number of
their troops to be paid, exceeds the difference between French and English pay.
Those on the English establishment in Germany, have at no time exceeded 25,000,
and the rest of the confederates serve very nearly on the same terms with the
French. Not to mention the subsidies so greatly superior to ours, which that
power pays to states from whom she has not a single regiment to augment her
armies. Thus, although by our victories, France is relieved from the charge of
her navy, and that of the defense of some of her most considerable colonies,
the German war alone has brought her finances to a distress of which the whole
world has been witness. And nothing less could have happened; the expense
however contracted was still enormous; and the resource of every war, trade was
almost wholly destroyed. In England, the expense was also undoubtedly great:
but then, the old trade still remained to supply it, and new channels were
opened. Had we lain by and tamely beheld Germany in part possessed, and the
rest compelled to receive laws from France, the war there would soon have been
brought to an end; and France strengthened by victory, by conquest and
alliance, would have the whole force and whole revenue of her mighty monarchy
free to act against us alone.

They argued further, that common faith obliged us (...) an adherence to our
engagements both with Hanover (...) Prussia; and that the pleaded incapacity to
assist them ^sing from the greatness of the charge could not excuse because the
incapacity was not real; and if the exp^ was inconvenient, we ought to have
looked to that w^ we contracted our engagements. That it was nott^ that we
received no advantage from our alliance with King of Prussia; for if it be once
admitted, that we ^tered with any reason into the German war (which (...)
supposed proved) then the King of Prussia has been (...) materially serviceable
to us; because it was his victor^ Rosbach, and the reinforcement from his
troops, w^ has enabled us to do all that has since been achieved. (...) the
like manner, if the support of the protestant relig^ be any part of our care,
that religion must suffer emin^ly by the ruin of the King of Prussia; for
though the ^tings attributed to his Prussian Majesty be such, as if re^ his,
reflect on account of their impiety great disgrace (...) his character as a
man, yet as a king, in his public and ^litical capacity, he is the natural
protector of the protes^ religion in Germany; and it will always be his
interest defend it.

We shall not presume to determine, which party has (...) right side of this
question; it was once undoubtedly a q^tion very fit to be discussed with great
care; but have chose our party, it is at present little more than a m^ of
political speculation.

CHAP. XII.
Thurot sails from Dunkirk. Puts into Gottenburg Bergen. Puts into the Isle of
Ilay. He takes Carnfergus. Sails from thence. He is killed and his (...)
squadron taken. War in America. General Am^ goes down the river St. Laurence.
General Mu^ marches from Quebec. Montreal surrenders. Che^ war. Affairs of the
East Indies. Lally deseated Coote.

BEfore we resume the account of the war in Amen^ it will be necessary to take
some notice of the atten^ of the celebrated Thurot. It happened much earlier in
(...) year, than the events which we have just related. But to avoid breaking
the thread of the more important events in Germany, we have reserved it for
this place.

The reader will remember, that in the French scheme for invading these
islands, (which was described as it then appeared to us in the 4th chapter of
the annals of 1759,) a small squadron was prepared at Dunkirk, under Monsieur
Thurot, the destination of which most people at that time imagined to have been
for Scotland. But, it has since appeared, that this little squadron was
intended to make a diversion on the north coast of Ireland, whilst the grand
fleet under Monsieur de Conflans, made the principal descent in some of the
southern parts of that kingdom. The manner in which the latter and principal
part of this project failed, has already been related among the transactions of
that year. It remains now to give some account of the part in which Thurot was
concerned.

His squadron, consisting of five frigates, on board of which were 1270 land
soldiers, sailed from the port of Dunkirk on the 5th of October 1759. They had
been blocked up until that time by an English fleet; but under favor of an
hazy night, they put out to sea, and arrived at Gottenburg in Sweden ten days
after. From thence they made to Bergen in Norway. In these voyages, the men
were reduced by sickness, and the vessels themselves had so suffered by storms,
that they were obliged to send one of the most considerable of them back to
France. It was not until the 5th of December, that they were able to sail
directly for their place of destination. But their old ill fortune pursued them
with fresh disappointments. For near three months they beat backward and
forward amongst the western isles of Scotland, having in vain attempted a
convenient landing near Derry. In this tedious interval they suffered every
possible hardship. Their men were thinned and disheartened. Another of their
ships was separated from them, of which they never heard more. The now
remaining three were extremely shattered, and their crews suffered extremely by
famine. This obliged them to put into the isle of Ilay;

Here they heard for the first time of the defeat of Cflan's squadron. This was
a circumstance of great ^couragement. But as Thurot could not be sure that
intelligence was not given to deceive him; he persisted his resolution to sail
for Ireland. Indeed he had sca^ any other choice; for he was so poorly
victualled, tha^ could not hope without some refreshment, to get back France.
And he was further urged on by his love of gl^ no small share of which he was
certain to add to his ^racter, if he could strike a blow of never so little
im^tance on the coast of Ireland: For by this he might (...) some appearance of
having revenged the many ins^ which had been offered to the coast of France.

Full of these ideas, he arrived before the town of ^rickfergus on the 28th of
February; and landed his tro^ now reduced to about 600 men, the day following.
T^ were augmented by draughts from his seamen to near (...) These he formed on
the beach, and moved to the attac^ the town. Carrickfergus is surrounded by an
old wall ^ous in many places. Colonel Jennings commanded al^ four companies in
the town, mostly of new raised men, ^tremely ill provided with ammunition, and
no way pre^red for this attack, which they had not the least re^ to expect.
However, they shut the gates, sent off^ French prisoners to Belfast, and took
all the measures (...) circumstances would admit. The enemy advanced (...)
attacked the gates. There was no cannon; but the g^ were defended with effect
by musket shot, until the ^munition was spent. Then the garrison retired into
(...) castle, which having a breach in the wall near 50 fee^ extent, was no
ways tenable. They therefore surrende^ prisoners of war with terms of safety
for the town.

Thurot as soon as he was master of Carrickfergus, iss^ orders to Belfast to
send him a quantity of wine and p^visions; he made the same demand to the
magistrate^ Carrickfergus, which they having imprudently refused comply with,
the town was plundered. Thurot havi^ victualled, and gained as much reputation
by this action could be expected from a fleet which was no more tha^ sort of
wreck of the grand enterprise, set sail for Fra^ But he had not left the bay of
Carrickfergus many hou^ when near the coast of the isle of Man, he perceived
the sail that bore down upon him. These were three Eng^ frigates which happened
to be in the harbor of Kinsale, when Thurot made his descent; the duke of
Bedford, lord lieutenant, dispatched orders to the commander of the frigates to
go in quest of the French armament. The English frigates were one of 36 guns
commanded by Capt. Elliott; and two of 32.

Such was their diligence and success, that they overtook Thurot's squadron
before they could get out of the Irish sea. They were exactly three frigates to
three. The French ships were much the larger, and their men much more numerous;
but both ships and men were in a bad condition. A sharp and close engagement
began. None of the French could possibly escape, and they must take or be
taken. Thurot did all that could be expected from the intrepidity of his
character; he fought his ship until she had her hold almost filled with water,
and her decks covered with dead bodies. At length he was killed. The crew of
his ship, and by her example those of the other two, dispirited by this blow,
and pressed with uncommon alacrity by the signal bravery of Capt. Elliott, and
those who commanded under him, struck, and were carried into Ramsay Bay in the
Isle of Man. Even this inconsiderable action added to the glory of the English
arms. None had been better conducted, or fought with greater resolution. This
sole insult on our coasts was severely punished; and not a vessel concerned in
it escaped. The public indeed lamented the death of the brave Thurot, who even
whilst he commanded a privateer, fought less for plunder than honor; whose
behavior was on all occasions full of humanity and generosity; and whose
undaunted courage raised him to rank, and merited distinction. His death
secured the glory he always sought: he did not live to be brought a prisoner
into England; or to hear in France those malignant criticisms, which so often
attend unfortunate bravery. This was the fate of the last remaining branch of
that grand armament, which had so long been the hope of France, the alarm of
England, and the object of general attention to all Europe Capt. Elliott's
Account of his Engagement with Mons. Thurot, in a Letter to his Grace the Duke
of Bedford.
Aeolus, in Ramsay Bay, Feb. 29, 176^ My Lord,
I Had the honor to write to you on the 26th inst. off D^ but very incorrectly
and in great haste, as I that minute information from the fishermen, that the
enemy were then at^ ^rickfergus, I made all the dispatch possible to attack
them (...) and got off the entrance of the harbor that evening, but the^ being
contrary and blowing very hard I could not get in.

On the 28th, at four in the morning, we got sight of the ^der sail, and gave
chase; about nine I got up along side (...) Commodore, and, in a few minutes
after, the engagement came general, and continued very briskly for an hour and
a^ when they all three struck their colors.

They proved to be the Marshal Belleisle, of 44 guns and (...) men, M. Thurot,
commander, who is killed: the La Bl^ 32 guns and 400 men, and the Terpsichore,
of 26 guns and (...) men (including the troops in this number). I put in here
to the ships who are all greatly disabled in their masts and rig^ the Marshal
Belleisle in particular, who lost her bowsprit, (...) mast, and main-yard in
the action, and it is with much diff^ we keep her from sinking.

I have acquainted my Lords Commissioners of the Admi^ with the particulars by
express, and I purpose returning to ^port in England as soon as the ships can
possibly be rep^ Subjoined is a list of the killed and wounded.

I am, My Lord, Your Grace's Most humble, and most obedient Servant, JOHN
ELLIOTT


In his Majesty's Ships. Killed. Wounded. Aeolus, 4 15 Pallas, 1 5 Brilliant, 0
11 5 31


.

In America, the French had no great reason to bo^ their success. The action of
Sillery only gained the^ an immense effusion of their blood, a victory which
^ttended with no advantageous consequences. Vaudreuil, ^he governor of Canada,
after Levy had been compelled ^o raise the siege of Quebec, fixed his
headquarters at Montreal, to make if possible a last stand in that place; ^or
which purpose he carried in all his posts; and here he ^ollected the whole
regular force that remained in Canada. At the same time he sought to keep up
the spirits of the people by various rumors and devices, which he practiced on
their credulity. But Monsieur Vaudreuil's greatest hope, ^as not in his
artifices, nor his force, but in the situation ^f Canada, which is much harder
to be entered, than when the enemy has entered it, to be conquered. On the ^ide
where the most considerable part of the British force was to act, it is covered
with vast impenetrable woods, ^orasses, and mountains; the only tolerable
entrance for an ^rmy, is by the river St. Laurence; and the navigation of ^his
river is rendered extremely difficult and hazardous by the number of shallows,
rifts and falls, that lie between the discharge of Ontario and the isle of
Montreal. Vaudreuil was in expectation, that the preparations necessary for
conducting an army through such a long and difficult way, would necessarily
consume so much of the summer, as not to leave sufficient time for the
operations absolutely necessary to reduce the remainder of Canada. He did not
apprehend much danger from the garrison of Quebec, which had been weakened by
its defeat in the spring. These considerations gave him some confidence that he
might protract the war somewhat longer, and another year might possibly give
fortune an opportunity to take some turn in his favor.

But Mr. Amherst, whose calm and steady resolution no difficulties could
overcome, was taking the most effectual measures to defeat his expectations.
His plan was disposed in this manner. Brig. Genesis Murray had orders to advance
toward Montreal, on his side, with all the troops which could be spared from
the garrison of Quebec. Colonel Haviland sailed from Crown Point, and took
possession of the Isle au Noix, which had been abandoned by the enemy on the
28th of August, and from thence had orders to proceed directly to the city of
Montreal. His own army, consisting of about 10,000 men, he proposed to
transport by the way of Lake Ontario into the river St. Laurence. Thus he
proposed entirely to surround the last place of importance which the enemy
possessed, and by the mo^ the three armies, in three such different routs, to
re^ impossible for them to form an effectual opposition to (...) his corpse.

Having laid this general plan, he left Sherdy on the frontiers of New York,

It was a matter of the greatest difficulty to transp^ numerous an army, the
whole of its artillery, its am^tion, and all its provisions, over the expanse
of the lake in open boats and galleys; it required the greate^ ^tion and the
exactest order, lest they should fall foul one another, lest they should be
driven out too far to the land on the first threatening of a storm, or lest they
(...) come too near the shore. But all the dispositions made in the most
admirable method, and with that ^rity of military arrangement, which makes so
conside^ a part of the character of that able commander. (...) the whole army
embarked on the 10th of August. ^tachment had been sent some days before to
clear the ^sage of the river St. Laurence of any obstruction, and (...) the
best passage for the vessels.

On the 27th he had entered that river, taken pos^ of Swegatchie, and made all
dispositions for the att^ L'Isle Royale, a fort lower down in the river which
^manded it, and by this command is the most important (...) and as it were the
key of Canada. The troops and were so disposed, that the isle was completely
invested the garrison was left no means of escape. The ba^ were then raised and
opened, and after two sharp firing,

This being a post of importance both to command (...) Ontario and to cover our
frontier, the general spent days here in order to repair the fort, and at the
same (...) to fit out his vessels, and to prepare all things for passin^ troops
down the river, the most dangerous part of (...) he was now to encounter, as
all the rapids lie betwee^ (...) of the Town and Fortifications of Montreal in
Canada.
place and Montreal; but notwithstanding all precautions, near 90 men were
drowned in passing these dangerous falls, and a great number of vessels broke
to pieces. This loss from so large an embarkation, in such circumstances, is to
be regarded as very inconsiderable. At length, after a tedious fatiguing and
dangerous voyage of two months and seventeen days since they left Senectady,
the English saw to their great joy,

They were immediately landed in the best order; and all dispositions were made
for attacking the place. So excellently was this plan concerted, and so
faithfully executed, that Genesis Murray landed from Quebec that very day; and
Col. Haviland with his army from Isle au Noix the day following.

Montreal An Explanation of the Referrences to the Perspective Views of
Montreal.
1. The river St. Laurence. 2. St. Peter's river. 3. A bridge over St. Peter's
river. 4. M. de la Calliere's house. 5. The general hospital. 6. A dry ditch
encompassing the town, except that part toward the river; it is about eight
feet deep. 7. The glacis. 8. The small gate. 9. Market-gate. 10. St.
Mary's-gate. 11. Watergate. 12. The sally-port. 13. The Recollets convent. 14.
The parish church. 15. The nunnery-hospital. 16. The Jesuits church and
seminary. 17. The palace of M. Vaudreuil, Governor-general of Canada. 18. M. de
Longuevil's house. 19. The citadel. 20. The wharf.


is the second place in Canada for extent, building, traffic, and strength.
Its middle situation between the lakes and Quebec, has made it the staple of
the Indian trade; but the fortifications before this war were mean and
inconsiderable; something has been since added; but nothing made the taking of
it an enterprise of difficulty except that here was collected the whole
regular, and no small part of the provincial force which remained in Canada.
However, by the dispositions which at once brought against them three armies,
the greatest part of the flower of British troops in America, Mons. Vaudreuil
saw him entirely enclosed; he despaired of defending the place; therefore
surrendered the garrison of Montreal as They were not in strictness prisoners;
but sent to Fra^ upon condition not to serve during the war.
pr^ners of war, and the inhabitants of his government as ^jects to the King of
Great Britain on the 8th of Septem^ 1760.

And thus, in the sixth year of the war, and after the (...) severe struggles,
was the vast country of Canada red^ to the King's obedience. In this time six
battles had (...) fought, the fortune of which was equally divided; in t^ the
French had been victorious; in three the Eng^ The first of those in which the
French had the better, fought in the meadows near Fort du Quesne, where (...)
Braddock was killed; the other at Ticonderoga, w^ Genesis Abercrombie commanded;
the third at Sillery, w^ Genesis Murray was repulsed. The victories of the En^
were, 1st. that near Crown Point, where Genesis Joh^ commanded, and Dieskau was
made prisoner; the 2d Niagara, where Genesis Johnson also commanded; and the and
principal near Quebec, where Wolf gained the vi^ry and lost his life. From the
English two forts had (...) taken, Oswego and Fort William-Henry. The Englis^
their side took three cities; Louisbourgh, Quebec, Montreal; and five principal
forts, which commanded many important communications. Beausejour, Niag^
Frontenac, Ticonderoga, Crown Point, and Isle-Roy besides some others of
inferior consideration.

Taking the whole war in America into one view, Ca^ had been defended with
bravery and conduct sufficient crown the Generals Wolf and Amherst, and the
Adm^ Boscawen and Saunders, who finally reduced it, with greatest glory. And
without question, the conduct Genesis Amherst in his last expedition, by which he
oblig^ Montreal to surrender without a blow, and finally c^quered Canada
without effusion of blood, deserves ev^ honor and every recompense a grateful
people can besto^ The humanity with which he behaved to the conque^ both French
and Indians, though the one had perpetrate^ and the other at least connived at
the most horrid cruelties on the English prisoners, adds a high luster to his
conquest. His troops set not one house on fire, not one habitation was
plundered, not one man was killed (except in the attack of Isle-Royal). None
was more distinguished in this respect than Sir William Johnson; he led into
Canada an army of 1000 of the fiercest and most cruel savages which are bred in
America, without doing the least damage to the country, or offering the
slightest injury to the Persons of the inhabitants. To effect this he was
obliged to exert the most unwearied endeavors, and the whole of those uncommon
talents which give him such power over the minds of all sorts of men. The great
victories by which he has advanced the interest of the nation, have done him
less honor than his conduct, by which he has so greatly advanced its character
for humanity and moderation. It were to be wished that the same might be said
of the army, which marched from Quebec; who finding that the inhabitants in
some parts were out in arms, were under a necessity of setting fire to the
villages; the tenderness of Genesis Murray's nature revolted when the giving such
orders became a necessary part of his duty. In the course of this summer,

Before we take our leave of the American affairs of this year, we ought to
make some mention of a war with the savage Indians, which broke out on the back
settlements of our southern colonies. The Cherokees, one of the most numerous
and powerful nations of these barbarians, had in the beginning, and during the
greatest part of the progress of the war, appeared to be heartily engaged in
our interests; at their desire a fort had been built in their country called
Fort London, from the then commander in chief of the British forces in America.
Some parties of them had ^peared in our favor on the last expedition against
For Quesne. But it is thought that on that occasion they ^^ceived some insults,
and had been treated in general w^ neglect which made the deepest impression on
the min^ so vindictive a people. These discontents were fome^ by the French,
who hoped to cause a diversion of a p^ our forces in this quarter. At length
they commenced ^tilities in their usual manner, by cruel ravages and m^ on the
frontier of their neighboring provinces. And (...) was very great reason to
apprehend that the same ar^ of the enemy, and the same opinion of ill usage, ^
draw the neighboring and powerful nation of the C^ into the like measures.

Mr. Lyttleton, who was then governor of Car^ having in vain endeavored to
pacify them, (...) the resolution of marching with all the force ^^gular and
provincial,

The governor had all imaginable reason to be sati^ with the effect his
expedition had produced; and ha^ as every body believed effectually chastised
the former ^lence of the enemy, and secured the future traquillity the southern
provinces, he returned to Charlestown. (...) these perfidious barbarians,
equal regardless of their (...) and of the safety of their countrymen, whose
lives (...) pledged for their fidelity, broke cut as soon as the (...) was
removed, into their former ravages; blocked up (...) London, which stands in
the middle of their country, made some attempts on Fort Edward, which lies
nearer to the settlements. Their total want of skill in carrying on sieges
prevented them from any hope of mastering these places, otherwise than by
treachery or famine. They failed in the first instance; and the last required
time.

The imminent danger of two English garrisons, and that whole tract of her
colonies, being made known to General Amherst, he detached Colonel Montgomery
to their assistance, with a regiment of Highlanders, a battalion of the Royal
Americans, a body of grenadiers, and the provincial troops. He marched into the
enemies country. He made war upon the Indians after their own manner. No other
would have been effectual. He burned Estatoe the capital of the Lower
Cherokees, consisting of 200 houses, an Indian town of the very first
magnitude; and then proceeded to the same execution on all the towns and
villages of that district of the Cherokees, which were numerous, populous, and
wealthy. The inhabitants generally fled on the approach of our troops; some
however were burned in their houses, and some women and children were made
prisoners.

This universal destruction of the lower settlements being completed, Col.
Montgomery passed on to the middle Cherokees:

Though Col. Montgomery was victorious on this occasion; yet it was necessary
to retreat on account of his wounded, for whom he had no place of safety. For
if he should attempt to proceed, he had to apprehend frequent skirmishes as he
had advanced, and the number of wounded together with the difficulty of his
march, would be hourly ^^creased. This retreat was certainly necessary. But wh^
Col. Montgomery had arrived at Fort St. George, he ^covered part of his orders,
which threw the whole cou^ into consternation; which was, that when he had cha^
the enemy, he was to return to New York with the tr^ under his command, and
rejoin the grand army. The orders without delay he obeyed; not however with
(...) rigor, but that the earnest entreaties of the province ^vailed on him to
leave about four hundred men for the protection.

Carolina and the neighboring colonies were again exp^ to the fury of a savage
enemy, not so much weakened exasperated by their late sufferings; the fate of
the garri^ of Fort Loudon was but too certain. For several mo^ they had
suffered a close blockade; at length seeing hope of relief their provisions
being totally ^sumed and the enemy showing some pacific (...) positions,

But the enemy, equally regardless of faith and hum^ty, fell upon them in their
march, butchered all the ^cers but one, killed several of the private soldiers
and ^ried thee rest into an horrible captivity. These outrage^ the southern
colonies threw some damp on the joy wh^ was felt over the English America, on
the entire conq^ of Canada.

In Europe the fortune of the campaign was nearly b^lanced. In America, except
this inconsiderable savage w^ it was entirely triumphant. In the East Indies
also (...) gained glory and new advantages. After the raising (...) siege of
Fort St. George, in February 1759. (...) English army took the field under
Major Bre^ton, which also the French were entirely driven by the heroic actions
of Col. Clive.

Encouraged by these successes, a body of about 1200 men, Europeans and
Seapoys, under the command of Major Brereton, advanced further, and attempted
to dislodge an army of French and their confederate Indians, encamped under the
cannon of a fort of that country construction. The acquisition of that place
had been a valuable advantage. Sept. ^
But here our army was obliged to retire, with a loss of between 3 and 400
killed and wounded.

Genesis Lally animated with this and some slighter advantages, threatened the
siege of Trichenopoly, and the French affairs seemed again to revive. But it
was only a momentary gleam. To check his progress, Col. Coote at the head of
the greatest body he could draw together on that coast, invested Wandewash,
took the place in three days, and made the garrison prisoners of war.

This progress alarmed Genesis Lally; he called large detachments in from every
side; and knowing the importance of Wandewash, made all his efforts to recover
it. He pushed forward the siege with the utmost vigor; hoping to take the town
before Col. Coote could arrive to its relief. But the Colonel marched with
equal diligence and arrived about the time when the French had made a
practicable breach.

Of the English in this action near 200 were killed and wounded; in particular
the death of the gallant Major Brereton was much regretted. Of the blacks about
70 wounded and slain.

Except the battle of Paissy, followed by the revol^ in Bengal, this action was
the most considerable in its ^sequences, of any in which our troops had ever
been e^ged in India. This was fought in part against Euro^ troops headed by an
able General. The dispositions ^o battle, and the conduct of Col. Coote in the
engage^ merit every honor.

This victory was pursued with a spirit equal to the which it was won.
Chittiput was taken in a few days (...) and the army allowing itself no repose,
marched di^ from thence to Arcot, the capital of this immense pro^ The siege
was opened on the 5th of February, and t^ surrendered on the 10th; near 300
Europeans were (...) prisoners of war Colonel Air Coote's Letter to Mr.
Secretary Pit, dated, Village, 13th of February, 1760.
SIR,
I Have the honor to acquaint you of the situation of our (...) on the coast
of Coromandel since my arrival, and of our (...) successes. Soon after I
arrived, the governor and council ^dras being informed, that Genesis Lally had
sent a detach^ his army to the southward, and that that party had taken ^ham,
and threatened Trichenopoly with a siege, it was thoug^ ^viseable, that I should
take the field with the army, and by means endeavor to draw the enemy from the
southward. ^cordingly on the 25th of November, 1759, I took the field on the
27th, invested Wondiwash, and erected batteries having made a breach by the
30th, took the place and man garrison (which consisted of five subaltern
officers, 63 pri^men, and 800 seapoys,) prisoners of war. There were (...)
garrison 49 pieces of cannon, and a great quantity of ammu^ December the 3d, I
invested Carangoly. On the 6th, I open two gun battery, and on the 7th another,
and began to ca^ the approaches. On the 10th, being near the crest of the (...)
and having dismounted all their guns but four, Col. O'^ who commanded, sent out
a flag of truce, and, on the ac^ of his gallant defense, I granted him the
following terms: (...) the Europeans should have leave to march out with their
two rounds per man, drums beating, and six days provi^ The Seapoys to be
disarmed, and turned about their bu^ The garrison consisted of 100 Europeans,
(officers included) 500 Seapoys, and nine guns. Having intelligence that Brig.
Genesis Bussy was arrived at Arcot from the northward, with 300 Europeans, and a
large black army, and that the army, which lay at Chittiput, was to join him,
and that the force from the southward were on their march toward Arcot, I
therefore thought it advisable to cross the Palla, and encamp the army
opposite the Arcot, having the Palla between us. Three thousand Moratta horse
about this time joined the enemy, which put me to the greatest distress for
want of provisions, as they plundered all the country. On the 27th, Lieut. Genesis
Lally arrived at Arcot, and took the command. January the 9th, the enemy were
all in motion. On the 10th, Genesis Lally marched with all his army toward
Wondiwash, and I moved with our army along the bank of the river, in order to
observe their motions, and cover our own country. On the 12th, I received a
letter from the commanding officer at Conjeveram, that 500 of the enemy's
Europeans, and a large body of horse, had entered the town; and that the rest
of their army lay at Jangolam, three miles distance from it: I therefore put
the army in motion, and endeavored, by a forced march, to save that place,
which was very weak (but of consequence to us) and happily arrived there the
13th before daylight. The enemy quitted the place, their army moved toward
Wondiwash. The 15th I crossed the Palla with all the army, and on the 17th
arrived at Outremalour, about fourteen miles from Wondiwash, which place I
found M. Lally had invested, and began to raise batteries. The 21st, I went
with all the cavalry to reconnoitre, having received a letter from the
commanding officer of the garrison, that a breach was made; I therefore
determined to engage the enemy the next morning. Accordingly, I sent orders
back to the army to join me at Irimborough, nine miles from Wondiwash, where I
had taken post with the cavalry. On the 22d, the army marched, at six o'clock
in the morning, agreeable to the orders I had given out the day before for that
purpose. About 7 o'clock, our advanced guard of horse, and that of the enemy,
began to fire at each other; upon which I ordered Captain Baron de Vasserot,
who commanded the cavalry, to form them in order of battle; he was supported by
five companies of Seapoys; and, at the same time I ordered up two pieces of
cannon, and advancing (...) with two companies of Seapoys, obliged the enemy to
reti^ their main body of horse, which consisted of 200 European, 3000 Morat^as,
on their left. Upon the whole of our ca^ advancing, that of the enemy retired
in pretty good orde^ our cannon began to play, which was extremely well served
obliged them to retire precipitately. I then ordered the^ of brigade to the
army, which was about three quarters of (...) in the rear, with orders for them
to form the line of battle, not to advance till I had joined them. Soon after,
having t^ possession of a tank, which the enemy's cavalry had occupi^ returned
to the line, which by that time was formed accordi^ my orders. After reviewing
the whole, and finding the (...) great spirit, and eager to engage, I ordered
the army to (...) forward.

About nine o'clock we arrived at the post we had drive^ enemy from, which was
about two miles from their camp* halted in their view, near half an hour;
during which t^ went very near to them, and reconnoitred their situation. (...)
finding they were strongly posted, and our flanks exposed to enemy's cavalry,
which was vastly superior to ours, I ord^ the army to march by the right, in
order to gain the advantag^ a hill three miles from us, and about two miles
from Wondi^ fort; and the horse, which was then in the front, to wheel to right
and left, and form behind the second line, in order to (...) the rear guard,
and cover the baggage. By this motion, ^vered my right flank with the hill, and
had some villages i^ rear, where I then ordered the baggage to. This oblige^
enemy to alter their disposition. During all this time we can^ded each other,
and skirmished with their advanced posts, (...) Mor^tta horse: The latter
disappeared about 11 o'clock* (...) enemy, after making their second
disposition, moved toward about the distance of three quarters of a mile, under
cover^ bank The cannonading then began to be smart on both (...) and upon
seeing the enemy coming briskly up, I ordered the^ to march forward. At 12
o'clock the enemy's European ca^ pushed with a great deal of resolution, in
order to force our (...) and come round upon our rear. Immediately I ordered up
(...) companies of Seapoys, and two pieces of cannon, which were sustain our
cavalry, who had been ordered to oppose them. (...) on the cannon and Seapoys
flanking them, they broke. The cavalry then had orders to charge, who drove
them a mile from our left, upon the rear of their own army. We continued all
this while advancing toward each other, the enemy's flank being very well
covered by a tank. It was one o'clock when we arrived within reach of
musquetry, when a shot from us striking one of their tumbrils, it blew up. I
then immediately ordered Major Brere^on to wheel Col. Draper's regiment to the
left, and charge their left flank, which was executed with great order, and
much honor to that corpse. Seeing that regiment likely to suffer from a body of
black troops, together with their marines, who were under cover, and fired very
briskly upon them; and at the same time, finding they had reinforced their left
with a piquet from Lally's regiment, I ordered the grenadier company of
Draper's which was on the right of the second line, to support their own
regiment; and having likewise two pieces of cannon playing upon the enemy's
flank, completed the rout of that wing, who abandoned their cannon, and fell
upon their own center, which was by this time, together with their right,
closely engaged with our left. I then ordered up Major Monson, with the rest of
the second line, and placed him so as to be able to support any part of our
line, at the same time flanking the enemy. About two o'clock their whole army
gave way, and ran toward their own camp; but finding we pursued them, quitted
it, and left us entire masters of the field, together with all their cannon,
except three small pieces, which they carried off. The number of cannon taken
is as follows. One 32, one 24, three 20, two 18, one 14, two 3, and two
2-pounders, iron. Three 6, four 4, one 3, and two 2-pounders, brass. In all 22
pieces. Round shot 3204. Grape 110, besides tumbrils, and all other implements
belonging to the train. The prisoners we have taken are Brig. Genesis Bussy, le
chevalier Godeville, quartermaster general. Of Lally's regiment, Lieut. Col.
Murphy, two Captains, two Lieutenants,. Of the Lorrain regiment, one Captain,
one Lieutenant. Of the Indian battalions two Lieutenants, two Ensigns. Of the
Marines, le chevalier le Poet, knight of Malta, who is since dead of his
wounds. All the above gentlemen were wounded, but M. Bussy, and an ensign of
the Indian battalion. The French reckon they had 800 killed and wounded, 200 of
which we buried in the field. We have taken above 200 wounded prisoners,
besides 40 not wounded. Our loss is as follows: Of col. Draper's regi^ ensign
Collins killed, and 17 private men. Wounded, (...) Brereton, and lieut. Brown
(since dead of their wounds) t^ Knutial, ensign Halfpenny, Thompson and Horier
and 66 ^vate. Of my regiment, killed ensign Stuart, and 13 pri^ Wounded;
lieuts. Frasier and Tyd, ensign Heron, and 36 pri^ The honorable company's
troops, killed, ensign Evans, and private. Wounded, cornet Kuhn, and 29
private. Among black troops, about 70 killed and wounded. The enemy's a^
commanded by Lieut. Genesis Lally, consisted of 2200 Europ^ including artillery
and cavalry; 300 cofferies, and between (...) 10,000 black troops. Twenty
pieces of cannon in the field, five in their batteries against the fort, where
they blew up a^ magazine of powder upon their retreat. Our army amount^ 1700
Europeans, including artillery and cavalry; 3500 (...) troops; 14 pieces of
cannon, and one howitz. The enemy ^lected themselves under the walls of
Chittiput, about 18 (...) from the field of battle, and the next day marched
into (...) Our cavalry being greatly fatigued, put it out of my power pursue
the enemy as far as I could have wished. During (...) whole engagement, and
ever since I have had the honor of ^^manding the army, the officers and men
have shown the gre^ spirit; nor can I say too much for the behavior of the
^tillery.

The next day I sent out a detachment of cavalry, to be^ the enemy. January 26.
Finding that Genesis Lally had re^ with his broken troops to Pondicherry, I sent
capt. de Vos^ with 1000 horse, and 300 Seapoys, toward Pondicherry, to ^stroy
the French country, and marched the army to besiege C^put; and on the 28th at
night, erected a two gun battery, (...) got in one 24 and one 20 pounder, and
played upon them fr^ 8-inch howitz. The next day, after making a breach, Le
^valier de Tilly, with his garrison surrendered prisoners of (...) The garrison
consisted of four officers 54 private, and 300 ^poys, with 73 Europeans wounded
in the hospital. I found in^ fort 9 guns, and a good quantity of ammunition.
Having int^gence of a party of the enemy going from Arcot to Gingey, (...)
capt. Smith with a detachment to intercept them. On the (...) marched the army
toward Arcot, the capital of the province* ^der to besiege it. This day capt.
Smith joined me, having taken the party I had sent him after, which consisted
of 10 Europeans 50 Seapoys, and two brass 8 pounders; and soon after he took a
captain of the Lorrain regiment, and three French commissaries.

On the 1st of February, I set out from the army for Arcot, leaving orders with
major Monson to throw a few shells into Timmery, and to summon the garrison.
February 2. The army marched and encamped within two miles of Arcot. Major
Monson reported to me this day, that the garrison of Timmery had surrendered
prisoners of war. There were in it, six guns, one sergeant, 20 Europeans, and
60 Seapoys. February 5. I opened the batteries against the fort of Arcot, viz.
One of five 18-pounders, and another of two 18 and one 24-pounders. On the 6th,
began to carry on approaches to the south west and west towers of the fort; and
having by the 10th, got within 60 yards of the crest* of the glacis, the
garrison surrendered prisoners of war. It consisted of three captains, eight
subalterns, 236 private, and between 2 and 300 Seapoys. There were in it, four
mortars, 22 pieces of cannon, and a great quantity of all kinds of military
stores. We had during the siege, seven non-commissioned and private, killed;
and ensign Mac Mahon, who acted as engineer, and 16 wounded.



.

At sea Admiral Pocock seconded the extraordinary efforts of Col. Coote with
his own usual skill and intrepidity. French marine; but though superior in the
number of ships, and more than in that proportion superior in guns men, he was
obliged after upwards of two hours severe bloody conflict to give way before
Admiral Pocock, and to take shelter under the forts of Pondicherry. During this
engagement eight of the English ships stood the fire of the whole French fleet,
which consisted of 16 sail; The (...) were greatly shattered; 560 of our
squadron were ki^ and wounded; and on the side of the French the loss (...) not
less than 1000. Admiral Pocock immediately got himself again in a fighting
condition, and braved the French fleet before pondicherry, who lay under their
cannon, and refused a new engagement.

It has been observed that history can hardly produce an instance of two
squadrons fighting three pitched battles, under the same commanders, in 18
months, without the loss of a ship on either side. After this engagement
Admiral Cornish arrived on the coast of Coromandel and joined Pocock, by which
we attained so decided a superiority in strength, as we had before in courage
and ability, that the French no longer appeared in those seas. Most of their
ships went off, as it was thought, to Mauritius. Then the French affairs went
rapidly to ruin. On the 5th of April the important fortress of Caracal
surrendered to the sea and land forces under Admiral Cornish and Major Monkton.
By the taking of this and two other places of lesser consideration, the French
were actually reduced to the single port of Pondicherry; which was when these
accounts (...) away, closely blocked up by land and sea. The stron^ hopes are
conceived that this capital of the French (...) power and commerce will shortly
be brought into our ^session; and with these pleasing hopes we conclude the
^tory of the war of 1760.

THE ANNUAL REGISTER: OR HISTORY OF THE WAR. For the YEAR 1761.
CHAP. I.
Preliminary remarks. Treaty proposed and entered into by the belligerent
powers. Mr. Stanley sent to Paris, and Mr. Bussy to London. French machinations
in Spain. Difficulties in the negotiation. Design of the campaign in Hesse, and
of the expedition to Belleisle.

AFTER a general war of five years, carried on with the greatest effusion of
blood, and the most extraordinary expense ever known to attend a war of that
continuance, it was hoped that, if the animosity of the belligerent powers was
not abated, at least a great part of the fuel of discord had been consumed; and
that the time was arrived for giving peace to Europe. Some propositions for
that purpose had been made in the close of the year 1759. Those who rather
wished for peace, than very attentively considered the probability of effecting
it, se^ed to think it might then have been expected. But w^ the public was
flattered with these hopes, the situatio^ affairs would not suffer us to
believe that they had any (...) foundation. We accordingly ventured to point
out the ^ficulties which then obstructed any scheme for pea^ And as these
difficulties were such, as did not attend (...) particular conjuncture only,
but must subsist as long as fortune of war continued in the same train, we were
(...) the beginning apprehensive that the new negotiation (...) we have since
seen opened, and for some time carrie^ with such pleasing appearances, might in
the issue be ^tended with no better success.

There are indeed but two situations in which peace^ be very rationally
expected. The first situation is the equality; and this is, either where
nothing is gained o^side; so that when ever mutual weariness, and unp^ble
hostilities have calmed the ardor of the warring po^ no intricate points
intervene to frustrate the first p^ disposition; or it may be where the losses
are so equal, (...) exchanges may easily be made, or the parties may rest
^tually satisfied with their advantage over each other.

The second situation is that of necessity; where o^ the parties is so entirely
broken and reduced, as to se^ to receive conditions on the footing of conquest,
a^ purchase repose by humiliating and enfeebling conce^ A peace upon this
latter basis is always the grand po^ object. In every war we flatter ourselves
with the ho^ it, against an experience almost uniform. In fact, it (...) the
last degree difficult to reduce any of the great power Europe to this
disgraceful necessity. For to reduce any^ of them to this state of submission,
you must, in a man reduce all of them to it. The war if it continues, d^ state
after state into its vortex until all Europe is invol^ A sort of balance is
then produced, and the peace of c^quest becomes impracticable.

It would prove of the utmost moment to the tranq^ of mankind that this point
was sufficiently regarded, that they would willingly adopt that system of
equality which sooner or later, with more or fewer struggles, are so often
compelled to submit. When, seldom, a (...) See History of the War 1760, Chap.
I. p. 249.
is concluded on other terms, as the King of Prussia has found by severe
experience, and as we observed on a former occasion, is only a short cessation,
and not a perfect peace. But it must be acknowledged that this situation, the
most coincident with their true interest, is at the same time the most
contradictory to the passions and prejudices of nations. It appears hard to
loose upon every side every object of the war. A peace on this foundation will
be censured, but it is the best, on the same principle that the shortest
follies are the best; and that no injured pride is left to brood over a future
war. Contrary to the opinion of the warm patriots on all sides, we therefore
imagined that the year seventeen hundred and fifty-eight, in the close of the
third campaign, was the happy moment for negotiation. At this time, however, no
propositions had been made. The propositions of seventeen hundred and
fifty-nine were but slightly regarded, and obviously could end in nothing. But
in the beginning of the year, of which we are now going to treat, the scene of
negotiation was opened with far greater solemnity and parade; and as it was
carried on with great diligence, it necessarily makes a principal part of the
history of this year. It is indeed somewhat fortunate both for the writers and
the readers of these events that this treaty has intervened. The narative
otherwise had proved extremely barren and unentertaining. For though the
animosity of the belligerent powers was not, as we observed, abated, their
efforts, however, had considerably slackened, and their operations began
gradually to degenerate into the Petiteguerre. Those vast events that astonish
the mind, or hold it in a pleasing suspense; those important battles and
sieges; those rapid and well conducted marches, and those lively enterprises
which distinguish the former years, except in a very few instances, scarce make
any part of the history before us. But though the operations of the field had
fallen into a state of langour, the cabinet became full of business, and
negotiation flourished. In this situation candor obliges us to acquaint our
readers that we are still more liable to mistakes, than when we attempt to
describe the transactions of the campaign. It very frequently happens, that the
accounts of the military operations come authenticated from the hands of those
great generals who have conducted them, and when we have allowed for the
partiality of the account, there is nothing to be detracted from them for want
of sufficient information. Even in the case of partiality, we are often able to
correc^ the misrepresentation or over-charge of one of the parties by that of
the other. These things are done in the eye of the world. But the motives
either to peace or war, and the steps taken in a negotiation, are all behind
the curtain. They do not appear for a long time, and, sometimes they never
appear completely. There is however, an advantage in the present conjuncture.
For one of the powers at war, in order to justify to its subjects and to the
world, its part in the continuance of a war so fatal to both, has published an
account of the late negotiation; artful indeed, and probably in some respects
unfair; but containing at the same time many valuable and illustrating pieces,
the authenticity of which is not disputed. The point in such cases to be
dreaded is not the publication of false pieces but the concealment of several
that are real and important. The public information is probably rather
incomplete, than untrue. We wait with impatience for that full and authentic
narrative of so important a negotiation, which undoubtedly our court proposes
to publish. We have delayed the setting out our work the longer, in hopes of
its appearance, by which we might have been able to perfect and correct our
account of this transaction. The account of the Spanish negotiation has
appeared late, but we have not failed to make use of it. At present we engage
in our work, under those difficulties, which it is just the reader should know
and allow for. In the succeeding year we shall take care to profit of whatever
further lights may be imparted.

Very early in this year 1761, the courts of Petersburgh, Vienna, France,
Sweden and Poland, agreed severally and jointly to offer proposals toward
renewing that negotiation for peace, which had abruptly been broken off in the
close of the year 1759. France was the principal and first mover; for as it was
her ambition which had made the war so general, and her revenue which in a
great measure supported it; the former being now humbled by a series of
unfortunate events, and the latter reduced by most enormous expenses, she began
at length to relent, and apparently to desire peace in earnest. The other
members of the grand alliance could not decently, nor safely oppose these
dispositions of France. The court of Sweden in particular was given to
understand, that the exhausted condition of France was the true motive of her
moderation; that in fact, she was not able any longer to furnish the stipulated
subsidies, nor to adhere to the letter of her engagements with her allies.
These circumstances, which she was neither able, nor seemed disposed to
conceal, formed the surest guaranty of her sincerity.

The five parties to the war on that side, made as many declarations, which
were signed at Paris on the 25th of March, and delivered at London on the 31st
of the same month. The counter declaration of Great Britain and Prussia
appeared on the 3d of April. Augsburg, as the situation most commodious for the
powers at war, was appointed for the congress.

Lord Egremont, Lord Stormont ambassador in Poland, and general York our
ambassador in Holland, were nominated as the English plenipotentiaries. On the
part of France, the count de Choisel was appointed. Augsburg now became the
center of attention to all Europe, and each court prepared every thing toward
this important meeting which it could furnish of splendour for the display of
its dignity, and of ability for the support of its interest. The public
conversation was for a while diverted from scenes of horror, bloodshed, and
pillage; and every mind was employed more agreeably on the public scene of
magnificence, and the private game of policy, which was to ensue.

In the first place, it was unanimously agreed, in order that a negotiation, in
itself sufficiently intricate, should be the less embarrassed, to admit to the
treaty none but the parties principally concerned, together with their allies.

Although this exclusion of the neutral interests tended greatly to
disembarress and simplify the negotiation, yet such was the variety of separate
and independent matters, which still remained to be discussed, that it became
advisable to make a further separation, if they hoped to treat upon them with
any tolerable ease, or with any prospect of coming to a speedy decision.

For this purpose it was necessary to bring back the motives to the war to
their first principles; and to disengage those several interests which
originally, and in their own nature had no connection, from that mass, in which
mutual injuries and a common animosity had blended and confounded them. This
proposition came first from France, and it was an early and happy omen of her
inclination t^ peace.

The war, which was truly and originally German, evidently had but a single,
though this a very difficult object to determine the fate of the King of
Prussia. So many powers were concerned in this determination, and the^ views of
aggrandisement, indemnification, and revenge, ^ various and difficult to be
reconciled, that this alone seemed matter enough for a separate and very
arduous negotiation. In effect all the powers of the north were concerned in
it. For this reason, the other great object of the general war, the limits of
America, which by that strange chain of hostile connections, which even unites
the various independent quarrels and enmities of Europe, had been mixed with
the German disputes, was again set upon its proper and peculiar basis; and
whilst the truly German interests were handled at Augsburg, it was proposed to
treat on this head separately in London and in Paris. For this purpose,
ministers were mutually sent from those courts; Mr. Stanley on the part of
England; and Mr. Bussy on that (...) France.

This proposition was also exceedingly prudent; for there is no doubt that if
these potentates could settle their claims to their mutual satisfaction, and
should carry to Augsburg the same candor and good faith, and the same sincere
desire of peace, their influence must necessarily tend to inspire principles of
moderation into the rest, and must contribute largely to accelerate the great
work of pacification.

Things were thus set upon the best footing possible, and the negotiation
seemed to be in the happiest train that could be wished. But unfortunately the
plan and disposition of the treaty were much more easily adjusted, than the
matter and the substance. It was very obvious, that France if she was willing
even to pretend to a desire of peace, could scarce avoid making concessions,
which to her were sufficiently mortifying. The moment her proper quarrel came
to be separated from the general cause, she had every disadvantage in the
negotiation, because she had suffered every disaster in the war. On the side of
Germany indeed she had acted with success; but even there the advantages she
had acquired were still precarious, as the chance of war was still open: no
proposition for a cessation of arms having been admitted. As she knew
therefore, that great sacrifices might be expected from her, she did not so
finally rest her hopes upon the negotiation, as not to look out for another
resource; and this rendered on her part the whole proceeding less effective and
less sincere.

The resource she sought was in Spain, who she hoped could not look with
indifference on the humiliation of the principal branch of the house of
Bourbon. Hitherto indeed the king of Spain had observed a tolerable exact
neutrality in his conduct, and in his declarations had spared no expressions of
good will and friendship to our court. He seemed to be wholly intent on the
internal economy of his dominions, on the improvement of their long neglected
police, on the advancement of their commerce, and the regulation of the
finances. But notwithstanding these domestic attentions, the French ministry
did not despair of drawing his regards abroad. They thought that the offers
which France in her present circumstances would find herself obliged to make,
must extremely alarm all good Spaniards, who could not see without the most
serious apprehensions, the French power wholly annihilated in America. By this
event, their colonies, though so much superior to all others in opulence and
extent, must in a manner be at the mercy of England: no power being in any sort
able to afford them assistance, or to hold the balance between them and the
power of England. At this time indeed, the French court had not absolutely
succeeded in her designs at Madrid: but she was in hopes, that every step she
took in the treaty and every concession she should make, would prove a fresh
incentive to the jealousies and apprehensions of Spain. Thus in effect all the
motions which France seemingly made toward peace were in reality so many steps
toward a new war; and whilst at London she breathed nothing but moderation,
and the most earnest desire of putting a period to the calamities of Europe, at
Madrid she was taking the most vigorous measures for spreading them further,
and continuing them longer.

On the side of England, though there was far more good faith in the public
procedure, there were also, it must be admitted, many circumstances which
co-operated to retard the peace. The great and almost unparallelled success
which attended our arms in this war, had raised a proportionable expectation,
and inspired very high thoughts into the minds of the people. They thought it
unreasonable to make almost any concessions to a nation whose ambition and
violence they had always found to correspond with its power, and whom they now
considered as lying at their mercy. That this was the time for reducing France,
which if we let pass, we could never hope again to recover. In these sentiments
it must have fared ill with that administration, who should make a sacrifice of
any of those objects on which the people had set their hearts.

On the other hand it could not have escaped them, that the situation of
affairs in Germany, however they might be artificially separated in the
discussion, must necessarily have an influence on the final determination of
the treaty. They saw, that after a severe struggle of five years, the affairs
of our nearest allies were only not ruined. To say nothing of the condition of
the King of Prussia, the whole country of Hesse was in the actual possession of
France; they likewise held the county of Hanau; and by their occupation of
Gottingen, the Hanoverian territory lay open to their arms. If this quarrel
should be considered as a cause not strictly English, (though the French in
their memorials contended it was), yet certainly the Hessians, and principally
the Hanoverians, were allies of so near a connection, and had done and suffered
so much in the common cause, that it must have appeared shocking to all Europe,
if solely attentive to our own peculiar advantages, we should patch up a peace
without any provision in their favor: and it was very evident, that this
provision could not be made in the situation in which the last campaign had
left them, unless our government purchased it at a price that would be very
grudgingly paid by the English subjects.

The ministry, perplexed between the natural expectations of their country, and
the reasonable expectations of their allies, must have found it not a little
difficult to know what party they ought to take. In order to reconcile, as much
as possible, these contradictory desires, the only solution which could be
found was to push the war with the utmost vigor; and in the mean time not to
hurry the negotiation: in hopes that during its progress things might take such
a turn, as to enable them to purchase peace for their allies out of the
acquisitions they should have made after the commencement of the treaty, and
without being obliged to have recourse to their conquests, previous to that
era. On this footing they proposed to satisfy the demands of the public faith,
and at the same time to preserve the reputation which was so necessary to their
affairs at home. Accordingly the duke of Brunswick was to prosecute with the
utmost vigor, the operations which he had begun in the depth of winter; and an
expedition, the object of which was then secret, was prepared with equal
diligence in England.

In these equivocal dispositions, and in this odd mixture of hostile and
pacific measures, began the year 1761, a year more remarkable, perhaps, than
any of those we have hitherto described, for events which will be radically
decisive of the future prosperity or misery of Europe, but less, for those
matters by which the imagination of the reader is commonly affected. Having in
this chapter laid down, as far as we can conjecture, the political motives for
the uncommon effort which was made in Germany, in our next chapter we shall
give an account of the military plan of this effort, the execution and the
success of it.

CHAP. II.
Prince Ferdinand's plan. Allies enter into Hesse and Thuringia. French retire.
Hereditary prince repulsed at Fritzlar. Fritzlar taken. Several magazines
taken. Blockade of Marpurg and Ziegenhayn. Siege of Cassel. Battle of
Langensaltze. Broglio reinforced from the Lower Rhine. Hereditary prince
defeated at Stangerode. Siege of Cassel, etc. raised. Allies retire behind the
Dymel.

AT the close of the last campaign, the French had the entire and undisturbed
possession of the whole territory of Hesse: a country tolerably provided, and
which contains many tenable places. Some of these, they had strengthened with
additional works; and they had amassed immense magazines in the most convenient
situations. This was their condition in the front of their winter cantonments.
On their left they had driven the allies from the Lower Rhine, where they kept
a considerable body of troops, which streightened our quarters, and checked our
efforts on that side. On their right they possessed the town of Gottingen, in
which they had placed a very strong garrison; and thus they shut us up on this
quarter also, whilst the king's German dominions lay entirely open to their
enterprises.

If we consider the situation of the French armies, they will present us with
the idea of an immense crescent, the two advanced points of which were at
Gottingen and Wes^ and the body extended in Hesse: so that being perfectly well
provided with magazines, and master of all the prope^ communications, necessary
for their current subsistence, with strong places in their rear, and in both
their flanks* in the next campaign they had only to advance their severa^ posts
in a manner to enclose the allied army, which, without some signal success
(from their numbers and situation, hardly to be expected) would find itself
entirely incapable o^ making any stand against them.

Prince Ferdinand was very sensible of these inconveniences of his situation,
and of the advantages the enemy ha^ over him. It was extremely difficult to
settle a plan for action; but no action could be attended with much wor^^
consequences, than inactivity in a bad condition. He knew from experience, that
the French were ill qualified for winter operations in Germany, and that his
own soldiers, beside^ their superior hardiness, and their being inured to the
rigor of the climate, could suffer but little more from field service,
especially if attended with success, than they mu^^ endure from the badness of
their winter quarters. It is tr^^ that there was something discouraging in the
attack of a very superior body of the enemy, possessed of every advantage
against him: but it was clear, that this superiority, and these advantages
would not lessen as the summer approached. It was clear, that every step the
enemy gained on him would render his defense weaker and his resources mo^^
scanty; and that if the enemy found themselves in a condition to commence this
campaign where they had conclude^ the last, and that nothing should hinder
their proceeding (...) the earliest season, he could never reasonably hope to
pr^tract the war to another year. For to speak the truth, th^^ was the utmost,
which in his circumstances he could promise himself from the most judicious
scheme of conduct.

Having therefore resolved to act, he lost no time to a^^ with vigor. He
appointed three places of rendezvous (...) the Dymel, the Rhine, and in
Saverland. His army assembled on the 9th of February, without suffering the
enemy to have any previous notice of their intentions. The next day the troops
halted, and the duke communicated to his generals the disposition he had made
for the motions of the whole.

The center was led by his serene highness in person; it penetrated directly
into Hesse, and marching by Zierenberg and Durenberg, made its way toward
Cassel. The right and left of the army were each at a very considerable
distance from this body; but they were so disposed as fully to cooperate in
the general plan of operation, which was very extensive. The hereditary prince
commanded on the right: he marched by Stadbergen for Mengeringhausen; and
leaving the country of Hesse to the Eastward, as the alarm was to be as sudden,
and as widely diffused as possible, he pushed forward with the utmost
expedition into the heart of the French quarters. General Sporcken commanded a
corpse at a greater distance to the left, and penetrated into Thuringia, by
Duderstadt and Heiligenstadt. The design of this movement was to break the
communication of the French with the army of the Empire, to open one for
ourselves with the Prussians, and to cut off all intercourse between the grand
army of the enemy, and their garrison at Gottingen.

By this sudden, extensive, and vigorous attack, the French were thrown into
the utmost consternation: they retreated, or rather fled upon every side. It
could scarcely have been imagined, that this was the same army which had but
just closed the campaign with so much success. Such has been the sport of
fortune in this war, even beyond all former examples of her caprice, that the
instances are numerous of inferior and beaten armies, without any apparent
change in their circumstances, driving the conquerors before them. So
remarkable was the revolution of fortune at this time, that it is highly
credible if the French had had their quarters in an open country, their army
had been totally destroyed: but happily for them, they had very sufficient
means of securing their retreat. For as the allies advanced, they were obliged
to leave Cassel and Gottingen at their backs; into the former of which the
enemy had thrown a garrison equal to a moderate army; and in the latter they
had 7 or 8000 men. Beyond these again were Fritzlar, Ziegenhayn, and Marpurg,
places of a tolerable degree of strength and well garrisoned, besides some
other inferior posts.

The hereditary prince, whose party was the most advanced, struck the first
blow, by an attempt to surprise Fritzlar. He had received advice that it was
not prepared to receive him. He accordingly took only a few battalions and no
cannon, in hopes of being able to carry that place at once. But unfortunately
he was deceived in his intelligence. The garrison was prepared and resolute,
and though the hereditary prince attacked it with his usual spirit, he was
obliged for that time to desist, and to draw off with no inconsiderable loss.

About this time, Marpurg was attempted in the same manner, and with no better
success. Genesis Breidenback, an Hanoverian officer, of great bravery, experience
and reputation, who commanded there, lost his life in the attack. These two
severe checks at the entrance into action, did not however discourage either
the parties that suffered them, or the rest of the army. They advanced as
expeditiously, and with more caution. Cannon and mortars were brought before
Fritzlar, which, after a defense that was rather made for the credit of the
commander, than from any hope of saving the place,

Notwithstanding this success in front, it was not here the grand object of our
operations lay. Cassel was to be reduced. The French had in that town a
garrison of 17 battalions, besides some other corpse, under the command of the
count de Broglio; and there was no doubt, that he would defend the place to the
utmost. The fortifications of Cassel are mostly in the old manner; they consist
of very high, but strong walls. Some works indeed had been newly added; but the
great hope of the enemy was in the strength of the garrison and the rigor of
the season. The siege of this place was not to be delayed; however it was
necessary previously to clear all the adjacent country of the enemy, and to cut
off the communication of the garrison with their grand army.

Therefore when marshal Broglio had been driven quite out off Hesse, and had
retreated toward Frankfort, prince Ferdinand ceased to advance; and having
ordered two bodies to the blockade of Marpurg and Ziegenhayn, which still
obstinately held out, he formed that part of the army which was with him into a
chain of cantonments, making a front toward the enemy which extended from the
river Lahn to the river Ohm, and from the Ohm to the Fulda; thus he proposed to
watch the motions of marshal Broglio's army, to cover the siege of Cassel, and
the blockades of the two fortresses just mentioned. The siege of Cassel was
carried on by the count of Lip Schaumburg a sovereign prince of the empire,
reputed one of the ablest engineers in Europe. His management of the artillery
at Thornhausen was a principal cause in the acquisition of that great victory;
and it was not doubted that his abilities would be exerted as effectively at
Cassel. Trenches were opened on the first of March. All eyes were now directed
to this point; for on the success of this stroke depended the whole fortune of
the campaign. It was very apparent that if Cassel and its garrison should fall
into the hands of the allies, Gottingen and the inferior places must inevitably
fall along with it; and this misfortune would be more than equivalent to the
loss of a great battle.

Whilst the war was thus carried on in Hesse, M. Sporcken who commanded the
detachment to the left, on the side of Saxony, advanced with an intrepidity
equal to the rest; he was soon joined by a corpse of Prussians, and the united
army lost no time to clear the Werra and the Unstrut of the bodies of French
and Saxons which occupied the most important post upon these rivers. As these
bodies were advantageously posted and could be supported on one side by the
garrison of Gottingen, and on the other, as they promised themselves, by the
army of the empire, they maintained their ground; and this soon brought on a
sharp action.

Hitherto the affairs of the allies proceeded almost in an uninterrupted course
of prosperity. It was indeed a degree of prosperity altogether astonishing, and
which as at first it could scarcely have been expected, so there was no reason
to imagine it would have any long continuance. For the allies on the side of
Saxony, where M. Sporcken acted, in proportion as their activity and success
carried them forward, left the countries on their rear more and more uncovered,
and exposed, without any or with a very insufficient defense, to the attempts
of the powerful garrison of Gottingen. The count de Vaux, who commanded that
garrison, is a very able and enterprizing officer. And he no sooner perceived,
that the allies were wholly intent upon driving their enemies from the Werra
and Unstrut, and on pushing the advantages they had acquired to the utmost,
then he marched out of Gottingen with a strong detachment, attacked and routed
as Hanoverian convoy, fell upon the town of Duderstadt with the utmost
violence; and though he failed in his first attempt, he repeated it with so
much spirit, that at length he carried that town, and afterward some of the
most considerable places near it. By these successes he prevented M. de
Sporcken's corpse from returning by the way they had advanced, and indeed
absolutely disqualified them from acting seperately from their main army; to
which soon after these events, they were obliged to join themselves. This
junction now became necessary on another account,

Marshal Broglio toward the close of the last campaign had been obliged, by
the enterprises of the hereditary Prince, to detach from his army in Hesse a
large body to the lower Rhine. He now found it equally proper to recall this
body together with further reinforcements, in order to maintain his ground in
the country northward of the Maine, where he was closely pressed by the allies,
and which he must be compelled shamefully to relinquish, if Cassel was not
relieved in time. Sensible of this, with whatever difficulty, he called in his
most distant posts, embodied his army, inspired them with new spirits, and made
them capable, by a more exact order in their discipline and a great superiority
in their numbers, of attempting something considerable.

On the other hand, the hopes of the allies, depended on the effect of their
first impression; they were obliged to attempt too many objects at the same
time, and these too arduous for the number of which their army consisted. For
it was necessary that they should keep one army, and that no small one,
employed on the siege of Cassel; another was occupied in the blockade of
Ziegenhayn; a third was employed to the eastward of the Fulda; and still a
fourth was necessary to cover and sustain all these various operations, and to
oppose itself to the attempts of Marshal Broglio. It was but too plain, that
when the whole of the French force was collected in one point, it could never
be resisted by a part only of the allied army; if they should attempt to draw
away any of the separate corpse from the critical service upon which it was
employed, the entire purpose of their labors was given up. In a word, Prince
Ferdinand had three strong posts of the enemy on his rear, and their grand army
now perfectly united on his front, and his situation, which was far from
advantageous, obliged him to call in M. Sporcken's body which had effected its
purpose and could best be spared. However the prince kept his position as long
as possible; and the siege was carried on with as much vigor as a winter
operation, and the spirited defense of a great garrison ably commanded, would
admit.

But Marshal Broglio, as soon as he had collected his army, advanced without
delay. He caused the troops under the hereditary prince to be attacked near the
village of Stangerode, in the neighborhood of Grunberg, where he was advanced
in front of the beforementioned line of the allied army. The attack was made
by the enemies dragoons, the very first shock of which broke the whole foot,
consisting of nine regiments, Hanoverians, Hessians, and Brunswickers. The
French on this occasion made two thousand prisoners, and possessed themselves
of several trophies of victory; few were killed or wounded on either side.

After this blow the allied army could no longer think of making head against
the French, or of maintaining their ground in Hesse. They broke up the blockade
of Ziegenhayn; and soon after raised the siege of Cassel, after twenty-seven
days open trenches. They evacuated the whole country of Hesse, retired behind
the Dymel, and falling back nearly to the quarters they possessed before this
undertaking.

Thus ended an expedition which was carried on against many difficulties, with
much spirit, and which at first excited great hopes. It failed indeed in some
of its objects; but it produced its effect in the total of the operations of
the year. The French, by the destruction or seizure of so many of their
principal magazines, were for a long time disabled from taking any advantage of
their successes in the preceding campaign, or from their late victory. It was
hot until the season was a good deal advanced that they were in a condition to
act. This cessation was not dearly bought even by the loss we sustained at
Stangerode, and the extreme hardships the troops had endured during the whole
service; for circumstanced as both armies were at their quitting the field,
without this seasonable check it is probable we should have at this day no
footing in Germany. Both armies as it where by consent lay quiet in their
winter quarters. During their inaction, the negotiation at London and Paris,
whose commencement we have related in the first chapter, was pursued without
interruption.

CHAP. III.
The negotiation continued. Propositions of uti possidetis. Debate concerning
the periods. Belleisle described. Englise repulsed at Lochmaria bay. They make
good their landing. Palais besieged. Town abandoned. Citadel capitulates.

IT must be observed, that after the judicious seperations which had been made
of the interests of the several powers at war, there still remained a
sufficient fund of intricacy and altercations in each particular discussion. In
order therefore to make the way to peace as smooth as possible, it was resolved
previously to establish some certain and simple points that might serve to
direct and keep steady the whole negotiation. These points were but two; indeed
they were so inseperably connected with each other, that they seemed rather
members of the same proposition than separate articles. The first was, that the
two crowns should remain in possession of what they have conquered one from the
other. The second imported that, the situation in which they shall stand at
certain periods, shall be the position to serve as a basis for the treaty which
may be negotiated between the two powers.

As France was known to have had the worst in the war, a proposition of statu
quo, coming from her, must have appeared an instance of moderation, altogether
surprising to our ministers. It is certain, that had peace been concluded at
that instant, and upon the sole foundation of this article, England would then
have possessed all (...) conquests she had made, every one of which was in a
very high degree advantageous to her commerce and her power, and none of which
could be considered as a subject of future discussion. On the other hand,
France continuing in possession of the places she had conquered, would have
acquired no advantage that could at all countervail the expense of keeping
them; at the same time that she would be exposed to endless altercations, and
would afford matter of the highest jealousy, indignation, and discontent, even
to her nearest allies. This basis being therefore settled, although it was
evident, that the treaty could not rest upon this basis solely. England had
certainly a great superiority in the negotiation, and might rationally expect
(when they should come to talk of restitutions) to purchase the evacuation of
the French conquests in Germany, at a much smaller price than their apparent
magnitude might seem to demand. However these were still a matter of so much
anxiety, and the nature of the precise stipulations were still so uncertain,
that the negotiation, though it proceeded with strong appearance of a desire
for peace, met with very frequent checks and delays. Both parties were indeed
unanimous in the article of uti possidetis; than which, it must be admitted,
there could not be a better ground to treat upon. But as the war still
continued, and whilst it continued might make a daily alteration in the fortune
of the contracting powers, it was necessary to fix upon some epochas to which
this possessory article should refer.

The French on this head proposed, that the situation in which they shall stand
on the first of September in the year 1761 in the East Indies, on the first of
July in the same year in the West Indies and in Africa, and on the first of May
following in Europe, should be the position, which should serve as a basis to
the treaty which may be negotiated between the two powers. They added further,
that as these epochas might seem too near or too distant for the interest of
Great Britain, they were extremely willing to enter into a negotiation upon
that object.

The English ministry received this proposition with less satisfaction than its
apparent fairness deserved. They entirely rejected the French epochas; and
declared that they could not admit, without prejudice to themselves, any other
epochas than those which have reference to the day of signing the treaty of
peace. Had this resolution been strictly adhered to, it was evident that the
negotiation was that moment at an end. For though what was asserted in the
French memorial in reply to this declaration, (that the basis of the
proposition of uti possidetis was necessarily connected with the particular
epochas proposed) is by no means to be admitted; it is on the other hand not
easy to deny the validity of their subsequent assertion, "that if not these, at
least some certain periods during the war ought to be fixed; and that the uti
possidetis could not reasonably have reference only to the time of signing the
treaty of peace." For if the contrary principle was once admitted, it would
become difficult to know, or even with probability to guess, at the nature or
the value of the possessions which by such an article should be mutually given
away. And if these difficulties occurred in the simplicity of a possessory
article, they must be increased tenfold upon every other, and must come to such
an height as to preclude all possibility of negotiation on things of so
intricate a nature as exchanges and equivalents. The French in their memorial
insisted so strongly on the propriety of establishing these periods, that they
threatened to recall the whole proposition if they were not agreed to.

It must doubtless appear at first view surprising to see France, whose actual
situation was very indifferent, contending for a near period, and England,
whose affairs were at that time apparently in a prosperous situation,
postponing the uti possidetis to one more remote. But the truth is, that in
that particular neither party consulted their present condition. They acted
wholly on foresight. For though the English, on the 25th of March, when this
proposition was made, were carrying on the siege of Cassel, and the other
strong places in Hesse, and the enemy had no army in that country to oppose
them, it was notwithstanding evident that from the slow progress of those
sieges, and from the alacrity of marshal Broglio in collecting his troops, they
must be shortly obliged to abandon the enterprise; it was evident that France
must be reinstated in the absolute possession of her former conquests long
before the epoch of the first of May, the period which they fixed for Europe.
Both courts were fully apprized of this. It was therefore the interest of
France to offer and of England to reject this near period; especially as the
fate of the design on the coast of France was then depending, and our
administration seemed to have conceived no mean hopes of its success, and no
small opinion of its importance in the negotiation.

The fleet employed in this expedition sailed from Spithead on the 29th of
March, and it was soon discovered that Belleisle was the object.

Belleisle, the largest of all the European islands belonging to the French
King, is between 12 and 13 leagues in circumference.

The island originally belonged to the earl of Cornouaille, but has been since
yielded to the king: it contains only one little city, called Le Palais, three
country towns, 103 villages, and about 5000 inhabitants,

The town of Palais takes its name from a castle, belonging to the duke de
Belleisle, in its neighborhood, which is now converted into a citadel, which
is a regular and strong fortification, fronting the sea, composed principally
of hornwork, and is provided with two dry ditches, the one next the
counterscarp, and the other so contrived as to secure the interior
fortifications. This citadel is divided from the largest part of the town by an
inlet of the sea, over which there is a bridge of communication; from the other
part of the town; and which is most inhabited, it is only divided by its own
fortifications, and a glacis. There are three nominal harbors in this island,
Palais, Sauzon and Goulfard; every one of which labors under some capital
defect, either in being exposed, shallow, or dangerous at the entrance. The
only branch of trade carried on here is the curing pilchards.

From this state of the island, poor in itself, capable of little improvement,
and so ill circumstanced in point of harbors, a sort of a dislike to the
expedition began to arise. Several did not see of what considerable service
such a conquest could be of to England in time of peace, or of what prejudice
to the enemy in time of war. They foresaw that it could not be taken without
considerable loss, or kept without considerable expense; and on the whole they
apprehended that when exchanges came to be made, France would lay no great
stress upon it. On the other hand it was urged, that though the harbors were
bad, yet small privateers might issue from thence, greatly to the molestation
of the French coasting trade; and that the fleet of England might ride between
it and the continent in a well protected road. They imagined the possession of
this island, if not of great detriment to the interest of France, would be a
grievous wound to her pride; and that those circumstances which had formerly
induced her to expend money on the fortifications there, and on the
apprehension of an invasion to fill them with a powerful garrison, would
likewise persuade her to set a value on the place when it came to be estimated
in the treaty.

Whilst they reasoned in this manner in England, the fleet under the command of
commodore Keppel, and the land forces under general Hodgson, arrived before
Belleisle on the 7th of April, and on the 8th agreed to attempt a landing on
the south-east of the island in a sandy bay near Lochmaria point. Here the
enemy were in possession of a little fort; they had moreover entrenched
themselves on an hill excessively steep, and the foot of which was scraped
away. The attempt was made in three places with great resolution: a few
grenadiers got on shore, and formed themselves; but as they were not supported,
they were for the greater part made prisoners. The rest of the army, after
several very brave and repeated efforts, being wholly unable to force the
enemies lines, or make good their landing, were obliged to retire with loss;
what added to the disaster was, that several of the flat bottomed vessels were
destroyed or damaged in an hard gale which followed on our retiring from the
shore. This made the prospect of any future attempt more unpleasing even than
the first. In this attack we lost in killed, wounded and prisoners, near five
hundred men.

Neither commanders nor soldiers were however dispirited by this mortifying
repulse. They resolved, if possible, not to return without effect, and then
determined diligently to search the whole coast, in order to find a place more
favorable for another attack. The view indeed was not encouraging. The island
is naturally a fortification; and what nature had left undone to make it such,
had been amply supplied by art.

It was a long time after this first failure before the weather would give our
commanders an opportunity of a second trial; however they persisted with the
utmost steadiness, and found at length a convenient situation. Not that it was
a part of the coast less strong than the rest; on the contrary, they built
their principal hopes on the excessive steepness and difficulty of the rocks,
which had rendered the enemy rather less attentive on this quarter. This
arduous attempt was made at a bold rocky shore, near the abovementioned point
of Lockmaria. Besides the principle attack, two feints were made at the same
time to distract the enemy, whilst the men of war directed their fire with
great judgment and effect on the hills. These maneuvers gave brigadier general
Lambert with an handful of men, an opportunity of climbing up a very steep
rock, without molestation. This little body having thus prosperously gained the
top of the hill, formed themselves in good order, and without delay. Letters
from Major Genesis Hodgson, and the Hon. Coommodore Keppel, to the Secretaries of
State, relative to their expedition against the Island of Belleisle.
On board the Valiant, off Belleisle April 12, 1761. SIR,
I Have the honor to acquaint you, that his Majesty's fleet under the command
of Com. Keppel, and the transports with his Mjesty's forces on board, came to
an anchor in this road on Tuesday, the 7th inst. about twelve o'clock. Soon
after their arrival, I went with the Commodore to take a view of the coast; and
we agreed at our return, that the port of St. Andro appeared to us to be the
best place to make a descent; and it was settled, that Sir Thomas Stanhope,
with some of his Majesty's ships, and the transports, with Stuart's and Gray's
battalions and marines on board, should make a feint at Sauzon, at the same
time that we made a real attack at St. Andro. Then it was too late in the day
to do more than give the necessary orders for the troops destined to land
first, to be ready to embark early in the morning in the flat bottomed boats,
that I might attempt a landing as soon as the ships had silenced a four
gun-battery, which commanded the entrance of the bay. This was soon done by the
Achilles, after she took her station. No time was then lost to go in with the
boats, with the grenadiers, and the regiments ordered for this service. But
when we entered the bay, we found the enemy so strongly entrenched on each side
of the hill, which was excessively steep, and the foot of it scraped away, that
it was impossible to get up to the breastwork. After several unsuccesful
efforts, seeing it was impracticable to force the enemy from their lines, I
thought it advisable to desist. Maj. Genesis Crawford and Brig. Carleton exerted
themselves as much as possible on the occasion: the latter is wounded in the
thigh, but in a good way of doing well. The loss we suffered in our retreat was
very inconsiderable, as the fire of the ships covered it. The weather has been
so bad ever since the 8th, that I have not been able to get returns from the
several corpse, so I cannot ascertain our loss; but I believe there are near 500
killed, wounded, and prisoners. I shall desire Mr. Keppel to go along with me
to reconnoitre the island once more, and if we can discover any part whereon an
attempt can be made with the least probability of success, we shall make a
second trial. I cannot help observing to you, that the whole island is a
fortification; and that the little nature had left undone, to make it such, has
been amply supplied by art; the enemy having been at work upon it ever since
Sir Edward Hawke appeared before it last winter.

I have the honor to inform you, the greatest harmony has subsisted between
the two services; and I should not do justice to the commander and officers of
his Majesty's fleet, if I did not at the same time I inform you, that they have
assisted me to the utmost of my wishes in carrying on the operations, pursuant
to his Majesty's instructions.

I have the honor to be, etc. SHEDHOLM HODGSON.


Valiant in the great road of Belleisle, April 13, 1761. SIR,
I Had the honor of writing to you the 29th of March, when I left Spithead. It
was from that time to the 6th inst. before the wind came to the westward, to
enable the fleet to steer in with the coast of France; and that evening I
detached six frigates, in hopes they might in the night get so stationed, as to
cut off the enemy's communication with the main land. The next morning the
fleet passed the south end of Belleisle, close along the shore; and at one of
the bays by Point Lomaria, the General and myself thought a descent might be
tried: but as the wind was southerly, it could not possibly be attempted at
that time. At twelve o'clock the whole fleet anchored in the great road; when
immediately I went with Genesis Hodgson to the northern part of the island, to be
as well informed of the strength of the enemy's works there as the time would
admit; and while we were upon this necessary service, the ships of war in the
road were preparing the flat boats for the reception of the troops; but by the
time we got back, it was too late in the day to make any trial.

The 8th the wind north-easterly, the boats being ready for the reception of
the troops, the signal was made very early in the morning for them to assemble
at the rendezvous; and three ships, with two bomb-vessels, were ordered to
proceed round the point of Lomaria, at the S. E. part of the island, and attack
the fort and other works in the Sandy Bay round the beforementioned point, the
place the General and myself had agreed to have attacked,

Capt. Barrington, in the Achilles, got placed first, and soon silenced the
fire from the fort and from the shore; and then, as he was directed, made the
signal of his having done so; when the troops in the boats were pushed to the
landing, with great briskness and spirited behavior, at three different places
near to each other, by Capt. Barton, whom I ordered to command the boats. But
the difficulty of getting footing, and the enemy being strongly entrenched on
the heights, and in the little fort, the troops soon met with such a repulse,
that it became necessary, as well as prudent, to desist from the attempt for
the present, and retire with the flat boats; in which they were well covered by
the ships and bombs.

One of the flat boats landed sixty of Erskine's grenadiers, who got up a very
difficult place to the top of the hills; where they formed with great skill,
but were so immediately routed by a much more numerous body of the enemy, that
all attempts to succor them was ineffectual, any further than the boats
bringing from the rocks about twenty of them.

While all this was transacting, Sir Thomas Stanhope, with four ships of war,
the battalions of Gray's and Stuart's, with 500 marines in transports, were
opposite Sauzor, at the northern part of the island. these troops were embarked
in the boats, if possible to divert the enemy from the principal object.

A gale of wind coming on very quick after the retiring from the shore, has
occasioned so much damage among the transports, by the loss of anchors and flat
boats, that it takes up a very considerable time to put things in away to
attempt what further may be thought practicable. The loss of flat boats in the
gale is twenty-two, which will render the force of landing much inferior to
what it was first attempted with.

While the repairing and adjusting of these defects are in hand, I hope some
spot may be agreed upon, where we may be more successful in the attempt, than
we were on the 8th; but if not so, I hope his Majesty will believe I have had
nothing more at heart than the exerting the force entrusted to me, in a manner
most conducive to the honor of his arms.

I have the honor to be, etc. A. KEPPEL.


Belleisle, four o'Clock in the morning, April 23, 1761. SIR,
AS I have just had a note from Com. Keppel, to inform, me, that a frigate will
sail this day for England, I have only time to acquaint you, that his Majesty's
troops under my command landed yesterday at five. The enemy's attention was so
distracted with our attempts of landing at different places, where there was
the least appearance of our being able to succeed, that it gave Brig. Lambert
an opportunity of climbing up a rock with a corpse I had left with him for that
purpose, if practicable. The difficulty of mounting had made the enemy least
attentive to that part. Beauclerk's grenadiers, with their captain, Patterson,
got up before they saw what was intended. They immediately marched a body of
300 men to attack him. The grenadiers maintained their ground till the rest of
Brig. Lambert's got up. We took three brass fieldpieces, and some wounded
prisoners. It is impossible for me sufficiently to commend Mr. Lambert's
conduct and gallant behavior on the occasion; and take the liberty to beg you
will permit me to request you will recommend him to the King, as an officer
deserving his majesty's favor. Capt. Patterson has lost his arm. I believe our
loss is not above thirty killed. I am afraid you will not be able to read this
scrawl, as I write it in the field, the troops being on their march,

I am, etc, S. HODGSON.


Valiant, in the Great-Road of Belleisle, April 23, 1761. SIR,
I Had the honor to send you a letter by the Actoen frigate, in which I gave
you but little hopes. Since which time the General and I having considered,
that by attempting a place where the mounting the rocks was just possible, and
where the enemy were no otherwise prepared, from the impracticable appearance
it had to them, than by a corpse of troops to annoy the boats in the attempt,
that it carried some degree of hopes with it; and by making a disposition for
the attack of their entrenched bays, and at Sauzon at the same time, which the
arrival of the transports with the light horse enabled me to do, we might
possibly gain a footing; I have now the greatest pleasure in acquainting you,
that his Majesty's troops have made good a landing on the rocks near Point
Lomaria; and cannot sufficiently commend the spirit and good behavior of the
troops in the attempt, and the judgment with which Sir Thomas Stanhope, and the
rest of the captains of the king's ships, directed the fire upon the hills.

Capt. Barrington having been employed in many of the operations of this
service, I have sent him home with this letter: and ^eg, Sir, to refer you to
him for the particulars.

I have the honor to be, etc. A. KEPPEL.





The landing of all the forces was made good in a short time after. The loss in
this daring and successful attempt, was inconsiderable. In one or two places
the enemy seemed disposed to make some stand; but the body of light horse,
which was embarked in this expedition, soon drove them to the town, and laid
all quite open to the intrenchments before it. The great difficulty now
consisted in bringing forward the cannon, which were first to be dragged up the
rocks, and afterward, for two leagues, along a very rugged and broken road.
This necessarily took up some time. However the siege was commenced with
vigor: and the garrison, commanded by the chevalier de St. Croix. a brave and
experienced officer, threatened on their side a long and obstinate defense.
Nothing in fact was deficient on either part. The enemy made some sallies; one
of them with considerable effect. Major Genesis Crawford was made prisoner on this
occasion. But our troops were only animated by these checks. A furious attack
was made upon the enemies lines which covered the town, and they were carried
without much loss; principally by the uncommon intrepidity of a company of
marines which had been but newly raised, No action of greater spirit and
gallantry had been performed during the whole war.

The town was now entirely abandoned, and the defense confined to the citadel.
It was obvious, that as our fleet prevented all communication with the
continent, and thereby cut off all hopes of relief, the place must necessarily
be reduced; but the chevalier de St. Croix was resolved to provide for his own
honor, when he could not for the preservation of the place entrusted to him,
and, since he could not maintain it, to sell it as dear a possible. Accordingly
there was no mention of yielding, until the 7th of June, when there was no
longer the slightest prospect of succor, and the place was by no means safely
tenable. Then he capitulated, and the garrison marched out with the honors of
war.

Thus was the island of Belleisle reduced under the English government, after a
defense of two months. In this expedition we had about eighteen hundred men
killed and wounded. The loss most regretted was, that of Sir William Peer
Williams, a young gentleman of great talents and expectations, and who had made
a distinguished figure in parliament. He had but newly entered into the
service. He was shot in the night, by having carelessly approached too near a
sentinel of the enemy. He was the third person of family whom in this war, the
love of enterprise had brought to an honorable death in these expeditions to
the coast of France.

Whatever difference of opinion might have been entertained concerning the
value of this conquest, or the price which was paid for it, the rejoicing in
London was great and sincere. The general and the land and sea officers
employed in the expedition were the subject of very just applause, who with so
noble a perseverance had struggled with, and had overcome such great
difficulties, and who had the spirit, after such a disaster on their outset, to
renew an attack under circumstances nearly as unfavourable as those by which
they had been at first foiled. The city of London addressed the King on the
occasion. And it was generally expected that this new proof of our superiority
must influence the negotiation in our favor. Some however were of opinion,
that it would rather exasperate the French, and irritate their pride to renew
these efforts which their misfortunes had slackened when they saw us in the
midst of a treaty making attempts, and carrying places in Old France, and as it
were, in the presence of that haughty court. However as there was nothing done
that was not strictly justifiable, no complaint was made, and the treaty
proceeded, to all appearance with as much good humor as before.

CHAP. IV.
England and France agree to treat of a separate peace. Epochas proposed by
England. Court of Vienna agrees. Objects of the negotiation. Proposals of
France with regard to Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. French memorial
concerning Spain. Indignation of the English minister. English answer to the
French memorial.

IT must be observed, that though the courts of London and Versailles treated
seperately, it was hitherto by no means proposed, that this separate discussion
should lead to a separate peace. It was no more than a previous arrangement for
the removal of those difficulties, which might prevent the peace of France with
England from being united with the general peace of Europe. But in proportion
as the treaty advanced, it became obvious, that the settling of any terms,
which had no reference to the signature of something obligatory between the two
crowns, could at best be only void and illusory, and might in the end even
prove the source of dangerous and captious altercations. The English minister
therefore, before he would agree to that definitively upon any point, and
particularly upon the epochas, insisted upon two preliminary conditions.

First, that every thing, which should be happily adjusted between the two
crowns in relation to their particular war, shall be made obligatory, final,
and conclusive, independent of the fate of the negotiation of Augsburg.

Secondly, that the definitive treaty of peace between Great Britain and
France, or preliminary articles to that end, shall be signed and ratified
between the date of that memorial and the first of the following August.

If these conditions were accepted, then England on her part consented to name
determinate epochas, to which the uti possidetis should refer; the first of
July for Europe; the first of September for Africa and America; and the first
of November for the East Indies. The French ministry without contesting the
epochas themselves, complained of the conditions; of the first, because they
said it departed from the letter and spirit of the memorial of the 26th of
March, which was the foundation of the whole treaty; of the second, on account
of the extreme shortness of the time allotted for the discussion of some
difficult and momentous points; and the adjustment of matters which regarded a
war extended over the four quarters of the globe; for the memorial which
contained those conditions, was dated on the 17th, and was not received at
Paris until the end of June, so that little more than a month was left to
obtain the consent of the court of Vienna to a separate treaty, to settle the
terms of this treaty, and finally, to ratify it.

If a very uncommon good understanding had not subsisted between her imperial
Majesty and the king of France, it must have been very difficult to have
received this consent. But in fact it was immediately received, and upon one
very short and apparently reasonable condition, "That nothing might be
stipulated to the prejudice of the house of Austria." But when this condition
came to be explained, as we shall see presently, it was so far from
faciliating, that it created new obstacles to the peace. However, this
acquiescence of the principal of her allies, enabled France to accept of the
first condition without reserve; and to the last she verbally, though not in
the clearest terms, agreed also.

Things seemed for the present in the best situation, which in this stage of
the treaty could be expected. The basis of the negotiation was solidly
established. The article uti possidetis, since the taking Belleisle, was a
matter of less difficulty, and the epochas were in general settled in such a
manner, as to coincide with the designs and desires of both parties. The treaty
was confined to the two powers, and it was to be perfectly definitive as to
them. A time for concluding it, was also in a great measure settled; a
circumstance, which if it did not admit sufficient leisure for accurate
discussion, cut off however the opportunities of chicane, and seemed to be the
most suitable to a candid proceeding, and a sincere desire of peace.

The foundation being thus laid, the superstructure was the next consideration.
This superstructure consisted in the adjustment of those compensations which
were to be made for the reciprocal conquests (and here the difficulty lay) of
the two powers; a punctilio of honor might have intervened at the very first
setting out, extremely pernicious to the salutary work in hand; from which
party the first proposition should proceed? But in this respect France gave
way, and that concession afforded no inconsiderable proof of her pacific
intentions.

We must apprize the reader that we do not mean to enter exactly into the whole
detail of this negotiation, nor undertake precisely to describe all the turns
that were taken in it. This, we imagine, would prove a tedious and unacceptable
performance. We shall attach ourselves to the capital objects which were
contended for in this game of policy: We shall endeavor to point out the
matters which first obstructed, and then finally broke off the treaty; and we
shall rest on these things in such a manner, as seems to us fittest for marking
out the true spirit of the negotiating powers. Our own observations shall be
very sparingly interposed. We are historians, and not advocates.

The uti possidetis being settled as the basis of the treaty, nothing could
reasonably be claimed by either party, that was not to be counterpoised by some
equivalent from the other; and consequently it was necessary to adjust and
value their several possessions, pretensions and demands. There were six
principal objects in this negotiation. First, the limits of the two crowns in
North America. Secondly, the conquests of Great Britain in the West Indies,
(together with the Neutral Islands there.) Thirdly, our conquests in Africa and
in India. Fourthly, the adjustment of the particular affair between the English
and French in Germany. Fifthly, the conduct which the two crowns were to hold
with regard to their respective allies in Germany. And lastly, the restitution
of the captures made by England, previous to the declaration of war.

On the first of these articles, France proposed to cede and guaranty all
Canada to England; stipulating only that the free and public exercises of the
Roman Catholic religion should be permitted under the English government, and
that those of the old French colonists who chose to retire might have leave to
transport themselves from thence, and take away or dispose of their effects. In
compensation for this, they required a confirmation of the privilege (...) what
fishing they enjoyed on the coast of Newfoundland, under the treaty of Utrecht;
and that this fishery might be carried on with advantage, they likewise
required the restitution of the isle of Cape Breton, excluding themselves in
return from erecting on that island any kind of fortification whatsoever.

The affairs in the West Indies, which make the second capital object, they
proposed to settle in this manner. They offered to exchange Minorca for
Guadaloupe and Marigalante; and as to the four Neutral Islands, they insisted
that two of them, Dominica and St. Vincent, were held by their natural
inhabitants the Carribees, under the protection of France, and that they ought
still to remain in the same condition. With regard to the two others, they
proposed to make a fair division; that St. Lucia should remain to France, and
that England should enter into possession of Tobago. On this head it is
sufficient to observe, that in the opinion of some people, our ministry did
not, in this treaty, set the just value on the acquisition they had made; when
they looked upon Canada as the great and leading object, and only considered
Guadaloupe and Marigalante in a secondary and subordinate light. This is a
question of difficulty, and has been much agitated. Those who dread a fresh
American war from the ambition of France, and were struck with the idea of
extended empire, preferred the former conquest; those who solely considered our
interest as a commercial people, were generally in favor of the latter.

On the side of Africa, France satisfied herself with demanding either the
settlement at Senegal, or the isle of Goree: for which (together with the
restoration of Belleisle) they consented to evacuate Gottingen, Hesse and
Hanau, and to draw off their army to the Maine and the Rhine. This was
certainly a full equivalent. But with regard to the East Indies, they had no
tolerable equivalent to offer. They expatiated much in their memorial upon the
disadvantages which must arise to the companies of the two nations, from their
entertaining views of conquest, so contrary to the true spirit, and the real
interest of these trading establishments; and they concluded by proposing the
treaty, formerly settled between the sieurs Godcheau and Saunders, as a basis
for the re-establishment of peace in Asia. It must be remarked, that this
treaty had been concluded at a time when the affairs of France in the East
Indies made a figure very different from their present situation; and therefore
it seemed unfair to make this treaty a standard under circumstances altogether
inapplicable.

The war, which has been so long, with so much bloodshed and so fruitlessly
carried on in Westphalia, the French strenuously contended, was from the time
of (what they called) the breach of the capitulation of Closter-Seven, a war
purely English; and therefore that their conquests in that part of Germany,
formed a proper compensation for the English conquests in the other quarters of
the world. Our ministers did not attempt formally to refute this assertion;
they rather seemed to admit it; and they agreed accordingly to receive the
evacuation of these places as an equivalent for cessions to be made on the
footing we have already mentioned. On this point there was little difficulty.

The intricate and knotty part was on what we have stated as the fifth object;
the conduct of the two crowns with regard to their allies. Here was a real, a
capital difficulty. From the beginning of the negotiation, England had declared
that they would inviolably preserve their faith to the King of Prussia, and
would act strenuously in his support. This picqued the French ministers; who,
in their turn, thought themselves bound to make a declaration equally strong in
favor of the empress; and they had, moreover, recently conditioned with the
court of Vienna, to admit nothing in the treaty to her disadvantage; words of
great latitude. However, in this difficulty, they found out a solution, which
it must be confessed, had a very fair and captivating appearance. They proposed
that both armies in Germany should observe an exact neutrality; and should be
reciprocally bound to afford no sort of assistance, nor to give no sort of
offense to the allies of either of the parties And they proposed further, that
as armies in this state ^inert neutrality must be a dead and useless expense to
the power who maintains them, the French king, from the time his Britannic
majesty recalled the English forces from Germany, would cause double the number
of French forces from the armies of the Upper and Lower Rhine to return into
France; and that no French troops should remain in Germany but in proportion to
those which the king (...) England should keep in his pay. It might certainly
be urged in confirmation of the propriety of this offer, that is reality these
armies, whilst they continued in action, though they worried each other
abundantly, afforded no kind of assistance to their allies, and therefore, when
they came mutually to entertain pacific sentiments concerning their own
particular quarrel, and were to give an example of moderation to the rest of
Europe, there seemed to be no reason why they should make efforts in favor of
any ally which they had not made, or been able to make in the hottest time of
hostility.

The last article had its difficulties also. The French insisted, as a point
from which they were resolved never to recede, upon the restitution of the
captures made before the declaration of war. This demand, they were of opinion,
was grounded on the clearest principles of the law of nations, and the most
express stipulation of treaties. Without entering into these various arguments
with which this position might be maintained and attacked, it appeared to many
that the honor of both nations was almost equally concerned, the one to claim,
the other as resolutely to refuse this restitution.

On the whole, these proposals, which the French sent to London in a memorial
of the 15th of July, formed, though in some respects undoubtedly exceptionable, a
very agreeable plan for a treaty of peace. A better could not have been
expected in the first project of an enemy, and it might be hoped, that a
negotiation thus favorably begun, could not fail of adjusting easily whatever
appeared wrong, or supplying whatever was defective in this first draught of
the propositions. But fatally for the repose of mankind, in the very instant
that this fair proposal was made, at the very moment when these strong
demonstrations were given, an act was done which blew up at one explosion, the
whole basis of the treaty that had been long and carefully laying, scattered
the materials which had been so industriously collected, and so cautiously
arranged, and instead of extinguishing, spread the flames of war more widely,
and made them rage with new fury. From this time forward all the transaction
was full of animosity, resentment and mistrust. The reader has been apprized of
the measures which France had been invariably pursuing at the court of Madrid,
and the arguments she employed to infuse a jealousy into that court. Hitherto
however, there was no appearance that these measures had any effect; but to the
infinite surprise and indignation of the British minister, together with the
memorial which contained the above recited propositions, Mr. Bussy, the French
agent, delivered a private memorial, signifying, that in order to establish the
peace upon solid foundations, not to be shaken by the contested interests of a
third power, the king of Spain might be invited to accede to guaranty the
treaty, and that to prevent the differences which subsisted between Great
Britain and this monarchy from being a means of producing a fresh war in
Europe, with the consent and communication of his Catholic majesty, he
proposes, that in this negotiation, the three points, which had been disputed
between the crowns of England and Spain, might be finally settled. First, the
restitution of some captures made upon the Spanish flag. Secondly, the
privilege of the Spanish nation to fish on the banks of Newfoundland. Thirdly,
the demolition of the English settlements made on the Spanish territories in
the bay of Honduras.

It may be easily imagined, from the character of the then secretary of state,
in what manner he received these proposals: he rejected with the utmost scorn,
the offer of negotiating, through an enemy humbled, and almost at his feet, the
disputes of his nation, with a power actually in friendship with us. He called
upon the Spanish minister to disavow the propositions, which had been said to
be made with the knowledge of his court. He returned as wholly in admissible
this offensive memorial, declaring, that it would be looked upon as an affront
to the dignity of his master, and incompatible with the sincerity of the
negotiation, to make any further mention of such a circumstance.

And now he prepared, without delay, an answer to the principal memorial, in a
style rather dictated by the circumstances which accompanied that paper, and
which sufficiently indicated the designs of France, than what the propositions
themselves strictly deserved. Indeed, as he had by this time conceived an
incurable suspicion of the sincerity of France in the whole proceeding, it
would not have been prudent to have made those advances, which on a supposition
of good faith and pacific intentions, might possibly have been advisable; for
though both powers had over and over declared, that their respective
propositions, if the treaty should by any accident be broken off, would be
considered as retracted or never made; yet it is certain, tha^ things once
settled and agreed to, unavoidably stamp their own impression upon any future
negotiation, relative to the same subject.

Mr. Pitt's answer, which is dated on the 29th of July, agrees to the
restitution of Guadaloupe, Marigalante and Belleisle, on the compensations
proposed by France. It agrees also to receive Canada, but without any new
limits or any exception whatsoever; and it adds to the French offer of all
Canada, "its appurtenances." It admits the proposal of the partition of the
Neutral Islands. It rejects the French demand of Cape Breton, or of any other
island in the gulf or river of St. Lawrence; or of any power of fishing in
that river, in that gulf, or on those coasts; and it allows the privilege of
fishing on the banks of Newfoundland, only on consideration of the demolition
of Dunkirk. But the proposed restitution either of Senegal or Goree, is utterly
refused. The German neutrality is rejected with disdain; and it is declared
that Great Britain is unalterably resolved to support the king of Prussia with
efficacy and good faith. In addition to the offer made to evacuate Hesse, etc.
it is insisted that the French shall make a general evacuation of all her
conquests in Westphalia, and all its countries, including its conquests from
the king of Prussia on the Rhine, though France had before declared, that they
were conquered for the queen of Hungary, that they were actually governed in
her name, and that she could not, consistently with good faith, agree to
deliver them to the king of Prussia. The treaty between Saunders and Godcheau
was not admitted as a proper basis for a treaty relative to the East Indies.
But it was agreed, that the two companies should negotiate concerning their
respective interests, as the king of Great Britain could not dispose of the
rights of the English East India company without their consent. As to the
restitution of the captures before the war, this was most positively refused.

In this period we leave the negotiation to follow the motions of the armies in
Germany. It is certain, that the dispositions of the two courts grew daily more
unfavourable: their confidence in each other, and their mutual good will wore
away; and it was to be feared, that this negotiation, if it broke off in an
unsatisfactory manner, must leave impressions on the minds of the two nations
of such a nature, as might cause them to wish they had never engaged in it.

CHAP. V.
Motions of the French and allied armies. General Sporcken attacked. French
pass the Dymel. Skirmishes. Position of prince Ferdinand. Junction of Broglio
and Soubise. Battle of Kirch Denkern. French defeated. French threaten Hanover.
Prince Henry of Brunswick killed. Taking of Dorsten. Various movements of the
armies. Destruction of Schartsfelts-castle. Prince Xavier of Saxony takes
Wolfenbuttle, and invests Brunswick. Detachments from prince Soubise take and
abandon Embden. Attempt on Bremen. Sufferings of Lower Westphalia.

ALthough the great purpose of the early and strenuous effort made by the
allies was not fully answered, it nevertheless produced, as we have before
observed, a very considerable and useful effect. The destruction of the French
magazines retarded their operations in such a manner, that the greatest part of
the month of June was spent before their armies found themselves in a condition
to act. But as soon as they had taken proper measures for their subsistence,
the prince of Soubise caused his troops to pass the Rhine, and to advance on
the side of Munster, not far from which city the hereditary prince of Brunswick
was posted to oppose him. Marshal Broglio assembled the forces under his
command at Cassel, and moved toward the Dymel, in order to effect a junction
with the body under the prince of Soubise. They made no doubt that their
conjoining strength would soon attain a decided superiority over the allies,
who had ended their late enterprise with a loss which was considerable, and
which in their circumstances, they could not well bear, nor easily supply.

These hopes were supported by the success of their first encounter. General
Sporcken with a strong detachment had been posted in an advantageous situation
on the Dymel, and in the front of the allied army. On the approach of Marshal
Broglio, he attempted to retire with all that expedition which his inferiority
made necessary. But the French came upon him with such rapidity,

The allies, however, soon recovered their spirits; and the main body of their
army being well secured, they sent out several detachments. Their small bodies
were conducted by General Luckner, and other able partisans, who undertook
several bold and very distant enterprises, attacked the enemy where they were
least upon their guard, routed their convoys, destroyed several of their
magazines, carriages and horses, and carried off their prey even from the gates
of Cassel. These lively actions seemed a prelude to some more important and
decisive attempt.

The French became sensible that a stroke of some importance was expected from
the greatness of their force, and that it was not for the credit of their arms
only, but for their security from the minute, but continual and galling
attempts of parties from the allied army.

For some time prince Ferdinand had been posted to the south of the Lip,
between Ham and Lipstadt. This position he took, in all probability, because M.
Broglio had, by occupying the places on the Dymel, got between him and Hanover.
Therefore he judged it expedient for him in his turn to get between the prince
de Soubise and the Rhine. In this situation, if the enemy attempted any
movement toward the king's dominions, he was ready to fall directly on the
places they occupied by that river, which, in the present circumstances, were
full as important to them as the Hanoverian territory was to us. Thus whilst he
seemed to retire from that territory, and in a manner to abandon it, he in
reality provided with the greater effect for its security.

Marshal Broglio, when he had resolved on the attack of the allied army, united
his troops to those of the prince de Soubise, at a place called Soest, between
Lipstadt and Ham. On the other hand, as soon as the general of the allies was
apprized of their intention he posted his army in a very strong and
advantageous manner.

The river Aest runs for a considerable way, almost parallel to the Lip, from
which it is not distant in some places, much more than half a mile. The high
road from Lipstadt, to Ham passes between these rivers; and it was of the
utmost moment to prince Ferdinand to secure that important communication by
which, alone he could hope an advantageous retreat, or in any degree propose to
command the adjacent country. With a view therefore to protect that
communication, he established his left wing on the Isthmus between the rivers.
The left extremity of that wing under General Wutgenau, leaning to the Lip,
by which it was perfectly secured, as the right was supported by the village of
Kirch Denkern, situated immediately on the Aest. The marquis of Granby
commanded in that wing, with the assistance of lieutenant general Howard and
the prince of Anhalt, who were posted toward the abovementioned village.

At that village another river called the Saltzbach, small, but very deep,
joins the Aest almost in a right angle. Behind this river on a considerable
eminence was placed the center commanded by general Conway; and on the
continuation of the same eminence, the right wing, under the hereditary prince,
stretched out toward the village of Werle, and it was well defended on the
flank by rugged, bushy, and almost impracticable ground. Nothing could be more
advantageous than this disposition of the army, by which the whole center and
right wing were covered in front by the river, and the left supported by rivers
on both its flanks. In the left indeed was the strength and flower of the army;
the count of Lip had placed also in this wing, the greatest part of the
artillery, as he knew that it defended the most important situation, was the
most exposed in front, and consequently would be the object of the enemy's most
considerable efforts.

He was not mistaken in his conjecture. On the 15th of July, in the evening, a
very furious attack was made on lord Granby's posts, which was sustained for a
long time with all the intrepidity and firmness, which British troops always
exert, and which that gallant officer knows so well how to inspire. The
disposition we have just mentioned, was not then completed; so that they had
the whole torrent of that impetuosity, which distinguishes the French in their
first attacks, to resist for some hours, until Wutgenau, according to the plan
originally projected, arrived to their assistance, and then with efforts united
and redoubled in a long and obstinate combat, which continued until it was
quite dark, they repulsed the French and drove them into the woods.

By the next morning, the disposition of the allies was perfected;

This movement was decisive, the enemy gave way, fell into disorder, and
retired with precipitation. Their center and left, which had not been able to
pass the Saltzbach, after a long and effectual cannonade, retired with the
rest, and covered their retreat; so that favored by this circumstance, and the
closeness of the country, which was full of hedges, they marched off in
tolerable order, and were pursued but a little way. However, their loss was
considerable: the Regiment of Rouge, consisting of four battalions, with its
cannon and colors, was entirely taken by the single battalion of Maxwell.
Their whole loss in killed, wounded, and prisoners, has been estimated at 5000.
The allies had about 300 killed, 1000 wounded, and about 200 prisoners. This
action was the climax of the campaign of 1761 Prince Ferdinand 's Letter to his
Majesty from the Field of Battle, dated, Kirch Denckern, July 16, 1761.
I Have the honor to congratulate your majesty upon a very signal advantage,
which your majesty's arms have this day gained. It is impossible for me to set
down every particular of this glorious day. The bearer of this, an officer of
very distinguished merit, and who has greatly contributed to the happy success
of this day, will give your majesty an exact account of it, I have the honor
to recommend him to your majesty's royal favor.

FERDINAND, Duke of Brunswick and Lunebourg.


What follows is the Account given by Major Wedderbourne,
ON the 15th of July the French attacked the light troops in the front of Lord
Granby's corpse, which was encamped on the heights of Kirch Denckern. His
Lordship ordered the regiments of Cornwallis, Keith, Campbell, and Marsberg, to
the left to support the posts. There was an uninterupted fire of cannon and
small arms, till nine at night, when it ceased, without any impression having
been made by the enemy upon Lord Granby's left.

In the morning of the 16th, about three o'clock the cannonading began very
briskly on both sides, and continued till nine, when the enemy gave way in
great disorder. His most serene highness the Duke, then ordered the corpse of
the prince of Anhalt, Lord Granby and Wutgenau, to attack them on their
retreat; which they did with so much vigor that the enemy never attempted to
form before them, but threw down their arms and ran off in the utmost disorder.

When major Wedderbourn came away, there were six colors already taken, eleven
or twelve pieces of cannon; many officers, amongst whom the Comte de Rouge, and
great part of the regiments of De Rouge, Dauphin, and Provence, to the amount
of 3000 men.

After having pursued them about a league, the duke ordered the troops to form
upon the heights of Kirch Denckern. The hereditary prince was still driving the
enemy on their left. Prisoners and cannon, were coming in every moment.

It was said, that the Marshal duc de Broglio commanded on the right of the
French army, opposite to the prince of Anhalt, Lord Granby, and Lieutenant
General Wutgenau, where his serene hignness was in person.

Major Wedderbourn adds, that this great victory was obtained with scarce any
loss on the part of the allied army.



, in Westphalia; it did the greatest honor to the wisdom of the accomplished
commander in the disposition, and to the bravery of the troops in the combat;
but it was far from decisive. Notwithstanding the loss the French suffered,
they were still much superior, in their numbers. On this misfortune the old ill
understanding between Soubise and Broglio broke out with fresh animosity.
Narratives, memorials, and replies, conceived with great bitterness, were
mutually remitted from both marshals to their court. Marshal Broglio alleged,
that his misfortune was owing to the prince de Soubise's delay, who did not
begin the attack till it was too late for him to continue it; the prince de
Soubise, on the other hand, suggested, that Broglio began his attack earlier
than the time that had been fixed, in hopes of forcing the allies without
Soubise's assistance; and when he found that point lost, obliged Soubise to
retreat, that he might not have the honor of recovering it.

The allies after this battle kept their ground for some time, whilst the
French retreated. It is impossible regularly to account for all the unexpected
turns which have happened, perhaps, more in this campaign, than in any of the
former. It is enough to know that the original superiority of the French,
together with their opportunity of continual reinforcement, may very tolerably
explain the reason of the advantages which they so often obtained after very
considerable defeats. This is a point which it is necessary the reader should
continually keep in his mind during the whole narration of this strange war.
After their late loss and retreat, the French soon advanced again. The party
under the prince de Soubise passed the Lip, and made dispositions for the
siege of Munster, whilst marshal Broglio's army turned off on the other side,
crossed the Weser, and threatened to fall in upon Hanover.

This division of the enemy compelled prince Ferdinand, though little in a
condition for it, to divide his army also. The hereditary prince posted himself
to cover Munster; whilst prince Ferdinand continued in the country toward the
Weser, to observe the motions of marshal Broglio.

Whilst these various positions were mutually taken, as the armies were
continually moving near each other, a number of very sharp skirmishes ensued.
Marshal Broglio cautiously avoided a battle whenever he saw that the duke of
Brunswick, by calling together his troops, had prepared for, and was desirous
of it; so that there was no way left, but if possible, to check his motions,
and wear down his force, by reiterated lesser actions Translation of Prince
Ferdinand's Letter to the Marquis of Granby.
Convent at Bubren, August 6, 1761. "My Lord,
I Think it my duty to acquaint your lordship how much I admire the valiant and
brave conduct of lord George Lenox, with the picquets, and of major Walsh, with
his battalions of grenadiers yesterday in the attack of the post and village of
Westen. I beg your lordship will be pleased to signify to them my most grateful
acknowledgements, and that these two gentlemen would do the same to the brave
troops who were led on by commanders of such distinguished valor.

I have the honor to be, With the most perfect respect, My Lord etc.


. These actions were almost always to the advantage of our troops. In one of
them however, the young prince Henry of Brunswick was mortally wounded; and the
whole army saw with regret,

On the side of Westphalia, the prince de Soubise persevered, notwithstanding
some checks, in his design of laying siege to Munster; there was great reason
to apprehend that he might succeed in that enterprise, as it was always in
marshal Broglio's power, by taking some steps on the side of Hanover, to make
it necessary to draw away the greatest part of the force destined to the
succor of Munster. He therefore began to make the previous arrangements at
Dorsten. The hereditary prince, who knew that he was continually liable to be
called off, took the first opportunity of attacking this place. Copy of the
Marquis of Granby's Leter to Major Walsh, commanding the first Battalion of
British Grenadiers.
Camp at Haarn, August 7, 1761. "SIR,
YOU will perceive, by the copy of the letter I have the pleasure to enclose to
you, how much his Serene Highness admired your behavior, and that of the first
battalion of grenadiers under your command, at the attack of the post and
village of Westen, on the 5th.

"You will, therefore, according to his Serene Highness's desire, testify to
the troops his extreme approbation of their distinguished bravery and firmness,
and likewise my thanks in the strongest manner.

I am, with the greatest regard, Sir, etc. GRANBY.



which were established here, and by this means not only frustrated their
design of besieging Munster, but compelled them for a time, to retire from the
Lip.

As to prince Ferdinand, he saw clearly, that the intentions of marshal Broglio
were to make himself master of his majesty's, and the duke of Brunswick's
territories. To attempt to follow him, and to beat him from thence, would only
be irrecoverably to transfer the seat of war into those countries, and wholly
to abandon Westphalia to the enemy. Diversion therefore, and not direct
opposition, became his object. He resolved, that as often as he perceived
marshal Broglio making any progress on the suspected quarter, he should throw
himself as far into Hesse as the enemy had advanced toward Hanover, and by
stopping their subsistence, oblige them to quit their enterprise. This plan at
first succeeded to his wishes, and drew back marshal Broglio into Hesse, upon
whose approach prince Ferdinand retired to his old quarters at Paderborn, and
ready for a new movement as soon as Broglio should return to the execution of
his former design.

Accordingly he soon returned to the Weser. Then the hereditary prince, who had
by this time re-joined the grand army, advanced into Hesse, and pushed to the
farthest extremities of that country, even as far as Fritzlar; but though he
succeeded so far in his attempts as to destroy all the lesser magazines which
he found in the open country; yet as all the fortresses were in the hands of
the enemy, as the garrisons had been newly reinforced and the grand magazines
were well secured in those places, he kept his ground in his advanced position.

It was on this occasion principally that prince Ferdinand found the
disadvantage of not being able to form two armies, which might act seperately.
For on one hand, marshal Broglio, when he had perfectly secured his posts in
Hesse, took a situation in which he watched all the motions of prince
Ferdinand, and kept himself in readiness to fall back into Hesse, or to advance
into Hanover, as might best agree with his designs. From hence he sent out some
powerful detachments which acted with great effect. One of these detachments
entered the Hearts Forest (the remains of the great Hercynian, so famous among
the ancients) and besieged the strong castle of Schartsfelts, which they took
and demolished. Then they laid the whole tract of country under severe
contribution. Another, and still more powerful detachment under prince Xavier
of Saxony appeared before Wolfenbuttle, a considerable city, and strongly
situated,

Flushed with this success, the French followed their blow, and advanced,
keeping still the course of the Ocker, to Brunswick; and began also to invest
that city. The reigning prince, unable to protect his subjects, or to secure
his person in his dominions, fled to Hamburgh, where he met the landgrave of
Hesse, whom the rage of war had in the same manner driven from his territories.
This free city now became a place of general refuge, and enriched itself by the
calamities, as it had in better times done by the prosperity of Germany. It was
lately computed, that the strangers there had increased to 40,000, amongst whom
they could reckon two sovereign princes, and several other persons of the first
distinction.

This rapid and unresisted progress of the French to the eastward of the Weser,
was to the highest degree alarming. Prince Ferdinand with all the expedition in
his power, detached the hereditary prince to the relief of Brunswick. This
measure fortunately saved that very important place. This active commander
compelled the enemy not only to raise the siege of Brunswick, but to abandon
Wolfenbuttel, and to make a precipitate retreat with the loss of some of their
cannon, and upwards of 1000 men.

Whilst Broglio's detachments proceeded thus in distressing the country to the
eastward of the Weser, the prince of Soubise, who by the removal of the
hereditary prince of Brunswick to another quarter, saw no longer any thing
capable of opposing him, spread his army by detachments over all Westphalia,
and ravaged it in the most cruel manner. They took Osnabrug; and because the
contributions were not immediately paid, they gave up the place to be pillaged
by their troops, who rifled the miserable inhabitants without mercy. Another
body pushed as far as Embden. This important town was immediately surrendered
by the garrison (two English companies of invalids) at the desire of the timid
inhabitants, and the promise of a favorable treatment: notwithstanding this
capitulation, and the merit of so easy a surrender, the town, as well as the
whole country of East-Friesland, was laid under a ruinous contribuon. But their
exorbitances grew to such an extremity, that the boors were at length compelled
to rise, and with such arms as a sudden rage supplied them, to drive these
oppressors out of their country.

A more considerable corpse commanded by the prince de Conde, laid siege to
Meppen, a place on the Ems, of some consequence,

The city of Bremen was defended by a weak garrison. This was a place of far
greater moment than Meppen, the allies having amassed their immense magazines,
as it was a great and trading town, advantageously situated on the river Weser;
and the possession of this place must undoubtedly have given to the French the
command of that river, through which the allies derived all their subsistence. If
the English had lost Bremen, they must have seen themselves invested and locked
up in a barren counrry, in the heart of Germany, surrounded by their enemies,
and deprived of every resource. Fortunately the inhabitants of this city proved
as brave as those of Embden were timid. They were exasperated by the example of
the French rigor, which they had seen on every side of them. They therefore
joined the garrison, instead of discouraging them in the defense of the place.
The French were obliged to retire precipitately; and a strong reinforcement was
thrown into Bremen, to secure that very important city from the like
enterprises for the future.

Whilst the two French armies in this manner ravaged all the country held by
the allies, prince Ferdinand, who saw the rage of war spread all around him,
with his usual firmness, kept that central position which he had taken soon
after the battle of Kirch Denkern; no movements of the enemy could terrify or
allure him from it. He had settled his head quarters at Buhne, and his army
extended from thence toward Hammelen. Posted in this manner, he secured the
course of the Weser, by preventing the enemy from making themselves masters
either of Hammelen or Minden; he lay in the best situation in which it was
possible to place a single army, that was to act against two; and knowing that
he could not follow their movements with the body of his army, without
hazarding the king's electoral dominions, and indeed every object of the war,
he contented himself with sending out such detachments as he could spare,
successively to the relief of the places which were attacked. He saw that the
winter approached, which had always been a circumstance fayourable to him; and
it was evident that whilst he continued with his main body immoveably fixed as
it was, and his detachments active on every side, it was impossible for the
enemy to keep any of those places, they had seized in their incursions.

CHAP. VI.
Condition of the King of Prussia. His inaction. Motions of the Russians and
Laudohn. Breslau cannonaded. Tottleben removed. Colberg besieged. Russian
magazines in Poland destroyed. War transferred to Pomerania. King of Prussia
quits his strong camp. Schweidnitz taken by a coup de main. General Platen
repulsed. General Knoblock made prisoner at Treptow. Prince Wurtenburg
retreats. Colberg taken, Russians winter in Pomerania.

UNTIL this year the operations of the Prussian armies took the lead in
interest and importance before all the other events of the war. The firmness
and activity of their illustrious monarch, the number and animosity of his
enemies, the blows that he gave, and those that he suffered, his distressing
and terrible falls, his amazing and almost miraculous recoveries, kept all eyes
fixed on his motions, as the great center of public attention. Undoubtedly
nothing that has ever been acted on the scene of human affairs, attracted the
minds of men to it with greater justice; none perhaps afforded at once more
entertainment to the imagination, and furnished more copious materials for
political and military instruction; and probably, therefore, this part of all
our modern history, will be the most carefully studied by posterity, when it
comes to be properly known, and worthily written.

To judge of the importance of this branch of the general war, it will be
proper to recollect that, besides a number of sieges which were prosecuted,
together with innumerable and bloody skirmishes, no less than nineteen pitched
battles, or capital actions, have been fought on his part since the close of
the year 1756, when the king of Prussia first seized upon Saxony, and made an
iruption into Bohemia. In eleven of these battles, the King or his generals
were defeated. He was victorious only in eight. Ten of them were fought under
his own command; and seven out of the eight victories which were gained, were
obtained by himself in person; of the eleven defeats, he was present only at
three.

From these circumstances some judgment may be formed of the active and
enterprizing character of this monarch, and of the amazing resource he had
prepared, or formed, or seized, and in some instances, one may say, almost
created. We have observed that the last campaign had ended more to his
advantage than the one preceding had done; for those two great victories of
Lignitz and Torgau, with which he then ended his operations, had not only
rescued his affairs in Silesia and Saxony from impending destruction, but had
enlarged his field for recruiting, and prepared him, to all appearance, for
more early and vigorous action, than could have been expected in most of the
preceding campaigns. But every one was surprised to observe, that this year he
had totally altered the system of his conduct. An inactivity and languor was
diffused over all his proceedings. He seemed to have adopted the caution and
slowness which had been so long opposed to his vivacity by M. Daun. The summer
was almost wholly spent, and the King of Prussia had scarcely been mentioned.

It was not suspected that the proposed negotiation at Augsburg could have had
much, if any influence upon his method of proceeding. No particular proposals
had been made concerning his affairs, nor indeed any other marks of a pacific
disposition toward him shown, except what were contained in those general
declarations, which a regard to common decency had exacted. It must have added
to the anxiety of his situation, that Great Britain and France were at that
time engaged in a separate treaty, in which the latter power was in a condition
to make so many flattering offers in relation to Germany, that he might well
have dreaded the withdrawing of that assistance which had hitherto been his
great support against all attacks, and his final resource in all his
distresses. Perhaps he was well assured, that the faith of Great Britain was
proof against every offer, however alluring; in fact it proved to be so; for in
rejecting the German neutrality, which the French proposed in the late
negotiation, our country afforded as convincing a proof of an unshaken public
faith, as any people had ever given to their allies.

However, whilst this point remained in any degree of suspense, it would have
appeared natural, that the King of Prussia should make some uncommon exertions
to confirm the faith of his allies, as well as to put himself upon a more
respectable footing at the ensuing congress. It is, notwithstanding certain,
that he contented himself with acting wholly upon the defensive; a conduct,
which perhaps his circumstances had rendered absolutely unavoidable. Prince
Henry commanded an army in Saxony, which entrenched itself strongly under
Leipsic. M. Daun continued near Dresden; and these two armies did no more than
watch each other during the campaign. The King was also entrenched in a very
strong position in Upper Silesia, not far from Schweidnitz, whilst the
fortresses in the lower part of that country were filled with such garrisons,
as put them out of the reach of any sudden insult.

This position was pointed out by the motions and apparent designs of his
enemies. The Russian army was this year, as well as in the former, divided into
two strong bodies; one of which, led by Tottleben, directed its march toward
Pomerania: and the other under M. Butterlin, entered into the upper Silesia,
advancing toward Breslau Baron Laudohn entered that province in the part
opposite to them, and they proposed to unite their armies, in order to attack
the King, or to take Breslau or Schweidnitz in his presence. The remarkable
drought in the beginning of the season, which had greatly lowered the Oder,
facilitated their junction. The Russians spread themselves over all the open
country of Silesia; and exacted heavy contributions. these attempts failing, he
turned off and made a feint as if he proposed to fall upon the Lower Silesia,
in hopes that he might at least oblige the King of Prussia to detach and divide
his forces; but the King continued immovable in his post.

Whilst these various movements were making with little effect, on the side of
Silesia, the other grand division of the Russians advanced without opposition
into Pomerania; and it was expected that their proceedings would be attended
with greater effect since the removal of Tottleben, and the appointment of
general Romanzow to the command. Tottleben had been long suspected, and, it is
said, at length convicted, of a secret correspondence with the King of Prussia.
The situation of this Monarch obliged him to fight with every sort of weapon;
and Tottleben, a soldier of fortune, without any national attachment or
particular allegiance, was a fit object for the King of Prussia's pecuniary
stratagems. He did not succeed so well in the attempts of the same kind which
he is said to have made upon Laudohn. Every circumstance concurred to render
the method of corruption less successful in that quarter.

Colberg, regularly besieged, or closely streightened every campaign, since the
Russians made themselves masters of the kingdom of Prussia, was now assaulted
with greater and more determined force than ever. A strong fleet consisting of
forty sail of all kinds, blockaded it by sea, whilst the army of general
Romanzow formed the siege by land. On the other hand, the place threatened a
defense worthy of its former efforts. This city was from the beginning of the
war of greater strength than it had commonly been represented; every attempt of
the Russians, by demonstrating where any weakness lay, taught the Prussians,
who were fully sensible of its importance, in what part and in what manner it
was necessary to add to its works; and they had omitted no opportunity. In
addition to this defense, the Prince of Wurtenburg was strongly entrenched
under the cannon of the town, with a body of six or seven thousand men.

The King of Prussia was extremely alarmed at the danger of this momentous
post, the key of his dominions to the north, from the relief of which he was
removed, and, as it were, chained down, at such an immense distance. Though
Laudohn and Butterlin found abundant employment for his forces, he resolved to
send a considerable detachment under general Platen to the assistance of
Colberg. The fertility of his genius proposed two ends from this single
expedient. He ordered Platen to direct his march through Poland, and to destroy
the Russian magazines, which had been amassed on the frontiers of that kingdom,
and from which their army in Silesia drew its whole subsistence. This service,
might, he hoped, be performed without any considerable interruption to the
progress of the detachment toward Colberg. The event was entirely answerable
to his wishes. General Platen ruined three principal magazines of the enemy. He
attacked a great convoy of their wagons; destroyed 500, and burned (...)
dispersed the provisions they carried. Four thousand men who protected this
convoy, were, for the greater part, killed or made prisoners. General Platen,
after this useful and brilliant exploit, pursued his march with the utmost
diligence to Pomerania.

Intelligence of this blow was no sooner received by the Russians in Silesia,
than they were struck with the utmost consternation. They had lately effected
one of their purposes by their junction with the Austrians;

So unfortunately circumstanced were the affairs of the King of Prussia, that
his wisest schemes and happiest successes could hardly answer any other end
than to vary the scene of his distress. The storm which had been diverted from
Silesia by general Platen's expedition, was only removed from thence to be
discharged with irresistible fury on Colberg. The Russians, when they saw that
the measures the king had taken, rendered the completion of both their designs
impracticable, resolved at all adventures to secure one of them. Colberg was
the object of their choice, not only as the place furthest from succor but as
the possession of it would be an advantage fittest for answering those ends
which were more nearly and properly Russian. M. Butturlin, therefore, as soon
as he had established his convoys, directed his course toward Pomerania, and
being master of Lansperg, he sent detachments from thence, that cruelly wasted
all the adjoining March of Brandenburg, without at the same time diverting
himself by these ravages from his main intention.

A force of Russians was by this time assembled in Pomerania, to which it was
impossible for the king of Prussia to oppose any thing that was in any degree
able to contend with them in the field; of course he could not promise himself
that immediate raising the siege could be the effect of these succors. All he
could do was to send another detachment to that part under general Knoblock;
and hoped that by the union of these several small corpse, and by their
intercepting or at least distressing the Russian convoys of provision, the
place might be enabled to hold out, until the severe setting in of winter
should render the operations of a siege impracticable.

He was providing in this manner, and studying new methods for the relief of
Colberg, to the danger of which place his whole attention was drawn, when an
event happened just by him, and, as it were, under his eye, almost as
distressing as the taking of Colberg would have proved, and so much the more
distressing, as it was entirely unexpected.

On the retreat of the Russians under Butturlin, the king of Prussia imagined
himself at liberty. He found a want of provisions in his strong camp near
Schweidnitz, and to be the more easily supplied, he aproached nearer to the
Oder, He was so little in fear of the enemy, that on making this movement he
drafted 4000 men from the garrison of Schwidnitz: he thought that the
preparations necessary to a siege would give him sufficient notice, and
sufficient leisure to provide for the safety of that important place, from
which after all, he had removed but to a very small distance. Laudohn, who
through the whole campaign had watched the king with a most diligent and
penetrating assiduity, and hitherto had found no part open and unguarded,
thought in this instant he perceived an advantage. It was indeed an advantage
which would never have appeared as such, but to a general as resolute as
sagacious. He resolved to attempt this strong place, by a coup de main. On the
1st of October at three in the morning, the assault began. An attack was made
at the same time on all the four outworks which the troops, ordered on this
important enterprise approached with so much precaution, that they were not
perceived by the garrison. They scaled all the four at the same time; and the
troops which defended them had scarce time to fire a few cannon shot. On the
side of the assailants, not a gun was discharged: but in one of those outworks
the fire of the small arms set fire to a powder magazine, which blew up, and on
this occasion about 300 of the Austrians, and about the same number of the
Prussians were killed. As soon at the outworks were carried, they prepared to
assault the body of the place, which they entered by bursting open the gates,
and at daybreak they found themselves-masters of the town after firing a few
shot. Five battalions, making about 3000 men, and lieutenant general Zastrow,
governor of the fortress, were made prisoners. The conquerors found here a
great number of cannon, and a large magazine of meal. Their loss in the whole
of this bold and fortunate undertaking amounted, by their accounts, to no more
than 600 men.

In a manner so unexpected, and considering the nature of the fortifications,
so unprecedented, Schweidnitz fell for a second time in this war into the hands
of the Austrians; and that city, which in the year 1758 had cost the Prussians
a blockade of some months, and a siege of thirteen days open trenches to
recover it, was again lost in a few hours, and with a very inconsiderable
damage to those who undertook this daring enterprise.

The king of Prussia felt this grievous blow to the quick. By their possession
of Schweidnitz he saw the Austrians enabled to winter in Silesia; he saw that
whilst they held this place, he could possibly make no motion for the relief of
any other part of his dominions, without exposing Breslau, and along with it
the whole of Upper Silesia, to a certain and irrecoverable conquest. In the
first agitations produced by so extraordinary and affecting a disaster, he was
disposed to attribute this misfortune to the treachery of the governor, but he
was too generous to harbor such a suspicion, for any time, against an officer
who had hitherto served him with fidelity, and who might have been surprised
with an attack of so uncommon a nature, and which the king himself had as
little suspected as the governor. He immediately recovered his temper, and said
with a smile, It is a fatal blow; we must endeavor to remedy it. He wrote to
general Zastrow, who commanded there, We may now say, what Francis I. of France
wrote to his mother after the battle of Pavia, We have lost all except our
honor. As I cannot comprehend what has happened to you, I shall suspend my
judgment; the thing is very extraordinary.

Schweidnitz was lost suddenly; but Colberg made a most obstinate and noble
defense, At length, however, the garrison began to be sorely distressed for
provisions. General Platen quitted the intrenchments, which he had maintained
in conjunction with the prince of Wurtenburg, in order to cover the
reinforcements, which the numerous and strong detachments of the Russians, who
overspread the whole country, had hitherto kept at a distance. But he had the
misfortune to meet an infinitely superior body of the enemy, to be beaten, and
to lose part of his convoy; and it was with difficulty he escaped with the
remainder to Stettin.

The other (general Knoblock) had established himself at Treptow, which was to
serve as a resting place for the convoys; but as general Platen had been
repulsed, in the manner we have just seen, Romanzow advanced with a large force
to Treptow. Knoblock, hopeless of assistance in a town which had scarcely any
walls, and invested by a body so vastly superior, yet made a vigorous and
gallant defense for five days; he was at length compelled to surrender himself
and his body of about 2000 men prisoners of war.

These successive disasters were occasioned by the necesssity there was for
revictualling Colberg, cost what it would, for that end, of dispersing the
Prussian troops in the face of a Russian army of 50,000 men. The revictualling
in these circumstances could not be effected without a singular piece of good
fortune; and, in order to get into the way of this good fortune, every risque
was to be run.

These advantages over Platen and Knoblock raised the spirits of the Russians,
and enabled them to contend with the extreme rigor of the season in that
northern latitude; they pushed the siege with redoubled efforts. All hope of a
supply from the land was absolutely at an end; and though the Russian fleet had
been by a violent storm driven off the coast, the succor from the sea was too
precarious to be depended on. In this desperate situation the prince of
Wurtenburg became apprehensive, lest his army, which had been unable to relieve
the town, by delaying any longer under its walls would only share its fate, and
that famine might also oblige him to surrender. He therefore resolved, whilst
his men retained their vigor, to break through a part of the Russian army, and
to leave Colberg to make the best terms its circumstances would admit. This
design he accomplished happily, and with little or no loss.

Heyde, who to this time had maintained it successfully against all the efforts
of the Russians during the war; and as he was distinguished by the king his
master, for his merit in the successful defense of it, he had likewise as full
assurances of his favors after having on the late occasion conducted himself
with his former bravery, though it was not with the former good fortune.

The loss of two such places as Schweidnitz and Colberg, at the two extremities
of his dominions, was decisive against the king of Prussia. It was now
impossible for him to make any movement by which the enemy could not profit to
his almost certain destruction. To form sieges, with an army like his, inferior
in the field, was impossible. The Russians, by possessing Colberg, possessed
every thing. They were masters of the Baltic; and they now acquired a port, by
which their armies could be well provided, without the necessity of tedious,
uncertain, and expensive convoys from Poland, The road lay almost open into the
heart of Brandenburg. Stetin alone stood in their way; but it was obvious that
nothing but the advanced season could save Stetin from the fate of Colberg. The
Russians, now for the first time, took up their winter quarters in Pomerania.

It is remarkable, that this whole year passed without a regular battle between
the king of Prussia and any of his enemies, yet none of the most unfortunate of
his campaigns had been so ruinous to him. He had suffered four terrible
defeats, without having balanced them with a single advantage of consequence
in the campaign of 1759. Yet in these circumstances it is almost incredible how
little he really lost. He was able to take the field again the ensuing year in
a very respectable manner, and to make head against his enemies. In that year
he lost a whole army near Landshut; still he was far from being broken.
Afterward in that same campaign, he gave his enemies two signal defeats, and
ended his operations advantageously, and with great glory. But in the year, of
which we now write, without suffering any considerable blow in the field,
without any striking efforts on any side, his power has gradually crumbled
away. The most calamitous defeats could not sink him lower. And in the
situation in which he stood after the taking of Colberg, we may safely say,
that there was scarcely a possibility that he could be preserved from
destruction by any thing that lay within the reach of human endeavors.

CHAP. VII.
The negotiation resumed. French concessions. Difference concerning the German
alliance. Difference concerning the captures antecedent to the declaration of
war. Treaty breaks off. Messieurs Stanley and Bussy recalled.

AFTER having been so long detained on the theater of war, it is time we should
return to take a view of the negotiation for putting an end to the miseries it
occasioned. In reality the view, even of this scene, was very glooming and
unpromising. The confidence and good humor of the two courts being subverted,
all that followed was rather an altercation than a treaty. It is true, that
papers passed backward and forward; and the pretensions of each party, the
points they agreed to cede, and those which they were determined to adhere to,
grew more distinct and explicit. But all that cordiality was vanished, which is
so necessary toward smoothing and clearing a road, which a long hostility had
broken up, and so many intricate topics had contributed to embarrass.

Without involving ourselves in the detail of the several memorials which were
delivered in and without referring numerically to the several articles, it will
be sufficient that we briefly state those points which were, or seemed to be,
in a fair way of adjustment between England and France; and afterward those on
which it should appear that the negotiation broke off.

After some discussions concerning its proper limits, it was agreed, that all
Canada should be ceded to the English. This cession comprehended, on one side,
all the islands and countries adjoining to the gulf of St. Lawrence. On the
other, it took in all the great lakes, and the whole course of the Ohio, to its
discharge into the Missisippi. A territory sufficient for the basis of a great
empire.

In drawing this line of division, another question arose concerning the bounds
of Louisiana, and the state of the intermediate Indian nation between the lakes
and the Missisippi, who inhabit, or are rather scattered over an immense
country, that lies along the back of our colonies all the way from Pensylvania
to Georgia. It was therefore very proper that something definitive should be
settled on this article, as it might otherwise easily be made productive of a
new war, England proposed that all those nations should continue, as she
contended they had heretofore been, under the protection of Great Britain,
without saying any thing precise as to the dominion of the soil.

France controverted this proposition; she on her part proposed to divide these
nations; that those to the northward of the line drawn to ascertain the limits
of Canada should be independent, under the protection of England, but that
those, which were to the southward, should enjoy the same independence, under
the protection of France. Nothing was perfectly settled in relation to this
point; but it does not seem as if there could have been any material
disagreement upon it had the other matters in debate been adjusted to their
mutual satisfaction.

The African contest seemed to have been attended with still less difficulty.
The French consented to give up both Senegal and Goree, provided Anamaboo and
Acra were guarantied to them.

The momentous question of the fishery was likewise determined, The French gave
up their claim to Cape Breton and St. John's, and were satisfied to receive the
little island of St, Pierre on the coast of Newfoundland; but even this they
were to receive on conditions sufficiently humiliating. They were to erect no
sort of fortification, nor to keep up any military establishment there. An
English commissary was to reside on the island, in order to see that these
stipulations were adhered to. As to the rest, the French were to have the same
privileges on the coast of Newfoundland, checked with the same restrictions,
which before the war they had enjoyed under the 15th article of the treaty of
Utrecht. In conformity to another article of that treaty, and in compensation
for the privilege of the fishery, they consented that Dunkirk should be
demolished.

Concerning the islands of Guadaloupe, Marigalante, Minorca and Belleisle, no
great controversy had subsisted from the beginning. It had all along been
agreed, that, these conquests should be reciprocally restored. Neither did the
French scruple to adopt our proposal concerning the affairs of the East Indies,
nor to make satisfactory declaration concerning Ostend and Nieuport.

So many delicate and interesting points were settled, that it does not first
appear what it was that could have retarded the peace. A discussion of the
separate interests of two powers only, that are in earnest to agree, may be
settled without any very considerable difficulty. The hard and almost
inextricable part of the knot, is that wherein the cross concerns and interests
of allies intervene. There were two points upon which, if we may form a
judgment from appearances, this negotiation unfortunately broke off. The first
was upon the manner in which England and France might be at liberty to assist
their respective allies; and on the restitution of Wesel, Gueldres, and such
other places as the French had conquered from his Prussian majesty.

On the first member of this principal point, the repeated proposals of France
for a neutrality in Germany had been uniformly and positively rejected by our
administration. They were considered as so many attacks upon national
integrity. This scheme therefore, not being admitted they would or could come
to no agreement, and scarcely to an intelligible explanation either of the mode
or the quantity of the assistance which they should be at liberty mutually to
impart to their German allies, or of the place in which such succors should be
employed. As to Wesel and Gueldres, the French obstinately refused to restore
those places. They declared that such a cession would be directly against the
faith by which they were bound to the empress queen of Hungary, for whom they
insisted that these places had been conquered, and in whose name alone they
were governed, though they had been reduced by the French arms, and were at
that moment held by French garrisons.

As to the second point, namely, the restitution of captures made previous to
the declaration of war, the negotiating powers were equally positive, the one
to demand, the other to refuse it. The English argued that this claim had no
sort of foundation in the law of nations, neither was it grounded on any
particular convention. That the right of all hostile operations results, not
from a formal declaration of war but from the hostilities which the aggressor
has first offered; that the contrary of this proposition is at least extremely
contestible; and since, it can by no means be clearly established, it follows
that the detainment of those captures must be considered, on the side of
England, as part of the uti possidetis, originally proposed as the basis of
this treaty.

France on the other hand, seemed as fully convinced of the justice of her
pretensions, and she deemed the arguments with which she supported them to be
so unanswerable, that she offered to submit them to the justice of the English
tribunals. They urged that this claim of restitution was founded on the law of
nations, and upon particular convention; by the 19th article of the peace of
Utrecht; and by the second article of the treaty of commerce; and that this was
strengthened by the third article of the treaty of Aixla-Chappelle, which
renews and confirms those articles in the preceding treaties.

By these articles a protection is allowed to the respective subjects who may
have ships in the ports of either of the powers, because having no opportunity
of knowing that a rupture is fallen out, they sailed under a security of peace,
and under the faith of treaties. By a parity of reasoning, the ships not
actually in those ports ought to enjoy the same security; else, as they are
included in the same parity of circumstances, it would follow, contrary to the
principals of humanity and right reason, that the sovereigns had provided for
the preservation of one part of their subjects from the miseries of a sudden
rupture, to which they expose the rest. The particular conventions of these
treaties, they said, had their foundation in general equity and the law of
nations; since, as it is impracticable for belligerent states to agree amongst
themselves which is the agressor, it is proper that the subjects should receive
previous notice of the rupture, in order that they may be able distinctly to
know when they are, or are not in security, or when they may, or may not rely
on the treaties which subsist between their sovereigns.

These topics were as usual, bandied to and fro with great heat and little
effect; and as in such discussions the arguments on both sides are plausible,
and there can be no authorized judge, the weight of the several pretensions
commonly depends upon the power of the parties to enforce them. On these two
points, therefore, the renunciation of German alliances, and the restitution of
captures, the negotiation from the beginning was at a stand; and on these at
length to all appearance, it finally broke off.

Not but we are fully satisfied that the disagreement even on these points
might have been only the ostensible cause of the rupture. The true cause of the
breach seems to have been the unseasonable interposition of the Spanish claims.
For could France be supposed in good earnest to desire peace, that is, to
desire such a reasonable peace, as her circumstances might demand, when she
officiously mingled with our particular debate, the affairs of a foreign and
neutral power, which had not the smallest connection with those that were at
this time properly under deliberation? It was ridiculous to urge, that this was
done from a prudent foresight, and to prevent a future war, which these
disputes might possibly occasion. The business was to put an end to the war
which then actually subsisted; and nothing could be farther from assisting this
design than to increase the subjects of debate. France must be sensible of the
weight of this argument, who herself proposed in the very beginning of this
treaty, as means almost necessary for carrying it on with effect, that their
particular dispute should be separated from those of their German allies, with
which it certainly had a more natural connection than with those that subsisted
between England and Spain; as all the former parties were then engaged directly
or indirectly in the war, to which Spain had then no manner of relation.

The English ministry finding the French immovable on the two capital points
above mentioned and having no opinion of the sincerity of their procedure, sent
directions to Mr. Stanly, to return to England, and to desire that Mr. Bussy
should on the part of his court, receive the same orders. engaged, or from
extinguishing the old war, that the parties separated with intention more
hostile, and opinions more adverse than ever; and the war was soon spread to a
much greater extent by the taking in of a new party, and may possibly spread,
still more widely, by laying open new sources of contention which may gradually
draw in other powers, and finally involve every part of Europe. It was also a
means of producing changes in England, which at a time of less tranquillity, and
in circumstances of less internal strength might have been productive of the
most fatal consequences. But these matters are reserved for the subject of the
ensuing chapter.

The leading negotiation in London and Paris being thus broken off, that which
was proposed at Augsburg never took place.

CHAP. VIII.
Conduct of Spain during the negotiation, Spanish minister's memorial. Treaty
between France and Spain. Difference in the English ministry. Mr. Pit resigns.
Mr. Pitt's letter. Dispute concerning the resignation. Addresses, Parliament
meets. The German war continued.

AS nothing could have been more unprecedented, so nothing was more alarming
than the proceeding of the court of Spain in the negotiation. It was altogether
extraordinary to see a proposal for accommodating disputes that subsisted
between friends coming through the channel of an enemy. It was extremely singular
to see points of such consequence formally communicated and proposed for
deliberation by a French agent, commissioned only to negotiate a particular and
distinct business, when the Spaniards had an ambassador residing in London,
from whom no sort of intimation had been previously received of such a design.

That proposal not only marked out a want of sincerity on the part of France,
but it manifested so strange and irregular a partiality on the part of Spain,
that it would very little have become the dignity of the king of Great Britain,
or his attention to the safety of his subjects, to let it pass without a full
and satisfactory explanation. Accordingly the Spanish ambassador was called
upon to disavow this irregular procedure; but he returned a verbal, and soon
after was authorized by his court to return a written answer, in which he
openly avowed and justified the step taken by the French agent, as entirely
agreeable to the sentiments of his master. He declared that the kings of France
and Spain were united not only by ties of blood, but by a mutual interest. He
applauded the humanity and greatness of mind which his most Christian majesty
demonstrated in the proposition that was complained of. He insisted much on the
sincere desire of peace, the only motive which influenced the conduct of the
two monarchs; and he added, haughtily, that if his master had been governed by
any other principles, His Catholic majesty giving full scope to his greatness,
would have spoken from himself, and as became his dignity.

It appeared evidently from the whole of this paper, that the court of Spain
was regularly, as a fort of party, apprised of every step that was taken in the
negotiation; that her judgment was appealed to upon every point, and her
authority called in aid to force the acceptance of the terms which were offered
by France; in a word, that there was a perfect union of affections, interests,
and councils between these two courts; and the minister of the former, so far
from denying or palliating this conduct, seemed to glory in it.

Mr. Pit who then took the lead in the ministry, was fully satisfied the
intentions of Spain were by no means equivocal, and that this partiality, which
they strongly avowed not only by declarations, but by facts, would drive them
into all the measures of France. That a war on that account was absolutely
inevitable; and if, for the present moment, the Spaniards rather delayed their
declaration of war, than laid aside their hostile intentions, it was in order
to strike the blow at their own time, and with the greater effect; that
therefore their reasons for delaying to act were the very motives, which ought
to induce us to act with the utmost speed, and utmost vigor. That we ought to
consider the evasions of that court as a refusal of satisfaction, and that
refusal, as a declaration of war. That we ought from prudence as well as from
spirit to secure ourselves the first blow; and to be practically convinced,
that the early and effective measures, which had so large a share in reducing
France to this dependence upon Spain, would also be the fittest for deterring
or disabling Spain from affording any protection to France. That, to carry on
this war with vigor, it was only necessary to continue our present efforts; no
new armament would be necessary; and that if any war could provide its own
resources, it must be a war with Spain. That their flota had not yet arrived,
and that the taking of it, would at once disable theirs and strengthen our
hands. This procedure so suited to the dignity of the nation, and the insults
it had received, would be a lesson to Spain, and to every other power, how they
should presume to dictate in our affairs, and to intermeddle with a menacing
mediation, and an officiousness as insidious as it was audacious. That he would
allow our enemies, whether secret or declared, no time to think and recollect
themselves.

These sentiments, so agreeable to the resolute and enterprising character of
this minister, appeared shocking to almost all the rest of his colleagues. They
admitted that we ought not to be terrified from the assertions of our just
demands, by the menaces of any power. They owned that Spain had taken a very
extraordinary and very unjustifiable step; but that we ought to admit and even
to wish for, an explanation; this court upon a sober yet spirited remonstrance,
might recall that rash proposition into which they had been perhaps unwarily
seduced by the artifices of France; that to shun war upon a just occasion was
cowardice, but to provoke or court it was madness. And, if to court a war was
not in general a very wise measure, to desire it with Spain, if possibly it
could be avoided, was to overturn the most fundamental principles of the policy
of both nations. That this desire of adding war to war, and enemy to enemy,
whilst we had our hands already as full as they could hold, and whilst all our
faculties were strained to the utmost pitch, was ill to calculate the national
strength of our country, which, however great, had its limits, and was not able
to contend with all the world; that whilst we were calling for new enemies, no
motion was made of new allies, nor indeed of any new resource whatsoever. To
plunge into such measures, in the manner proposed, and upon no better grounds,
could not fail to scandalize and alarm all Europe; and we could possibly derive
no advantage from this precipitate conduct, which would not be more than
counter-balanced by the jealousy and terror it would necessarily create in
every nation near us. As to the seizure of the flota, it was not to be reckoned
upon, as at the very time of that deliberation it might be expected to be safe
in its harbor; and perhaps if we could succeed in seizing it, we might perform
a service not very agreeable to neutral nations, and as little advantageous to
our own commerce. If Spain, blind to her true interests, and misled by French
councils, should give in a more decisive manner into the designs of that court,
and obstinately refuse a reasonable satisfaction, it would be then the true
time to declare war, when all the neighboring and impartial powers were
convinced that we acted with as much temper as resolution, and when every
thinking man at home should be satisfied that he was not hurried into the
hazards and expenses of war, from an idea of chimerical heroism, but from
inevitable necessity; and that in such a case we might depend upon the utmost
support which the nation could give to an administration that depended upon its
strength, and yet dreaded to waste it wantonly, or to employ it unjustly. The
minister warmed by this opposition, declared that, This was the time for
humbling the whole House of Bourbon; that if this opportunity was let slip, it
might never be recovered; and if he could not prevail in this instance, he was
resolved that this was the last time he would sit in that council. He thanked
the ministers of the late king for their support; said he was himself called to
the ministry by the voice of the people, to whom he considered himself as
accountable for his conduct; and that he would no longer remain in a situation
which made him responsible for measures he was no longer allowed to guide.

The noble lord, who precided in this council, to whom years have added the
wisdom of experience, without abating the vigor and fire of youth; and who was
himself as bold a minister as ever directed the affairs of this nation, made
him this reply: I find the gentleman is determined to leave us, nor can I say I
am sorry for it, since he would otherwise have certainly compelled us to leave
him; but, if he be resolved to assume the right of advising his majesty, and
directing the operations of the war, to what purposes are we called to this
council? When he talks of being responsible to the people, he talks the
language of the house of commons, and forgets, that at this board, he is only
responsible to the king. However, though he may possibly have convinced himself
of his infallibility, still it remains that we should be equally convinced
before we can resign our understanding to his direction, or join with him in
the measure be proposes. This speech has been since discovered to be one
amongst the number of contrivances that were formed and published by the
opposite party to prejudice Mr. Pit in the eyes of the public; for after Mr.
Pit and lord Temple had taken their leaves at the third and last council
summoned to deliberate on the conduct of Spain, the late earl Granville, then
lord president of the council, rose up to speak, expressing a very high opinion
of Mr. Pitt's wisdom, penetration, abilities, honor and integrity, and in a
very particular, and emphatical manner, spoke of the innumerable and almost
insurmountable difficulties, which Mr. Pit and lord Temple had to struggle
with; these, he said, were the sentiments he then delivered, and in justice to
himself, several times declared, that the speech sent abroad, (as spoke by him
on that occasion) was no other than a vile forgery, calculated to serve a
purpose as base as it was ungrateful. It may not be improper to detect another
instance of their base conduct, propagated with no less avidity; that Mr. Pit
in his heart was not an enemy to pensions, witness his letter to a noble duke
soliciting his grace's interest, with his late majesty for a pension: By the
noble duke is meant the duke of Newcastle, who, on all occasions publicly
declared, he had never received any such letter.

Review of Lord Bute's Administration.




On the division, the minister himself, and a noble lord closely connected with
him, were the only voices in favor of the immediate declaration of war; the
rest of the board were unanimously against it.

The reader will observe that together with those matters, which have been
published, relative to this very important deliberation, with some appearance
of authenticity, we have added such arguments as have been agitated among the
people; a liberty necessary to place the matter in its full light.

Mr. Pit and lord Temple, adhering to their first opinion, and having
delivered their reasons in writing, resigned their employments. This
resignation seemed equal to a revolution in the state. An universal alarm was
spread; a thousand rumors flew abroad, and the first suggestions were, that
this great minister, endeavoring to avail himself by his firmness in
negotiation of the advantages he had acquired by his vigor in war, was opposed
by the whole council, who were resolved to have a peace at any rate, and that
this opposition had driven him to resign the seals* But the true cause of the
resignation very soon came out; and on this point a violent conflict ensued, in
which the popular cause was worse sustained, and the ministerial better, (that
is, with greater effect) than is usual in such discussions. Some circumstances
contributed not a little to this success.

When Mr. Pit resigned the seals, the great person to whom they were delivered
received them with ease and firmness, without requesting that he should resume
his office. His majesty expressed his concern for the loss of so able a
servant; and to show the favorable sense he entertained of his services, he
made him a most gracious and unlimited offer of any rewards in the power of the
crown to bestow. His majesty at the same time expressed himself not only
satisfied with the opinion of the majority of his council, but declared he
would have found himself under the greatest difficulty how to have acted, had
that council concurred as fully in supporting the measure proposed by Mr. Pit,
as they had done in rejecting it. A sentiment (in the light in which his
majesty considered this measure) grounded upon the firmest principles of
integrity and honor, and which must raise the highest veneration for his royal
character not only among his own subjects, but amongst all nations, when they
see a power which has so little to fear from any human effort, so very fearful
of the least infringement of the strictest and most critical rules of justice.

Mr. Pit was sensibly touched with the grandeur and condescension of this
proceeding. 'I confess, Sir, I had but too much reason to expect your majesty's
displeasure. I did not come prepared for this exceeding goodness. Pardon me,
Sir, -- it overpowers, it oppresses me.' He burst into tears.

We are far from an attempt to add any coloring to so exquisitely affecting a
picture. We are indeed far from being able to do justice to perhaps one of the
most pathetic and elevated scenes which could possibly be displayed, the
parting of such a prince, and such a minister.

The next day a pension of three thousand pounds a year was settled on Mr. Pit
for three lives, and at the same time a title was conferred upon his lady and
her issue; a pension the best bestowed, and a nobility the most honorably
acquired, and most truly merited. Immediately the Gazette gave notice to the
public of all these transactions. The resignation made the first article; the
honors and rewards the next; and they were followed by a letter from our
ambassador in Spain, containing an account of the favorable and pacific
language of that court, and of the strong assurances they gave of a desire to
accommodate all differences in an amicable manner.

It must be owned that this maneuver was very skilfully executed. For it at
once gave the people to understand the true motive to the resignation; the
insufficiency of that motive, and the graciousness of the king notwithstanding
the abrupt departure of his minister. If after this the late minister should
choose to enter into opposition, he must go into it loaded and oppressed with
the imputation of the blackest ingratitude; if on the other hand he should
retire from business, or should concur in support of that administration which
he had left, because he disapproved its measures, his acquiescence would be
attributed by the multitude to a bargain for his forsaking the public, and that
the title and the pension were the considerations.

These were the barriers that were opposed against that torrent of popular
rage, which it was apprehended would proceed from this resignation. And the
truth is, they answered their end perfectly: This torrent for some time was
beaten back, almost diverted into an opposite course; and when afterward it
returned to those objects, against which it was originally directed, and where
it was most dreaded, it was no longer that impetuous and irresistible tide,
which in the year 1757 had borne down every thing before it; it was weakened,
divided, and ineffective.

On this occasion the clamours and inferior members of each party went lengths,
which undoubtedly were neither authorized nor approved by their leaders. The
friends of Mr. Pit raised the most violent clamours for displacing a minister,
whose measures had raised the nation from the most abject state, to the highest
pinnacle of glory. They said, that he was in fact displaced, when he was
compelled to resign, by not being suffered to carry into execution those
measures which he knew to be necessary to the honor and safety of his country.
That the check which this minister had received, would most unseasonably revive
the drooping hopes of France, sunk by the vigor of our military operations,
and the firmness of our councils under his administration, and would show Spain
with what impunity she might insult the honor of the British crown, and
violate the property of its subjects. They reckoned up the disgraces which the
nation had suffered before Mr. Pit had entered into the management of affairs,
and the victories and conquests which were the fruit of his councils.

In consequence of these reasonings, addresses, resolutions and instructions
were set on foot in the great corporations; and it was believed that the
example would be followed, as on a former occasion of the same kind, by all the
other cities and boroughs of the kingdom. But the progress of this measure,
though commenced with much alacrity, was slow and languid: a few only of the
corporations entered into it, and some even of these few in a manner less warm
than was expected. A strenuous defense was made on the part of the remaining
ministry.

Was it ever heard, said they, that a sovereign has been censured for listening
to the whole body of his council, in preference to the particular opinions of a
single man? On the contrary, this uncontrouled sway of a single minister has
been often thought dangerous, and was always odious in our free constitution;
and is the more justly to be disliked, as perhaps inconsistent with the true
spirit, either of absolute monarchy, or of limited government. Let the merit of
this minister be what it will, shall his master therefore be forced to receive
him upon any terms? Must his prince, to gratify his ambitious views, or if you
please, his virtuous intentions, dismiss his whole council, and annihilate his
prerogative as a king, his reason and judgment as a man? Was it ever heard
before, that a counselor has professed without any reserve or any mask, that
because he could not guide in government, he would not cooperate? This has
unquestionably been the true motive for the conduct of many ministers, but
never was the avowed motive until this occasion. Mr. Pit has had the freest
scope for the exertion of his genius; he was, perhaps, the only English
minister that never met with the slightest opposition; he has had the treasures
and the forces of the nation at his most absolute command; let him, in his
turn, do that justice that has been done to him; let him if the favors of the
crown constitute no obligation, be bound at least by the rules of equity; and
if he will not partake in the conduct of the present most intricate and
difficult business of administration, let him not render it still more
intricate and more difficult by his opposition; and let him not study to find a
justification of his measures, from the ill success of those whom he has left,
when that ill sucess will be owing to his own devices.

Thus far the points seem to have been urged with propriety and weight. A
torrent, however, of low and illiberal abuse was also poured out on this
occasion A Letter from the Right Hon. Mr. Pit, to a Person of Eminence in the
city.
London, October 17. Dear Sir,
FINDING, to my great surprise, that the cause and manner of my resigning the
seals, is grossly misrepresented in the city, as well as that the most gracious
and spontaneous marks of his majesty's approbation of my services, which marks
followed my resignation, have been infamously traduced as a bargain for my
forsaking the public, I am under a necessity of declaring the truth of both
these facts, in a manner which I am sure no gentleman will contradict; a
difference of opinion with regard to measures to be taken against Spain, of the
highest importance to the honor of the crown, and to the most essential
national interests, (and this founded on what Spain had already done, not on
what that court may farther intend to do) was the cause of my resigning the
seals* Lord Temple and I submitted in writing, and signed by us, our most
humble sentiments to his majesty, which being overruled by the united opinion
of all the rest of the king's servants, I resigned the seals on Monday the 5th
of this month, in order not to remain responsible for measures, which I was no
longer allowed to guide. Most gracious public marks of his majesty's
approbation of my services followed my resignation: They are unmerited and
unsolicited; and I shall ever he proud to have received them from the best of
sovereigns.

I will now only add, my dear Sir, that I have explained these matters only for
the honor of truth, not in any view to court return of confidence from any
man, who with a credulity, as weak as it is injurous, has thought fit hastily
to withdraw his good opinion, from one who served his country with fidelity and
success; and who justly reveres the upright and candid judgment of it; little
solicitous about the censures of the capricious and ungenerous: Accept my
sincerest acknowledgments for all your kind friendship, and believe me ever
with truth and esteem,

My dear Sir, your faithful friend, etc.



. His SECRETARY PIT.
portrait of Secretary Pit whole life, public and private, was scrutinized
with the utmost malignity, to furnish matter of calumny against him.

The successes of his administration were depreciated; his faults were
monstrously exaggerated, and the rewards and honors so justly conferred on him
by his sovereign, were by every trick of wit, ridicule, and buffoonery,
converted into matter of degradation and disgrace.

Without presuming to take any part in a controversy, which (however unequally)
divided the royal council, or without entering into the sentiments of any
faction, which we have always shunned, we may affirm with truth and
impartiality, that no man was ever better fitted than Mr. Pit, to be the
minister in a great and powerful nation, or better qualified to carry that
power and greatness to their utmost limits. There was in all his designs a
magnitude, and even a vastness, which was not easily comprehended by every
mind, and which nothing but success could have made to appear reasonable. If he
was sometimes incorrect he was never vulgar.

His power, as it was not acquired, so neither was exercised in an ordinary
manner. With very little parliamentary, and with less court influence, he
swayed both at court and in parliament with an authority unknown before, to the
best supported ministers. He was called to the ministry by the voice of the
people; and what is more rare, he held it with that approbation; and under him
for the first time, administration and popularity were seen united. Under him
Great Britain carried on the most important war in which she ever was engaged,
alone and unassisted, with greater splendor, and with more success than she
had ever enjoyed at the head of the most powerful alliances. Alone this island
seemed to balance the rest of Europe.

In the conduct of the war he never suffered the enemy to breathe, but
overwhelmed them with re-iterated blows, and kept up the alarm in every
quarter. If one of his expeditions was not so well calculated or so
successfully executed, amends were made by another, and by a third. The spirit
of the nation once roused, was not suffered for a moment to subside; and the
French, dazzled, as it were, by the multitude and celerity of his enterprises,
seemed to have lost all power of resistance. In short, he revived the military
genius of our people; he supported our allies; he extended our trade; he raised
our reputation; he augmented our dominions; and on his departure from
administration, left the nation in no other danger than that which ever must
attend exorbitant power, and the temptation which may be, to the invidious
exertion of it. Happy it had been for him, for his sovereign, and his country,
if a temper less austere, and a disposition more practicable, more compliant,
and conciliating, had been joined to his other great virtues. The want of these
qualities disabled him from acting any otherwise than alone: it prevented our
enjoying the joint fruit of the wisdom of many able men, who might mutually
have tempered, and mutually forwarded each other; and finally, which was not
the meanest loss, it deprived us of his own immediate services.

Those who censured his political conduct the most severely, could raise but
few exceptions to it; none of them singly and perhaps, the whole united, of no
great weight against a person long engaged in so great a scene of action.

Whether the part, which under his administration we rather continued to act
than newly took, with regard to the affairs of Germany, be for the real
interest of Great Britain, is a question of the utmost difficulty, and which
perhaps will never admit a satisfactory solution. To condemn him on this head
we must be sure of this solution. It has been observed in favor of that
contested measure, that France demonstrated, through the whole progress of the
late treaty, the most earnest desire, that we should abandon the German
connection; no trifling argument, that our enemy did not look upon it to be
extremely prejudicial to our interests. If he has carried on that war at a vast
expense, a prodigious stand has been made against the entire power of France;
had less been expended, the whole expense might have been lost. How far this
part of his conduct was agreeable to his former declarations, is a discussion
which can avail but little. He found the nation engaged in these affairs; it
was more easy to push them forward, than to extricate himself from them; as he
proceeded, he discovered by experience the advantages of that plan of action,
and his opinion was changed.

But even admitting, that, to attain the ends of opposition, he had once fallen
upon popular topics, which even then he knew were not tenable, it can form but
a very small blemish in a public character, however wrong it may be by
application to the strictest rules of morality. Ill would it fare with
statesmen if this sort of consistency were to be expected from the most
consistent of them.

With regard to the pension and title, it is a shame that any defense should be
necessary. What eye cannot distinguish, at the first glance, the difference
between this and the exceptionable case of titles and pensions? What Briton,
with the smallest sense of honor and gratitude, but must blush for his
country, if such a man retired unrewarded from the public service, let the
motives to that retirement be what they would? It was not possible that his
sovereign could let his eminent services pass unrequited; the sum that was
given was undoubtedly inadequate to his merits; and the quantum was rather
regulated by the moderation of the great mind that received it, than by the
liberality of that which bestowed it.

The conduct of Mr. Pit when the parliament met, in which he made his own
justification, without impeaching the conduct of any of his colleagues, or
taking one measure that might seem to arise from disgust or opposition, has set
a seal upon his character.

Lord Egremont was appointed to succeed him as Secretary for the southern
department.

CHAP. IX.
Dispute with Spain. Representation of the earl of Bristol. Disposition of the
court of Madrid. Treaty between France and Spain. England desires a
communication. Court of Spain refuses. The ministers mutually withdraw. A
rupture.

THE unfortunate intervention of Spain in the late negotiation, raised so many
difficulties, and created so* much mischief both abroad and at home, that it
becomes an era in this history, and it is necessary we should pursue that
object from the point at which we left it, to its final and fatal determination.

The answer which had been received from the Spanish minister in London was far
from being satisfactory to our court. Orders were immediately given to the earl
of Bristol, our ambassador in Spain, to remonstrate with energy and firmness on
so extraordinary a proceeding; to adhere to the negative put upon the Spanish
pretensions to fish at Newfoundland; to rest the article of disputed captures,
on the justice of our tribunals; to continue the former professions of our
desire of an amicable adjustment of the logwood dispute; and of our willingness
to cause the settlements on the coast of Honduras to be evacuated, as soon as
ever his Catholic majesty should suggest a method for our enjoyment of that
traffic to which we had a right by treaty, and which was further confirmed to
us by repeated promises from that court.

At the same time that the earl of Bristol was authorized to proceed with that
spirit, which the offended dignity of our court required, and to bring Spain to
a categorical and satisfactory declaration, concerning her final intentions;
yet if he perceived on her part any intention to disavow or even to explain
away this offensive transaction, he was readily to accept it, and to afford to
that court as handsome a retreat as possible. The letter which conveyed these
instructions was written by Mr. Pit, and dated on the 28th of July, a few days
after the fatal memorial had been delivered by Mr. Bussy.

The earl of Bristol punctually obeyed those orders. He found General Wall, the
Spanish minister, much in cold blood, and in very equivocal dispositions. He
heard with great patience the proper and energetic representation that had been
very ably made by the earl of Bristol. He applauded the king of Great Britain's
magnanimity in not suffering France as a tribunal, to be appealed to in his
disputes with Spain; and declared, that in the proposition which had been made
with the consent of his court, things were not considered in that light; asked
whether it could be imagined in England, that the Catholic king was seeking to
provoke us in our present most flourishing and most exalted situation, and
after such a series of prosperous events as no single nation had ever met with?
He valued, and reciprocally returned, our frequent professions of friendship
and our desire of amicable adjustment. But these favorable demonstrations were
accompanied with some circumstances, that had a very menacing appearance. For
in the first place, he declared that at that time the utmost harmony subsisted
between the courts of France and Spain; that in consequence of their perfect
agreement, there was a mutual unreserved communication of every step taken in
their several negotiations with England; that France had even offered to assist
Spain, in case the discussions she had with us should grow into a rupture; and
that this offer was considered in a friendly light. Such an intimate union of a
third power with one of the parties at war, forebodes no long duration to its
friendship, or even to its neutrality with the other. If Spain justified the
proceedings of France, and owned herself concerned in them, it was but one, and
that a short, step, to a junction with her.

As to the three matters in dispute, the Spanish minister resolutely adhered to
them all; and as to the last (that of the logwood) he observed, that Great
Britain had offered them nothing, but what they had long since been tired of,
treaty and negotiation; that this matter had been already fully discussed; and
that on this head Spain had given the most convincing proofs of her desire to
be on the best terms with England; for in the beginning of this war, before
England had grown terrible by her successes, when their American governors had
endeavored to dislodge the English from some new establishments on the coast
of Honduras, they had, at the complaint of our court, in order to take away all
cause of mistrust, ordered the governor to desist from so justifiable an
enterprise. That on the offer of England on this occasion to settle matters in
an amicable manner, they cheerfully agreed to that method. But that six years
had elapsed without their receiving the least satisfaction. They even alleged
that the English encroachments on their coasts in that time increased.

In this manner the Spaniards vindicated the form and the matter of their
proceeding: they showed no sort of disposition to relax from their claims; but
at the same time they no longer insisted on blending together the several
discussions; and they professed in general, though not very warm terms, a
desire of continuing in amity with us. With regard to the matter in dispute,
the pretensions of both powers stood in this posture throughout the whole
discussion; except that they were urged with more or less asperity, according
to the fluctuating disposition of the court of Spain, which seemed to rest upon
no sure and settled principals. There were probably two factions in her
councils who as they alternately prevailed, changed the language and
countenance of the Spanish minister. However, for some time the aspect of
things continued on the whole to be rather favorable; and even an express
declaration was at length made, that Spain had been, at no time, more intent on
cultivating a good correspondence with us. But still the French interest
silently gained ground at Madrid; the confidental communications of that court
with Spain; her affected moderation in the treaty; the dangerous greatness of
England; the common interest of the house of Buorbon, every part of which must
suffer, both in its dignity and safety, by allowing the principal of its
branches to be pruned to the quick: these points were urged with continual
solicitation; and they assured the Spaniards that even the signing an alliance
between the sovereigns of the two nations, would intimidate England, already
exhausted by the war, and apprehensive of losing the valuable commerce she
carried on with Spain.

These arguments and suggestions at length prevailed, and a treaty was signed
between the two courts, the purpose of which was to preserve from oppression,
and to maintain the interests of the house of Bourbon. This alliance was of a
nature the more dangerous, as it turned upon family not national interest, and
because not stating exactly its objects, it might be made just of what extent
they pleased. We make no mention of any other treaty than this, of itself
sufficiently alarming, because whatever suspicions may be entertained,, there
is no certainty that any other has been concluded between those powers.

France had obtained in this treaty almost all that she aimed at; by it she
entered into the closest connection with Spain; this connection did not indeed
seem directly of necessity to conclude a breach with England; it led to it
however, almost inevitably. At first the whole transaction was kept a profound
secret; the inferiority of the marine of Spain, and the precariousness of their
supplies from America, in case they came to a present rupture with England,
obliged them to this temporary reserve. France took care that this treaty
should not transpire until the negotiation was broken off; and Spain, whilst
she was under these apprehensions, exhibited those occasional proofs of a
pacific disposition, which we have just now seen. But as soon as France had
lost all hopes of concluding the negotiation in the manner she had wished, and
had failed in the use she made of the intervention of the claims of Spain, she
circulated with great industry a report, that Spain would immediately declare
against Great Britain, in consequence of a treaty lately concluded among the
Bourbon courts.

England found that those boasts of the French were too confidently made, and
too generally believed, to be altogether without foundation. In consequence of
these apprehensions, orders were sent to Spain, to demand in the most moderate
terms, but in a manner not to be evaded, a communication of this treaty, or at
least a disavowal that it contained any thing to the prejudice of Great
Britain. But before these orders could reach Spain, lord Bristol had himself
received intelligence of the treaty, and of the hopes, which the French made no
secret of their deriving from that source. He therefore thought himself under a
necessity of desiring satisfaction from the Spanish secretary of state
concerning it.

Upon this application there appeared on a sudden such a change in the
countenance, language, and sentiments of that minister, as indicated but too
fully the justness of the suspicions that were entertained. The Spanish flota
was now safely arrived with a very rich cargo; the French arms had made a
considerable progress in the king's electoral dominions; the success of the
Imperial arms was no less striking; the reasons for their former show of
moderation no longer existed. They therefore gave a loose to those movements
which they had hitherto concealed. M. Wall, evading a direct answer, entered
into a long and bitter complaint, not only of the treatment which Spain had
received from us, but of the haughtiness of our late proceedings with France;
that it was time for them to open their eyes, and not to suffer a neighbor, an
ally, a relation, and a friend, any longer to run the risque of receiving such
rigid laws as were prescribed by an insulting conqueror; that we were
intoxicated with our successes; and a continued series of victories had elated
us so far, as to make us reject the reasonable concession offered by France.
This refusal made it evident that our design in ruining the French power, was
the more easily to crush Spain; that we proposed entirely to chase the French
from all their colonies in America to have the easier task in seizing on the
Spanish dominions in those parts, thereby to satisfy to the utmost of our
ambition, and to gratify our boundless thirst of conquest; therefore he would
himself be the man to advise the king of Spain, that since his dominions were
to be overwhelmed, at least that they should be siezed with arms in his
subjects hands, and not to continue the passive victim he had hitherto appeared
in the eyes of the world.

The English ambassador, though astonished at so extraordinary a change of
style, replied with coolness to the invectives, and with firmness to the
menaces of the Spanish minister; he obviated the objections which had been
made, and supported our pretensions; after answering in the best manner to what
M. Wall had urged, he returned to his first demand, an explanation concerning
the treaty: as often as a direct answer was evaded, the same question was again
put; and at length the only reply was, that the king of Spain had thought
proper to renew his family compact; and then Mr. Wall, as if he was gone
farther than he was authorized, suddenly turned the discourse, and no farther
satisfaction could be obtained,

This revolution in the appearances of things in Spain, was too interesting not
to be immediately communicated. Our ministry saw evidently, that the moderation
they had hitherto displayed, might be attributed to fear, and that the language
of the court of Spain would permit no doubt of their hostile intensions. Orders
were therefore given to the earl of Bristol, conformable to dignity of the
nation, and the justice of our claim. He was ordered to renew his instances
concerning the treaty; to demand an explanation with a proper firmness, but
without the mixture of any thing which might irritate; and to signify, that a
peremptory refusal to communicate the treaty, or to disavow an intention to
take part with our enemies, would be considered as an aggression on the part of
Spain, and an absolute declaration of war.

Things were now brought to a single and precise point. The demand was made in
the terms of the order. Then it was that the pride of Spain entirely threw of
the remainder of that mask, which her policy had persuaded her to assume; the
secretary, M. Wall, replied, That the spirit of haughtiness and of discord,

The Earl of Bristol parted from Madrid the 17th of December; and thus was
brought on a rupture which has prodigiously extended the operations, and
consequently the miseries of war, and threatens to protect them to a very long
duration. Europe unfortunately found herself plunged into the gulf of a new
war, at the time she hoped to emerge from the old one, and by the very means
which were used to draw her out of it. A point of honor alone seemed to have
been the last and immediate cause of the breach; but whoever has diligently
attended to the Spanish affairs from the memorial presented by Bussy to the
final answer delivered by Wall, will see that the motives were, however ill
understood, of a much more serious and important nature.

As the two powers had now come to extremities, and the English ambassador had
departed from Madrid, the Spanish minister also quitted London; but before his
departure he left a paper, in the nature of a manifesto, of very little
importance in point of argument, but filled with invectives, charging the war
on the haughtiness of the late English minister, and on the little respect with
which his court had been treated, both during the administration of that
minister, and since his resignation. That had the purport of the treaty been
desired in a manner less offensive to the dignity of his master, it might as
easily have been obtained, as it could have been justified; for the treaty,
which was believed to have been signed on the 15th of August, contained only a
reciprocal guaranty of the dominions of the several branches of the house of
Bourbon, but with this particular restriction, that it should only extend to
the dominions which shall remain to France after the present war.

It must be remarked that, this paper, whilst it pretends to set forth the
purport of a treaty dated the 15th of August, does not deny the existence of
any other treaty, which might more offensively concern the interest of Great
Britain. It was however answered in every article with the utmost moderation,
perspicuity and force, in a memorial of loath Egremont. Here we close the
Spanish transaction; as the is the whole of what belongs properly to the year
we trea^ of. All that remains for us to do, is to touch upon the affairs of the
East Indies and America.

CHAP. X.
Blockade of Pondicherry. Distress of the French. Fleet dispersed in a storm.
Fleet returns. Town surrenders Mahie taken. Enterprises of Mr. Law. Mogul's are
defeated by Major Carnac. Nabob of Bengal deposed Coast of Sumatra ravaged by
the count d'Estaing. Dominica taken by lord Rollo and Sir James Douglas.

AFTER the defeat of the French near Wandewash, the taking of the city of
Arcot, and the reduction of the fortresses of Chitteput and Carrical,
Pondicherry wa^ the only space of consequence which remained to our enemies in
India. This town, beautifully built, strongly fortified, and four leagues in
circuit, seemed rather the capital of a kingdom, than a trading establishment.
It is situated on the coast of Malabar, about forty miles from our settlement
at Madrass, which in the days of its prosperity it rivalled, if not exceeded in
trade, opulence and splendour; and it still remained the depository of whatever
wealth was left to the French, after the reverse of their fortune in war.

As soon as the fortresses adjacent to this important place had been reduced,
and the inland country brought perfectly to our interests by the total
expulsion of the French, the blockade of Pondicherry was commenced by the land
forces under colonel Coote, and the marine under admiral Stevens. A regular
siege was at that time impracticable on account of the periodical rains, which
were daily expected; and even under more favorable circumstances it would have
proved a task of infinite difficulty to attempt any army that could be
supported in India, the taking of a place so strongly fortified, defended by a
good garrison, and by an officer able and resolute, and whose pride and
obstinacy, so prejudicial on all other occasions, would have made him, as in
effect they did make him, persevere to the very last moment, is the defense of
the last stake, which the French had left in India.

The blockade being therefore chosen as the most eligible for the time, was
continued with the best dispositions, and the most extraordinary patience on
both sides, for full seven months. In this time the garrison and inhabitants
suffered sorely by famine. Col. Coote, in order to augment their distress,
erected batteries at a distance, not with a view of ruining the walls, but to
harrass the enemy by an increase of garrison duty.

At length when the weather appeared settled, four batteries were raised at
some distance to enfilade the streets of Pondicherry, whilst others were
advanced nearer in order to play upon the works. These operations, though the
siege was not yet formally undertaken, commenced on the 26th of November, 1760,
but as the season of the rains and winds was not yet quite over, much was
suffered from storms, which ruined the batteries and approaches. They were
however always repaired with the utmost alacrity and speed, and the siege
suffered no intermission. So that the besieged, who eagerly expected the
arrival of their fleet to their relief, were reduced to the most extreme
distress. They lived on camels, elephants, dogs, and cats. The extreme scarcity
and dearness even of this wretched provision, increased their misery. Sixteen
roupies (half crowns) had been paid for the flesh of a dog.

In the midst of this distress their hopes were suddenly revived, and those of
the besiegers, notwithstanding the progress they had made, almost totally
depressed. On the first of January 1761, one of those terrible storms, so
frequent in the Indian sea, and so ruinous, drove the English squadron from
before Pondicherry. Two ships of the line were wrecked, and their crews, with
the exception of two or three men, entirely perished. Two others of the same
class were driven ashore, and beat to pieces. The men fortunately escaped. The
real damage which our fleet sustained on this occasion, together with the idea
of a far greater, suggested by their own desires, and justified by the violence
of the storm, elevated to the highest pitch the spirits of the garrison, sunk
by disease, famine, fatigue, and an uninterrupted train of adverse fortune.
General Lally seeing the port clear, sent an express without delay to the
French agent in the neighboring neutral settlements, that this was the time to
throw in succors; he seemed sanguine and f^ of vigor. The letter, which was
intercepted, is printed below Translation of an intercepted letter from general
Lally, to (...) Raymond, the French resident at Pullicat, dated Pondicherry the
2d of January 1761.
Mr. Raymond,
THE English squadron is no more, Sir; out of the twelve ships they had in our
road, seven are lost, crews and all, the four others dismasted; and it appears
there is no more than one frigate that has escaped; therefore don't lose an
instant to send us chelingoes upon chelingoes loaded with rice; the Da^ have
nothing to fear now; besides (according to the law of nations) they are only to
send us no provisions themselves, and we are no more blocked up by sea.

The saving of Pondicherry has been in your power once already; if you miss the
present opportunity, it will be entirely your fault; do not forget also some
small chelingoes: offer great rewards: I expect seventeen thousand Morattoes
within these four days. In short, risque all, attempt all, force all, and send
us some rice, should it be but half a garse at a time,

Signed, LALLY.



, as it may tend to furnish some idea of the character of this singular man.

But admiral Stevens, and those who commanded under him, exerting themselves
with unparalleled diligence and celerity, appeared again before Pondicherry in
less than four days after the storm, with eleven ships of the line and one
frigate, and the blockade was as complete as ever. No succors had been thrown
in, and admiral Stevens in order to prevent the ill impression which the late
disaster might have occasioned, sent a message to the neighboring Dutch and
Danish settlements, of the good condition and strength of the remainder of his
fleet, and assured them he would make prize of such vessels as he found
infringing the neutrality by attempting to supply the enemy.

Notwithstanding this mortifying disappointment, M. Lally made no proposal to
surrender. The siege was carried on with redoubled alacrity; and at length a
large battery being advanced within four hundred and fifty yards of the
rampart, a breach being effected, and not more than one day's provision of any
kind remaining, a signal was made for a cessation of arms; the principal of the
Jesuits, together with two Civilians came out, and offered terms of
capitulation. The governor preserving all his haughtiness, which neither his
errors nor misfortunes could in the least abate, declined to offer any terms;

Nothing can be said too highly of the conduct, perseverance, and unanimity of
the land and sea services during a tedious siege and blockade of eight months,
in a climate so unfavourable to all military operations. Colonel Coote gave the
final blow to the French power in India; he was now indisputed master of the
rich coast of Coromandel; the French power was wholly extirpated; the neutral
nations were contemptible; the princes of the country considered us with an
aweful regard, and nothing but a little French settlement on the coast of
Malabar, called Mahie, (and which was soon after reduced) opposed our
commanding the whole trade of that vast peninsula of India from the Ganges to
the Indies, the most extensive and profitable sphere of commerce in the world.

Whilst every thing was giving way to our arms in the southern parts of this
peninsula, the affairs of France, which in Bengal had been to all appearance
totally suppressed, rose up again for a moment from a quarter, and in a manner,
which was little expected. After the taking of Chandenagore by admiral Watson
in the year 1757, Mr. Law, (nephew to that Law who had made himself so well
known by the Missisippi scheme) put himself at the head of a party of French
fugitives, which was augmented from time to time to about two hundred men. With
this small party he threw himself into the heart of the country, and joining
himself sometimes to one, sometimes to another of the native princes, as his
interest led him; he rendered himself considerable by several striking
services, and supported the credit of his little corpse with a very high
reputation.

The Great Mogul having some time since been deposed by an irruption of the
Marrattas, and dying soon after, one of his sons, Sha Zaddah, assumed the
title, and was supported by some of the provinces of that extensive and
disunited empire; he was opposed by others; and though he was at the head of a
royal army of his native subjects, such is the state of the military in that
part of the world, that he considered an handful of European fugitives, as an
acquisition of the greatest importance, and such as might turn the balance
against any weight of Indians, which might be thrown into the opposite scale.
In fact, it was to Mr. Law he attributed the reduction of several considerable
provinces to his obedience.

Elated with these successes, Law persuaded him to turn his arms against
Bengal, which had not acknowledged him; it was a rich and flourishing country,
and the possession of it, would undoubtedly contribute more than all the rest
to set him on the throne of the Moguls. Here, unfortunately for him the evil
genius of Law impelled him to encounter again with those arms, by which the
interest of his country had been before ruined in this part of the world, and
which indeed were those only, from which he had a great deal to fear. Sha
Zaddah entered the kingdom of Bengal at the head of an army of 80,000 Indians
and something more than 200 French.

The French support was more prejudicial to his title in the eyes of the
English, than any other objection, and as they were now become the arbiters of
crowns in the East, they joined the Nabob of Bengal to oppose his progress.
About 20,000 blacks supported by 500 English soldiers, formed the army against
him. A major (major Carnac) commanded that body, which engaged, and totally
routed an army of fourscore thousand men, commanded by the Mogul in person.
That prince was taken prisoner; Mr. Law was also taken, and the party of French
adventurers dispersed for ever. It is not yet known with certainty, in what
manner they mean to dispose of their captive monarch. It was some heightening
to the satisfaction of this great event, that it happened on the same day in
which the French agreed to the surrender of Pondicherry.

A little before this, Jaffier Ali Cawn, the Nabob who, in 1757, had been
placed in that dignity by general Clive, notwithstanding the terrifying example
of his predecessor, by his weakness and misgovernment, drew on himself the
hatred of his subjects, and lost the protection of the English. But as his
ambition was the feeblest of his passions, he consented quietly to quit the
throne. The revolution was effected without bloodshed, his son-in-law was
appointed in his room; and as the whole transaction was with the consent and
cooperation of the English governor Vansittart, the old privileges of the
company were confirmed, and new were acquired: the English in Bengal were
become necessary to the government of that country, and every change produced
something to their advantage.

It is certain, that the period of this war in the East Indies, has been marked
by as many striking events, uncommon circumstances, and singular reverses of
fortune, as any that have happened from the time of our knowledge of this part
of the world.

It can hardly be said, that this series of prosperity was interrupted by the
successful attempts of the count d'Estaign. This lively adventurer, with the
command of no more than two ordinary frigates, had in October 1759, taken and
destroyed the English settlement of Bender-Abassi, on the Persian gulf; he
then struck over to the island of Sumatra, where we carry on our most
considerable commerce in pepper; and before the end of the following April,
reduced Bencoolen, the principal settlement, and all the rest of our forts and
factories on that island, which made a defense altogether as unworthy of the
rest of our conduct in India, as that of the count d'Estaign was superior to
the efforts of his countrymen in that quarter. This bold adventurer, however,
could not derive so much honor from the vigor of his enterprise, as disgrace
from having made them against the most sacred law of arms: if what is said is
true, that he was at the very time a prisoner upon parole.

In America the island of Dominica, one of those islands called Neutral, but
which the French had fortified and settled, was reduced by a small armament
under lord Rollo and Sir James Douglas. North America was perfectly quieted by
a peace with the Cherokees. Colonel Grant reduced them to this necessity, by
penetrating with great courage and perseverance into their country, and
destroying fifteen of their towns, and almost their whole harvest.

THE ANNUAL REGISTER: OR HISTORY OF THE WAR. For the YEAR 1762.
CHAP. I.
State of Europe in the beginning of this year. Ill state of the British
alliance. Condition of the northern powers. War reaches to the southern. Family
compact, Some articles from it. Observations upon them. Consequences of this
treaty to Europe. War declared against Spain. State of Spain and Great Britain
at the beginning of the war between them. Advantages and disadvantages on each
side.

THE close of the year 1761 left the affairs of all Europe, both military and
political, in the most interesting situation, in which they have stood, at
perhaps any period of our modern history. The endeavors which had been made to
bring about peace amongst the belligerent powers, served only to increase their
animosity. And at the same time they brought into light and exertion, those
latent motives and dispositions to war, which had long lurked in other powers
under the veil of neutrality; and had only been kept down sometimes by
irresolution of temper in persons, and sometimes by want of system in politics.
These ineffectual endeavors for peace produced also many occasions of quarrel
and debate, that were absolutely new.

To the north there was no appearance of relenting in any one of the powers
engaged. It was not to be expected, that the confederacy, which had held
together so long, and under such difficulties and disappointments, should now
break to pieces, just at the moment when the states which composed it seemed in
a condition to reap the mature fruits of their unanimity and perseverance. The
king of Prussia was not in a state either to allure or to intimidate. Great
Britain could not increase his subsidy, nor reinforce his armies. The allied
army in Westphalia played a defensive, and, on the whole of the campaign, a
losing game; and there was nobody so sanguine as to think that Great Britain
could increase her strength in Germany, where she paid already 100,000 men, and
expended five millions annually.

Although nothing seems more certain in a general view of the political system,
than that the king of Prussia is not the natural and necessary ally of this
nation; yet his fortune neither was, since the beginning of the war, nor is it
now a matter of indifference to us.

The late Mr. Shippin was of opinion, that the power of France was become an
object of much less terror since the growth of the power of Russia. But he
never imagined it possible, that all the great continental powers of Europe
should ever be united with France; and that they should conspire to load her
scale instead of ballancing it. He never could foresee, what has actually
happened in this war, that this very power of Russia could cooperate with
France, and even with Sweden; and what is full as extraordinary, that both
these latter could cooperate with Austria to destroy in effect the system,
which had been established by the treaty of Westphalia; that system, which it
had been the great drift of policy, and the great object of war to both France
and Sweden in the last century to establish and to confirm, and to the house of
Austria constantly to oppose. The destruction of the king of Prussia seemed to
include the destruction of the treaty of Westphalia; because he is the only
power in the empire capable of asserting the independency of its members, and
supporting the declining credit of the Protestant cause.

The total ruin of Saxony, with such circumstances of unpardonable cruelty by
that prince himself, and the exhausted state of all the other Protestant
members of the empire, have narrowed that interest more and more to the single
object of Prussia. As this interest was first formed in the empire, so its
condition there cannot fail of having the most sensible influence on all the
potentates of the same communion. Even in this light, England had an interest
that the king of Prussia should not be entirely crushed by the prevalence of a
combination composed in so extraordinary a manner, that its success must
necessarily produce a total revolution in the system of Europe, and draw on a
series of consequences, which, though it is impossible to particularize, must
have undoubtedly been of the most important and alarming nature.

But there was an interest yet nearer to us, the fate of our own army in
Germany, which could not survive the destruction of the king of Prussia for an
hour. These circumstances rendered the prospect of the campaign in Germany very
gloomy; as there was no sort of ground to suppose that this prince, upon whose
fate so many important interests immediately depended, could hold out to the
middle of summer. Besides, Denmark showed no favorable dispositions toward
us; and Holland discovered evident marks of coldness, if not of absolute
alienation. Such was the disposition of the powers in the north.

The southern powers of Europe, whose total inconnection with the causes, and
whose great remoteness from the seat of war might appear sufficient to ensure
their tranquillity, began to enter into action with a spirit equal to that of
any of the parties, who had from the beginning acted as principals; new fuel
was heaped upon the fire of contention, which had wasted so many nations, just
as it seemed to be on the point of expiring.

That alliance between the branches of the house of Bourbon, of which we have
spoken last year, and which is so well known by the name of the Family Compact,
is one of the most extraordinary transactions of this, or, perhaps, of any
time, It has already produced some effects answerable to its design; it may
produce others still more important; and on the whole must be considered as an
event of the most extensive, lasting, and alarming influence.

The treaty of Vienna in 1756, between France and Austria, has certainly
contributed not a little to give that new turn to affairs, by which almost all
the discourses, that have hitherto been written on the interests of princes,
are rendered erroneous, and of little use in future speculations. That treaty,
however, though it seems entirely to have disjointed the ancient system of
alliance by which France was formerly counterpoised, may, possibly, not be so
much a lasting change, as a temporary and excentric deviation from the sphere
in which the house of Austria had formerly moved, and into which it seems so
sutiable to her natural and permanent interest to return. The Bourbon compact
is of a different nature; and it seems to have at length produced that entire
union between the French and Spanish monarchies, which was so much dreaded on
the death of Charles II. and which it was the great purpose of the treaty of
partition, and the war of the grand alliance to prevent. We have seen it take
place in our days, comparatively with very little notice; so much greater is
our present strength; or so much greater was the apprehension in those days,
than the danger of the actual event in the present.

It was a bold push in France to attempt, and an uncommon success to procure,
toward the close of an unfortunate and disgraceful war, an alliance of this
kind. France could not have expected from the most fortunate issue of her
affairs, an advantage so great as that which she derived from her uncommon
distresses. It is some time since the jealousy of her power has began to abate.
But in fact her security, and probably too her power, will be greatly increased
by this very circumstance. Instead of forming such an object as alarmed
mankind, and against which all Europe used to unite, she is herself become the
center of an alliance, which extends from the northern to the southern extemity
of Europe; and she was in this war, actually united with Russia, Sweden,
Austria, the Empire, Spain, and Naples; to say nothing of Denmark, with which
she had also some connections.

With other nations, however, her ties are comparatively slight: but the
engagements of the Bourbon compact form rather an act of incorporation than an
alliance. It contains stipulations hitherto unheard of in any treaty. By the
23d and 24th articles, the subjects of the several branches of the house of
Bourbon are admitted to a mutual naturalization, and to a participation of such
privileges and immunities, as if they were natural born subjects of the
countries of their respective sovereigns. The direct trade to America forms the
only exception to this comprehensive communitive of interests. The tenor of
this article is of infinite consequence to the general trading interest of
Europe; all the states of which, by the 25th article of the same alliance, are
excluded from any prospect of obtaining similar advantages.

This forms a civil union in almost the strictest sense; the political union is
even more perfect. By the 1st and 16th articles, the two monarchs of France and
Spain agree to look upon every power as their enemy, which becomes an enemy of
the other; that a war declared against either, shall be regarded as personal by
the other; and that, when they happen to be both engaged in a war against the
same enemy or enemies, they will wage it jointly with their whole forces; and
that their military operations shall proceed by common consent and with a
perfect agreement.

By the 26th article, they agree reciprocally to disclose to each other their
alliances and negotiations.

By the 17th and 18th, they formally engage not to make, or even to listen, to
any proposal of peace from their common enemies, but by mutual consent; being
resolved, in time of peace as well as in time of war, each mutually to consider
the interests of the allied crown as its own; to compensate their several
losses and advantages, and to act as if the two monarchies formed only one and
the same power. The king of the Sicilies, and the infant duke of Parma are
comprehended in this treaty.

Here is the model of the most perfect confederacy. There is but one
restriction to the extent of this scheme; but this particular restriction is a
key to the whole treaty; as it shows, in the most satisfactory manner against
what object it was principally directed. For by the 8th article it is provided,
that Spain shall not be bound to succor France, when she is engaged in a war
in consequence of her engagements by the treaty of Westphalia, or other
alliances with the princes and states of Germany and the north, unless some
maritime power takes part in those wars, or France be attacked by land in her
own country. This exception of the maritime powers indicates sufficiently that
the tendency of this article is to affect England, and serves to point out
clearly, though obliquely, to the other powers of Europe, that their connection
with England is the great circumstance which is to provoke the enmity of Spain.

It should seem that this treaty alone, when once its true nature came to be
discovered, if no other cause existed, would have been sufficient to justify
Great Britain in a declaration of war against a monarchy, which had united
itself in so intimate a manner with her enemy, that it was rendered impossible
to distinguish the one from the other. In this point, however, prudence was to
interpose, and circumstances to direct. It was not therefore, until every
attempt to bring Spain to a clear declaration of pacific intentions had been
tried without success, in the manner she have already seen, that war was
actually declared against her. This declaration was made, on our part, in
London, the 2d of January of the present year.

Since Great Britain was a kingdom, she never was in such a doubtful and
dangerous situation; for at this time we was engaged, directly or indirectly,
in a war, not only with all the great continental powers, but, what is more
material, with the most considerable part of the maritime strength of Europe.
According to the ordinary computations, the navy of Spain consisted of more
than 100 men of war; and though the French navy was greatly reduced, it became
of consideration when added to the Spanish. Great efforts were made to render
it respectable. Several communities in France engaged to fit out men of war at
their own expense; and in general that whole people felt, after having been
sunk under a long despondency, a momentary glow of hope and animation from this
alliance, so powerful in its real strength, and in its principals so flattering
to the national vanity. The glory of their royal house, was, on this occasion,
united with the safety of their country. They were reinforced by the most
cordial amity of a power untouched in its resources of men, money, and stores;
whilst Great Britain was exhausted of men by her many victories, and her
resources were sinking under a debt of more than one hundred millions.

Besides a rude shock had been lately given to the system of the English
ministry, which might be supposed, in some degree, likely to affect public
credit. The part which Mr. Pit might finally take, and the consequences which
might result from his actions, were extremely undetermined; nor was it at all
clear, what degree of harmony and real confidence continued amongst the several
parts of the subsisting administration. All these considerations could not fail
of inspiring France with great confidence.

Great Britain, under these circumstances, had, however, some things in her
favor. The hope of plunder which always attends a Spanish war, disposed the
minds of many toward the present; and was sure to call forth a very vigorous
exertion both of public and private strength. This circumstance also insured
the supplies.

With regard to the administration, their delay in entering into this Spanish
war, contrary to the ideas of Mr. Pit, his resignation in consequence of this
delay; the necessity, which so soon after appeared, of engaging in hostilities,
and which, to the bulk of the people, seemed to justify the sentiments of that
minister, together with a recollection of the singular spirit with which the
French war had been carried on, must necessarily have excited them to the most
strenous efforts, and to every act of laudable emulation. There was a necessity
of showing, that the spirit of the nation, and the wisdom of its councils, were
not confined to a single man; and it was shown effectually.

We had also, to balance the great strength derived from the extraordinary
combination of our enemies, that uniform tenor of success on our side, which
made our people believe themselves invincible. This was not an ungrounded
presumption, or a dream of enthusiasm; their just opinion of superior courage,
together with the solid experience derived from such a variety of services, and
so many sharp conflicts by sea, and land, all combined to make our forces seem,
and be, almost irresistible.

Spain, on the other hand, had, in the very constitution of her power, an
essential defect, which exposed her on this, as upon all other occasions. Her
resources, though very great, are not within herself; and consequently are not
always at her command, being subject not only to be intercepted by the
operations of the war, but to be destroyed or lost by the casualty of long
voyages; and, in every event, are liable to delay and disappointment.

CHAP. II.
Portugal threatened. Melancholy state of that kingdom. Arrogant proposition of
the French and Spanish ministers to the court of Lisbon. Answer of that court.
Several memorials. Resolution of the king of Portugal. French and Spanish
ministers depart. War declared by those powers against Portugal.

SUCH was our situation, both at home and abroad, at the breaking out of this
new war. Something extraordinary was to be expected from the confederacy of the
house of Bourbon. It was not, however, altogether certain where the storm, that
was gathering, would fall. There were apprehensions for the peace of Italy;
Holland had some cause of dread; and menaces were used in that quarter. But
Portugal seemed to be most endangered, on account of her close and natural
connection with Great Britain, her internal weakness, the ancient claims of the
Catholic king, and the opportunity of invasion; that kingdom being on all
sides, except to the sea, in a manner enclosed by Spain.

Public conjecture was not mistaken in fixing upon Portugal. No mention was
made, indeed, of the Spanish pretensions to that crown; but a resolution was
taken not only to oblige her to renounce all friendship, but to violate her
neutrality with Great Britain.

No attempt was ever designed with less appearance of justice; no proposition
was ever made with more arrogance and despotism to an independent sovereign;
and no scheme seemed, according to every human appearance, so certain of
success.

The kingdom of Portugal, on the recovery of her liberty; which happened in the
year 1640, found herself stripped of the greatest part of those acquisitions,
in both Indies, which had been the principal sources of her power, and the
great monuments of the captivity of her former kings and commanders. During the
interval of her subjection, new commerical powers had risen, some on the ruins
of her fortune, and others upon different but not less substantial foundations.
though the Brazils were recovered, and Goa and some other places in India
remained still to Portugal, her maritime power, and the share of trade, on
which it depended, were not recoverable. Contrary to the fate of other nations,
who have shaken off a foreign dominion, she did not owe her liberty to great
abilities. Whilst the United Provinces were first freed, and afterward
aggrandized, by the capacity of the princes of Orange, and whilst Prussia, from
an inconsiderable and dependent principality, grew into a formidable monarchy
by the genuis of her sovereigns, Portugal continued to languish in a state of
mediocrity. Without any symptoms of danger to her existence, she suffered a
gradual decay of her power and consideration. The character of her government
was narrow and biggoted, and the whole system of her commerce preposterous. If,
on the one hand, a long peace added to the resources of her revenue, it, on the
other, absolutely annihilated her military; and no country in the world had an
army so complete in numbers, so ill furnished with arms, so deficient in
discipline, and so wholly unprovided of able and experienced officers.

In this condition she suffered a fatal blow from the earthquake in 1756. The
wealthy and flourishing city of Lisbon was laid level with the ground; near
30,000 of the inhabitants were buried in the ruins; and those who remained,
with the court itself, were reduced to the utmost distress and misery.

As if this earthquake, which overturned their capital, had also shaken and
destracted the frame of their government, and the temper of their minds, the
most dreadful distempers broke out in the state, A series of horrid crimes, and
of cruel punishments, succeeded to this calamity. The most noble and wealthy
family of Portugal, having engaged itself in a sacrilegious attempt on the life
of their sovereign, was cut off at once, with little distinction of sex or age,
by a bloody and dreadful exertion of justice. Many others, who were accused or
suspected, suffered death, or exile, or imprisonment. Amongst these, and from
the same causes, one of the most considerable religious orders for wealth,
influence, and policy, was stripped of its possessions, and entirely driven out
of the country.

All these circumstances left this unhappy kingdom in the utmost weakness and
confusion. All those, and they were not a few, who were attached by connection
of blood or interest to the nobles that had suffered, or by religious prejudice
to the Jesuits who had been expelled, could never be cordially relied upon by
the crown, and were probably as little inclined to any extraordinary efforts in
favor of a government, which their resentments must have represented to them
as no better than a bloody tyranny.

The Bourbon confederacy had some ground to suppose that Portugal, in this
situation, would not have courage to withstand their menaces, and much less
ability for any long time to resist their efforts. The Spanish army overspread
the frontiers of Portugal; the commerce of corn between the two kingdoms was
prohibited, and every thing threatened a sudden invasion. In the midst of these
hostile preparations,

It was not easy to find very convincing arguments to induce Portugal to adopt
so extraordinary a change of system. The united crowns, in a memorial which was
signed by the ambassadors of both, insisted largely on the tyranny which Great
Britain exerted upon all powers, especially the maritime, and upon Portugal
among the rest; on the particular insult which had been offered to her
jurisdiction, by Boscawen's attack on de la Clue's squadron in a Portuguese
harbor; on that affinity, by which the two monarchs of Spain and Portugal are
as closely connected by the ties of blood, as all powers are by a common
interest, to oppose the ambitious designs of the English.

Whatever these arguments were deficient in reason, was made up by a strong
insinuation of force. The memorial concluded with a declaration, that, as soon
as his most faithful majesty had taken his resolution, which they doubted not
would prove favorable, their army was ready to enter Portugal, and to garrison
the principal ports of that kingdom, in order to prevent the dangers to which
they might be exposed from the attempts of the English.

The two ministers added to this extraordinary memorial, that they were ordered
by their courts to demand a categorical answer in four days; and that any
delay, beyond that time, should be considered as a negative.

The situation of Portugal was at this time certainly worthy of compassion. If,
contrary to her known interests, contrary to her ancient connections, and to
the faith of treaties, she should engage in this offensive alliance, she must
expect to see her territories and her colonies exposed to the formidable navies
of England. This however dangerous condescension was not to secure her, by her
own act, she would have put herself, bound hand and foot, into the power of the
Bourbon alliance; and having received foreign garrisons into all her places of
strength, would have reduced herself to the condition of a province to Spain.
On the other hand, if she adhered to her faith, and attempted to maintain her
independency, an army of sixty thousand men was ready to enter her territories,
which contained no place of real strength, and which had not twenty thousand
troops, and those ill armed, and worse disciplined, to defend it.

In this emergency, the firmness of the king of Portugal was eminent, and such
as must deliver his name to posterity with the most distinguished advantage. He
resolved steadily to adhere to his ancient and natural alliance, and to brave
all dangers and difficulties, that he might preserve his fidelity inviolable;
following that generous maxim of king John of France, that if good faith were
to be banished from all other parts of the world, it ought to be found in the
breast of sovereigns.

His answer to this insulting proposition was humble and moderate, but firm: he
observed, that the ties, which equally united him to Great Britain and the two
crowns, rendered him as proper a mediator to them all, as they made it improper
for him to declare himself an enemy to any of them; that his alliance with
England was ancient, and therefore could give no offense at this conjuncture;
that it was purely defensive, and therefore innocent in all its circumstances;
that the late sufferings of Portugal disabled her (in case she were willing)
from taking part in an offensive war, into the calamities of which, neither the
love his faithful majesty bore to his subjects as a father, nor the duty by
which he was bound to them as a king, could suffer him to plunge them. Finally,
he reminded the catholic king of his pacific dispositions, by which, on former
occasions, he had yielded so much, to preserve peace between the two kingdoms.

This reasonable and moderate answer drew on replies, which more and more
disclosed the true character and spirit of the Bourbon confederacy. They denied
that the alliance with England was purely defensive, or entirely innocent; and
for this unheard of reason, that the defensive alliance is converted into an
offensive one, from the situation of the Portuguese dominions, and from the
nature of the English power: the English squadron, said they, cannot keep the
sea in all seasons, nor cruize on the principal coasts for cutting off the
French and Spanish navigation, without the ports and the assistance of
Portugal; that these islanders could not insult all maritime Europe, if all the
riches of Portugal did not pass into their hands; that therefore Portugal
furnishes them with the means to make war; and their alliance with the court of
Great Britain is offensive.

Certainly, the situation of a country was never before given as a reason,
however it might have served as a secret motive, for declaring war against it.
Nor was it before heard, that the common advantages of trade, derived from a
neutral nation, could be deemed an act of hostility. These were rather insults
than arguments. And the whole proceedings of the united crowns were in the same
strain; they undertook to judge for Portugal of the pretended yoke which was
imposed upon her by England, and which she could not herself discover; to
resent injuries for her, for which she had received and accepted satisfaction;
and, as if this had not been indignity sufficient, they insultingly inform the
king of Portugal, that he ought to be glad of the nececessity which they laid
upon him to make use of his reason, in order to take the road of his glory, and
the common interest. This necessity was the immediate march of their army to
take possession of his dominions.

So extraordinary a treatment neither intimidated the king from the firmness of
his resolution, nor provoked him to change from the moderation of his language.
He maintained, that the treaties of league and commerce, which subsisted
between Portugal and Great Britain, are such as the law of God, of nature, and
of nations, have always deemed innocent. He entreated their most christian and
catholic majesty's to open their eyes to the crying injustice of pursuing
against Portugal, the war kindled against Great Britain; he desired them to
consider, that they were giving an example, which would produce the destruction
of mankind; that there was an end of the public safety, if neutral nations were
to be attacked, because they have defensive treaties with the belligerent
powers; that a maxim so destructive would occasion desolation in all Europe,
the moment a war was kindled between any two states; that, therefore, if their
troops should enter his dominions, he would, in defense of his neutrality,
endeavor to repulse them with all his forces, and those of his allies; and he
concluded with this magnanimous declaration, that it would affect him less,
though reduced to the last extremity, of which the Great Judge is the sole
arbiter, to let the last tile of his palace fall, and to see his faithful
subjects spill the last drop of their blood, than to sacrifice, together with
the honor of his crown, all that Portugal holds most dear; and to submit, by
such extraordinary means, to become an unheard of example to all pacific
powers, who will no longer be able to enjoy the benefit of neutrality, whenever
a war shall be kindled between other powers, with which the former are
connected by defensive treaties. When this final resolution was thus spiritedly
declared, passports were demanded for the ambassadors of the two crowns,

We have dwelt some time upon this transaction: we hope the reader will not
think the narrative drawn into a blameable length. The subject is interesting,
the procedure uncommon, and the example alarming. This war against Portugal was
the first fruit of the Bourbon compact: they showed very early to the world,
what it was to expect from the maturity of this league; when they were so
elevated by the superiority they imagined they had attained, even in forming
it, that they thought themselves dispensed from those decorums, and plausible
appearances, which the most ambitious princes commonly make use of, in the
execution of their most ambitious designs. If they had invaded Portugal without
any declaration at all, it might, perhaps, be considered as a piece of
convenient injustice, which they left to the previous necessity, and subsequent
success of their affairs, to justify as they could; but so many memorials and
reasonings on the subject, show that this oppression was deliberate, and that
they had not been driven to it by a sudden emergency, but that it became a
regular and avowed part of their political system.

Having laid open the manner in which the southern part of Europe so
surprisingly became engaged in this war, it is now our business to relate in
what manner some of the northern parts were as surprisingly extricated out of
it.

CHAP. III.
Death of the empress Elizabeth of Russia. Her character. State of the power of
Russia on her decease. Her nephew, Peter III. succeeds. Entire change of
system. Peace with Prussia. Peace between Prussia and Sweden. Prussian
conquests restored. The czar enters into an alliance with the king of Prussia.
War with Denmark threatened. Its cause. Extorted loan from Hamburgh. Campaign
between Prussians and Austrians opens. Prussians obtain advantages in Saxony
and Silesia. Sudden revolution in Russia.

WE have seen, in the close of the last year, that by the taking of Colberg, on
one hand, and Schweidnitz, on the other, the king of Prussia's dominions were
entirely at the mercy of his enemies: his forces were worn away, and even his
efforts had gradually declined: a complete victory, though this was an event not
at all probable, could not save him. The Russians, by wintering in Pomerania,
and by the possession of Colberg, which insured them supplies by a safe and
expeditious channel, were in a condition to commence their operations much
earlier than usual, as well as to sustain them with more spirit and uniformity.
No resource of policy could be tried with the least expectation of success.
After such a resistance for five years, of which the world never furnished
another example, the king of Prussia had nothing left but such a conduct, as
might close the scene with glory, since there was so little appearance of his
concluding the war with safety.

In the midst of these gloomy appearances, his inveterate and inflexible enemy,
the empress of Russia, died, in the sixty-third year of her age,

This princess was second daughter to Peter the Great and a descendant not
altogether unworthy of that illustrious founder of the Russian empire. From
being little better than a prisoner, she became in a moment a despotic
sovereign. At the accession of this princess, the Russian power, so newly
created, seemed to be in danger of a decline, from the many revolutions to
which the empire had been subject; and the institutions of Peter the Great, by
which that extensive part of the world was drawn out of barbarism, began
perceivably to decay, until her accession to the throne, when the former was
put out of all question by the vigor of her government, and the latter
cherished and promoted by the encouragement which she gave to every valuable
art and science. The academy at Petersburgh is at present one of the most
flourishing in Europe, and has already enriched the learned world with
considerable discoveries.

In fact, she governed the Russian empire with more lenity than any of her
predecessors; and, perhaps, carried this amiable disposition to an impolitic
access. She regulated and increased her finances; kept alive, and even
increased, the discipline of her armies; and in all her transactions with
foreign states, and in the various faces which her politics assumed, she always
supported the dignity and importance of her country at the highest point. For
her private pleasures, indeed, she has been much censured; but as they were
merely pleasures, and of such a nature that sentiment had little share in them,
they had little influence on her public conduct, which was always manly and
firm.

The part she took in this war, though it might in some measure have been
dictated by resentment, was at the fame time the result of the soundest policy.
No power, but that of the king of Prussia, was capable of checking hers. He
was, not only from his strength and character, but from the situation of his
dominions, the only prince in Europe from whom it could be materially her
interest to make conquests. By the retention of Prussia, and by the dominion
which in another name, she held over the duchy of Courland, she possessed a
very great share of the Baltic coast, and thereby possessed the means of
becoming a maritime power of the first order. With these advantages, she might
easily complete all that had been wanting, toward establishing an
uncontrollable power over Poland. By the same means she might entirely overawe
Denmark and Sweden; and also, by her vicinity, she would be enabled to
interpose in the concerns of Germany, with much more authority than she had
hitherto possessed; although her intervention had always been of consequence.

In reality, the house of Austria seemed to make far greater sacrifices of her
interest to her resentment than Russia did, with whom those two principals went
hand in hand, and supported each other. For nothing is more evident, than that
Russia would set up for a defender of the liberties of Germany, if ever she got
any footing in its neighborhood; that she would animate the powers there to
assert a greater degree of independence than they do at present; that she would
render, by her machinations, the empire in the Austrian family very precarious;
and might even find means of setting some feeble prince on the imperial throne,
in order to embroil the whole Germanic body, and to keep it in entire
dependence upon Russia. On the whole, if the projects of Austria had succeeded
in their full extent, she would have very soon found in Russia a more powerful
restraint than ever she had either in France or Sweden, even in the greatest
heights of their power and credit in Germany. She would, indeed, have ruined
the king of Prussia; but she would have purchased his ruin with her own
independency.

These were the prospects that lay before all political reasoners at the time
of the death of the empress Elizabeth. Charles Peter Ulric, of the house of
Holstein, who had been created grand duke of Russia, and appointed heir
apparent to that vast empire by the late czarina, succeeded, under the name of
Peter III. None but those who were intimately acquainted with the character and
disposition of the new czar, could have any reason to imagine that he would
abandon the system of his predecessor, which was certainly founded on the true
interest of the country he governed. The king of Prussia himself seemed for
some time to have entertained no great hopes from this change. The czar had,
however, sometimes discovered marks of esteem for the character of this
monarch. He had the black eagle, of which order the king of Prussia is grand
master. But the king of Prussia could place very little confidence in this:
however, with that air of pleasantry, which never entirely forsook him in all
his misfortunes, he said in a letter to Mr. Mitchel, the British minister at
the Russian court, "Is not this a very extraordinary knight, to feed 80,000 men
at my expense? He is the only one of my knights that takes that liberty. If
every knight of the garter did the same, your England (England though it is)
would be devoured by them. I beg you would endeavor to make my knight more
tractable, and tell him it is against the institutes of the order, for a knight
to eat up his grand master."

The eyes of all Europe were now fixed upon the steps which the czar might
take. With regard to the government of his country, nothing could be more
popular and auspicious than his first measures. The earliest use he made of his
absolute power, was to set the Russian nobility and gentry free, and to put
them on the same footing with those of their rank in the other more moderate
governments of Europe. Almost all the exiles were recalled to court, and
amongst the rest the unfortunate count Biron, who, from a sovereign prince, had
been reduced to the most wretched condition, in the most wretched country on
the globe. He had been many years a peasant of Siberia, and may very probably
once more become a sovereign prince. It is in those despotic governments we see
the most striking excesses, and dismal reverses of fortune; in which one day a
person is raised to something almost above man, and the next is perhaps in a
moment degraded to the lowest station of humanity.

The new emperor proceeded in his reformation to abolish some severe and
tyrannical jurisdictions, and intending the same benign disposition to all
degrees of his subjects, he lessened the tax upon salt, to the very great and
universal relief of the poor.

These beginnings gave the most favorable impressions of his domestic
government. But Europe was principally concerned in his foreign politics. It
was not long before his dispositions to peace became apparent. What astonished
the world, was the high rate at which he valued this blessing. In a memorial,
which he caused to be delivered on the 23d of February, to the ministers of the
allied courts, he declared, that, in order to the establishment of peace, he
was ready to sacrifice all the conquests made by the arms of Russia in this
war, in hopes that the allied courts will on their parts equally prefer the
restoration of peace and tranquillity, to the advantages which they might
expect from the continuance of the war, but which they cannot obtain but by a
continuance of the effusion of human blood.

The allies praised the disinterestedness, spirit, and humanity of this
declaration; but recommended to his attention the fidelity to treaties, which
constitutes a no less valuable part of the royal character, and a no less
considerable branch of the duty of a monarch to his subjects. They showed a
disposition to imitate his desire for peace, but by no means to follow his
example in purchasing it by a cession of all the advantages, which they had
acquired, or hoped to acquire by the war.

The Czar having thus far complied with decency, and being of a character
little fitted to wait the slow procedure of a joint negotiation, gave way to
his ardent desires for peace, and to the sentiments of that extravagant
admiration, which he had conceived for the king of Prussia. A suspension of
hostilities was concluded between them on the 16th of March; and it was
followed not long after by a treaty of peace and alliance.

This was a miraculous revolution. Fortune who had so long abandoned the king
of Prussia to his genuis, after having persecuted him for near five years, and
overpowered him with the whole weight of her anger, at length made amends by a
sudden turn, and did for him at one stroke the only thing, by which he could
possibly be saved.

Sweden who since she has recovered her liberty has lost her political
importance, and for a long time acted entirely under the direction of Russian
councils, followed on this, as on all other occasions, the example of the
courts of Petersburgh, and signed a treaty of peace with the king of Prussia on
the 22d of May.

In order to account for whatever was not the result of mere personal character
in this extraordinary revolution of politics in Russia, it will be necessary to
remind the reader, that the czar Peter the third was duke of Holstein; and that
the dukes of Holstein had pretensions to the duchy of Sleswick. These
pretensions were compromised by a treaty in 1732. But as the cession made by
the house of Holstein in this treaty was the effect of necessity, it had been
always apprehended that she would make use of the first safe opportunity of
reclaiming her ancient rights. The czar seized eagerly on the great one, which
the possession of the whole Russian power afforded him, and he resolved to
enter into an immediate war for this object, to which his predilection for his
native country gave in his eyes a far greater importance than to all the
conquests of his predecessor. As long as this war with the king of Prussia
subsisted, it was impossible that his designs against Denmark could be
prosecuted with any hope of success. Wholly indifferent therefore to all
others, and passionately fond of this object, as soon as he came to the throne,
without any dispute or negotiation, he offered the king of Prussia in his great
distress every thing he could have hoped from a series of victories, and whilst
he joined his arms to those of that monarch in Silesia, he caused an army to
march toward Holstein.

Thus the peace with Russia, far from conducing to the general peace of Europe,
did very little more than change the face of the war. It brought in new
subjects of dispute, and new parties, and by threatening Denmark, left not a
single power in the north in a state of assured tranquillity.

The king of Denmark, though threatened by so formidable a power engaged in
pursuit of a favorite object, was not terrified into any mean concessions. He
recruited His army, repaired his fortifications, and prepared for his defense;
with temper and magnanimty. As money must be much wanting for the services of
so important a war, as his country could furnish no great supplies, and the
borrowings in every part of Europe, together with the sudden invasion of his
dominions, could enable him to form no sanguine hopes of public credit, he
turned his eyes toward the city of Hamburgh, which had enriched itself by its
industry and neutrality during the whole war, and by the number of wealthy
persons who had fled there for refuge from the calamities, which all the
neighboring countries had suffered.

His Danish majesty had always kept alive a claim of sovereignty over that
city, which (whoever founded) he exercised whenever he found himself able. He
thought the present one of those conjunctures. Therefore without any previous
notice he appears with a strong army before Hamburg, immediately submit to a
loan of 1,000,000 of rix dollars. The magistrates of this trading city, little
prepared for, or accustomed to war, having no ally at hand, and who would be
equally endangered by the strength of any ally able to protect them, prudently
submitted, and furnished the king with such a supply as his affairs required.

The king of Prussia lost no time to profit of this great and unexpected
revolution in his favor. The neutrality of the Russians still left the
Austrians much superior to him Their alliance brought him to an equality. Two
Austrian armies in Silesia and one in Saxony, were prepared to act, and it was
not clear which side would begin to act on the offensive; the Austrian armies
threatened Glogau and Breslaw with a siege, and the king of Prussia's
threatened Schweidnitz.

The active character of the king of Prussia, and the caution of marshal Daun,
soon determined the part which the several armies were to take, and the spirit
of the several operations.

By this signal advantage, all the part of Saxony, possessed by the Prussians,
was effectually secured; and any attempt which might hereafter be thought
proper for the recovery of Dresden, was much facilitated. Although the
Austrians, sensible of the consequence of this loss, and largely reinforceed
from the armies in Silesia, attempted to recover these posts by several lively
efforts, they were repulsed with no small slaughter on both sides; and prince
Henry remained so much master of Saxony, that it was necessary to keep a large
army from the war in Silesia, to prevent if possible his making irruptions into
the very heart of Bohemia.

His Prussian majesty derived advantages from the conduct of his brother, which
he did not neglect to improve. It was not until the latter end of June that he
was joined by his new Russian allies. As soon as this junction was formed, he
resolved to make a trial of what these men could do in his favor, who had
acted so strenuously against him. Marshal Daun's army occupied several strong,
but detached eminences, which enabled him to communicate with and protect
Schweidnitz from all attempts of the enemy. The king of Prussia undertook to
dislodge,

This was no regular battle; but the king of Prussia, though he did not succeed
immediately in his attack, yet by his judicious maneuvers he attained all the
advantages he proposed from his enterprise. For marshal Daun, apprehensive from
the motions of his army, that the king of Prussia intended to seize upon his
principal magazine, and even cut off his communication with Bohemia, abandoned
those important posts which he had hitherto maintained with success, fell back
to the extremities of Silesia, and left Schweidnitz entirely uncovered.

The king of Prussia immediately prepared to invest that city whilst different
detachments of Prussians, some on the side of Saxony, others on the side of
Silesia, penetrated deep into Bohemia, laid many parts of the country under
contribution, and spread an universal alarm. It was about five Years since they
had been driven from thence by the victorious arms of marshal Daun, who now
found himself unable to protect that kingdom from their ravages. A considerable
body of Russian irregulars also made an irruption into Bohemia, and began there
to retaliate on the Austrians those excesses, which they had themselves so
often before committed on the Prussian dominions,

Whilst the king of Prussia was thus playing with spirit the great game which
fortune had put into his hands, he was all at once threatened with a sudden
reverse, by another revolution in Russia, which bore all the appearance of
being as unfavourable to him, as the former had been beyond all hopes
beneficial. The variable political climate of Russia, under whose influence all
his fortune decayed or flourished, was covered with a sudden cloud by the
deposition, followed close by the death, of his fast friend, and faithful ally,
the czar of Muscovy.

CHAP. IV.
Causes of the revolution in Russia. Czar irritates the clergy and soldiery.
Differences with the czarina. Conspiracy against him. Czar deposed by the
senate. Attempts an escape. His imprisonment and death. The czarina declared
empress. Her politic conduct. Ingratiates herself with the People.

FROM the moment of the late czar's accession to the throne of the Russia's,
something extraordinary was expected. His disposition seemed to lead him to
make alterations in every thing, and having set before himself two great
examples, that of the king of Prussia and of his predecessor Peter I. it was
expected that this vast empire was going once more, almost within the life of a
man, to assume a new face; a circumstance which could not fail of having a
serious influence on the affairs of Europe. Peter III. made more new
regulations in Russia in a few weeks, than wise and cautious princes undertake
in a long reign. It was to be feared that his actions were rather guided by a
rash and irregular turn of mind, and the spirit of innovation, than by any
regular and well digested plan, for the improvement of his extensive dominions.

His first actions on coming to the throne, it is true, were laudable, and
seemed well calculated to acquire him the affections of his people. But if in
some instances he consulted their interests, in many he shocked their
prejudices; and he lost thereby that opinion, which is on all occasions
necessary, but is particularly so for carrying such uncommon designs as his
into execution.

The power of the czar's though absolute and uncontrollable in its exercise, is
extremely weak in its foundation. There is not perhaps in Europe a government
which depends so much on the good will and affection of those that are
governed; and which requires a greater degree of vigilance and a steadier hand.
The regular succession which has been so often broken, and the great change of
manners, which in less than a century has been introduced, have left in Russia
a weakness amidst all the appearance of strength, and a great facility to
sudden and dangerous revolutions.

Peter III. paid little attention to those difficulties, which to him were the
greater, as he was a foreigner born. They were augmented by the superior and
invidious regard he seemed to pay to foreign interests, and foreign persons.
The preference he so manifestly gave to the uncertain hope of inconsiderable
conquest in Holstein over the solid and valuable possessions which the fortune
of his predecessor had left him, must have disgusted all the politicians of his
country. His intimate connection with, and boundless admiration of that prince,
with whom Russia had been so lately, and so long, in a state of the most
violent hostility, could not add to the opinion of his prudence. They did not
think he sufficiently consulted his dignity, in soliciting with great anxiety a
command in the Prussian service. When he received it, he dressed himself in the
Prussian uniform, made a grand festival, and displayed all the marks of an
immoderate and puerile satisfaction. He pushed his extravagance in this point
so far, that he made preparations in this immature state of his government to
quit Russia, and to go into Germany for the sake of an interview with that
great monarch, whose genius, principles and fortune he so greatly admired.

Although this proceeding was, almost in every respect, extremely impolitic, it
did not threaten so dangerous consequences as the other steps, which he took
about the same time. Nothing requires so much judgment, and so nice a hand, as
to effect a change in the settled establishments of any country. Above all,
there must be something favorable in the conjuncture; or something so uncommon
and overruling in the genius of the conductor of those changes, as will render
him superior to all difficulties. This latter was the case of Peter I. who had
indeed very little favorable in the conjuncture; but he did every thing by his
capacity, courage, and perseverance. The soldiery and the ecclesiastics are the
great supports of all absolute rule, and they are certainly the last bodies,
upon which a prince of this kind would choose to exert any invidious act of
authority. But the czar was indiscreet enough, very early in his reign, highly
to provoke both these bodies; the soldiery, by the manifest preference he gave
to his Holstein guards, and to all officers of that nation; and by the change
he made in favor of the Prussian uniform to the exclusion of that, in which
the Russians believed they had so often asserted the honor of their country,
and gained many signal advantages over the troops distinguished by those
regimentals which were now preferred

These trifles had very important consequences. But what he did in matters of
religion was still more dangerous. This prince had been educated a Luthern; and
though he conformed to the Greek church, in order to qualify himself for the
succession, he never showed much respect to that mode of religion, to the rites
and doctrines of which his subjects had been always extremely attached. He
seized upon the revenues of the clergy, whether monks or seculars, whether
bishops or inferiors, and for compensation allowed them some mean pensions, in
such a proportion as his fancy suggested. His capricious order that the clergy
should be no longer distinguished by beards, was in itself of less moment, but
it was hardly less offensive. He made also some regulations concerning the
images and pictures in their churches, which gave them reason to apprehend his
intention of accomplishing a total change in the religion of the empire, and
introducing Lutheranism.

Whilst he was taking these measures to alienate the minds of his people in
general, and especially of those bodies, with whom it was the most his interest
to be well, he had not the good fortune to live in union with his own family.
He had long slighted his consort, a princess of the house of Anhalt Zerbst, a
woman of a masculine understanding, and by whose councils he might have
profited. He lived in a very public manner with the countess of Woronzoff,
niece to the chancellor of that name, and seemed devoted to her with so strong
a passion, that it was apprehended he had some thoughts of throwing his empress
into a monastery, and raising this lady to the throne of all the Russias. What
seemed to confirm this opinion, was his omitting formally to declare his son
the grand duke Paul Petrowitz the successor. This omission in a country where
the succession is established and regular, would have been of no consequence;
the punctual observance of such a ceremony would rather have betrayed some
doubt of the title. But the nature of this government, as well as possitive
constitutions, had made it necessary in Russia, and the omission was certainly
alarming.

That unfortunate prince, having in this manner affronted his army, irritated
his clergy, offended his nobility, and alienated his own family, without having
left himself any firm ground of authority, in personal esteem or national
prejudice, proceeded with his usual precipitation to new changes. In the mean
time a most dangerous conspiracy was forming against him. The cruel punishments
inflicted in Russia on state criminals, have only an effect to harden the minds
of men already fierce and obdurate, and seldom deter them from the most
desperate undertakings. Rosamouski, Hetman or chief of the Cossacks, a person
of importance by that command, Panin, governor of the grand duke Paul, marshal
Butterlin, the chamberlain Teplow, the attorney general Glebow, baron Orlow
major of the guards, and many others of the great officers and first nobility
of the Empire, engaged in a conspiracy to dethrone the czar, who was now
universally hated; and, what was more fatal to him, universally despised.

They assured themselves that their actions could not be disagreeable to the
empress; whose conduct had always been the very reverse of that of her consort,
This princess finding that the affections of her husband were irrecoverably
alienated, endeavored to set up a separate and independent interest in her own
favor, and for asserting the rights of her son. She therefore assiduously
cultivated the affections of the Russian nation, and paid a respect to their
manners and religion, in the same degree that her husband seemed to cotemn them.

So ill was the czar served, that this conspiracy was grown general, without
his receiving the least notice of it, and he remained in perfect security,
whilst the senate and the clergy were assembled to pass the sentence of his
disposition.

This prince was indulging himself in indolent amusements, and lulled in the
most profound security at a house of pleasure, called Oraniebaum on the sea
shore, when a soldier brought him an account that his kingdom was taken away
from him.

Astonished, and wholly unprepared for this event, he was some time senseless,
and entirely at a loss what part to take. When he was rouzed from this trance
by the approaching danger, his first suggestion was to defend the place with
his Holstein guards; but though satisfied of their attachment, he doubted their
strength, and he knew it was in vain to hope for any effort in his favor from
the Russians.

Nothing then remained but flight, by which he might escape to Holstein, and
wait some favorable turn of fortune. This late lord of powerful fleets and
armies embarked in a small vessel, and with a few attendants, rowed toward
Cronstadt; but he had not proceeded very far, when he was informed that this
fortress was in the hands of his enemies, and that every avenue for escape was
shut against him. Dejected and desponding he returned to Oraniebaum. After some
short and tumultuous deliberation, he resolved to abandon all thoughts of
defense, and to throw himself on the compassion of the empress.

On her march she met his messengers, who brought letters containing a
renunciation of the empire, and stipulating no other terms than leave to return
to Holstein, and the satisfaction of taking with him, as the companion of his
retreat, the countess of Woronzoff and one single friend.

Reasons of state could not permit the empress to consent to the first of those
terms, and the last could not be very flattering to her. His terms were
rejected; and he was required to sign an unconditional resignation of his
crown, according to a form that was prepared for him. Not satisfied with
depriving him of his crown, it was thought fit to make him the murderer of his
own reputation; and this unfortunate prince, moved with the vain hope of life,
signed a paper declaring his conviction of his inability to govern the empire,
either as a sovereign, or in any other capacity, and his sense of the distress,
in which his continuing at the head of affairs would inevitably involve it.
After he had signed this abdication, he gave up his sword, and was conducted to
prison, where in a short time,

Thus was a revolution of such immense importance effected in a single day, and
without shedding a single drop of blood. The unfortunate emperor enjoyed the
power, of which he had made so imprudent and unpolitic an use, no longer than
six months. His wife, without any hereditary title, is sovereign mistress of
the Russian empire; and the most absolute power on earth, is now held by an
elective monarch.

Immediately on this revolution a number of manifestoes appeared, in which the
conduct of the late czar was severely condemned, the weakness of his personal
character exposed, and designs of the blackest kind, even that of murdering his
consort, attributed to him. Those manifestoes at the same time were filled with
the strongest declarations of affection from the empress to the subjects of
Russia, of regard to their interests, and of attachment to their religion; and
they are all filled with such unaffected and fervent strains of piety, as must
needs prove extremely edifying to those who are acquainted with the sentiments
of pure religion, by which great princes are generally animated on occasions of
this nature.

Nothing could be more able than the conduct of the empress, since her
accession to the throne. In almost all respects it was the very reverse of that
of her husband. She dismissed all foreigners from her confidence and service;
she sent away the Holstein guards, and chose Russian, whose ancient uniform was
revived with luster, the empress herself frequently condescending to appear in
it. The clergy were restored to their possessions, and their beards. She
conferred all the great posts of the empire on native Russians, and entirely
threw herself on the affections of that people to whom she owed her elevation.

CHAP. V.
Effect of the revolution in Russia on the king of Prussia's affairs. Situation
of the new empress. She adopts a neutrality. Russian conquests restored.
Russians quit the Prussian camp. King of Prussia draws marshal Daun from
Buckersdorff. Schweidnitz besieged. Marshal Laudohn attacks the prince of
Bevern. Is repulsed. Disposition of the French and allied armies. Broglio
removed. Battle of Grabenstein. French defeated. Lord Granby drives the French
from Hambourgh. Prince Xavier of Saxony defeated. Gottingen evacuated. French
army called from the Lower Rhine.

THIS great change in the government of Russia, it was universally feared,
would be followed by a total change of system with regard to foreign affairs.
The peace and alliance with the king of Prussia were very unpopular measures in
Muscovy. It was not probable that the close and intimate connection which had
subsisted between the king of Prussia and the late czar, could greatly
recommend him to the successor. And as it was imagined that this revolution
must have been in a great degree owing to the machinations of those courts,
whom the czar had irritated by withdrawing from their alliance, there was the
greater reason to apprehend that the power, which was now set up, would be
exerted in their favor.

There were also great advantages on the side of Russia, if the empress should
not hold the peace concluded by her late husband to be binding on her, as none
of the conquests were at this time evacuated. Every thing seemed to conspire
toward plunging the king of Prussia into the abyss of his former distresses,
after he had emerged from them, only for such a time, and in such a manner, as
to make them more bitter and insupportable.

Fortunately, however, for this wonderful man, the empress, who had come to the
Russian throne in the extraordinary manner that we have seen, could not look
upon herself as sufficiently secure to undertake again a war of so much
importance as that which had been just concluded. It was necessary, for some
time at least, that she should confine her attention solely to her own safety.
Therefore it was expedient to collect, within itself, all the force of the
empire, in order to oppose it to the designs of the many malcontents, with
which that empire always abounds, and who, though not attached to the interest
of the late czar, and little inclined to revenge his fate, would find now both
inducement and opportunity for raising troubles and attempting new changes.
Very plausible pretenses for such attempts existed from the time of Peter the
Great; who, whilst he improved and strengthened his kingdom, left in it, at the
same time, the seeds of civil wars and revolutions.

These considerations, whatever her desires might be, induced the czarina to
continue so much of the system of her predecessor, as coincided with her
situation. She therefore declared to the king of Prussia's ministers, "that she
was resolved to observe inviolably, in all points, the perpetual peace
concluded under the preceding reign, that nevertheless she had thought proper
to bring back to Russia, by the nearest roads, all her troops in Silesia,
Prussia, and Pomerania."

It was not the critical situation alone of the czarina which produced this
moderation; the prudent behavior of his Prussian majesty, during the time of
his connection with the late czar, had a considerable share in reconciling the
mind of this empress to him, and of perpetuating something like the same
friendship, with interests so very different. The Russian senate, flaming with
resentment against this monarch, and against their late sovereign; and the
empress, full of suspicion that the conduct of the latter might have been
influenced by the councils of the former, searched eagerly amongst the papers
of the late emperor for elucidation or proofs of this point. They found indeed
many letters from the king of Prussia; but in a strain absolutely different
from what they apprehended. The king of Prussia had, as far as prudence would
admit, kept a reserve and distance in regard to the rash advances of this
unhappy ally. Too experienced to be carried away by his inconsiderate
impetuosity, he gave him much salutary, though fruitless, advice; he counseled
him to undertake nothing against the empress his consort; to desist from the
war with Denmark; to attempt no changes in the religion and fundamental laws of
the country; and not to think of coming into Germany.

On hearing these letters read, the empress is said to have burst into tears of
gratitude, and made in consequence the strongest declarations in favor of this
prince. They were not without effect. Orders had been given with relation to
Prussia, which threatened a renewal of hostilities. They were soon suspended.
The army of the Russians was indeed separated from that of Prussia; but all the
important places, which the Russians had, with so much bloodshed, and through
so many difficulties acquired, and which gave them the command of every thing
else that remained to the king, were faithfully restored.

This change from a strict alliance to a cold neutrality, though it made no
small difference in the Prussian affairs, yet, all things considered, must be
regarded as an escape, and as a deliverance almost as wonderful as his former.
However, this circumstance could not fail of inspiring some degree of
confidence into his enemies, which the king of Prussia endeavored above all
things to prevent.

On the 21st of July* the orders arrived at the allied camp from Petersburg,
for the Russians to separate themselves from his army, and return without delay
to their own country. The king, without being confounded by this sudden order,
and instead of slackening his efforts on account of this desertion, resolved to
fall with vigor, and without delay; upon marshal Daun, and to attack him
before the news of this change could reach him. Since he could no longer profit
by the arms of the Russians, he endeavored to profit at least by their
appearance in his camp. The very next day therefore he attacked the Austrian
army, whose right wing occupied the heights of Buckersdorff; drove them from
that eminence, and from some villages where they were advantageously posted.
The success was not owing only to the spirit of the actual attack, but to an
apprehension of the Austrians, that the whole united army of the Prussians and
Muscovites was on the point of engaging them. The king of Prussia made an use
of those allies, in the moment they deserted him.

This lively attack was made with a loss only of three hundred men on the side
of the Prussians; the number of the Austrians killed is not known. The
prisoners amounted to one thousand; and fourteen pieces of cannon were taken.
It was indeed no more than an affair of posts; but its consequences were
important; for the communication of the Imperialists with Schweidnitz was now
entirely and finally cut off; they could not attempt any thing considerable for
the relief of that place. Prince Henry held them in continual alarm for
Bohemia, and a great part of their attention, and no small part of their forces
were kept continually engaged upon that ^ide.

The king of Prussia having thus pushed back marshal Daun, invested
Schweidnitz, and laid siege to that important fortress before his face. This
was the fourth time which that place had been besieged since the beginning of
this war; and this circumstance alone might suffice to show the many and
extraordinary changes of fortune which distinguished these campaigns. We
apprehend no instance has happened before of any place like this of real
strength being so often successively taken and retaken in the course of a
single war.

As Schweidnitz is the key of Silesia, and, though not quite a regular place,
is notwithstanding well situated and well fortified; as the garrison amounted
to nine thousand men, commanded by a good officer, and assisted by a very
experienced engineer, and as two great armies of the enemy observed all his
motions, it was necessary to make the dispositions for the siege with uncommon
care. His infantry were encamped on the heights behind Schweidnitz. His cavalry
formed a chain in the plains of Keintzerdorf, to be nearer the camp of the
prince of Wirtemberg, which was situated so as to prevent any enterprise from
the county of Glatz. The prince of Bevern commanded a strong corpse, which
posted itself advantageously near Cosel. One under general Werner did the same
at Noissa.

By these dispositions the Prussian convoys were protected, the principal
places in Silesia guarded, the siege of Schweidnitz covered, and an easy
communication preserved between all the detached corpse employed in these
several services.

The effects of this wise disposition were soon felt. Marshal Daun, despairing
to succeed against the army, which, under the king in person, covered the siege
of Schweidnitz, endeavored to break this chain, and by that means distress the
Prussians who were carrying on the siege. Laudohn was therefore detached, with
a very superior force, to attack the prince of Bevern, and to drive him from
the advantageous post he occupied. This attack was made with all the celerity
and resolution, which distinguish the operations of this brave officer. But the
prince, mindful of the disgrace he had formerly suffered in this province,
opposed him with such constancy and perseverance, that the king of Prussia had
time to come to his relief. The Austrians were then put between two fires,
routed, and pursued with a terrible slaughter.

This attempt being defeated, the king of Prussia met with no disturbance in
his preparations for the siege, and the trenches were opened on the night of
the 8th of July.

Whilst the king of Prussia was making this advantageous use of his fortune,
the armies of the French and the allies in Westphalia were not inactive. Among
the commanders of the former a great disunion had long prevailed. The marshals
de Broglio and de Soubise had mutually accused each other; the camp and the
court were for some time entirely distracted with the cabals of the partisans
of these officers. The result was not favorable to marshal Broglio. In him the
French court was obliged to recall, and in some measure to disgrace, one of the
very best of their officers. A suspicion, and that not weakly founded,
prevailed against this general, that unable to bear a competitor in fame, or an
associate in command, he had often, in order to disgrace those with whom he was
to act, neglected to improve his favorable opportunities; and that in some
instances, by his conduct, he had purposely occasioned some failures, and even
defeats. This was a fault which no great qualities in an officer could
compensate, He was therefore removed from his command, and the conduct of the
army left to the prince de Soubise, who was infinitely beloved by the soldiers
for his generous and benevolent disposition; and marshal d'Etrees, who has been
so often mentioned in the course of this history, was associated with him.

The plan of the campaign, on the part of the French, did not differ much from
that which had been formerly pursued. They had, as before, two armies; this
under the prince de Soubise and marshal d'Etrees on the Weser, and another
under the prince de Conde on the Lower Rhine.

The disposition of the allies was also but little varied. The hereditary
prince was posted in the bishopric of Munster, to watch the latter of these
armies; and prince Ferdinand in person, with the body of the army, lay behind
the Dymel to make head against the former. So little had the French profited by
their superior numbers, and superior resources in this continental war, and so
little decisive use had they made even of some advantages in the field, that
this campaign commenced very nearly in the same place, and they contended for
pretty much the same objects, which they had struggled for in the two preceding
years.

So superior was the genius of prince Ferdinand, that under many disadvantages
he was the first to commence offensive operations. The stroke he struck on this
occasion would suffice alone to rank him with the first commanders of his age.
His abilities throughout the war have never shone out with more luster than in
this campaign, which concluded it.

The French army was most advantageously posted, both for command of the
country, and for strength, near a place called Graebenstein, in the frontiers
of Hesse; their center occupied an advantageous eminence; their left wing was
almost inaccessible by several deep ravines, and their right was covered by the
village of Graebenstein, by several rivulets, and a strong detached body under
one of their best officers, monsieur de Castries.

In this situation they imagined they had nothing to fear from the attempts of
prince Ferdinand, whose army, besides the inferiority of its numbers, was
separated in such a manner, and in such distant places, that they judged it
impossible it could unite in any attack upon their camp. But whilst they
enjoyed themselves in full security, the storm was preparing to fall upon them
from all quarters.

A considerable corpse of the allied army, under general Luckner, was posted to
the eastward of the Weser, near E^mbecke, on the Leine. He lay there to observe
prince Xavier of Saxony, who was encamped between the Werra and Gottingen. But
if he watched the prince, the prince also watched him. When, therefore, he had
orders to quit this post, that he might cooperate in the grand design, he left
a small party of his corpse in his station, by which he deceived the prince of
Saxony; and marching in the night with the utmost speed, he crossed the Weser,
turned the right of the French army, and, without being discovered, placed
himself upon their rear. General Sporcken at the same time placed himself so as
to attack the same wing in flank. Prince Ferdinand crossed the Dymel, in order
to fall upon their center. The attack on the enemy's left was commanded by lord
Granby.

These preparations were made with so much judgment, celerity, and good order,
that the French had not perceived the approach of the allies, when they found
themselves attacked with infinite impetuosity in front, flank, and rear.

As the French placed all their hopes rather in retreat than combat, an entire
rout must have ensued, if monsieur Stainville, who commanded on the left, had
not thrown himself with the flower of the French infantry into a wood, which
enabled him, at the expense of the best part of it, to cover the retreat of the
army. Here this brave and accomplished officer made a resolute stand, and for a
long time sustained the whole weight of the allies. His corpse was a devoted
sacrifice. All but two battalions were cut to pieces or made prisoners. The
other bodies, covered by this resolute maneuver, made a shift to cover
themseles under the cannon of Cassel, or precipitately escaped to the other
side of the Fulda.

Thus did the French army, by the virtue of monsieur de Stainville, escape a
total defeat; but the consequences of the action were not recovered during the
whole campaign. They lost much credit both in point of resolution and
generalship. Their infantry, in this engagement, consisted of one hundred
battalions, when that of the allies was composed but of sixty. The common men
made prisoners by the allies on this occasion were two thousand seven hundred
and fifty, and no less than one hundred and sixty-two officers were taken. The
English lost but a few men killed, and no officer of rank but
lieutenant colonel Townshend This col. Townshend was second son to the hon.
Thomas Townshend, Esquire He had distinguished himself on several occasions.
Guadaloupe he was pushed overboard in the landing of the troops, but his black
saved his life by jumping after him. In the last campaign in Germany, he was
shot through the arm, and in this engagement he lost his life, seeking the post
of honor that his duty did not require
, who fell with great glory to himself, and to the regret of the whole army.

Every thing in the conduct of prince Ferdinand appears the effect of a well
digested plan; and one great action completed always helps to disclose a
series of bold, masterly, and connected designs.

As soon as the enemy was disloged from their strong post, use was made of this
advantage (whilst the French, under the hurry and confusion of their late
misfortunes, were unable to provide against unexpected accidents) to push
forward a body of the English under lord Granby and lord Frederick Cavendish.
The French could scarcely imagine, that, whilst they were in possession of so
strong a place as Cassel, and commanded an army so superior in numbers to the
allies, that, whilst prince Ferdinand braved them in front, they should find
one of his detachments upwards of thirty miles behind them. In this emergency,
monsieur de Rochambeau perceiving their motions, hastily collected some
brigades of infantry and cavalry at Hombourg,

To the north of Hesse also the allies were not less active, nor less
successful: they obliged prince Xavier, with his Saxon detachments, to abandon
his advanced post on the Leine, and unite himself to the grand army. They got
between him and Gottingen, by which the French garrison there was left without
support. This garrison, seeing its communication interrupted, blew up a part of
the fortifications, and attempted a retreat; but finding no avenue open, they
were obliged to return in confusion. Despairing of their ability to hold this
important place, they thought themselves happy, when at length, with much
management and difficulty,

Prince Xavier, after having, as we said before, quitted his advanced situation
at Morungen in the territories of Hanover, united himself to the right of the
principal army, which was posted to the eastward of the Fulda, not far from the
place where that river forms an angle in its junction with the Werra. In this
angle stands the town of Munden, a fortified place, in which the French had a
garrison. Full of confidence from this situation, they were under no
apprehension: but the generals Zastrow, Gilsac, and Waldhausen, passed the
Fulda in their sight,

The bold passage of the Fulda, and the judgment of the subsequent
dispositions, insured the victory. Prince Xavier, for a good while, defended
himself with an obstinate resolution; but finding his flank gained, he began to
give way. In this Instant Waldhausen, who had hitherto only watched the issue
of the engagement, threw in his horse upon the rear and completed the defeat.

General Stainville, who occupied a strong entrenched camp in the
neighborhood, seeing the party of the prince of Saxony in danger of being
totally cut to pieces, quitted his intrenchments with his whole army of ten
thousand men, and hastened to their relief. Prince Frederick of Brunswick,
attentive to this movement, with great quickness seized this critical
opportunity, entered their camp the moment they had left it, and entirely
destroyed all their works. In this action 1100 of the enemy were made prisoners.

The French finding their communication destroyed, their army surrounded and
harrassed on every side, and without intermission, were neither able to advance
with a prospect of success, or to retreat with any hope of safety. In this
distress they had nothing left but to call their army from the Lower Rhine to
their assistance. No time was to be lost. Express after express was sent to
hasten them. In consequence of these dispatches, the prince of Conde advanced
by forced marches; the hereditary prince stuck close to him, and kept himself
in readiness to fall upon his corpse, when a favorable opportunity should offer.

In the mean time prince Ferdinand pressed upon Soubise's army. Advantageously
as they were situated, he offered them battle for a whole day. Rather than
risque an engagement they decamped in the night, and quitted, without an
action, those advantageous grounds called the heights of Mulsingen, where they
could not be attempted without the greatest difficulty and hazard; and the
quitting of which gave prince Ferdinand the most important advantages over them.

Never were military operations pushed with more vivacity, whilst the
negotiation for peace was in great forwardness. The two great contending courts
had opened conferences, whilst their armies were cutting one another in pieces:
but prince Ferdinand on that account, rather strained than slackened his
efforts. He knew that the negotiation for peace is always much forwarded by the
opperations of the campaign, and that a successful action often hastens the
decision of a contested article. Perhaps too he was willing to show in England,
that the necessity of making peace ought not to be attributed to the
circumstances of that part of the war which had been committed to his care.
People imagined they could discern something like coldness toward this great
commander in the new British ministry; and that he, on his side, seemed rather
to favor that party in England which was for prolonging the war.

CHAP. VI.
War in Portugal. Plan of the Campaign. Mirand, Braganz, and Chaves taken.
Almeida besieged and taken. Count of La Lip arrives in Portugal. Surprise of
Valentia d' Alcantara, by general Burgoyne. Affair of Villa Velha. Spaniards
retire.

THE events of the war in Germany, though its object was not more interesting
than that in Portugal, seem to rank far before the actions of the latter in
dignity and importance. They naturally occupy the first place, and justify a
more minute detail in an history of military operations. It is in Germany that
the great efforts of all the great powers in Europe were made from the
beginning. Here the most considerable armies were maintained; here the great
battles were fought; and on this theater the great commanders gave a full scope
to their genius. Germany seems, as it were, the natural soil of hostility; but
Portugal, which had long languished in a tranquil obscurity, could scarce
furnish out a faint image of war.

Of the state of the military in that country we have spoken in a preceding
chapter. The marine was not on a much more respectable footing. About six or
seven ships of the line, and a very few frigates, composed all the naval force
of Portugal that was fit for service; of that Portugal which had formerly been
one of the first maritime powers in Europe. The fortifications in that kingdom
had been also long neglected, and scarce any of them were in a condition to
sustain a regular siege.

Portugal, however, possessed some advantages; but they were only such as she
derived from her weakness. The extreme barrenness and poverty of the country,
made it very difficult for an army, either of friends or enemies, to subsist in
it. The badness of the roads, and the frequency and steepness of the mountains,
which occupy the greatest part of that kingdom, made it no less difficult to
advance with rapid marches, and to improve the advantages of the campaign with
proper expedition. The nature of the country also rendered it not unfit for
that species of defense, which the best force it had was best qualified to
make; that is, in the way of an irregular war, by its armed peasantry; for the
defiles in many places are of such a nature, as to be capable of being
maintained by a small and undisciplined body, against very numerous and very
regular forces. And the Portuguese, from the highest to the lowest, were
animated with such a sincere and inveterate hatred to the Spanish name, and
were filled with so much terror at the prospect of falling a second time under
the government of that nation, that great hopes were entertained of their
exerting themselves to the utmost on this occasion, and of their rousing that
natural courage in which the Portuguese are not deficient.

These advantages, however, did by no means balance the dangers to which that
kingdom was exposed, from the joint hostility of France and Spain. All the hope
of Portugal was centered in England, for whose sake, and in whose quarrel she
had been drawn into this unequal contest. The greater the weakness of Portugal
was, the more conspicuous were the magnanimity and resources of Great Britain,
who made in the close of so expensive and ruinous a war, such astonishing
efforts and who was in a condition by her strength to prop up, at least for a
time, so very feeble a system. She sent to Portugal, officers, troops,
artillery, arms, military stores, provisions, and money, every thing which
could enable the Portuguese to exert their natural strength, and every thing
which could supply that strength where it was deficient.

When the Bourbon courts made war against Portugal, the declared object was to
prevent Great Britain from the military and commercial use of the ports of that
kingdom. As it was impossible to attain this object by naval operations, they
attempted it by military ones, and aimed their principal endeavors at the two
great ports, to which the English principally resort, Oporto and Lisbon. The
possession of these two objects would probably have finished the war in their
favor; the possession of either of them would have given them the most
decisive advantages in it.

With this view three inroads were to be made, one to the north, another was
proposed more to the south, whilst the third was made in the middle provinces,
in order to sustain these two bodies, and preserve the communication between
them. The reader must consider this as what appears from their designs, and
from the steps they took to execute them to have been their general plan; not
that it was ever perfectly executed in all its parts, or at the same time.

The first body which commenced hostilities was commanded by the marquis de
Sarria. This army entered into the north east angle of Portugal, and marched
toward Miranda. This town, though in no good state of defense, might have
delayed them in their progress; but a powder magazine having blown up by
accident, the fortifications were ruined, and the Spaniards, before they had
raised their first battery,

Animated by this easy and fortunate success, they proceeded to Braganza, a
considerable city, from whence the royal family of Portugal derived its ducal
titles. This town made no greater defense than Miranda. From thence a
detachment marched to Moncorvo, every thing was cleared before them to the
banks of the Douro. A party under count O'Reilly made a forced march of
fourteen leagues, in two days,

The second body of the Spaniards, which we have mentioned as the connective
link between the two others, entered into the province of Beira, at the
villages called Val de Mula and Valde Coelha. They were joined by strong
detachments, amounting to almost the whole army in Tralos Montes, and
immediately laid siege to Almeida, which, though in no good order, was the
strongest and best provided place upon the frontiers of Portugal. Besides, it
was of the greatest importance from its middle situation, as the possession of
it would greatly facilitate the operations upon every side, and would
especially tend to forward an attempt upon Lisbon, which was the capital
object, toward which, at this time, all the endeavors of the Spaniards seem
to have been directed.

Almedia was defended with sufficient resolution; but its fate was foreseen as
soon as it was attempted, there being no means of affording relief to any of
the places besieged. It surrendered however,

The Spaniards, having made themselves masters of this place overspread the
whole ter^iority of Castle Branco, a principal district of the province of
Beira, making their way to the southward, until they approached the banks of
the Tagus. During the whole of their progress, and indeed during the whole
campaign, the allied troops of Great Britain and Portugal had nothing that
could be called a body of an army in the field, and they could not think of
opposing the enemy in a pitched battle. All that could be done was by the
defense of passes, by skirmish, and by surprise.

By this time the count of la Lip Buckeburg had arrived in Portugal. Lord
Tyrawly, who had been sent, at the desire of the court of Lisbon, thither
before the breaking out of the war, being disgusted by the behavior of some
persons at court, and much disappointed in his expectations of the exertion
they had promised to make of their own force, and even of the use they had made
of the succors from England, had been recalled very early in the campaign, and
probably not contrary to his own inclination.

It is impossible to express the joy which filled the whole nation at the
arrival of so celebrated an officer as the count la Lip to their assistance.
More unanimity was now expected, as the count had nothing to complain of, and
came an entire stranger to all the subjects of debate, which had hitherto
existed between the British general and the court of Lisbon.

That army, which we have mentioned as the third corpse destined for the
invasion of Portugal, assembled on the frontiers of Estremadura, with an
intention of penetrating into the province of Alentejo. Had this third body
been joined to the others already in Portugal, it would probably have formed
such an army as might, in spite of any obstruction, have forced its way to
Lisbon: had it acted separately, it might have greatly distracted the defense,
so as to enable some other body to penetrate to that city. It was necessary to
prevent, if possible, their entrance into Portugal; since their mere entrance
would have been almost equal, in its consequences, to a victory on their side.

The count la Lip, therefore formed a design of attacking an advanced body of
the Spaniards which lay on their frontiers, in a town called Valentia de
Alcantara, as he heard that they had here amassed considerable magazines. The
conduct of this important enterprise was committed to brigadier general
Burgoyne.

This gallant and able officer, though at a distance of five days march, and in
spite of all the disappointments and obstructions to which services of this
kind are so liable, when they cannot be executed immediately; yet effected a
complete surprise on the town of Valentia de Alcantara; took the general,

Although they were disappointed in their expectations of finding magagines in
this place, the effect of this well-conducted enterprise was not lost. The
taking of this general was probably the cause which prevented the Spaniards
from entering into the province of Alentejo. This seemed to have been for some
time the destination not only of that particular body, but also the great
object of the Spanish army, which had hitherto acted in Beira. The former of
these provinces is a plain, open, fertile country, where their cavalry, in
which consisted the chief of their army, and in which lay their most marked
superiority, might have acted, and acted decisively; whereas the latter was a
rough mountainous region, in which the horse were subsisted with difficulty,
and could be of little service. To prevent, therefore, the entry of the Bourbon
army from any quarter, into Alentejo, seemed to be the great and single object
of the campaign on our side. General Burgoyne, by his expedition into the
Spanish territories, had already prevented it on one part; and the vigilance
and activity of the same officer had no small share in preventing it also on
the other.

That part of the Bourbon army, which acted in the territory of Castle Branco,
had made themselves masters of several important passes, which they obliged
some bodies of the Portuguese to abandon. They attacked the rear of the
combined army, which was passing the river Alveito, with the appearance of a
retreat; but, in reality, with a view to draw them insensibly into the
mountainous tracts: here they were repulsed with loss; but still they continued
masters of the country; and nothing remained but the passage of the Tagus, to
enable them to take up their quarters in Alentejo.

Burgoyne, who was posted with an intention to obstruct them in their passage,
lay in the neighborhood, and within view of a detached camp, composed of a
considerable body of the enemy's cavalry, which lay near a village called Villa
Velha. As he observed that the enemy kept no very soldiery guard in this post,
and were uncovered both on their rear and their flanks, he conceived a design
of faling on them by surprise. He confided the execution of this design to
colonel Lee, who turned their camp, fell upon their rear in the night,

This advantage, being obtained in a critical moment, was attended with
important consequences. The season was now far advanced; immense rains fell at
this time; the roads were destroyed; the country became impracticable; and the
Spaniards, having seized no advanced posts in which they could maintain
themselves during the winter, and being especially unprovided with magazines
for the support of their horse, every where fell back to the frontiers of
Spain, where their supplies were at hand, and where they were not liable to be
harrassed by the efforts of the combined army.

In this manner Portugal was saved, at least for that campaign, by the wise
conduct of count la Lip, and the distinguished valor of the English
commanders and soldiery: all that was wanting toward their deliverance was
accomplished by the success of the English army in more distant quarters, and
by the peace, in which so valuable and so exposed an ally was not neglected.
There never was probably so heavy a storm of national calamity, ready to fall
upon an unprovided people, so happily averted, or so speedily blown over. Every
thing, at the beginning of this campaign, bore the most louring and ominous
aspect to the affairs of Great Britain. As it advanced, the sky continually
cleared up; and the fortune of no nation, toward the close of it, was
enlivened with a more brilliant and more unclouded prosperity. We shall now
proceed in the relation of those successes, and of the progress of the English
arms in other parts of the world, where new scenes of danger and honor were
now opened to them.

CHAP. VII.
Expedition against Martinico. Forces sent thither. Troops land at Cas Navire.
Nature of the country. Attack of the posts near Fort Royal. Fort Royal
surrendered. St. Pierre and the whole island capitulate. St. Lucie, Grenades,
and St. Vincent taken. Preparations for war against the Spanish West Indies.

Toward the close of the last year, it was determined to resume the scheme of
operations in the West Indies; where nothing had been attempted since the year
1759. Distressed as the French trade to their islands had been, it still
continued a resource to that nation. On the other hand, nothing could possibly
furnish us with places of more importance, either to retain, or to exchange
upon a peace, than our success in this part of the world. Another consideration
had probably no small share in directing our arms toward that quarter. From
the time that the dispositions of Spain had become equivocal, it was necessary
to take such steps, as would put us in a respectable situation, in case a war
with that kingdom should become unavoidable. It was therefore very proper to
have a strong armament in the West Indies, that side on which Spain is most
vulnerable, and in which every wound affects a part of the quickest
sensibility. Accordingly the force which was sent into the West Indies on this
occasion was very great; and, if we take the naval and military together, it
was such an armament as had never been before seen in that part of the world.
It was certainly very right to leave as little to hazard as possible; and when,
in the most frugal method of proceeding, a great many men must have been
employed, and a great deal of money spent, it would have been an unpardonable
error, from a consideration of almost any saving, to have left any thing
imperfect; especially at a time, when the effect of every operation became
almost hourly, more and more critical and decisive.

Every thing which had been an object of war in North America, was by tnis time
completely acquired. It was therefore easy to draw a very considerable part of
the army from thence. Eleven battalions were drawn from New York; a draught was
also made from the garrison of Belleisle. These were reinforced by some troops
which had been scattered among the Leeward Islands; so that the whole land
armament did not fall very short of twelve thousand men. General Monckton, who
had acquired so much reputation in North America, and had received a very
grievous wound at the taking of Quebec, commanded the land forces in this
expedition. The marine was under rear-admiral Rodney.

The failure in 1759 did not discourage our administration from making
Martinico the object of another attempt. The English fleet, after having
rendezvouzed at Barbados, came before this island on the 7th of January, 1762.
The troops landed at a creek called Cas Navire without the loss of a man; the
fleet having been disposed so properly, and having directed their fire with
such effect, that the enemy was obliged in a short time to abandon the
batteries they had erected to defend this inlet.

When the landing was effected, the difficulties were far from being at an end.
It is true, that neither the number nor the quality of the enemy's regular
troops in the island were very formidable. But the militia was numerous, well
armed, and not unqualified for service in the only kind of war, which could be
carried on in their country. Besides, the whole country was a natural
fortification, from the number of ravines with rivulets between them, which lay
from distance to distance. Wherever these grounds were practicable, the French
had posted guards, and erected batteries. It is easy from hence to discern what
obstructions the progress of an army was liable to, particularly with regard to
its artillery. These obstructions were no where greater than in the
neighborhood of the place, against which the first regular attack was proposed.

This town and citadel is overlooked and commanded by two very considerable
eminences, called Morn Tortenson and Morn Garnier. Whilst the enemy kept
possession of these eminences, it was impossible to attack the town; if they
lost them, it would prove impossible to defend it. Suitable to the importance
of those situations were the measures taken to render them impregnable. They
were protected, like the other high grounds in this island, with very deep
ravines; and this great natural strength was improved by every contrivance of
art. The Morn Tortenson was first to be attacked. To favor this operation; a
The Honble. ROBT. MONCKTON.
portrait of Robert Monckton body of regular troops and marines were ordered to
advance on the right along the seaside, toward the town, in order to take the
redoubts which lay in the lower grounds. A thousand sailors in flat-bottomed
boats, rowed close to the shore to assist them. On the left, toward the
country, a corpse of light infantry, properly supported, was to get round the
enemy's left; whilst the attack in the center was made by the British
grenadiers and the body of the army, under the fire of batteries, which had
been erected on the opposite side with great labor and perseverance; the
cannon having been dragged upwards of three miles by the seamen.

The dispositions for the attack of this difficult post having been made with
so much judgment on the part of the commander, it was executed with equal
spirit and resolution by the soldiery. The attack succeeded in every quarter.
With irresistible impetuosity the enemy's works were successively carried. They
were driven from post to post; until our troops, after a sharp struggle,
remained masters of the whole Morn; some of the enemy fled precipitately into
the town, to the very entrance of which they were pursued. Others saved
themselves on the Morn Garnier, which was as strong, and much higher than
Morn Tortenson, and overlooked and commanded it. Thus far had they proceeded
with success; but nothing decisive could be done, without the possession of the
other eminence, our troops being much molested by the enemy from that superior
situation.

It was three days before proper dispositions could be made for driving them
from this ground. Whilst these dispositions were making, the enemy's whole
force descended from the hill, sallied out of the town, and attacked the
English in their advanced posts; but they were immediately repulsed: and the
ardour of the British troops hurrying them forward, they improved a defensive
advantage into an attack, passed the ravines, mingled with the enemy, scaled
the hill, seized the batteries, and posted themselves on the summit of Morn
Garnier. The French regular troops escaped into the town. The militia dispersed
themselves in the country.

All the situations which commanded the town and citadel were now secured;
completed to capitulate, and to surrender this important place, the second in
the island. General Monckton's Letter, to the Right Hon. the Earl of Egremont.
Headquarters in the Island of Martinico. Jan. 20, 1762. My Lord,
I HAVE the honor to acquaint your lordship, that we left Barbados the 5th
Instant, anchored in St. Anne's bay in this island the 7th, the ships of war
having silenced some batteries which the enemy had erected there, and where I
was in hopes to have been able to have landed on the western side of the bay,
and to have crossed over to Port Royal bay; but the difficulties that would
have attended our being supplied with provisions and stores, added to the
scarcity of fresh water in that part, made me desist. I then thought that if I
could get possession of Pidgeon Island, a secure anchorage might be had for the
fleet and transports in Port Royal harbor. For this purpose, I detached two
brigades of the army, under the command of brigadiers Haviland and Grant, to
Ance Darlet, where they landed, and marched to the ground opposite to the
island; but finding the road impassable for cannon, which were necessary for
the reduction of that island, I judged it best for his majesty's service, to
proceed (having previously reconnoitred the shore) and land near the Case des
Navires; which we effected on the 16th, without any molestation, the ships of
war having silenced the batteries above us. I had forgot, my lord, to mention,
that with the above command, were the light infantry under lieutenant colonel
Scott, who were advanced the night the command remained there, and were
attacked in the night by three companies of grenadiers, some free-booters,
negroes and mulattoes, which the enemy had passed over from Fort Royal; but
they were so warmly received, that they retreated precipitately, leaving some
dead; and a sergeant and three of their grenadiers taken prisoners, without any
loss on our side.

We are now encamped upon the heights, above Case des Navires; and I was in
hopes, before this time, to have given your lordship more satisfactory accounts
of our operations. But the ravines or gullys we have to pass, are of such depth
and difficulty of access, and that in the face of many batteries and redoubts,
with the whole country, as well mulattoes and negroes, as inhabitants in arms,
and without being able to procure any material intelligence, that I do not
think it prudent to expose his majesty's troops until I can erect batteries to
cover them, which we are at work upon with the utmost expedition.

However, my lord, I have the pleasure to acquaint you, that the troops
continue healthy, although they have been necessarily exposed to laying on
their arms, and are in the highest spirits; and I don't in the least doubt, but
that I shall be able to execute this principal object of his majesty's
commands, of which I shall give your lordship the earliest notice.

It gives me great pleasure to acquaint your lordship, how much I am indebted
to admiral Rodney, for the assistance received from the fleet under his
command: the utmost harmony has subsisted hitherto, and I am persuaded will
continue to do so.

This will be delivered to your lordship by captain Walsingham, who takes home
the admiral's dispatches.

I have the honor to be, etc. ROBERT MONCKTON.


Admiral Rodney's Letter to Mr. Cleveland.
Case Navire Bay, Martinico, Jan. 19, 1762. SIR,
I Desire you will acquaint their lordships, that I arrived at Barbados on the
22d of November, having parted company with the squadron under my command in a
hard gale of wind, a few days after we left the channel.

The Foudroyant, Modeste, and Basilisk, joined me the 27th, the Nottingham and
Thunder the 1st of December, and the Vanguard, with the remainder of the
squadron, on the 9th. The Temeraire, and Acteon, with the troops from
Belleisle, arrived the 14th of December, and major general Monckton, with the
forces from North America, on the 24th; and having remained a few days to water
the ships, refresh the men, and make necessary dispositions for our enterprise,
we arrived off Martinico the 7th of January; and on the 8th we all anchored in
St. Anne's bay; the ships I had appointed (under Sir James Douglas) having
silenced the forts of that coast; in performing of which, we had the misfortune
to lose the Raisonable, as she was leading in for one of the enemy's batteries,
owing to the pilot's being ignorant of a little reef of rocks which took her
up. We have saved all her people, all her stores, and I hope soon to get all
her guns.

Having by the motion of the fleet and army, taken possession of an excellent
harbor, and secured a landing on the weather-most part of the island, which
might be made tenable at any time, as likewise thereby greatly alarming the
enemy.

At general Monckton's request, I dispatched commodore Swanton, with a squadron
of ships, and two brigades, to the bay of Petite A^ce, in order to take post
there. Captain Hervey of the Dragon having silenced the battery of the Grand
Ance, landed his marines and seamen, who attacked it also from the shore, and
took possession of the fort; and, on the 14th, I followed with the whole fleet
and army, after destroying the enemy's batteries at St. Anne's bay, when
(having reconnoitred the coast with the general) we came to a resolution, to
make an attempt between Point Negroe and the Cas de Pilotte, which I ordered to
be attacked on the 16th; and having very successively, and with little loss
silenced the batteries, I landed general Monckton with the greatest part of his
forces by sunset; and the whole army was on shore a little after daylight
next morning, without the loss of a man (the boats being commanded by commodore
^wanton in the center, capt. Shuldoam on the right wing, and capt. Hervey on
the left) with such necessaries as they were most immediately in want of, and
had all the ships and transports anchored as much in safety, as this coast will
a^mit.

I also landed two battalions of marines, consisting of 450 men each.

The army are now carrying on their approaches to the heights of ^ount Grenie
and Mount Townson, which the enemy have made as strong as art can do, and from
whence the general proposes to lay siege to Port Royal.

I have the happiness to add, that the army and navy continue in perfect
health; and carry on the ^ervice with the greatest spirit and harmony.


General Monckton's second Letter to the Earl of Egremont.
Fort Royal in Martinico, Feb. 9, 1762. My Lord,
I Had the honor of writing to your ^ordship the 20th of J^nuary, when I
acquainted you that I intended to attack the enemy in the strong posts they
occupied on the opposite heights, and the Morn Tartenson, leading to Fort
Royal, as soon as I had erected batteries (which were thought necessary) to
assist us in the passing a very deep and wide ravine A large hollow made
between two hills, occasioned by a sudden current of water, which is very
frequent and rapid at the time of the Equinox. It is of a considerable depth,
and not less difficult to get into than to ascend as it is tufted with trees,
brush-wood on every side, and in many places covered over. These the French
lined with infantry; but our forces resolute, and determined to carry the
batteries on the other side, let each other down first slinging thelr muskets;
when they got to the other side, clambered up as fast as possible, formed, and
carried all before them. Some were let down precipitately, b^ the banks giving
way, but they soon recovered themselves and joined their corpse,
, or gully, which separated us from them.

My disposition for the attack being made on the 24th of January, at break of
day the troops advanced under a brisk fire of our batteries. The grenadiers
under brigadier Grant first falling in with the enemy's advanced posts, began
the attack: brigadier Rufane on the right, with his brigade, and the marines,
was to advance and attack the redoubts along the coast; 1000 seamen in the
flat-bottomed boats, rowed us as he advanced: Lord Rollo's brigade supported
the grenadiers: Brigadier Walsh with his brigade, (supporting the light
infantry under lieutenant colonel Scott) to attack the left of a plantation,
and to endeavor to get round the enemy. The light infantry effected their
attempt, and while the grenadiers were driving the enemy from post to post,
they got upon their left, which helped to complete the event of the day. The
enemy's works were now successively attacked with the most irresistible
impetuosity, so that at nine o'clock we were in the entire possession of all
their works, and the strong ground of Morn Tartenson, consisting of many
redoubts mounted with cannon, and advantageously situated to assist the natural
strength of the country. The enemy retired in the greatest confusion, to the
town of Fort Royal, and to Morn Garnier (a still higher hill than the Morn
Tartenson, and separated from it by a deep ravine, covered with a very thick
brush, and a rivulet at the bottom) from whence they thought they were never to
be dislodged, both from its natural strength, and the works and batteries they
had on it. The spirit of the grenadiers in this attack was such, that some of
them even pursued the enemy to the bridge of the town, and brought off
prisoners from thence.

While this was doing on this side, brigadier Haviland with his brigade, two
battalions of Highlanders, and a corpse of light infantry (which I had formed
from the several regiments and given the command of to major Leland) had orders
(from the reported practicability of the passage) to cross the ravine a good
deal to the left, and attack a body of the enemy who were posted on several
heights opposite to him, and to try to get into their left; and by that means
divide their force. Yet, although they began their march at two o'clock in the
morning such was the difficulty of access, though I am convinced every means
were tried, that it was late before they effected it.

When I found that the enemy were giving way on all sides, I ordered lieutenant
colonel Scott's light infantry, brigadier Walsh's brigade, and a division of
the grenadiers, to a plantation more to the left, where brigadier Haviland was
to have come down: they drove off some of the enemy posted there; and the light
infantry possessed themselves of a very advantageous post opposite to Morn
Garnier. To support them, I ordered brigadier Haviland's corpse (which now had
passed) to their right: the division of grenadiers under brigadier Grant, and
Walsh's brigade, kept possession of the upper plantation, and communicated with
Haviland's corpse. The marines, which I had taken from brigadier Rufane, I
posted to cover the road between the two plantations.

On the 25th, we began to erect batteries on Morn Tartenson, against the
citadel of Fort Royal, but were much annoyed on that, and the following day, by
the enemy from Morn Garnier. Finding that it was absolute necessary to attack
this place to the left, where the corpse of light infantry, and brigadier
Haviland's brigade were posted, I determined immediately to errect batteries
against these of the enemy which annoyed us, and which might also cover our
passage of the ravine.

On the 27th, about four o'clock in the evening, the enemy, under cover of
their batteries, and with the greatest part of their force, had the temerity to
attack the two corpse of light infantry, and brigadier Haviland's brigade, in
the posts they occupied; but were received with such steadiness, that they were
immediately repulsed; and such was the ardour of the troops, that they passed
the ravine with the enemy, seized their batteries, and took post there, being
reinforced by brigadier Walsh's brigade, and the division of grenadiers under
brigadier Grant, who immediately on the attack had marched to support them.
Night was now come on; but major Leland moving on to the left with his light
infantry, and finding no opposition, continued his rout toward the enemy's
redoubts, which he soon came up to, and took possession of the enemy (except a
few grenadiers, who were prisoners) having abandoned them. Their troops retired
into the town and citadel, and the militia dispersed in the country. Brigadiers
Walsh, Grant and Haviland, immediately moved up to support the light infantry:
so that at nine o'clock at night, his majesty's troops were in possession of
this very strong post, which entirely commanded the citadel. So precipitate was
the enemy's flight, that they left a mortar loaded, and 8 or 9 guns unspiked,
with a quantity of ammunition and provisions. The cannon and mortar were turned
against the citadel in the morning.

Having gained this advantageous post, from which the enemy had so much annoyed
us and having completed two batteries on Morn Tartenson, consisting of
fourteen guns and three mortars, we opened them on the 30th: but finding that
the distance was too great, and having now Morn Capuchine in our power, not
more than 400 yards distant from the fort, as well as the possession of the
town, I immediately resolved to erect batteries at both these places, the
sooner to reduce the citadel; but for the easier conveyance of our cannon by
water, I ordered major Leland, with his light infantry, to take post on the
river monsieur.

The enemy perceiving our designs, and for reasons best known to themselves, on
the evening of the 3d instant, beat the chamade; in consequence of which, the
gate of the citadel was delivered up to his majesty's troops the evening of the
4th, and at nine o'clock next morning the garrison marched out, on the terms of
the capitulation. It consisted of about 800 men, grenadiers, marines, militia,
and free-booters. About 150 of the garrison were killed and wounded in the
siege. The enemy might have kept us much longer, as it would have been
absolutely necessary to have made two or three breaches, which must have taken
some time.

In the several attacks, I am credibly informed, that the enemy had not less
than 1000 men killed, wounded, and taken prisoners: among the latter, several
of their principal officers of the militia, taken the 24th. Our loss your
lordship will see by the return. You have also my lord, a return of the
artillery and stores taken from the enemy on the 24th and 27th of January; and
in the citadel at its surrender on the 5th instant.

I cannot find words, my lord, to render that ample justice due to the true
valor and persevering ardour of his majesty's troops, which I have the honor
to command. The difficulties they had to encounter in the attack of an enemy,
possessed of every advantage that art or nature could give them, were great.
Their perseverance, in surmounting these obstacles, furnishes a noble example
of British spirit.

The brigadiers Haviland, Grant, Rufane, Lord Rollo, and Walsh, and all the
officers in general, deserve the highest applause for their animated and
soldierlike conduct.

The grenadiers of the army, in three divisions, headed by the lieutenant
colonels Fletcher, Massy, and Vaughan, and the light infantry and rangers, in
three bodies, commanded by lieutenant colonel Scott, major Leland, and captain
Kennedy, particularly distinguishing themselves, the warmest part of the
service having fallen to their lot.

M. la Touch the governor general, after leaving a garrison in Fort Royal,
retired with the remains of his grenadiers, and is now, as I am informed, at
St. Pierre. We have not as yet had the least correspondence together, nor has
he so much as sent to enquire after his killed, wounded, and prisoners.

Immediately upon the fort surrendering, the admiral and I received a
deputation from most of the quarters of the island, desiring likewise to
capitulate, M. La Touch having refused them to enter into any terms. On the
7th instant we agreed upon the capitulations, to which we have every day some
of the other quarters of the island acceding. St. Pierre, and the neighboring
quarters, are the only ones which hold out, owing to the presence of M. La
Touch; but should they not come in, in a day or two, which I am told I may
expect every hour, I purpose moving that way, and do not the least doubt but
that I shall soon reduce them to reason.

On the 7th instant, Pidgeon Island, one of the defenses of this harbor,
surrendered by summons on the same terms of the citadel, (cannon excepted.)

Your lordship may look upon the capitulation for the island as fixed, the
admiral and myself being resolved not to make the least alteration. The other
quarters must accede to it.

We hope both the capitulations will receive his majesty's approbation, as it
has been our earnest study to obtain, on our part, every advantage to the
nation, that could accrue from the conquest of this island.

The day after the affair of the 27th, learning from one of my parties that M.
Nadau Deutruil, late the French governor of the island of Guadaloupe, was at a
house about two leagues from my quarters, I thought it necessary to send, and
bring him in, and he is now with me a prisoner. I purpose sending him to France
by some opportunity that may offer hereafter. The French troops are all aboard,
and will soon sail for France according to the capitulation.

I have given orders for the repair of the citadel, and for every necessary
work. The inhabitants, who had all quitted their houses, and retired to the
heights, are now returning to them; and as soon as I have fixed the inhabitants
of St. Pierre, I shall pursue the other parts of his majesty's instructions.

I must repeat to your lordship the harmony that subsists between the fleet and
army, and the cordial assistance we have received from admiral Rodney, in every
part of the operations where his aid could be useful.

This will be delivered to your lordship by major Gates, one of my
aid-de-camps, who will inform your lordship of any particulars you may desire
to know. I must beg leave to recommend him to his majesty's favor, as a very
deserving officer, and who has now served upwards of twelve years in America
with much credit.

I have the honor to be, etc. R. MONCKTON.


Rear Admiral Rodney's second Letter to Mr. Cleveland.
Fort Royal Bay, Martinico, Feb. 10, 1762.
SINCE my letter of the 19th of January, sent express by captain Walsingham,
acquainting their lordships with my arrival and landing the army at Case
Navire; I have the honor to congratulate them on the surrender of the most
important citadel of Fort Royal, and Pidgeon Island; which has given his
majesty's forces possession of the noblest and best harbor in these parts of
the West Indies.

The almost insurmountable difficulties the troops had to struggle with, and
the surprising strength of the country, improved by all that art could add,
will be best explained by general Monckton. But this I must say, in justice to
those I have the honor to command, that the intrepidity and gallant behavior
of the officers and troops employed on this expedition, could be equalled only
by the eager and cheerful activity of the officers and seamen; who contributed
every thing in their power toward the reduction of the place, and made no
difficulties in transporting numbers of the heaviest mortars and ships cannon,
up the steepest mountains, at a very considerable distance from the sea, and
across the enemy's line of fire.

I have the pleasure to acquaint their lordships, that we have taken, in this
port, fourteen of the enemy's best privateers; and many more which are in the
other ports of the island, will be immediately delivered into my hands,
agreeable to the capitulation of the inhabitants: and for all further
particulars, I must refer their lordships to captain Darby, who is charged with
these dispatches.

It gives me the sincerest satisfaction, that I can assure their lordships, the
most perfect harmony has subsisted between the navy and army, each vying (in
the most friendly manner) which should serve his majesty and their country best.


General Monckton's third Letter, dated, St. Peter's, Martinino, February 27,
1762. My Lord,
I Had the honor of writing to your Lordship the 9th inst. from Fort Royal
which went by my aid-de-camp, major Gates, who sailed from thence in his
majesty's ship Nightingale, on the 10th inst. a duplicate of that letter I now
enclose.

Just when I was about to embark for the reduction of St. Peter's two deputies
arrived at Fort Royal on the 12th inst. offering terms of capitulation for the
whole island, on the part of M. La Vassor Delatouche, the Governor-General on
the 13th. They received the Admiral's and my answers, to their proposals, which
they carried to St. Peter's; and on the 14th returned with the capitulation
signed. In consequence of which, I left Fort Royal on the 15th, with the
grenadiers of the army, and the 2d brigade; and on the following day took
possession of this large and opulent town, with all the posts in the
neighborhood. The enemy marched out about 320 grenadiers, who are embarked,
and will sail immediately for France. M. Le Vassor Delatouche, the
Governor-General, M. Rouille, Lieutenant Governor, and the staff will shortly
follow.

Enclosed I send your Lordship a copy of the capitulation for the island, which
we humbly hope will meet with his Majesty's approbation. Commodore Swanton is
now off the Grenades with a squadron of men of war; and I propose sending
immediately Brig. Genesis Walsh with the 5th brigade, and the corpse of light
infantry under Lieut. Col. Scott, in order to reduce that and the other
islands. I have undoubted intelligence, that the number of white men in the
Grenades do not exceed 500; and in the other islands not quite so many.

I should have proceeded upon this service myself, had I not thought it of more
consequence, for his Majesty's service, my remaining here at this critical
time, when, by what we can learn, a rupture with Spain may be daily expected;
and here I am also at hand to settle many material affairs relative to the
security of this conquest.

Indeed, I have good reason to believe, that Brig. Walsh will meet with very
little obstruction in his operations. However, should he not immediately
succeed, I shall move that way with a larger force, and make no doubt to compel
them to a speedy surrender.

It was not my intention to have sent home an express until I could have
informed your Lordship of the reduction of the other islands mentioned in his
Majesty's instructions. -- But as this island is now completely reduced to his
Majesty's obedience, I was apprehensive that a delay, in signifying this
interesting event, might be attended with some bad consequences at this
critical juncture. I therefore send this by my Aid-de-Camp. Captain Ricaut, who
can inform your Lordship of any particulars you may desire to know; and I beg
leave to recommend him to your Lordship's countenance, as a very deserving and
good officer.

As it was necessary for his Majesty's service, immediately to fill some civil
employments here, I have, accordingly, appointed proper persons to act until
his Majesty's pleasure be known.

Your Lordship has, herewith, a return of the artillery, and warlike stores,
found in the town, the Reduit, and the other different posts.

I have the honor to be, etc. ROB. MONCKTON.


Admiral Rodney's third Letter, dated, St. Pierre's Road, Martinico, February
28, 1762.
SINCE my dispa^ches of the 10th instant, by Capt. Darby, acquainting their
Lordships with the surrender of Fort Royal, and the capitulation of the
greatest part of the inhabitants, I have the additional pleasure to
congratulate their Lordships on the conquest of the whole island of Martinico;
M. Delatouche having thought proper to send his brother on board the
Marlborough, with articles of capitulation, just in time to save the town of
St. Pierre from destruction; a copy of which capitulation, I have the honor to
enclose.

As this great island is now entirely subjected to his Majesty's obedience, I
can only repeat, in this public manner, my entire approbation of the conduct of
all the officers and seamen of that part of his Majesty's fleet, which I have
the honor to command, all having exerted themselves in their proper stations,
with an order and resolution becoming British seamen.

Immediately on the surrender of St. Pierre's, I dispatched Commodore Swanton,
with a squadron of his Majesty's ships to join those already before the island
of Granada, and block up that port as close as possible: The islands of St.
Vincent and St. Lucia are likewise very closely blockaded; and I make not the
least doubt, but that all the Caribbee islands will, in a very short time, be
subjected to his Majesty.

On the 4th instant, Capt. Ourry, of his Majesty's ship the Acteon, cruizing
off Tobago, fell in with and took a large Spanish register ship, laden with
cannon, powder, small arms, and ordinance stores, bound to Laquira.


Admiral Rodney's fourth Letter, dated, St. Pierre's Road, Martinico, March 1,
1762.
I Have this moment received an express from Captain Hervey, that the island of
St. Lucia is surrendered at discretion.





The capital of the island, St. Pierre, still remained to be reduced: this is
also a place of no contemptible strength; and it was apprehended that the
resistance here might be considerable, if the strength of the garrison in any
degree corresponded with that of the fortifications, and with the natural
advantages of the country. Our troops therefore were still under sorne anxiety
for the final success of their work, and feared, if not disappointment, at
least delay. But the reduction of Fort Royal had so greatly abated the enemy's
confidence, that the militia despaired of making any effectual defense. The
planters also, solicitous for their fortunes, were apprehensive of having their
estates ruined by a war too long continued, or perhaps of losing all by passing
the opportunity of a favorable capitulation. Influenced by these motives, and
disheartened by the train of misfortunes which had attended the French arms
here and in all other parts of the world, they resolved to hold out no longer;
and general Monckton, just as he was ready to embark sor the reduction of St.
Pierre, who came to capitulate for the surrender of that place, and of the
whole island.

The surrender of Martinico, which was the seat of the superior government, the
principal mart of trade, and the center of all the French force in the
Caribbees, naturally drew on the surrender of all the dependent islands.
Granada, a fertile island, and possessed of some good harbors, was given up
without opposition. St. Lucia, and St. Vincent, the right to which had so long
been objects of contention between the two nations, followed its example. The
English were now the sole and undisturbed possessors of all the Caribbees, and
held that chain of innumerable islands which forms an immense bow, extending
from the eastern point of Hispaniola almost to the continent of South America.
And though some of these islands are barren, none of them very large, and not
many of them well inhabited, they boast more trade than falls to the lot of
many respectable kingdoms.

The time, in which Martinico was reduced, was a circumstance of almost as much
consequence as the reduction itself; for the war against Spain having been
declared in the beginning of the year, it became advisable to strike early
such an effective blow against that nation as might incline them to a speedy
peace, or might influence the fortune of the whole war, if, contrary to our
wishes, the war should continue. It was, on this plan, necessary to employ a
very great force, and, of course, to call away a very considerable part of that
which had been employed at Martinico, whilst the season permitted them to act.

When the British administration determined to transfer the war into the
Spanish West Indies, with great judgment they fixed they eyes at once upon the
capital object As the merit of projecting this expedition has been variously
related, the following particulars may not be improperly given here. -- Admiral
Knowles on his return from Jamaica in 1756, took an opportunity of visiting the
Havanna, and inspecting its fortifications, of which he made plans, and other
material observations; these at the request of the duke of Gumberland, were
laid before him for his inspection, who knowing the merit of the admiral as an
engineer, consulted him on the most probable means of putting them into
execution; these his royal highness formed into a regular plan for execution,
which he sent to the ministry, who held them under consideration for some time;
however, this plan was disapproved of by lord Anson, then first lord of the
Admiralty, who formed another, which was carried into execution; but as his
royal highness had very early interested himself in the expedition, the
appointing of a commander of the land-force was left to him, which naturally
fell on the earl of Albemarle, whom he had in a manner tutored from his
earliest years.
: and resolved to commence their operations where others of less ability would
have chosen to conclude them. In an attack upon subordinate places, the
conquest would not have been much more certain; when obtained, it would be far
from decisive; and a failure would have been fatal, as it would include a loss
of reputation. The failure of an armament in a subordinate attack is a bad
preparative for a greater attempt. The plan, therefore, of the war of 1740 in
the Spanish Indies, in which we began with Porto Bello, and so proceeded to
Carthagena, etc. was mean, because the success in one of these attempts did
nothing toward insuring success in the other; and if we had succeeded in both
attempts, our advantage would have had but little influence on a third. But the
plan of the war, just now concluded, was great and just; because we began with
the Havannah, in which the whole trade and navigation of the Spanish West
Indies center, and without which it cannot be carried on. If we should
acquiesce in this conquest, this conquest alone would almost have finished the
war; because it would have utterly intercepted the enemy's resources. If we
chose to pursue our advantage, it exposed the whole Spanish America.

CHAP. VIII.
Commanders in the expedition against the Havannah. Fleet sails from
Portsmouth. Passage through the old streights of Bahama. Town and harbor of
the Havannah described. Troops land. Disposition of the troops. Siege of Fort
Moro. Captain Harvey cannonades the Moro. English battery fired. Distress of
the English forces. Succors arrive from North America. A sally. The fort
stormed. Operations against the town. The Havannah surrenders. Advantages of
this acquisition.

IT being determined to commence with this enterprise, such commanders were to
be chosen, as could be safely entrusted with the conduct of an undertaking so
weighty, and on the success of which so much depended. Lord Albemarle, the
friend and disciple of the duke of Cumberland, commanded the land forces.
Admiral Pococke, who having contributed by his valor toward that sovereignty
which his country had obtained in the East Indies, was now chosen to extend its
empire and its honor in the West.

They sailed from Portsmouth on the 5th of March, the day on which the Grenades
were surrendered. A fleet had sailed from Martinico under the command of that
spirited and intelligent officer, Sir James Douglas, in order to reinforce
them. The squadrons very happily met, without delay or dispersion, at Cape
Nichola, the north-west point of Hispaniola, on the 27th of May. After this
junction, the armament amounted to nineteen ships of the line; eighteen small
vessels of war; and near one hundred and fifty transports, which conveyed about
ten thousand land forces. A supply of four thousand had been ordered from New
York, and was expected to join them very near as early as they could be
supposed able to commence their operations.

There were two choices before the admiral for his course to the Havannah. The
first and most obvious was the common way, to keep to the south of Cuba, and
fall into the track of the galleons. But this, though by much the safest, would
prove by far the most tedious passage; and delays, above all things were to be
avoided, as the success of the whole enterprise would probably depend upon its
being in forwardness before the hurricane season came on. He therefore resolved
to run along the northern shore of that island, pursuing his career from east
to west through a narrow passage, not less than seven hundred miles in length,
called the old streights of Bahama.

This passage, through almost the whole of its extent, is bounded on the right
and left by the most dangerous sands and shoals, which render the navigation so
hazardous, that it has usually been avoided by single and small vessels. There
was no pilot in the fleet whose experience could be depended on to conduct them
safely through it. The admiral, however, determined on this passage; and being
provided with a good chart of lord Anson's, he resolved to trust to his own
sagacity, conduct, and vigilance, to carry safely through those streights a
fleet of near two hundred sail. So bold an attempt had never been made; but
every precaution was taken to guard this bo^dness from the imputation of
temerity. A vessel was sent to reconnoitre the passage, and, when returned, was
ordered to take the lead; some frigates followed; sloops and boats were
stationed on the right and left on the shallows, with well adapted signals both
for the day and the night. The fleet moved in seven divisions. And being
favored with pleasant weather, and secured by the admirable dispositions which
were made, they, without the smallest loss or interruption, got clear through
this perilous passage on the 5th of June, having entered it on the 27th of May.

The Havannah, the object of their long voyage, and of so many anxious hopes
and fears, was now before them. This place is not denominated the capital of
Cuba; St. Jago, situated at the south-east part of the island, has that title:
but the Havannah, though the second in rank, is the first in wealth, size, and
importance. The harbor, upon which it stands, is, in every respect, one of the
best in the West Indies, and perhaps in the world. It is entered by a narrow
passage, upwards of half a mile in length, which afterward expands into a
large basin, forming three cul de saes; Deep Bays.
and is sufficient, in extent and depth, to contain a thousand sail of the
largest ships, having almost throughout six fathom water, and being perfectly
covered from every wind. In this bay the rich fleets from the several parts of
the Spanish West Indies, called the Galleons and the Flota, assemble, before
they finally set out on their voyage for Europe.

This circumstance has rendered the Havannah one of the most opulent,
flourishing, and populous cities in this part of the world. Great care was
taken to fortify and secure a place, which, by being the center of so rich a
commerce, would naturally become the fairest mark for the attempts of an enemy.
The narrow entrance into this harbor is secured on one side by a very strong
fort, called the Moro, (C) built upon a projecting point of land: on the other,
it is defended by a fort called the Puntal, (D) which joins the town. The town
itself, which is situated to the westward of the entrance of the harbor, and
opposite to the Moro fort, is surrounded by a good rampart, (AA) flanked with
bastions, and covered with a ditch.

The Spaniards, who had been for some time preparing for war, had formed a
considerable navy in the West Indies: this fleet, (q) which was near twenty
sail, mostly of the line, lay at this time in the basin of the Havannah; but
they had not, when our armament appeared before the port, received, it seems,
any authentic account from their court concerning the commencement of
hostilities between the two nations.

Whether the Spaniards were rendered inactive by the want of instructions,
whether all their ships were not in fighting condition, or whatever else was
the cause, this fleet lay quiet in the harbor. If some of the above reasons
did not oppose, it may be very rationally supposed, that their best part would
have been to come out, and fight our squadron. They were not very far from an
equality; and though the issue of a battle might have proved unfavourable to
them, yet a battle tolerably maintained would have much disabled our armament,
and perhaps have been a means of preventing the success of the whole
enterprise. The loss of their fleet in this way might possibly have saved the
city; but, the city, once taken, nothing could possibly save the fleet. It is
true, they much trusted, and not wholly without reason, to the strength of the
place, and to those astonishing difficulties which attend any military
operation, that is drawn out to length in this unhealthy climate. In other
respects, they were very far from being deficient in proper measures for their
defense. They made a strong boom (p) across the mouth of the harbor; and
almost the only use they made of their shipping, in the defense of the place,
was to sink three of them (n) behind this boom.

When all things were in readiness for landing, the admiral, with a great part
of the fleet, bore away to the westward, (s) in order to draw the enemy's
attention from the true object, and made a feint, as if he intended to land
upon that side; while commodore Keppel and captain Harvey, commanding a
detachment of the squadron, approached the shore to the eastward (t) of the
harbor, and effected a landing there in the utmost order,

The principal body of the army was destined to act upon this side. It was
divided into two corpse; one of which was advanced a considerable way in the
country, toward the south-east of the harbor, in order to cover the siege,
and to secure our parties employed in watering and procuring provisions. This
corpse was commanded by general Elliot. The other was immediately occupied in
the attack on Fort Moro, (w) to the reduction of which the efforts of the
English were principally directed, as the Moro commanded the town, and the
entrance of the harbor. This attack was conducted by general Keppel. To make a
diversion in favor of this grand operation, a detachment, under colonel How,
was encamped to the westward of the town. This body cut off the communication
between the town and the country, and kept the enemy's attention divided. Such
was the disposition, and it was impossible to make a better, of the land forces
during the whole siege. Explanation of the Plan of the siege of the HAVANNAH,
drawn by an officer on the spot, August 15, 1762.
AA Extent of the wall. B The Land Gate. C Moor Castle. D Puntal Fort. E The
Fort; or Governor's House. F Fort Cojimar. G Fort Chorera. H The Castle of
Bocanoa.
References to the PLAN.
a Where his majesty's troops first landed, June 7, 1762. b The march of the
army immediately after landing. c His majesty's ship Dragon against Cojimar. d
Where the army first encamped, e Where the cannon and stores were landed. f The
batteries against the Moro. g The Dragon, Cambridge, and Marlborough, against
the Moro. h The bombs against the Puntal. i His majesty's ship Belleisle
against Chorera fort. k The batteries on the west side against the Puntal. l
The batteries on the Cavannes hill. m The hoetzers against the shipping. n The
Neptune of 70, Asia of 64, and Europa of 60 guns, sunk at the entrance of the
harbor. o One Company's ship overset. p* The chain and bomb. q. The Spanish
Admiral and fleet. r Two ships on the stocks. s Sir George Pocock, with the men
of war and transports. t Commodore Keppel* with the men of war and transports.
u Camp at the water-mills. w The besieging camp^. x Fortified houses. y
Headquarters. z A merchant ship struck with lightning, which blew up.



PLAN of the CITY and HARBOR of HAVANNA.
A PLAN of the SIEGE of the HAVANA Drawn by an OFFICER. 15th August 1762.

map of Havana

The hardships which the English army sustained, in carrying on the siege of
the Moro, are almost inexpressible: the earth was every where so thin, that it
was with great difficulty they could cover themselves in their approaches.
There was no spring or river near them; it was necessary to bring water from a
great distance; and so precarious and scanty was this supply, that they were
obliged to have recourse to water from the ships. Roads for communication were
to be cut through thick woods; the artillery was to be dragged for a vast way
over a rough rocky shore. Several dropped down dead with heat, thirst, and
fatigue. But such was the resolution of our people, such the happy and perfect
unanimity which subsisted between the land and the sea services, that no
difficulties, no hardships, slackened for a moment the operations against this
important, strong, and well defended place. Batteries were, in spite of all
difficulties, raised against the Moro, and along the hill upon which this fort
stands, in order to drive the enemy's ships deeper into the harbor, and thus
to prevent them from molesting our approaches.

The enemy's fire, and that of the besiegers, was for a long time pretty near
on an equality, and it was kept up with great vivacity on both sides. The
Spaniards in the fort communicated with the town, from which they were
recruited and supplied; they did not rely solely on their works;

Whilst these works were thus vigorously pushed on shore, the navy, not
contented with the great assistance which they had before lent to every part of
the land service, resolved to try something further, and which was more
directly within their own province, toward the reduction of the Moro.
Accordingly, the day the batteries on shore were opened, three of their
greatest ships, (g) the Dragon, the Cambridge, and the Marlborough, under the
conduct of capt. Harvey, laid their broadsides against the fort,

This bold attempt, though it had very little effect upon the works on that
side of the fort which the ships attacked, was nevertheless of considerable
service. The enemy's attention being diverted to that side, the other was a
good deal neglected: our fire was poured in the mean time with redoubled fury
from the batteries; it became much superior to that of the enemy, and did no
small damage to their works. But the moment the Spaniards were released from
their attention to our men of war, they returned again to the eastward face of
the fort: their defense was revived with as much vigor as before; on both
sides a constant unremitted fire was kept up, with a fierce emulation, for
several days. It now became evident, that the reduction of this fortress was to
be a work of time. Never, from the beginning of the war, had the English valor
been so well matched. Here was at length an adversary worthy of our arms, and
our whole military skill and spirit was put to the severest trial.

In the midst of this sharp and doubtful contention, the capital battery
against the fort unfortunately took fire;

This was a mortifying stroke. It was felt the more severely, because the other
hardships of the siege were become by this time almost insupportable. The
sickness, something of which the troops had brought with them from Martinico,
and which increased infinitely in this unwholesome country and rigorous
service, had reduced the army to half its number, at the same time that it
doubled the fatigue of those few who still preserved some remains of strength.
Five thousand soldiers were at one, time down in various distempers; no less
than three thousand of the seamen were in the same miserable condition. A total
want of good provisions exasperated the disease, and retarded the recovery. The
deficiency of water was of all their grievances the greatest, and extremely
aggravated all the rest of their sufferings. The procuring from a distance this
wretched supply, so unequal to their wants, exhausted all their force. Besides,
as the season advanced, the prospect of succeeding grew fainter. The hearts of
the most sanguine sunk within them, whilst they beheld this gallant army
wasting away by diseases; and they could not avoid, trembling for that noble
fleet, which had rid so long on an open shore, and which must to all
appearance, be exposed to inevitable ruin, if the hurricane season should come
on before the reduction of the place. A thousand languishing and impatient
looks were cast out for the reinforcement from North America. None however as
yet appeared; and the exhausted army was left to its own endeavors. Many fell
into despair, and died, overcome with fatigue, anguish and disappointment.

But in the midst of these cruel delays and distresses, the steadiness of the
commanders infused life and activity into their troops, and roused them to
incredible exertions. The rich prize, which was before them; the shame of
returning home baffled; and even the strenuous resistance which was made by the
enemy; all these motives called loudly on their interest, their honor, and
their pride, and obliged them to the exertion of every nerve. Nobody could
imagine that it was this reduced and slender army, by which these astonishing
efforts were made, and this extensive sphere of duty so perfectly filled. New
batteries arose in the place of the old; the fire soon became equal, and then
superior to that of the enemy.

These favorable events infused double life into their operations, in this
advanced state of the siege; but a new and grand difficulty appeared, just at
the seeming accomplishment of their work. An immense ditch yawned before them,
for the greater part cut in the solid rock, eighty feet deep, and forty feet
wide. To fill it up by any means appeared impossible. Difficult as the work of
mining was in those circumstances, it was the only expedient. It might have
been an impracticable one, if fortunately a thin ridge of rock had not been
left, in order to cover the ditch toward the sea. On this narrow ridge,

It now became visible to the governor of the Havannah, that the fort must be
speedily reduced: if left to its own strength. At all events something must be
done in this exigence for its immediate relief. Accordingly before break of day
a body of twelve hundred men,

This was the last effort for the relief of the Moro; which, abandoned as it
was by the city, and while an enemy was undermining its walls, held out with a
sullen resolution, and made no sort of proposal to capitulate. The mines at
length did their business. his sword to his conquerors. The English wept with
pity and admiration over that unfortunate valor, which had occasioned them so
many toilsome hours, and cost them so many lives.

Thus the Moro came into our possession after a vigorous struggle, forty-four
days from the time the first operations had been begun against it. No time was
lost to profit of this great advantage, notwithstanding that the sickness still
raged like a pestilence, and that many new and great works were to be
undertaken. Not only the fire of the fort was turned against the town, but a
line of batteries (l) was erected along the hill of the Cavannos, on the
extremity of which the fort stands. By these batteries which mounted three and
forty pieces of cannon, and twelve mortars, almost the whole eastern side of
the city was commanded from one end to the other. Preparations for an attack
were also made, and batteries erected to the westward of the town, which on
that side had hitheto been only watched. Some time before a part of the second
division of the troops from North America had arrived.

When those preparations were perfectly ready to take effect,

To convince the governor that the menaces employed were not an empty boast,
lord Albemarle the very next morning ordered a general fire from the batteries,
which was poured from all sides, with such continued and irresistible fury,
that in six hours almost all the enemy's guns were silenced. To the
inexpressible joy of the fleet and army, flags of truce appeared from every
quarter of the town. A capitulation ensued, in which the established religion,
the former laws, and private property were secured to the inhabitants. The
garrison, which was reduced to about seven hundred men had the honors of war,
and were to be conveyed to Spain. A district of an hundred and eighty miles
westward of the Havannah was yielded along with the town. The Spaniards
struggled a long time to save the men of war; but this was a capital point, and
wholly inadmissible. They also made some attempts to have the harbor declared
neutral during the war; but this was no less essential to the completeness of
the conquest, and was steadily refused. After two days altercation, they gave
up these points, and the English troops were put in possession of the Havannah
on the 14th of August, when they had been before it two months and eight days.

Although we have not pursued in exact order all the detail of the more minute
operations of this memorable siege, we have dwelt on it a longer time, than we
have on our plan generally allowed to such transactions; because it was,
without question, in itself the most considerable, and in its consequences the
most decisive conquest we have made since the beginning of the war; and because
in no operation were the courage, steadiness, and perseverance of the British
troops and the conduct of their leaders more conspicious. The acquisiton of
this place united in itself all the advantages which can be acquired in war. It
was a military advantage of the highest class; it was equal to the greatest
naval victory, by its effect on the enemy's marine; and in the plunder it
equalled the produce of a national subsidy. Nine sail of the enemy's ships of
the line, some of the finest vessels in the world, were taken, with four
frigates. Three of their capital ships had been, as already mentioned, sunk by
themselves at the beginning of the siege; two more were in forwardness on the
stocks, and these were destroyed by the English. The enemy, on this occasion,
lost a whole fleet. In ready money, in the tobacco collected at the Havannah on
account of the king of Spain, and in other valuable merchandises, the plunder
did not perhaps fall short of three millions sterling Letter from the Earl of
Albemarle to the Earl of Egremont, dated head quarters near the Havannah,
August 21, 1762.
My Lord,
I HAVE the honor of informing your Lordship, that the town of the Havannah,
with all its dependencies, and the men of war in the harbor, surrendered to
his majesty's arms by capitulation on the 13th instant.

Enclosed is a copy of the capitulation, various returns, and the chief
engineer's continuation of the journal of the siege of the M^ fort, which was
taken by storm on the 30th of last month, so much to the honor and credit of
his majesty's troops, and to major general Keppel, who commanded the attack,
that I should do them injustice if I did not mention them in a particular
manner to your lordship. Our mines were sprung about one o'clock, and a breach
made just practicable for a file of men in front. The enemy was drawn up on the
top of it, in force with a seeming determination to defend it; the attack was
so vigorous and impetuous, that the enemy was instantaneously drove from the
breach, and his majesty's standard planted upon the bastion.

I did not send a particular express with this good news to your lordship,
because I flattered myself, that what has happened would soon be the
consqeuence of our success at Fort Moro.

^n the 11th in the morning, by a signal from the fort, we opened our batteries
against the town, and Punta fort: The guns and mortars were so well served by
the artillery and sailors, and their effect so great, that in less than six
hours all the guns in the fort and north bastion were silenced. The governor
hung out the white flag, and beat a parley; and at the same time sent out an
officer to propose a cessation of arms for twenty-four hours in order to
prepare the articles of capitulation.

I sent on board the Namur to the Admiral, to inform him of the governor's
proposals.

Sir George Pocock immediately came to my quarters, and we agreed to a
suspension of hostilities to the 13th at twelve o'clock.

I summoned the governor on the 10th. His answer was very civil and proper; at
the same time said he would defend his town to the last extremity.

The difficulties the officers and soldiers have met with, and the fatigues
they have so cheerfully and resolutely gone through since the army first landed
on this island, are not to be described. They deserve from me the greatest
commendations; and I must entreat your lordship to take the first opportunity
of informing his majesty how much I think myself obliged to lieut. general
Elliot, and the rest of the general officers under my command; to every officer
and soldier in the army; and to the officers and sailors of his majesty's
fleet, for the zealous manner with which they have carried on the service, and
for the great assistance I have received from them. Happy we shall all think
ourselves, if our conduct meets with his majesty's approbation.

Sir George Pocock and commodore Keppel have exerted themselves in a most
particular manner: And I may venture to say, that there never was a joint
undertaking carried on with more harmony and zeal on both sides, which greatly
contributed to the success of it.

Capt. Nugent, one of my Aid-de-Camps, who has the honor of delivering you my
dispatches, can inform your lordship of any particulars you are pleased to
learn from him, He has been very active, and present at every material affair
that has happened since the landing of the troops. I must beg through your
lordship to recommend him to his majesty as a very deserving young man. He
carries with him the Spanish ensign taken at the Moro.

Colonel Carleton, who has acted as brigadier since lord Rollo left the army,
had the misfortune of being wounded on the 22d of July, when the enemy made a
sortie: He is at present in a fair way of doing well;

I think it but justice to major Fuller, who is my elder Aid-de-Camp, to say,
that I should have sent him to England, if I had not thought it would be more
agreeable to his majesty to receive the news by one of his own servants.

I am, etc. ALBEMARLE.


Letter from Sir George Pocock, to Mr. Cleveland, dated off Chorea River, near
the Havannah, the 19th of August 1762.
SIR,
I Desire you will acquaint their Lordships, that it is with the greatest
pleasure I now congratulate them on the great success of his majesty's arms, in
the reduction of the Havannah with all its dependencies.

The Moro fort was taken by storm on the 30th of last month, after a siege of
twenty-nine days; during which time the enemy lost above a thousand men, and a
brave officer in Don Lewis de Valasco, captain of one of their men of war, and
governor in the Moro, mortally wounded in defending the colors sword in hand
in the storm: And on the 11th instant, the governor of the Havannah desired to
capitulate for the town, which was granted, the articles agreed to, and signed,
(a copy of which I enclose) and we were put in possession of the Punta and land
gate the 14th. With this great and important acquisition to his majesty, have
also fallen twelve men of war of the line, as per list, three of which were
sunk, with a company's ship, in the entrance of the harbor; nine are fit for
sea, and two on the stocks; a blow that I hope will prove the more capital to
the enemy, as they receive it so early in the war; and, I may venture to say,
will leave all their settlements, in this part of the world, exposed to any
attempts that may be thought proper to be made on them. But however trivial,
with the possession of the Havannah, it may appear, yet I cannot help
mentioning the discovery and possessing of the harbor of Mariel, about seven
leagues to the leward of this, and which we had made ourselves masters of,
though the enemy had endeavored to ruin it by sinking ships in the entrance:
and we had lately sent near one hundred transports with some men of war there,
for security against the season, in which we are already advanced.

It will be as needless, as almost impossible, for me to express or describe
that perfect harmony that has uninterruptedly subsisted between the fleet and
the army, from our first setting out. Indeed it is doing injustice to both, to
mention them as two corpse, since each has endeavored, with the most constant
and cheerful emulation, to render it but one; uniting in the same principles of
honor and glory for their King and Country's service. I am glad, on this
occasion, to do justice to the distinguished merit of Commodore Keppel, who
executed the service, under his direction, on the Coxmar side, with the
greatest spirit, activity and diligence; and I must repeat that the zeal of his
majesty's sea officers and seamen exerted in carrying on the services alloted
to them, is highly to be commended.

I shall now beg leave to refer their Lordships to capt. Harvey for all further
particulars, who I send with this letter, and who has approved himself a brave
and deserving officer in this expedition; therefore think myself obliged to
desire their lordships will recommend him to his majesty.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, G. POCOCK.


A List of the ships of war that were in the harbor of the Havannah, under the
command of the Marquis del Real Transporte, commodore and commander in chief of
all his Catholic Majesty's ships in America, and surrendered with the city the
12th of August, 1762.
Guns. Tigre 70 Reyna 70 Soverano 70 Infant 70 Sunk at the entrance of the
harbor.
Neptuno 70 Aquilon 70 Sunk at the entrance of the harbor.
Asia 64 America 60 Sunk at the entrance of the harbor.
Europa 60 Conquestado 60 New ships.
San Genaro 60 New ships.
San Antonio 60 Frigates.
Taken by the Defiance.
Vinganaza 24 By the Alamain.
Thetis 24 Taken by the Defiance.
Mart 18

N. B. There are two ships of war on the stocks, and several merchants ships in
the harbor.

Letter from Sir George Pocock to Mr. Cleveland, dated off Chorera River, the
16th of Aug. 1762, enclosed in the foregoing of the 19th.
ON the 28th of July the Intrepide arrived, with 11 sail of transports, with
troops from New York. They sailed from thence the 11th of June. The
Chesterfield and four transports run on Cayo Comfite, the entrance of the
Bahama Streights on the Cuba side, the 24th of July, an hour before day light,
and were stranded, but lost no seamen or soldiers. The Intrepide met the
Richmond the day after, who was looking out for the convoy. Capt. Elphinston
returned with the three transports which were cleared, in order to bring away
the seamen and troops who were on shore; and, to make all possible dispatch, I
sent away the Echo, Cygnet and Thunder bomb, to meet the Richmond, and to take
the men out of her; and ordered captain Elphinston to take the Cygnet with him,
and proceed up the Streights to meet the second division of transports.

The 2d instant, the Echo and bomb returned with the second division,
consisting of eleven sail of transports, which sailed from New York the 30th of
June. The Richmond, Lizard, Enterprise, Cygnet, and Porcupine sloop, arrived
the 8th, bringing with them all the seamen and soldiers from the ships that
were wrecked. Captain Banks informed me, that, on the 21st of July, at three
o'clock in the afternoon, being near the passage between Maya Guanna, and the
North Caicos, he discovered two French ships of the line, three frigates, and
six sail of brigantine and sloops; that the men of war and frigates gave chase
to the convoy; and that five of the transports were taken with 350 regulars of
Anstruther's regiment, and 150 provincial troops on board of them. All the rest
of the troops arrived and landed in perfect health.

I have thought it necessary to order the Sutherland and Dover to be fitted as
flags of truce, taking out their lower tier of guns in order to accommodate the
late Spanish commodore, the governor of the Havannah, the viceroy of Peru, and
the governor of Carthagena, to Old Spain, and then return to England.
Transports are getting ready for the Spanish soldiers and sailors, agreeable to
the capitulation, which I hope we shall be able to dispatch in a few days.

I have not been able to collect an account of the killed and wounded seamen
belonging to the different ships since the beginning of the siege, who were
employed at the batteries on shore, but it shall go by the first opportunity.





Spain now began very sensibly to feel the inconveniences and miseries she had
voluntarily drawn on herself, by entering into a war so fatal to her. No sooner
had the news of this important capture reached Madrid, than an universal
dejection appeared in every countenance, and the high-towering hopes they had
formed at the beginning of the war entirely vanished: the prodigious advantages
they had vainly expected to flow from the family compact, were now rendered
abortive, and grief and despair were the melancholy offspring of injustice and
rashness.

Great Britain, on the contrary, as prudent in the enjoyment of victory, as
brave in gaining it, seemed not so elated with her good fortune, as to make her
indulge in the luxurious lap of indolence, but determined by the prosecution of
the war in the same able and vigorous manner, to compel her enemies to sue for
that peace they had, when offered, haughtily refused.

To effect so great, so desirable a work, it was thought the reduction of the
Philippine islands would not a little contribute; that enterprise was therefore
formed, and entrusted to the execution of two great men, who had on many
occasions before, signalized themselves in the service of their country, and
approved themselves equal to the greatest things: these were General Draper,
and Admiral Cornish. The troops allotted for the service, were the 79th
regiment, and a company of the royal artillery, 30 of the artillery furnished
by the gentlemen of Madrass, 600 Seapoys, a company of Caffrees, one of
Topazes, and one of Pioneers; to which were added, the precarious assistance of
two companies of Frenchmen, enlisted in their service, with some hundreds of
unarmed Lascars, for the use of the engineers, and park of artillery. This
little supply of men was farther reinforced with a fine battalion of 550
seamen, and 270 good marines; so that the whole force amounted to 2300 men,
who, with the necessary stores, were embarked on board of his majesty's
squadron, and two India ships employed as transports.

As it may appear surprising so important a conquest should be attempted with
so small a force, when a greater might be employed, it may not be amiss to
observe, that if more were drawn from the coasts the settlements would be in
danger; and therefore, it may be thought advisable, rather to attempt with a
few brave men, a place that was unprepared (as imagined) for such a visit, than
by employing a greater force to subject our own colonies to hostile attempts,
and, perhaps, to give the enemy time to be aware of our designs.

On the first of August the forces set sail, the Seahorse, Capt. Grant, having
been previously dispatched through the streights of Malacca, to the entrance of
the China sea, to stop all vessels that might be bound to Manila, or sent from
any of the neighboring settlements to give the Spaniards intelligence of the
design. On the 23d of the following month they anchored in Manila bay, and
found that their visit was unexpected, and the enemy unprepared. To increase as
much as possible their visible confusion and consternation, it was determined
to lose no time in the attack of the port of Cavite, as at first determined,
but proceed directly to the grand object, the city of Manila, the general and
admiral rightly judging, that their conquest of that important place would of
course occasion and draw after it the fall of Cavite.

In consequence of this resolution, a summons was sent to the governor to
surrender the town, fire to the right and left, to protect the flanks, and
disperse the enemy who were assembled in great numbers, both horse and foot, to
oppose a descent. It had the desired effect. The Spaniards retired, and left a
clear coast; but a violent surf arising, many boats were dashed to pieces, the
arms and ammunition much damaged, but providentially, no lives were lost. The
troops then formed upon the beach, marched, and took possession of the Malatta,
fixed their out-posts, and passed the whole night under arms. The Spaniards in
the mean time, were employed in burning of their suburbs. The next day a fort,
named the Polverista, which the enemy had abandoned was seized,

On the 26th, the admiral sent on shore the battalions of seamen under the
command of the captains Collins, of the Weymouth, Pitchford of the America, and
George Ourry from the Panther. The rest of the company's troops of all sorts
were likewise landed, and put under cover. The Spaniards advanced out of the
garrison, under the command of the chevalier Fayet, with 400 men, and two field
pieces, and from a church about 200 yards to the right of St. Jago's church,
began a cannonade upon the right flank of the troops posted there. Some
seapoys, under ensign Carty, were sent to skirmish with them, supported by
three picquets of the 79th regiment, and 100 seamen, all under the command of
colonel Monson, who soon drove the enemy back into the town.

The superior skill and bravery of the English troops were so evident from this
affair, that it occasioned a second summons to the governor, but to no purpose;
the answer was much more spirited than their conduct had been. The church from
whence the Spaniards had been driven, colonel Monson had orders to keep
possession of, if he found it tenable, from the top of which a perfect view was
had of the enemy's works. The front they were obliged to attack, was defended
by the bastions of St. Diego and St. Andrew, with orillons and retired flanks;
a ravelin which covered the royal gate, a wet ditch, covered way, and glacis,
but all these works were out of repair, except the bastions, which were in
excellent order, and lined with a great number of fine brass cannon. It became
absolutely necessary to sound the ditch, and which might have proved a very
perilous enterprise, had the Spaniards been careful in posting centries on the
covered way, but their omission and negligence made it the more easy. It was
therefore undertaken and effected by a small party of the 79th regiment under
captain Fletcher, with the loss only of three men.

The city of Manila being of great extent, and the number of men employed to
reduce it very small, it became impossible to invest it on every side; two
sides therefore were constantly open to the enemy to introduce supplies of men
and provisions, and carry out their effects. The garrison consisted of 800 men
of the royal regiment under the command of the marquis of Villa Mediana,
brigadier general, which was farther reinforced by a body of 10,000 Indians. It
is evident from hence, that the disadvantages under which the English forces
labored could not be remedied, nor could there be any reasonable ground for
success, but in the prudence and wisdom of the general, and the matchless
intrepidity of the troops.

The city continued thus invested, and was cannonaded both by the batteries
erected, and the frigates, which were brought up till the 2d of October, when a
battery for twenty-four pounders was completed, and a mortar battery for the
heavy shells of ten and twelve inches, which made a good parallel, and
communication from the church to the gun battery, and established a spacious
place of arms on the left of it, near the sea. These were greatly facilitated
by the roaring of the waves, it being very tempestuous weather, and which
prevented the Spaniards from hearing the noise of the workmen, who gave no sort
of interruption, but seemed to trust entirely to the elements. In the mean
time, the governor, who was an archbishop, gave out, that an Angel from the
Lord was gone forth to destroy the English, like the host of Senacherib. In the
afternoon the seamen, with great activity and indefatigable labor had brought
up and mounted all the guns in the battery,

A sally was made the 4th by 1000 of the Indians, who attacked the cantonment
of the seamen; but upon the alarm, colonel Monson and captain Fletcher, with
the picquets, being dispatched to their assistance, the enemy was repulsed, and
forced to fly, with the loss of 300 men. Had the skill and weapons of these
Indians, who are a wild and barbarous people from the province of Pampanga,
been equal to their strength and ferocity, the dispersion of them might not
have been so easy; for though armed chiefly with bows, arrows, and lances; they
advanced up to the very muzzles of their enemy's pieces, repeated their
assaults, and died like wild beasts, gnawing the bayonets. In this skirmish,
captain Porter, a brave and experienced sea officer was slain. Scarce were the
Indians thus routed, when another body of them, with part of the Spanish
garrison, attacked the church, and forced the seapoys from their post in it,
nearest the town, took possession of the top, from whence they killed and
wounded several of the English, who were entirely exposed to all their weapons.
Notwithstanding their disadvantageous situation, the European soldiers
maintained their post behind the church with great patience and firmness, and
at last dislodged the enemy, with the loss of captain Strahan, of the 79th
regiment, and 40 private men wounded or killed. The Spaniards left 70 dead
behind them in and about the church. This was their last effort. All their
Indians, excepting 1800, discouraged by the loss, returned home, and the fire
of the besiegers continuing with unremitted fury, the next day a breach
appeared practicable, and it was thought the Spaniards, sensible of their
danger, would think of giving up the town: but they were obstinate without
bravery, or any generous resolution of defending the breach.

The next day, at four in the morning, in consequence of a resolution formed
the preceding night, the troops filed off from their quarters in small bodies
to give the less suspicion to the enemy, enemy might be lodged or entrenched.
At day break a large body of Spaniards was discerned, forming themselves on the
bastion of St. Andrew, but upon the explosion of some shells that were thrown
among them, they went off. Taking immediate advantage of this, and by the
signal of a general discharge of artillery and mortars, the troops rushed on to
the assault, under cover of a thick smoke that blew directly upon the town.
Sixty volunteers of different corpse under lieutenant Russel of the 79th led the
way, supported by the grenadiers of that regiment. The engineers, with the
pioneers and other workmen, to clear and enlarge the breach, and make
lodgments, in case the enemy should have been too strongly entrenched in the
gorge of the bastion, followed. Col. Monson and major More were at the head of
two grand divisions of the 79th; the battalion of seamen advanced next,
sustained by the other two divisions of the 79th: and the company's troops
closed the rear. They all mounted the breach with amazing spirit and rapidity,
and dispersed the Spaniards with the greatest facility. Little resistance was
given, except at the Royal gate, and from the galleries of the lofty houses
which surrounded the grand square. In the guard house over the Royal gate, 100
of the Spaniards and Indians who would not surrender, were put to the sword;
and according to the enemy's own account, 300 men were drowned in attempting to
escape over the river, which was very deep and rapid. The governor and
principal officers retired to the citadel, and were glad to surrender as
prisoners at discretion, as that place was in no good posture of defense; the
marquis of Villa Mediana, and the rest of the Spanish officers, were admitted
as prisoners of war on their paroles of honor, and to conciliate the
affections of the natives, all the Indians taken prisoners, were dismissed in
safety.

The joy on taking this important place was greatly clouded by the loss of
major More, who being transfixed with an arrow near the Royal gate, died
immediately, universally lamented for his good qualities. A few officers only
were wounded, and no more than 30 private men killed or wounded. In consequence
of the terms given to the Spaniards, the port of Cavite, and the citadel, with
the islands and forts dependent on Manila, were given up to his Britannic
majesty, and they were to pay four millions of dollars for the preservation of
the town and their effects.

Such lucrative conquests as the Havannah and the Phillippine islands, had
never before been made Brigadier Genesis Draper's Letter to the Earl of Egremont,
dated Manila, November 2, 1762.
My Lord,
I DO myself the honor of sending lieut. col. Scott, late adjutant-general, to
inform your Lordship of the success of his Majesty's arms in the conquest of
Manila, the surrender of the port of Cavite, and the cession of the Phillippine
islands.

On the 6th of October we took the capital by storm, after 12 days operation,
which are detailed in my journal. Our loss upon this occasion would have been
trifling, but for the death of major More, a valiant good officer; and it is
with particular satisfaction I can assure your Lordship, that the firm bravery
and perseverance of the troops, could only be equalled by their humanity after
victory. Out of respect and deference to Admiral Cornish, we waited till he
came on shore, and being desirous to save so fine a city from destruction, we
jointly dictated the annexed conditions to the governor general (the
Archbishop) and the chief magistrates, who most readily embraced them.

Considering their critical situation, and vast opulence, the terms were as
reasonable for them as beneficial to us. We allow the India company a third
part of the ransom, the whole of which amounts to a million sterling; and,
according to my instructions, I have this day delivered up Manila, one of the
richest cities and islands in this part of the world, with the port of Cavite,
to Dawson Drake, Esquire and the other gentlemen appointed to receive them on
behalf of the company, with all the artillery, ammunition, and warlike stores
found therein, agreeable to the enclosed inventories.

I have appointed major Fell of the 79th regiment to be commandant of the
garrison, which must consist of all the troops brought from Madrass, as the
great extent of the place, its very numerous inhabitants, and unsettled
country, with the importance of the Cavite, demand at least, this force for an
effectual security.

The season of the year, and condition of the squadron, oblige us to defer the
taking possession of the subordinate places ceded to the crown, until the ships
have had a sufficient repair; and I have the pleasure to acquaint your
Lordship, that the large quantity of naval stores taken in the royal magazines
at Cavite, supply most excellent materials for this purpose, in which the
Admiral is indefatigable, whose zeal for his majesty's service, great
cordiality, and constant attention to us during the whole course of the
expedition, and fatiguing progress of the siege, are beyond all praise. The
other officers of the fleet exerted themselves to the utmost upon every
occasion. As a small acknowledgment of our many obligations to Mr. Kempenfelt,
the Admiral's captain. I begged his acceptance of the government of the citadel
and port of Cavite, till it was given up to the company; his prudent and
excellent regulations there were of infinite utility to the public service.

The captains Collins, Pitchford, and George Ourry, who commanded the battalion
of seamen, behaved with great spirit and conduct, and capt. Jocelyn, who was
entrusted with the care of the disembarkations, gave us all the assistance that
could be wished or expected from a diligent good officer. The marine officers
and corpse were of great service, and the seamen astonished us with most
extraordinary proofs of activity and valor, particularly those who assisted at
our batteries.

The reduction of Manila has been so much owing to the consummate skill and
bravery of Col. Monson, that I fear my faint representations cannot do justice
to his merit; and I most humbly beg leave, through your Lordship, to recommend
him to his Majesty, together with the following officers, viz. Lieut. Col.
Scott, Major Barker, who commanded our artillery; Capt. Fletcher, Major of
Brigade; the engineers, Captains Stephenson, and Cotsford, and Ensign Barnard;
the Captains Moore and Pemble, aids-de-camp, who have all acted in their
several departments with extraordinary merit, and greatly facilitated my good
fortune. Both the royal and the company's artillery, with their other troops,
behaved very well. In the last place, may I presume to point out the services
of the 79th regiment, which, from the good conduct of their former and present
field-officers, has the peculiar merit of having first stopped the progress of
the French in India, and not a little contributed to the happiness and decision
of that war under Col Coote, and has since extended the glory of his Majesty's
arms to the utmost verge of Asia. Twenty-three officers, with upwards of 800
men have fallen in the cause of their country, since the regiment left England:
Numbers of the survivors are wounded. Your Lordship's goodness encourages me to
mention them as objects of compassion and protection. Captain Fletcher has nine
colors to lay at his Majesty's feet.

I have the honor to he, etc. WILLIAM DRAPER. Brigadier General, and Commander
in Chief.


Letter from Vice Admiral Cornish, to Mr. Cleveland, dated in the Bay of
Manila, the 31st of October, 1762.
IT is with the greatest pleasure I have the honor to acquaint their lordships
with the success of his majesty's arms in the reduction of the city of Manila,
which was taken by storm on the morning of the 9th instant. In my letters of
the 23d and 31st of July, I acquainted their lordships with my proceedings to
that time; after which I used every possible means at Madras for dispatch; the
decline of the S. W. monsoon making it of the utmost importance. To promote
this end, I completed the Elizabeth, Grafton, Lenox, Weymouth, and Argo, with
such of the troops and military stores, as they were to take on board, and on
the 29th sent them away under the command of Commodore Tiddeman, to proceed to
Malacca, with a view that they might complete their water there by the time I
should arrive with the remainder of the squadron

Having accomplished the embarkation of every thing designed for the
expedition, with a dispatch much beyond my expectations, as we had from the
whole time of my being there a violent surf to contend with, I sailed the first
of August with the ships undermentioned, viz. Norfolk, Panther, America,
Seaford, South Sea Castle store ships, Admiral Steven's store-ship, Osterly
Company's ship, leaving the Falmouth, at the request of the president and
council, to convoy the Essex India ship, who was not ready to sail, having the
treasure to take on board the China cargoes, and to bring to Manila such of the
company's servants, as were to be put in possession of that Government, if the
expedition succeeded.

The 19th, I arrived at Mallacca, and was disappointed in not finding Mr.
Tiddeman there, who did not join me till the 21st having met with long calms:
the difficulty of watering the squadron at this place made it the 27th before I
could leave the road.

On the 2d of September I arrived off Pulo Timean, and was joined by capt,
Grant, in the Seahorse, whom I had detached, upon my first arrival at Madrass,
to cruize between this island and the straits of Sincapore, to stop any vessels
he might suspect going to Manila.

On the 19th I made the coast of Luconia, but was drove off again by a strong
N. E. wind, which separated some of the squadron. The 22d the gale broke up,
and the wind shifting to the S. W. the 23d we recovered the land again; the
next day entered the bay of Manila, and in the close of the evening anchored
off the port of Cavite with the whole squadron, except the South Sea Castle,
and Admiral Stevens, the Falmouth and Essex having joined me off the coast. In
the night I sent the masters to sound about the fortifications of Cavite, and,
by their report found that it might be attacked by ships.

The 25th in the morning, the wind not being favorable to attack the Cavite. I
took two of the frigates, and with general Draper, and some other officers,
reconnoitred the shore about Manila: and observed some churches and other
buildings to stand near the works on the south side of the town, particularly
toward the S. W. bastion. We had some design of attacking Cavite first, to have
had the convenience of that port for the shipping, but considered that though
the attack should be attended with all the success we could hope, yet it would
cause a delay at least of two days before we could land at Manila, which time
would afford opportunity to the enemy to demolish those buidings near the
works, and to prepare many obstacles to our landing and perhaps recover from
that consternation our unexpected arrival had thrown them in; and surther,
Manila being the capital, if that fell, Cavite would in consequence.

From these considerations, I joined in opinion with the general to take
advantage of circumstances, so favorable for a descent, and land the troops
with all dispatch, and endeavor to get possession of some posts near their
works, which, if effected, would greatly facilitate the reduction of the city.

In consequence of these resolutions, I immediately made the signal on board
the Seahorse for the squadron to join me, and for the troops to prepare to
land. About seven in the evening the ^9th regiment, with the marines in the
boats, under the direction of the captains Parker, Kempenfelt, and Brereton,
pushed for the shore; and under the fire of the three frigates, effected the
landing at a church called the Moratta, about a mile and a half from the walls.
We had no opposition from the enemy; but some difficulty from the surf, which
ran high, and bilged all the long boats, but happily lost no men.

The next morning the general took an advanced post about 200 yards from the
glacis, and there, under cover of a blind, intended his battery against the
face of the S. W. bastion. The number of troops being small, I landed a
battalion of seamen, consisting of about 700 men, under the command of the
Captains Collins, Pitchford, and George Ourry.

The 25th I dispatched three armed boats after a galley, coming up the bay to
Manila; they came up with her, resolutely boarded her; and took her,
notwithstanding she kept up a smart fire with patteraroes and muskets; she
mounted two carri^g and seventeen brass swivel guns, and had eighty men. By
letters found in her, we discovered she was dispatched from the galleon St.
Philippina, from Acapulca, and whom she had left the 10th of September, at
Cajaya^an, between the Embocad^r^ and Cape Spi^itu Santa. Upon this discovery,
I came to a resolution to send the Panther and Argo in quest of her, but it was
the 4th of October before the weather permitted their sailing.

The 28th of September the General acquainted me, that he was beginning to work
on the battery, and that if some ships could get near enough to throw shot on
the works of the town opposite to it, it might take off some of the enemy's
fire and attention, and thereby facilitate its construction. In consequence of
this, I ordered Commodore ^iddeman, with the Elizabeth and Falmouth, toward
the town, as near as the depth of water would permit, and to place the ships in
such a position as would best answer the purpose intended, which was
accordingly done the next day, and their fire had a very good effect.

On the 30th, the South Sea Castle arrived with stores which were much wanted,
particularly the entrenching tools, for want of which the army had been so
greatly distressed, that I was obliged to employ all the forges in making
spades, pickaxes, etc. for them. The first of October it began to blow fresh,
and in the night increased to a hard gale, which drove the South Sea Castle
ashore near the Pulverista, a little to the southward of our camp. This
accident, however, had some considerable advantages attending it, as the
situation she lay in made her cannon a protection for the rear of our camp: it
was likewise the means that all her military stores were got on board with
safety and dispatch, and the army supplied with the provisions she had on
board, both of which were articles they stood in immediate need of, and which
could not have been supplied by boats, as it continued blowing weather for
several days after, and the surf breaking very high on the beach.

This gale was from the W. S. W. directly on the shore, which gave me much
concern for the safety of the squadron, particularly for the Elizabeth and
Falmouth, who were only in four fathom water, and, as I have been since
informed, struck; but the bottom being mud, and soft to a considerable depth,
they received no damage. On the 4th in the morning, the General opened the
battery, which was so well managed, and seconded by the ships before the town
that in four hours the defenses were taken off, and the next day in the evening
the breach was made practicable.

On the 6th, at day light in the morning, the general's regiment, with the sea
battalion, mounted the breach, made the attack, and soon got possession of all
the bastions, which completed the conquest. I immediately went on shore, and
with the General, had a meeting with the Spanish Governor, and some of the
principal officers, when a capitulation was agreed on, that the town and port
of Cavite, with the islands and forts dependent on Manila, should be given up
to his Britannick Majesty, and that they should pay four millions of dollars
for the preservation of the town and their effects, (a copy of which
capitulation I have enclosed)

On the 10th I sent capt. Kempenfelt in the Norfolk, with the Seaford and
Seahorse, to take possession of Cavite, agreeable to the capitulation; by this
acquisition we are in possession of a very large quantity of naval stores; and
beside the advantage of almost every convenience for resisting a squadron, the
people are supplied with fresh meat and vegetables in great plenty.

The siege, though short, was attended with many difficulties and great
fatigue, in which both the officers and men exerted themselves with the utmost
cheerfulness. We had constant fresh gales, a lee shore, and consequently a high
surf to contend with, which made it always difficult, frequently hazardous and
sometimes impossible to land with boats. The rains fell very heavy; and our
little army were surrounded and harrassed by numerous bodies of Indians, who,
though undisciplined, and armed only with lances, bows and arrows, yet by a
daring resolution and contempt of death, they became not only troublesome but
formidable. I have the satisfaction of acquainting their lordships, that
throughout the whole expedition, the most perfect harmony and unanimity have
subsisted between his majesty's land and sea forces.

You will receive with this, an account of the number of officers and men, both
seamen and marines, that were landed from the squadron, as likewise of the
killed and wounded in each corpse. It is with concern, I acquaint their
lordships with the loss of commodore Tiddeman, who, in attempting to enter the
river in his barge, the morning after the reduction of Manila, was drowned with
five of his people, by which unhappy accident, his Majesty has lost a brave and
experienced officer.

Captain Kempenfelt, by whom I send this (and will present to you for their
lordships a plan of the town of Manila, and the port of Cavite) has been of the
greatest assistance to me during the course of this enterprise; he is very
capable of furnishing their lordships with many particulars necessary for their
information; and his great merit makes it my duty to recommend him as a very
able and good officer.

I am, etc. S. CORNISH.


Letter from Vice Admiral Cornish to Mr. Cleveland, dated in the Bay of Manila,
Nov. 10, 1762.
IN my letter of the 31st of October, I acquainted you of my having sent
Captain Parker with the Panther and Argo, in quest of the galeon St.
Philippina, from Acapulco, bound to Manila.

The 7th instant capt. King in the Argo, returned with a letter from capt.
Parker, acquainting me, that, in consequence of my orders, having the 30th of
October got the length of the island Capul, near the entrance into the
Embocadera, in pursuit of the St. Philippina, where the Argo had come to an
anchor (and which he intended to do for that night) just as the day closed saw
a sail, and standing to the northward; at eight in the evening he got sight of
the chase, about two leagues to leward, but unluckily by the rapidity of a
counter current, to what the chase was in, drove among the Narrango's in the
utmost danger of being lost, and obliged to anchor; the frigate having escaped
the danger, got up with the chase, and engaged her near two hours; but was so
roughly handled, that capt. King was obliged to bring too to repair his
damages. By this time the current slackened, which enabled capt. Parker to get
under sail with the chase in sight: about nine the next morning he came up with
her, and after battering her two hours within half musket shot, she struck. The
enemy made but little resistance, trusting to the immense thickness of the
sides of their ship, which the Panther's shot was not able to penetrate, except
her upper works. Capt. Parker was no less disappointed than surprised, when the
general came on board, to find, that instead of the Saint Philippina, he had
engaged and taken the Santissimo Trinadad, who departed from Manila the first
of August for Acapulco, and had got three hundred leagues to the eastward of
the Embocadero; but meeting with a hard gale of wind, was dismasted and put
back to refit. She had eight hundred men on board, and pierced for sixty guns,
but when Capt. King engaged her, had only six mounted, and but thirteen when
taken: she draws thirty-three feet water, and is a much larger ship than the
Panther. I cannot ascertain the value of the cargo, but there is to the amount
of one million and a half of dollars registered, and she is reputed so be worth
three millions.

Capt. King left the Panther with her prize at anchor about three leagues south
of the Corrigedow, at the mouth of this bay; and as I have sent a reinforcement
of men with launches and warps, I hope very soon to have her in safety.

I am, etc. S. CORNISH.
Officers killed and wounded, etc. belonging to the Norfolk Lieut. Peter
Porter, and Mr. White, surgeon's second mate, killed. -- Lenox Thomas Spearing,
second lieutenant of marines, wounded.

Total officers, seamen and marines landed, 1017. Killed, 17. Wounded, 17.

N. B. The surgeons, armourers, and other artificers, are not included in the
above account.

Norfolk, off Cavita, Oct. 31, 1762. S. CORNISH.





. But these immense captures though they enriched individuals, contributed
nothing directly to the public service. However, they might be said to
contribute something to it indirectly; by increasing the stock of the nation,
and supplying that prodigious drain of treasure, which for several years had
been made from this kingdom for foreign subsidies, and for the maintenance of
armies abroad. If it had not been for such pecuniary supplies, with which the
uncommon successes of this war were attended, it never could have been
maintained in the extent to which it was carried, notwithstanding the increase
of trade, which has been uniformly progressive for the last three years. It has
in a loose way been computed, that the success of our arms in the East Indies;
independently of the great increase of valuable merchandise, (which used to be
formerly the sole produce and advantage of the East India commerce,) has
brought into England during the war, near six millions in treasure and jewels.

The capture of the Spanish register ship, the Hermione, and that of the
Santissimo Trinidad, a Manila ship, must be added to these resources. The first
of these was worth little less than a million sterling, and the other at least
three millions of dollars. The taking of these ships is not altogether unworthy
a place in history; because it had no small influence on the affairs of the
Bourbon alliance, and considerably sunk those resources of money, which were
the principal objects to France, when she formed that famous treaty. All these
advantages were without any considerable allay on the side of Great Britain;
they would have served to balance any possible success, which the enemy might
have had in Portugal. But their success in that quarter, where they had
entertained the most sanguine hopes, was by no means considerable, and very far
from tending to any thing decisive. These considerations helped to dispose the
Bourbon courts to peace, almost as soon as they had jointly entered into the
war; and Europe, after having been deceived in the hopes of tranquillity, which
were entertained from the late negotiation, and plunged apparently deeper than
ever into war, was in reality approaching fast to peace, and the public repose
was preparing, when it seemed to be at the greatest distance.

CHAP. IX.
Proposals for peace. State of the ministry and parties. Dukes of Bedford and
Nivernois employed in the negotiation. Newfoundland taken and retaken. War in
Germany. Hereditary Prince defeated at Iohannisberg. French repulsed. Cassel
invested. Remarkable cannonade at Bucker Muhl. French take Amonebourg. Cassel
surrendered to the allies. War in Westphalia concluded.

WHEN France had found experimentally, that the present at least was not the
favorable time for drawing from her alliance all those advantages with which
she flattered herself, she inclined in good earnest to peace, The sincerity of
her procedure in the former negotiation might be justly questioned; because she
had prepared an after game in case of its breaking off. And she so much relied
on it, that it is very possible the negotiation itself was but a feint made to
cover and to prepare that project. But finding that Great Britain was neither
intimidated by the threats of that formidable alliance, nor at all likely to be
reduced by the exertion of its forces; she came in good earnest into these
pacific sentiments, which formerly she had only counterfeited. The slow
progress of the Bourbon troops in Portugal, the retrograde motion of the French
army in Germany, the taking of Martinico and its dependencies, and the imminent
danger in which they beheld the Havannah, all conspired to humble the pride,
and dash the hopes of the Bourbon alliance.

On the side of Great Britain likewise, the dispositions to peace became much
more cordial. No people were ever less intoxicated with their successes.
Victories were become familiar to us, and made but little impression. The marks
of public joy on the most considerable conquests, were become much slighter and
colder, than were showed at the beginning of the war, upon very trivial
advantages. Besides the nation had occasion for peace. Though her trade had
been greatly augmented, a circumstance without example favorable, and though
many of her conquests, as we have seen, were very far from unlucrative, her
supplies of money, great as they were, did not keep pace with her expenses. The
supply of men too, which was necessary to furnish the waste of so extensive a
war, became sensibly diminished, and the troops were not recruited but with
some difficulty, and at a heavy charge. It was time to close the war, when
every end, we could rationally propose to ourselves in carrying it on, was
answered; we had enough in our hands to answer all our demands, and almost all
our expectations; and as it is grown into a sort of maxim, that nations greatly
victorious, must cede something on a peace, the difficulty on our side was only
what, and how much we should retain. Not that there was a doubt, but whatever
choice of acquisition could be made upon any rational principles, a great deal
would still remain to give the fullest scope to every sentiment of equity and
moderation,

All these were sufficient inducements to peace. But other things operated as
causes. An alteration in the system of the British ministry had begun this war;
another alteration put an end to it.

The whole council had been almost unanimous to oppose Mr. Pit, in his scheme
for precipitating the declaration of war against Spain. They thought his
principles too violent, and they did not perfectly like his person. When he
retired from public business, it seemed as if they breathed more freely, and
had got rid of a burden that oppressed them. But he was not long removed, when
it appeared that the remaining part of the system, was framed upon principles
so very discordant in themselves, that it was by no means likely to stand.

The duke of Newcastle, first lord of the treasury, by his early zeal in favor
of the protestant succession, by the liberal and politic use he had made of a
great fortune, by the obligations which in a course of many years, and in a
succession of great employments, he was enabled to confer on some of the most
considerable people in the kingdom, had attached a great number to his
fortunes, and formed an interest in the parliament and the nation, which it was
extremely difficult to overturn, or even to shake. He came to be considered as
the head of the whigs; and he was in reality well qualified in many respects
for the chief of a party, from his unbounded liberality, from his affability,
magnificence, and personal disinterestedness. Even the defects and faults,
which might have appeared in his character, were rather of service to him, as
they often tended to soften resentments, and helped to give that great power,
of which he was possessed, an appearance less formidable.

During a great part of the late king's reign, his family had directed all
things without control. On the accession of his present majesty, his situation
seemed more doubtful. But in a little time he appeared outwardly as well
established as ever, not only in his former high employments, but in that share
of influence which is commonly supposed to attend it. There was, however, very
little reality in this specious appearance; for he did not possess the royal
confidence, upon which all the essential of power depends. Neither his age, nor
his situation in the former reign, had allowed him the opportunity of
cultivating an interest with the present king. Another noble person The Earl of
Bute.
had been in an employment near his person; and having formed his mind with
much attention and success to those virtues which adorn his station, deserved
and obtained a very uncommon share of his confidence.

This nobleman was first groom of the stole: afterward, taking a more open
share in the conduct of affairs, he accepted the seals as secretary of state.
On the removal of Mr. Pit, who preserved a sort of union in the administration
by their common dread of him, the only competition was between the duke of
Newcastle and lord Bute. The former could not well endure that decay of
influence, which, on a thousand occasions, he must have sensibly felt, and
which the great rank he held must have rendered only more painful. Lord Bute,
on the other hand, could not bear to see the treasury board, which, under
whatever limitations, was attended with so much power, in the hands of his
rival. It is indeed a department, the entire conduct of which is absolutely
essential to the person who has any pretensions to be at the head of the
British administration.

These principles soon produced their natural effect. In a short time the duke
of Newcastle thought himself obliged to resign,

In this condition of parties, a number of those called Whigs, who had lost
their places, being highly irritated at the late changes, and even many of
those who still continued in employments, being supposed attached to the
interest of the duke of Newcastle, and therefore not to be depended on by the
new administration, it became necessary to have recourse to those called
Tories, or country gentlemen.

From the beginning of this reign it had been professed, with the general
applause of all good men, to abolish those odious party distinctions, and to
extend the royal favor and protection equally to all his majesty's subjects.
The persons called Tories had, besides, been before active in support of some
of those, who now clamoured at the very measures which they had themselves,
more than once, adopted. However, occasion was taken from thence to endeavor
at the revival of this almost exploded distinction. There were great heats,
which were blown into a combustion by every art, and every instrument of party,
that had ever proved effectual upon similar occasions.

Whilst the nation was thus distracted, the conduct of a war became difficult;
its continuance unsafe; and its supplies uncertain. If the administration
failed, their failure would be construed into incapacity; if they succeeded,
their success would be converted into an argument for such terms of peace, as
it would be impossible for them to procure. Above all, the ancient and known
connection between the chiefs of the moneyed interest and the principal persons
in the opposition, must have been a subject of great anxiety to the
administration.

These causes co-operated to render the intentions of the British ministry
toward peace altogether cordial and sincere; and they thought themselves
abundantly justified in their wishes for it at this juncture, both from the
successes and the burdens of the nation; from the flourishing state of some of
their allies, and the doubtful state of others; and in general, from those
arguments of humanity, which made it high time that Europe should enjoy some
interval of repose.

Both courts thus concurring in the same point, all difficulties were speedily
smoothed. It is said, that the first overtures were made under the mediation of
his Sardinian majesty. As soon as terms were proposed, in order to give a
pledge to each other of their mutual sincerity, it was agreed that this treaty
should not be negotiated, as the former had been, by subordinate persons; but
that the two courts should reciprocally send to London and Versailles a person
of the first consequence and distinction in either kingdom. Accordingly the
duke of Bedford was sent to negotiate on the part of England, and the duke de
Nivernois on that of France; the great outlines of the treaty were very soon
explained and adjusted. The detail of some articles took up more time.

During this mixed interval of war and treaty, the French obtained a temporary
advantage; but which neither suspended nor influenced the negotiation. It was
the last offensive effort, which they made; and though this enterprise was
attended with a temporary success in the execution, it was in the design not
superior to any of those that had failed. Monsieur de Ternay, with a squadron
of four men of war and a bomb ketch, and M. d' Hausonville, with a
proportionable number of land forces, arrived the 24th of June at the bay of
Bulls in Newfoundland, and finding the island little prepared to resist them,
took without difficulty, the forts of St. John, Trinity; and Carbonear,
destroyed the two last, and likewise the stages and implements of the fishery,
to a considerable value. The immense extent of our military operations,
rendered it little wonderful or blameable, that this particular part was found
weak.

The French presumed by far too much on the supineness of the nation, when they
hoped such an advantage could have any great effect on the negotiation. In
fact, as soon as the news arrived in England, a force was fitted out to retake
those places. But such was the vigilance and readiness of general Amherst; our
commander in America, that it superseded the necessity of this armament. He
detached colonel Amherst with a body of forces, and Lord Colville with a small,
but sufficient squadron, to recover this valuable island. The land forces
attacked some detachments of the French, advantageously posted in the
neighborhood of St. John's, and prepared to attack St. John's itself, with so
much vigor and activity, that M. d'Hausonville, who had remained there as
governor, thought proper to deliver up that place, and surrendered himself and
garrison prisoners of war Colonel Amherst's Letter to the Earl of Egremont,
dated, St. John's, Newfoundland, Sept 20, 1762.
My Lord,
ACcording to the orders I received from Sir Jeffery Amherst, at New York, of
which your Lordship have been informed, I proceeded from New York to Halifax
with the transports, to take up there the troops destined for the expedition. I
got into the harbor the 26th of August; and finding Ld. Colville had sailed,
determined to embark the troops there, and at Louisbourg, as expeditiously as
possible, and proceed after his Lordship.

The men of war being sailed, who were to have taken part of the troops on
board, I was obliged to take up shipping to the amount of 400 tons.

I had every thing embarked, ready to sail the 29th, but contrary winds kept us
in the harbor till the 1st of September, when we got out, and arrived at
Louisbourg on the 5th. The next day the troops were embarked, and we sailed out
of the harbor the 7th in the morning.

I had the good fortune to join Lord Colville's fleet on the 11th, a few
leagues to the southward of St. John's; and by the intelligence his Lordship
had received, I was obliged to change my resolution of landing the troops at
Kitty Vitty, a narrow entrance, close to the harbor of St. John's, the enemy
having entirely stopped up the passage, by sinking shallops in the channel.

From the best information I could get, it appeared that Torbay, about three
leagues to the northward of St. John's, was the place to land the troops at,
within that district.

Lord Colville sent the Siren man of war into Torbay with the transports; and
it was late at night on the 12th, before they all came to an anchor. Capt.
Douglas of his Majesty's ship Siren, went with me to view the Bay, and we found
a very good Beach to land on. It blew hard in the night, and one of the
transports, with the Provincial Light Infantry corpse on board, was driven out
to sea.

I landed the troops early the next morning, at the bottom of the Bay, from
whence a path led to St. John's; a party of the enemy fired some shots at the
boats as they rowed in. The Light Infantry of the Regulars landed first, gave
the enemy one fire, and drove them toward St. John's. The battalions landed,
and we marched on. The path for four miles very narrow, through a thick wood,
and over very bad ground.

Capt. M'Donnell's Light Infantry corpse in front came up with some of the party
we drove from the Landing Place: They had concealed themselves in the wood,
fired upon us, and wounded three men. A part of M'Donnell's corpse rushed in
upon them, took three prisoners, and drove the rest off.

The country opened afterward, and we marched to the left of Kitty Vitty: It
was necessary to take possession of this pass, to open a communication for the
landing of artillery and stores, it being impracticable to get them up the way
we came.

As soon as our right was close to Kitty Vitty river, the enemy fired upon us
from a hill on the opposite side. I sent a party up a rock, which commanded the
passage over, and under cover of their fire, the Light Infantry companies of
the Royal and Montgomery's, supported by the grenadiers of the Royal, passed,
drove the enemy up the hill, and pursued them on that side toward St. John's:
when I perceived a body of the enemy coming to their support, I immediately
ordered over Major Sutherland, with the remainder of the first battalion, upon
which they thought proper to retreat; and we had just time, before dark, to
take post.

Capt. Mackenzie, who commanded Montgomery's Light Infantry, was dangerously
wounded. We took ten prisoners; the troops lay this night on their arms.

The next morning, the 14th, we opened the channel, where the enemy had sunk
the shallops: they had a breast-work which commanded the entrance, and a
battery not quite finished.

Lieut. Col. Tullikin, who had met with an accident by a fall, and was left on
board, joined me this day; and Capt. Ferguson commanding the artillery, brought
round some light artillery and stores from Torbay in the shallops.

The enemy had possession of two very high and steep hills, one in the front of
our advanced posts, and the other nearer to St. John's, which two hills
appeared to command the whole ground from Kitty Vitty to St. John's. It was
necessary that we should proceed on this side, to secure effectually the
landing at the Kitty Vitty, from the first hill the enemy fired upon our posts.

On the 15th, just before daybreak, I ordered Capt. M'Donnell's corpse of Light
Infantry, and the Provincial Light Infantry, supported by our advanced posts,
to march to surprise the enemy on this hill. Capt. M'Donnell passed their
centries and advanced guards, and was first discovered by their main body on
the hill, as he came climbing up the rocks near the summit, which he gained,
receiving the enemy's fire. He threw in his fire, and the enemy gave way.

Capt. M'Donnell was wounded; Lieut. Schuyler of his company killed, with three
or four men, and eighteen wounded.

The enemy had three companies of grenadiers and two picquets at this post,
commanded by Lieut. Col. Belcombe, second in command, who was wounded; a
Captain of Grenadiers wounded and taken prisoner; his Lieut. killed, several
men killed and wounded, and 13 taken prisoners.

The enemy had one mortar here, with which they threw some shells at us in the
night: a six-pounder not mounted, and two wall pieces.

This hill, with one adjoining, commands the harbor,

The 16th, we advanced to the hill nearer St. John's, which the enemy had
quitted. Twenty-nine shallops came in to day with artillery and stores,
provision and camp equipage from Torbay, which we unloaded. I moved the
remainder of the troops forward, leaving a post to guard the pass of Kitty
Vitty, on the other side. Last night the enemy's fleet got out of the harbor.
This night we lay on our arms.

The 17th, a mortar battery was completed, and a battery begun for four
24-pounders, and two 12-pounders, about 500 yards from the fort, made the road
from the landing for the artillery, and at night opened the mortar battery,
with one eight inch mortar, and seven cohorns, and six royals. The enemy fired
pretty briskly from the fort and threw some shells.

The 18th, in the morning, I received a letter from Count de Ha^ssonville, of
which I do myself the honor to enclose to your Lordship a copy, as also of my
answer; with copies of other letters that passed, and of the capitulation.

As Lord Colville, at this time, was some distance off the coast, and the wind
not permitting his Lordship to stand in, to honor me with his concurrence in
the terms to be given to the garrison, I thought no time should be lost in so
advanced a season, and therefore took upon me to determine it, hoping to meet
with his Lordship's approbation; and he has given me the greatest pleasure, by
entirely approving of everything I have done.

I must beg leave to say, my Lord, that every assistance we could possibly
desire from the fleet, has been given us, Lord Colville upon the short notice
he had of our joining him, having labored to get together all the shallops he
could, and with which we were so amply supplied, was a measure of essential
service: and without which our operations must have been considerably retarded.

The indefatigable labor and persevering ardour of the troops I have the
honor to command, so necessary toward completing the conquest, before the
bad season set in, did indeed exceed what I could have expected. Lieut. Col.
Tullikin seconded me in every thing as I could wish.

Capt. M'Donnell, of Col. Frazer's regiment, having Sir Jeffery Amherst's leave
to go to England, was to have delivered this to your Lordship; but his leg is
broken by the wound he received, which keeps him here: may I humbly presume, my
Lord, to recommend this gentleman to your Lordship's protection, as a real,
brave and good officer.

Lord Colville intends sending his Majesty's ship Siren immediately to England:
I send Capt. Campbell, of the 22d regiment, with these dispatches, who will
inform your Lordship of any particulars you may desire to know.

I do myself the honor to transmit to your Lordship such returns as I can
possibly get in time, to show the true state of the French troops and garrison
here.

I am, with the most profound respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most humble,
and most obedient Servant, WILLIAM AMHERST
Capt. Campbell has brought with him the French colors which were hoisted on
the fort of St. John's.




Lord Colville's Letter to Mr. Cleveland, dated, St. John's, Newfoundland,
September 20, 1762.
SIR,
I Had the honor of sending you an account of my proceedings until the 18th of
August, by a vessel which sailed from Placentia for England at that time; and
on the 22d I sailed with his majesty's ships the Northumberland, Antelope,
Gosport and Siren, and the King George, belonging to the province of
Massachusett's Bay. On the 25th, we chased a schooner off St. John's and took
her close to the harbour's mouth. She had been an English privateer, taken by
the enemy, had eight carriage guns mounted, and was manned with thirty
Frenchmen, commanded by an ensign de Vaisseau.

The enemy had sent away great part of the inhabitants of St. John's, men,
women, and children, by giving them vessels and provisions to carry them where
they pleased; two of these, a sloop and a schooner, we met with on the coast,
and took twenty-three Irishmen that were single men out of them, to replace in
part the marines of the squadron that were left in garrison at Placentia and
the isle of Boys. These Irishmen said, that if I would go into the bay of
Bulls, numbers of their countrymen would resort to me and enter on board the
squadron; but during two days which I stayed in that bay, not a man joined me.
The few inhabitants that remained there, quietly followed their business of
fishing, and it is possible the enemy prevented any others at St. John's from
coming.

Mr. Garland and Mr. Davis, two of the principal inhabitants of Harbor Grace
and Carbonera, in Conception Bay having acquainted me that a number of men in
their neighborhood were willing to serve in the squadron during the present
exigency, I sent the armed schooner for them, and she returned with fifty men,
which I have distributed among the ships. And the same gentlemen representing,
that the enemy sometimes sends small parties by land to Portugal Cove, which
have threatened to molest them in shallops from that place, desired, in behalf
of themselves and all their neighbors, that the schooner might be stationed in
Conception Bay. for their protection and defense, which request I complied with.

The island of Carbonera, in Conception Bay, has had no other garrison for many
years but a few old men of the artillery, to take care of the guns and ordnance
stores. Had some of the inhabitants of the adjacent coast taken post here, they
might easily have defended it against any force, except one narrow landing
place, and no safe road in the neighborhood for great ships; but the enemy
landed in boats, and destroyed the whole without resistance. And the isle of
Boys, near Ferryland, would probably have shared the same fate, had it not been
possessed in due time by the Syren's marines.

In frequently passing the harbour's mouth of St. John's, we could plainly see
that the fort, which fronts the entrance, was fortifyed all round the new
works; and that a redoubt, or something like one, was raised at the little
harbor of Kitty Vitty. The old battery at the South Side of the harbour's
mouth was repaired with additional works, and a new one erected on the same
side nearer the entrance. All these were to be seen from the sea; and I could
not learn that the enemy intended any thing more than the finishing these works.

On the 8th of September I received by a sloop express from Halifax, letters
from Sir Jeffery Amherst at New York, acquainting me, that he had come to a
resolution to send a body of troops, in order to dislodge the enemy as soon as
possible from St. John's; and that Lieut, Col. Amherst was to command these
troops. The same conveyance brought me letters from Col. Amherst, acquainting
me with his arrival at Halifax on the 26th of August, his departure from thence
on the first of September, and with his intention to call at Louisbourg for the
troops there, and then proceed round Cape Race, to join me on this coast. Upon
receipt of these letters, I sent the s^oop which brought them to look out for
Col. Amherst and the transports off Cape Race; and in order to join them the
sooner, to concert measures for the ensuing operations, before the enemy could
have notice of their arrival, I dropped down with the squadron to Cape Broyle,
but Mr. Gili, of St. John's who had been sent out of the town in a cartel
schooner two days before, sending off advice from Ferryland, that he was sure
the enemy intended to sail in a very little time, I returned with the squadron
to our station off St. John's.

On the 11th we were joined by Col. Amherst, with the troops in ten transport
vessels; and I proposed Torbay as the properest place to land at: It is to the
northward of St. John's, about seven miles by land, and the roads pretty good,
but the bay is not reckoned safe anchorage, being open to the easterly winds,
which usually begin to prevail at this season. By one of the transports from
New York, I received a duplicate, the original not yet come to hand, of their
Lordship's order of the 7th of June, directing me to repair myself, or send a
sufficient force to enable Capt. Graves of the Antelope, to defeat the designs
of the squadron commanded by M. de Ternay.

On the 12th we proceeded to Torbay. I sent capt. Douglas in the Siren to
anchor with the transports, accompanied by the boats of the squadron, and a
number of shallops, or fishing boats, which I had collected from different
parts for the king's service. With the rest of the ships I returned to my
station close to St. John's harbor. Next morning Col. Amherst landed with the
troops in the head of the bay, having only four men wounded from a distant
bush-firing of the enemy. He marched directly to Kitty Vitty, and made himself
master of that important post in the evening, without having a man killed, and
only two or three wounded. Every thing belonging to the army was carried from
Torbay to Kitty Vitty in shallops, escorted by boats from the squadron. And
this service was conducted with diligence and care, by Mr. Dugdale, my first
Lieutennant, Capt. Douglas having joined the squadron again. The enemy's fleet
was to have sailed the morning I passed the harbor with the transports; and
300 men only were to be left in St. John's for the winter; but, upon seeing us,
they landed their grenadiers again.

The 15th it blew strong from E. to E. S. E. with thick rainy weather. In the
evening the wind shifted to the westward, light breezes, and thick fog. At six
next morning, it being calm, with a great swell, we saw from the mast-head, but
could bring them down no lower than half way the topmast shrouds, four sail,
bearing S. S. E. distant seven Ieagues; the mouth of St. John's harbor at the
same time bore W. four leagues. We lost sight of them about seven, though very
clear; and some time after, a small breeze springing up in the S. W. quarter, I
stood in toward Torbay, in order to cover the shallops that might by going
from thence to Kitty Vitty.

In the afternoon I received a note from Col. Amherst, acquainting me that the
French fleet got out last night. Thus, after being blocked up in St. John's
harbor for three weeks by a squadron of equal number, but smaller ships, with
fewer guns and men, did M. Ternay make his escape in the night by a shameful
flight. I beg leave to observe, that not a man in the squadron imagined the
four sail, when we saw them, where the enemy; and the pilots were of opinion,
that they must have had the wind much stronger than with us, to overcome the
westerly swell in the harbour's mouth. I sent the King George round Cape Race,
as far as Trepassy, to bring me intelligence if the enemy should steer toward
Placentia; and I directed Capt. Douglas of the Siren to get the transports
moved from Torbay as a very unsafe road to the bay of Bulls.

A bomb battery was opened against the fort, in the night of the 17th, and next
day it capitulated, before any other battery began to play.

The squadron got into the harbor yesterday morning; and in the evening I
received their Lordships order of the 3d of August, sent me by capt. Palliser
of the Shrewsbury, who, with the Superbe, Bedford, and Minerva, had just
arrived on the coast. I have directed capt. Palliser, with the other ships, to
come into the harbor, as soon as a convenient opportunity offers for so doing.

We have about eight hundred prisoners, grenadiers, picquets, and some marines,
being a very fine body of men, and nearly equal in number to the regulars of
our army. I am now preparing transports to carry them to Breast.

The enemy did not intend to leave so great a part of their force here; their
grenadiers were ready for embarking, but M. de Ternay seemed determined at all
events to grasp an opportunity, which, if once lost, might never be regained;
therefore, in the utmost confusion, he left behind his grenadiers, anchors, and
turned his boats a drift when they had towed him out. The fog was so thick that
Lieut. Col. Tullikin, who was posted on an eminence in the narrowest part of
the harbour's mouth, could hear their noise, but could not discern any of their
ships. The fog even altered the direction of the sound, which seemed to come
from another part of the harbor, whilst they must have been directly under him.

There is a considerable quantity of provisions and other goods at this place,
collected and tumbled promiscuously into different storehouses by the enemy.
Many of the Irish servants have also been robbing and plundering their masters.
To ascertain property, in order to make restitution as far as can be, and to
restore regularity to a country, so long distracted by being in the enemy's
possession, will be the particular care of governor Graves, who, in my opinion,
is well qualified for such an office; and as he will stay here, he will be
able, in a great measure, to restore the affairs of this country.

Capt. Douglas of the Siren has behaved with spirit and activity, and exerted
every talent of a good officer during this expedition; and (without adding any
more officers to the corpse) I am happy in the opportunity of sending him to
wait on their lordships.


The following Letters having something in them very particular, we shall
subjoin them here, leaving our Readers to make such observations as may occur.
SIR,
'I Now being under some doubt of St. John's and Placentia in Newfoundland this
summer, as the squadron from Breast is sailed, I read in the newspapers whither
can they go but to Newfoundland, and as a loyal subject to his majesty, and a
great friend to trade, in which I have suffered much by being too enterprising;
I do therefore most humbly offer my thoughts for the good of my king and
country; that is, I really think from my heart that said Breast squadron is gone
to Newfoundland, many of our Newfoundland ships being taken the last year. The
common enemy must know the slender force of our Newfoundland convoy in those
parts; and, was a small squadron of his majesty's ships to go soon to
Newfoundland, and return again after examining into the safety of that valuable
island and trade, may likely save many of his majesty's subjects from ruin, and
prevent the common enemy a ^ooting in the Newfoundland fishery.

'You will please to communicate these my thoughts to their lordships, which, I
humbly think with submission, is worthy at this time of their consideration.

'I have by long experience, some judgment in sea affairs; as also a
willingness to serve my king and country, these will plead an excuse in my
behalf to their lorships for this trouble.

I am, etc.


To John Cleveland, Esquire Answer.
Admiralty-Office, June 11th, 1762. SIR,
'I Have received and communicated to my lords commissioners of the admiralty
your letter of the 8th instant, with respect to the apprehension you are under,
that the Breast fleet is gone for Newfoundland.

Your very humble servant, J. CLEVELAND.



, before Sept. 18. lord Colville could arrive from the place where the troops
had been landed, to cooperate with them. M. de Ternay escaped with the fleet,
partly by having gained a considerable distance, before they were discovered,
by means of a thick fog; and partly because lord Colville, after their having
been discovered, did not apprehend that they really were the enemy's ships.

It was in Germany that the greatest efforts were made. Even after the
negotiations had been considerably advanced, the military operations were in
that country no way slackened. The body under the marshal d'Estrees and
Soubise, being streightened, in the manner we have seen, by the incomparable
judgment of prince Ferdinand's measures, had been obliged to call that under
the prince of Conde from the Lower Rhine to their assistance. In order to
complete their junction with this corpse, the grand army uncovered Cassel,
quitted the banks of the Fulda, and fell back to a considerable distance. The
hereditary prince of Brunswick, who had attended this corpse all along, thought
at length a fair opportunity had occurred of striking a decisive blow against
it. which was posted at a place called the heights of Johannisberg, near the
banks of the Wetter. At first his success was answerable to his own
expectations, and the courage of his troops. He drove the enemy entirely from
the high grounds into the plain; but whilst he pursued his advantage, the body
he attacked was reinforced by the main army. The action which began so
favorable for the allies, ended in a defeat. They lost above three thousand
men in killed, wounded, and prisoners. The hereditary prince, who had, through
the whole action, made the most powerful efforts, and exposed himself to the
greatest dangers, received a wound from a musket-ball in his hip-bone, from
which his life was a long time doubtful, and his recovery lingering and
tedious. Whilst his life continued in danger, the concern was unusual, and
common to both armies; both taking an interest in the preservation of a prince,
as much endeared by his humanity, as admired for his valor and military genuis.

A victory of the greatest importance could not have more fully displayed the
superiority of prince Ferdinand's capacity, in the conduct of a war, than his
measures after this defeat. The French were not suffered to derive the smallest
advantage from their victory; nor did the allies lose a foot of ground. The
communication with Cassel was still at the mercy of the allies. The French, in
their retreat, had thrown a garrison of ten thousand men in that place; and the
prince made immediate and vigorous preparations to besiege it.

When the prince had adjusted his army to cover the siege the French took
advantage of his movement for that purpose, to repass the Lahan near Giessen,
and advanced toward Marpurg. But as they advanced, the prince drew his army
from the siege, and made such dispositions as enabled him to fall at once upon
their flank and rear, drove them from all their posts,

After this successful affair, the body of the army resumed their preparations
for the siege of Cassel, which was now become the grand object of the campaign;
and the great purpose of the endeavors of both armies was, of the one to open
the communication with Cassel, of the other to cut it off.

A number of skirmishes happened in these movements. The most remarkable among
them was the affair of Bucker Muhl, the allied troops, as they passed to and
from the redoubt, were, for a length of four hundred paces, exposed to all the
enemy's cannon loaded with grape shot.

The situation of the French was nearly the same. A dreadful fire was supported
between these resolute bodies, without a moments intermission, or the least
slackening on one side or the other, for near fifteen hours, from the dawn of
day to dark night. Neither side gave way; and this most bloody contest for a
most trifling object in the end left the allies in the possession of their
redoubt, and the French of their mill. The whole compass of military history
furnishes no instance of so obstinate a dispute. The allies lost six hundred
men in killed and wounded; toward the close of the day, the dead bodies served
to raise a parapet for the redoubt, in the place of that which had been beat to
pieces by the cannonade.

The French are thought to have suffered more in this action than the allies.
However, though they did not succeed in their attack upon the bridge, they
battered at the same time the castle of Amonebourg with so much fury, that in a
short time they effected a breach, and obliged the garrison to surrender. By
this advantage they gained a good deal of ground, and even got on the rear of
the allied army. But with this advantage, considerable as it was, they were
able to do nothing decisive: they were able neither to raise, nor materially to
disturb the siege of Cassel, which went on without interruption; nor where they
able to throw the least relief into this place, where their garrison already
began to suffer for want of provisions.

This capital of an unfortunate principality, which has so often been taken and
retaken during the course of this war, dispairing of relief, at length
surrendered to the victorious arms of the allies, without any difficulty. But
the signing of the preliminaries of peace,

These preliminaries had very little to do toward completing the relief of our
allies; except that they set the seal on their good fortune, and prevented
their being exposed any longer to the chances of war. This campaign, though it
was not distinguished by any great decisive victory, was not the less
honorable to the commander or the troops. A connected series of judicious and
spirited operations produced all the effects which could be proposed from a
single and brilliant stroke. At this period, the French, after having for six
years exerted almost the whole undivided strength of their monarchy upon this
single object, were, in the end, very little more advanced than they were the
day they first set their foot in Germany. The possession of three or four poor
unimportant places was all they had purchased by many millions of treasure
expended, and possibly near two hundred thousand lives thrown away.

The whole body of the allies acquired great and just glory in this war; but
the English had all along the post of honor, and obtained the highest
reputation. As to their commander the duke of Brunswick, having begun his
operations almost without an army, having continued the war with an army always
inferior in numbers, having experienced every variety of fortune, his capacity
and his firmness carried him with credit through all; and enabled him to
conclude the war with a triumphant superiority. He may now enjoy in the
honorable repose which his exploits have purchased for himself and his
country, the best of rewards, the consciousness of public service. Posterity
will consider him as the deliverer of Germany.

The English troops, after so many fatigues and dangers, at length enjoyed the
prospect of a speedy return to their country; but a general damp was cast
suddenly on their joy by the illness of lord Granby; who was attacked by a very
dangerous and long continued fever, The Marquis of Granby's Letter of Thanks to
the British Forces in Germany, dated Munster, Jan. 1, 1763.
"LORD Granby hoped to have had it in his power to have seen and taken his
leave of the troops, before their embarkation for England; but a severe illness
having detained him at Warburg, and his present state of health obliging him to
take another route, he could not leave this country without this public
testimony of his entire approbation of their conduct since he has had the
honor of commanding them

"These sentiments naturally call for his utmost acknowledgments; he therefore
returns his warmest thanks to the generals, officers, and private men,
composing the whole British corpse, for the bravery, zeal, discipline, and good
conduct he has constantly experienced from every individual; and his most
particular and personal thanks are due to them for their ready obedience, upon
all occasions to such orders as his station obliged him to give.

"His best endeavors have always been directed to their good, by every means
in his power; and he has the satisfaction to think he has some reason to
flatter himself of their being convinced, if not of the efficacy, at least of
the sincerity of his intentions, if he may judge by the noble return their
behavior has made him; a behavior, that while it fills him with gratitude,
has endeared them to their king and country, and has covered them with glory
and honor.

"Highly sensible of their merit, he shall continue, while he lives, to look
upon it as much his duty, as it will for ever be his inclinations, to give them
every possible proof of his affection and esteem^ which he should be happy to
make as apparent as their valor has been, (...) exemplary to after ages."



It is impossible to express the concern of the whole army during this anxious
interval, or the joy which enlivened every breast on his recovery. No commander
had ever been more distinguished for an enterprising and generous courage; and
none half so much for an unlimitted benevolence. The sick and wounded soldier,
the officer whose income was unequal to his rank or his necessities, in him
found a never failing and never burdensome resource. Whatever could be done to
animate the soldiery, to make them cheerful in the service, to alleviate the
hardships of war, was exerted beyond what could be thought possible in the
limits of a private fortune; and the satisfaction of the giver went always
beyond the actual benefit, because in his greatest liberality, it was evident
that he wished to do a thousand times more. By his whole conduct he inspired
foreigners with a favorable idea of the English nobility. His character is,
indeed, such as we are apt, in romantic ideas, fondly to conceive of our old
English barons. It is with pleasure we attempt, however feebly, to do justice
to the merit of those men, living or dead, who, in this memorable war, have
contributed to raise this country to a pitch of glory, in which it has not been
exceeded by any other in ancient or modern times. Future history will pay them
a reward more adequate to their merits.

CHAP. X.
Siege and surrender of Schweidnitz. War transferred to Saxony. Austrians
defeated at Freyberg. Prussians ravage the Empire. Preliminaries of peace
between Great Britain and France. Disputes concerning them. Mr. Fox comes into
administration. Preliminaries approved by parliament. Peace of Hubertsbourg
between Austria and Prussia. Conclusion.

WHILST the courts of London and Versailles Were making so considerable a
progress toward peace, those of Vienna and Berlin seemed to remit nothing of
their ancient animosity. The king of Prussia, deprived of the assistance, but
at the same time freed from the hostilities of the Russians directed his whole
force and attention toward the single object of driving the Austrians out of
Silesia.

Prince Henry, who commanded in Saxony, contented himself with acting upon the
defensive. The king in person carried on the siege of Schweidnitz, almost in
the presence of marshal Daun, who scarce made any attempts to relieve it. But
whatever deficiency there might have been in the spirit of the grand army of
the Austrians, it was amply compensated by the obstinate bravery of the
garrison, which resisted all the attacks of the Prussians for near two months
from the opening of the trenches. It is said that the attack was conducted, and
the defense made, by two engineers, who had written on the subject of the
attack and defense of places; and they were now practically engaged to prove
the superiority of their several systems.

However this may be, Schweidnitz cost the king of Prussia a great deal of
time, many laborious efforts, and a number of men. The brave garrison, to the
number of eight thousand men, prisoners were drowned at the mouth of the Oder,
on their passage to their intended confinement at Konigsberg: only nine men of
the whole number escaped.

The king of Prussia now master of Schweidnitz, and consequently of Silesia,
turned his attention to Saxony, where he considerably reinforced his brother's
army and made preparations which indicated a design of laying siege to Dresden.

In Saxony also the Austrians began to exert themselves with great spirit; and
made some progress under the generals Stolberg, and Haddick. They obtained
considerable advantages, in several encounters, over the army of prince Henry;
and even pushed them back to Freyberg; the possession of which place they
prepared to dispute with the Prussians.

But here fortune, which has seldom proved long constant to their arms,
entirely forsook them. The united army of Imperalists and Austrians was
attacked by prince Henry,

The Austrians attributed this defeat to the treachery of one of their superior
officers, who was soon after taken into custody. But whilst they were inquiring
into the cause of their disaster, and preparing to punish the author of it, the
Prussians were pushing the advantages which their victory afforded them with
all imaginable alacrity. And this they were enabled to do with the greatest
effect, by means of a partial cessation of hostilities, which the Austrians
were so imprudent as to conclude with the king of Prussia for Silesia and the
electoral Saxony only, without foreseeing the danger, or providing for the
safety, either of their own immediate dominions, or of those members of the
Empire, which were the most attached to their interests, and which were now
exposed to the attempts of a bold, rapacious, and exasperated enemy.

One body of the Prussian army broke into Bohemia, pushed on almost to the
gates of Prague, and destroyed a capital magazine. Another fell upon the same
country on another quarter, and laid the town of Egra almost in ashes, by a
bombardment and a cannonade of red hot bullets. Some extended themselves all
over Saxony; others penetrated into the furthest parts of Franconia, and even
as far as Suabia, ravaging the country; exacting the most exorbitant
contributions, and spreading dismay and confusion upon every side. The diet of
the Empire sitting at Ratisbon did not think themselves in safety; but were
beginning to fly and preparing to remove their records.

The free city of Nuremberg, so famous for the ingenious industry, and pacific
disposition of its inhabitants, suffered the most by this invasion; having been
obliged to pay contribution to the amount of two hundred thousand pounds of our
money. It has been supposed, that in this expedition the Prussians raised a sum
equal to the annual subsidy, which had formerly been paid by Great Britain to
their sovereign. Many of the states found themselves obbliged to sign a
neutrality, in order to save their territories from further ravages.

And now a great part of the Empire being already included in the peace between
Great Britain and France, and the rest, tied down by this neutrality, entirely
disabled by the late defeat, or exhausted by the subsequent incursions, were no
longer in a condition to furnish an army under the imperial name and authority.
After the whole alliance had been thus gradually dissolved, the affair was, at
length, left to be decided as it was begun, by the single arms of Austria and
Prussia; so that there was great reason to hope, as the war in Germany had
succeeded immediately to the rupture between Great Britain and France, the
peace between these powers would also lead to the speedy pacification of the
Empire.

The preliminaries had been signed by the British and French ministers at
Fountainbleau, on the third of November, and it is necessary for the completion
of our design, that we should here give some account of the definitive treaty
which was built upon them.

The reader will recollect, that, in the negotiation of 1761, it was laid down
as a principal by the two courts, that their respective propositions, in case
the treaty should by any accident be broken off, were to be considered as
retracted or never made. At that time we remarked, that these propositions
would probably have their influence, notwithstanding this provision; because,
as we then observed, things once settled and agreed to, unavoidably stamp their
own impression upon any future negotiation relative to the same subject. It
happened very nearly, as was then foreseen; for, as far as we can judge, the
negotiation did not set out upon any new or peculiar principle of its own, but
seemed to assume as a basis those points, which were nearest to an adjustment
in the preceding treaty; and to commence where that transaction concluded.

The spirit of the two negotiations, so far as regarded the peculiar interest
of Great Britain, seems to have been perfectly similar. There was scarcely any
other difference, than that Great Britain, in consequence of her successes
since that time, acquired more than she then demanded; but still the general
idea, on which she acquired, was nearly or altogether the same. But with regard
to some of our allies, the principal was greatly varied; and we imagine that
this change was sufficiently justified by the alteration which happened in the
affairs of Germany, during the interval between the two treaties. Those who
conducted the negotiation in 1761, were steady in rejecting every proposition,
in which they were not left at liberty to aid the king of Prussia, with the
whole force of Great Britain; those, who concluded the peace in 1762, paid less
attention to the interests, though they did not wholly neglect the safety of
that monarch. At the beginning of the year, and before they had entered into
the negotiation, they refused to renew that article of the annual treaty, by
which our court had engaged to conclude no peace without the king of Prussia;
though at the same time they declared themselves willing to assist him with the
usual subsidy. He on his part refused the subsidy unconnected with that
article. Some coldness grew between the two courts from this time forward.

The adjustment of affairs in the Empire, seemed to form no material impediment
to the progress of the treaty. Both parties readily agreed to withdraw
themselves totally from the German was. They thought and rightly, that nothing
could tend so much to give peace to their respective allies, as mutually to
withdraw their assistance from them; and to stop that current of English and
French money, which, as long as it ran into Germany, would be sure to feed a
perpetual war in that country.

Circumstanced as affairs then were, this conduct on our side was as defensible
as the conduct which we held in 1761. At that time the affairs of the king of
Prussia were at the lowest ebb; he was overpowered by the whole weight of
Austria, of Sweden, of the Empire, and of Russia, as determined as ever, in her
enmity, and then successful; to say nothing of France. Neither generosity, nor
perhaps sound policy, ought to have permitted us to desert him in that
situation. But when the last treaty was made, the condition of his affairs was
absolutely reversed. He had got rid of the most powerful, and one of the most
implacable of his enemies. He had concluded a peace with Sweden. The treaty
itself freed him from all apprehensions of France. He had then none to contend
with, but a nominal army of the Empire, and one of Austria, which, though
something more than nominal, was wholly unable to oppose his progress. His
situation, from being pitiable, was become formidable. It was good policy to
prevent the balance of Germany from being overturned to his prejudice. It
would have been the worst in the world to overturn it in his favor.

These principles sufficiently explain and justify the different conduct of
this nation, at these two periods, toward the king of Prussia. The demand of
the evacuation of Wesel, Cleves, and Gueldres, which had been made in the first
negotiation was then justly excepted to, because we refused to put an end to
the German war. In this last the French agreed to it, and with reason, because
we agreed in common with them to be neutral in the disputes of the Empire. And
on these principles, the peace of Germany, so far as it depended on Great
Britain and France, was restored. The rest of Europe was pacified by the
stipulation for the evacuation of Portugal. This was indeed, with regard to the
contracting courts, the primary object.

What remained after the concerns of the allies were provided for, was the
adjustment of what related to the settlements and commerce of Great Britain and
the Bourbon courts. The difficulty, which prevented this adjustment in the
preceding negotiation, was the intervention of the claims of Spain. The
attempts of the Bourbon powers to intermix and confound their affairs in the
preceding negotiation, had a share in making the war more general; on this
occasion it had a contrary effect. As the whole was negotiated together, it
facilitated the peace, by affording easier methods of adjusting the system of
compensation, and furnishing more largely to the general fund of equavalents.

The great object, and the original cause of the war, had been the settlement
of limits in America. This was therefore the first object to be attended to in
the treaty. And it must be observed, that this point was much more accurately,
as well as beneficially, settled, than it promised to be in the negotiation of
the foregoing year. For the French, not having ascertained the bounds between
their own several possessions with great exactness, than they had those between
their possessions and ours, it was not clear in ceding Canada, how much they
ceded to us. Disputes might have arisen, and did indeed immediately arise upon
this subject, besides, the western limits of our southern continental colonies,
were not mentioned. And those limits were extremely obscure and subject to many
discussions. Such discussions contained in them the seeds of a new war, In the
last treaty it was agreed, that a line drawn along the middle of the river
Missisippi, from its source to the river Iberville, (a small but navigable
branch of the Missisippi,) and thence along the middle of this river, and the
lakes of Maurepas and Pontchartrain, (which lakes communicate with both rivers)
to the sea, should be the bounds of the two nations in North America.

Nothing could be more distinct than this boundary. It gave us, in addition to
what was properly Canada, a very large tract of territory, which the French
used to include under the name of Louisania; to which our claims were never
clearly ascertained, and much less established by any possession. The French
have had for a long time forts and settlements in that country; whereas the
English never had either the one or the other; and this is a consideration of
no small moment in a contest concering rights in a country such as America.

What added also to the rounding of our territories, and cutting off the
occasions of limitary disputes, was the cession of Florida on the part of
Spain. This country indeed makes no great figure in the commercial world; and
cannot be therefore put in competition with the other conquests, But from the
situation of its harbors of Pensacola and Mobile, it affords some advantages
in the time of peace, and very considerable ones in time of war; by connecting
our future settlements on the Missisippi with those upon the Atlantic ocean,
and by enabling us greatly to distress, if not wholly to destroy the trade of
the Spaniards in case of a rupture with them. The navigation of the Missisippi
was made common to both nations.

By the treaty of Utrecht, which settled our northern limits, and by this
treaty which ascertained those to the west, our possessions in America are as
well defined, as the nature of such a country can possibly admit. They
comprehend in their extent the foundation of a vast empire; they have many
advantages of soil and climate; and many of intercourse and communication, by
the number of noble lakes and navigable rivers, with which that part of the
world abounds. These circumstances afford, though a distant, a fair prospect of
commerce to Great Britain, when this immense country comes to be fully peopled,
and properly cultivated. Some advantages also we derive from this possession,
that are not only considerable but immediate; among the principal of which must
be reckoned, the monopoly of the furr and peltry trade of North America, much
the greatest trade of that kind in the world, and which is now, we may say,
entirely in our hands. Besides the possession of Canada enlarged the sphere of
our fishery, and took from the French an opportunity of trade, which she might
employ greatly to our detriment.

Such are the advantages fairly, and without any exaggeration, for which we are
indebted to this part of the treaty, in which the interests of Great Britain
were well weighed and solidly provided for.

The next point we shall consider, is the arangement made concerning the
Newfoundland fishery, This was a point of infinite importance, and a subject of
much controversy. In a commercial view it is certainly of great estimation. But
it has been considered as even more material in a political light. Every body
knows that these extensive fisheries are the life of many maritime places,
which would otherwise be of no sort of value; that they are the great nurseries
of seamen, and consequently the great resources of the marine. Scarce any
object could be of more importance to two nations, who contended for a
superiority in naval power.

The more clearly therefore it was the interest of Great Britain, to acquire
the exclusive exercise of this fishery, the more strongly and evidently it
became the interest of France to oppose themselves to such a pretension. Not
only a large part of her foreign trade depended on this fishery, but a great
part of her domestic supply. Besides every hope of the strength and almost of
the existence of a naval power, must vanish with the cession of this fishery.

The English administration probably saw, that France would rather run all the
hazards of war, than totally relinquish this object. Since therefore they
despaired of driving the French entirely from the fishery, they endeavored as
much as possible to diminish its value to them. In this respect they followed
the plan of the former negotiation, except that some improvements were added.

In the first place, that article of the treaty of Utrecht was established, by
which the French were admitted to fish, and to dry their fish, on the
north-east and north-west parts of Newfoundland, from Cape Bonavista to Point
Biche, and excluded from the rest of this island. They were also permitted to
fish within the Gulf of St. Lawrence, but with this limitation, that they
shall not approach within three leagues of any of the coasts belonging to
England.

This precaution was taken, not only with a view of abridging the French
fishery of dry cod, but principally in order to prevent their landing, and on
that pretense forming settlements on those extensive deserts, which surrounded
the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Otherwise this privilege might become a means of
exciting new controversies between the two nations.

In compensation for the cession of the isles of Cape Breton and St. John to
England, we agreed to surrender to France the small island of St. Pierre and
Miquelon, situated to the south of Newfoundland. The cession of the two former
islands was, unquestionably, more than an equivalent for the two latter, though
the latter are by no means either incommodiously situated or ill circumstanced
for carrying on the fishery. The French stipulated to erect no fortifications
on these islands, nor to keep more than fifty soldiers to enforce the police.
In this instance the plan of the former negotiation was pursued. The ideas of a
resident commissary, and the occasional visitation by a ship of war were
omitted; as regulations, which were in truth more humiliating to France, than
in any respect advantageous to our interest.

The fishery was, as it had been at the treaty of Utrecht, divided between
France and England, but with less equality on this than on that occasion. The
French are not wholly deprived of their share; but this share is considerably
impaired. Their loss of Cape Breton does not appear to be fully supplied by St.
Pierre and Miquelon. The considerable and growing fishery, which the French had
settled at Gasp is taken away without hope of recovery. On the whole, we are
thus circumstanced; we have advantages in this fishery, which we may certainly
improve to a great superiority; but we have still a rival, which makes it
necessary to exert ourselves with unremitting industry in order to secure it.

With regard to Spain, she entirely desisted from the right she claimed of
fishing on these coasts. A more satisfactory expression could have been wished;
if it had been of great importance, in what terms a right was renounced, which
for a long time had never been exercised.

When the affairs of the West Indies came to be settled, though they caused
great difference of opinion among the public, they do not seem to have raised
any great difficulty in the negotiation. We had here made great conquests, and
here also we made great concessions. We ceded the Havannah, with a considerable
part of the island of Cuba; the islands of Martinico; Gaudeloupe; Mariegalante;
Desirade; and Santa Lucia. We retained in our hands the islands of Tobago,
Dominica, St. Vincent, and the Grenades. To the three former, of which, (as
well as to Santa Lucia, which we surrendered) we had an old claim. The last
only was a new acquisition; and the three others are at present of small value.

Many censured with great vehemence and asperity this part of the treaty. They
insisted that in this treaty we had lost sight of that great fundamental
principal, that France is chiefly, if not solely, to be dreaded by us in the
light of a maritime and commerical power. That therefore we had, by restoring
to her all her valuable West India islands, and by our concessions in the
Newfoundland fishery, left in her hands the means of recovering her prodigious
losses, and of becoming once more formidable to us at sea. That the fishery
trained up an innumerable multitude of young seamen; and that the West India
trade employed them when they were trained. That France had long since gained a
decided superiority over us in this lucrative branch of commerce, and supplied
almost all Europe with the rich commodities, which are produced only in that
part of the world. By this commerce, said they, she enriched her merchants and
augmented her finances; whilst from a want of sugar land, which has been long
known and severely felt by England, we at once lost the foreign trade, and
suffered all the inconveniences of a monopoly at home.

That, at the close of so expensive a war, we might very reasonably demand
something toward our indemnification, as well as toward our security. It is
evident said they, that our conquests in North America, however, they may
provide for the one, are altogether inadequate to the other of these ends. The
state of the existing trade of these conquests is extremely low; the
speculations of their future are precarious, and the prospect, at the very
best, very remote. We stand in need of supplies, which will have an effect,
certain, speedy, and considerable. The retaining both, or even one of the
considerable French islands, Martinico or Guadeloupe, will, and nothing else
can effectually answer this tripple purpose. The advantage is immediate. It is
a matter not of conjecture but of account. The trade with these conquests is of
the most lucrative nature, and of the most considerable extent; the number of
ships employed by it are a great resource to our maritime power; the monopoly
at home is corrected, and the foreign trade is recovered. And what is of equal
weight, all that we gain on this system, is made fourfold to us, by the loss
which ensues to France. But our conquests in North America, however
advantageous they may prove to us, in the idea of security, (for in that
respect alone they are of any moment) are of very little detriment to the
commerce of France. On the West India scheme of acquisition, our gain and her
loss go hand in hand.

They insisted upon the obvious connection of this trade, with that of our
colonies in North America, and with our commerce to the coast of Africa. The
African trade, said they, will be augmented, by the demand for slaves. That of
North America will all center in ourselves. Whereas if the islands are all
restored, a great part of the benefit of the northern colony trade must
redound, as it has hitherto done, to those who were lately our enemies, and
will always be our rivals.

They observed, that there was nothing extravagant or overbearing in this
demand. That though we should retain either Martinico or Guadeloupe, or even
both these islands, our conquests were such, that there was still abundant
matter left to display our moderation in the cession of the rest. To say
nothing of our many concessions in the fishery; on the coast of Africa; and in
the East Indies; from all which great provinces of commerce the French had been
entirely driven this war, and to a considerable share of which they were
restored by the treaty. But if further concessions must be made (for which
however they saw no necessity) let the prodigious demand in North America be
somewhat contracted; by this method we loose nothing to our commerce; and we do
not hazard our security, as we shall still be infinitely superior in strength;
and whenever a war breaks out, that power will be most secure, whose resources
are most considerable.

Such are concisely, and, we flatter ourselves, fairly, the principal heads of
argument, brought by the best writers upon this side of the question; they were
replied to by the best writers on the other, upon the following principles.

That the original object of the war was the security of our colonies upon the
continent; that the danger to which these colonies were exposed, and in
consequence of that danger, the immense waste of blood and treasure which
ensued to Great Britain, together with the calamities, which were from the same
source, derived upon the four quarters of the world, left no sort of doubt that
it was not only our best, but our only policy, to guard against all possibility
of the return of such evils. Experience has shown us that while France
possesses any single place in America, from whence she may molest our
settlements, they can never enjoy any repose, and of course that we are never
secure from being plunged again into those calamities, from which we have at
length, and with so much difficulty, happily emerged. To remove France from our
neighborhood in America, or to contract her power within the narrowest limits
possible, is therefore the most capital advantage we can obtain; and is worth
purchasing by almost any concessions.

They insisted that the absolute security derived from this plan, included in
itself an indemnification. First; by saving us, more effectually than any other
method could, from the necessity of another war, and consequently by giving us
an opportunity of increasing our trade, and lowering our debt. Secondly; by
permitting our colonies on he continent to extend themselves without danger or
molestation. They showed the great increase of poppulation in those colonies
within a few years. They showed that their trade with the mother country had
uniformly increased with this population. That being now freed from the
molestation of enemies, and the emulations of rivals, unlimited in their
possessions, and safe in their persons, our American planters would by the very
course of their natural propogation in a very short time, furnish out a demand
of our manufactures, as large as all the working hands of Great Britain could
possibly supply. That there was therefore no reason to dread that want of
trade, which their adversaries insinuated, since North America alone would
supply the deficiences of our trade in every other part of the world.

They expatiated on the great variety of climates, which that country
contained, and the vast resources which would thence arise to commerce. That
the value of our conquests thereby ought not to be estimated by the present
produce, but by their probable increase, Neither ought the value of any country
to be solely tried on its commercial advantages; that extent of territory and a
number of subjects, are matters of as much consideration to a state attentive
to the sources of real grandeur, as the mere advantages of traffic; that such
ideas are rather suitable to a limited and petty commonwealth, like Holland,
than to a great, powerful and warlike nation. That on these principles, having
made very large demands in North America, it was necessary to relax in other
parts. That France would never be brought to any considerable cession in the
West Indies; but that her power and increase there could never become
formidable, because the existence of her settlements depended upon ours in
North America, she not being any longer left a place from whence they can be
supplied with provisions; that in losing something of the sugar trade, we lost
very little else than a luxury: as to the other produce of the West Indies, it
might be in a great measure, and in part already was supplied by our
possessions on the continent, which daily increased not only in the quantity
but in the kind of its produce.

We do not pretend to pass any judgment on the merits of the several sides of
this question, which is certainly a very difficult one. We relate opinions, as
well as facts, historically.

The only point, which remained to be adjusted in the West Indies, was the
logwood trade. Spain consented not to disturb the English in their occupation
of cutting logwood in the bay of Honduras, and to permit them to occupy such
buildings as may be necessary for them in this occupation. Great Britain, on
her side, stipulated to destroy the fortifications which had been erected on
that bay Def. tr. art. xvii.
.

By this article the English acquired a solid right in this long contested
trade; but seemed at the same time, to lose all the means of protecting it. It
is, however, difficult to point out a better method of adjusting a claim of
such a peculiar nature. The right we claimed was not a right to the territory,
nor directly to the produce; but only a privilege of cutting and taking away
this wood by indulgence. To have insisted on the right of erecting
fortifications, would have been making the strongest claim to an absolute,
direct and exclusive dominion over the territory itself; a point, to which I do
not find that our most extensive claims have ever been carried.

In Africa, Goree was restored to France, and Senegal remained to Great Britain
Def. tr. art. x.
. This regulation seems to have divided the trade on this river, and the
adjacent coast, between the two nations. The English as they are now
circumstanced on that part, seem to be the most advantageously situated for the
trade in time of peace; and the French for carrying away the whole of it in
time of war.

With regard to the East Indies, all the French factories and settlements are
restored to that nation in every part of India Def. tr. art. xi.
: Although this must be regarded as a very great concession, it does not
however afford all those advantages to France, which might be imagined at the
first view. First, because the fortifications erected at such a vast expense in
all those settlements have been totally destroyed; and it cannot be expected,
in the present situation of the French company, that they can, in the course of
many years, if at all, be restored to their former state; in Bengal,
(including, by an explanation annexed to the definitive treaty, the kingdom of
Orixa.) they have engaged to erect no kind of fortification, nor to keep any
number of soldiers whatsoever. Secondly, they have agreed to acknowledge the
present reigning subas of Bengal, Decan, and the Carnatick, as the lawful
sovereigns of these countries. These princes are the greatest on the peninsula
of India: they are in our interest, and most of them owe either the
acquisition, or depend for the preservation of their power upon our arms; by
which means our company is become, in effect, arbiter of the commerce and
politics of that great and opulent coast, extending from the Ganges to Cape
Comorin; and in a great degree also of the other, from the same cape to the
mouth of the Indus. Thirdly, during the course of our successes, the traders
and the manufacturers have removed from the French to our settlements, where
they will have at least an equal market, and a superior protection; and it will
be difficult, if not impossible, to bring them back.

Minorca and Belleisle were to be restored to their former possessors Def. tr.
art. viii and xii.
. The fortifications and harbor of Dunkirk were to be demolished agreeable to
the stipulations of former treaties Def. tr. art. xiii.
.

This is the general outline of the late treaty. The particulars given here
will serve to point out the spirit and the general effect of that transaction,
which has been the subject of so much heat and controversy; and which nothing
but adulation will assert to be free from defect, nor any thing but ^action can
deny to be productive of many very great and essential advantages to this
kingdom.

This treaty, while it remained in agitation, formed a great crisis, not only
in the affairs of the nation, but in the fortune of the new ministry. Toward
the latter end of the summer Mr. Fox was called in, and engaged in their
support. Though he continued in his old place of paymaster, he undertook to
conduct the affairs, of government in the house of commons. Mr. Grenville,
whose employment would naturally have engaged him in that task, resigned the
seals of secretary of state, and was appointed first lord of the admiralty. The
great experience and known parliamentary abilities of Mr. Fox, seemed to give
new life to the affairs of the administration. A more vigorous and determined
conduct was from that time adopted. Many of those, who were not perfectly
attached to the new system, were immediately removed from their employments;
and measures were taken to clear every department of every friend of the Duke
of Newcastle.

The spirit of these proceedings seemed to augment that of the opposition. It
was apprehended, that the preliminaries would undergo a rigorous scrutiny, and
might possibly incur a heavy censure from parliament. The terms of peace were
criticized without mercy. They were declared to be inglorious, inadequate, and
insecure; unequal to the great successes of the war, and below the just
expectations of the nation; that our commerce was neglected, and our allies
abandoned. Public expectation was however entirely disappointed. The
preliminaries were approved, without any qualification, by both houses; by the
lords with out any division;

Many causes concurred to produce this moderate disposition. First, a very
great number, which included almost all the Tories, were engaged in the support
of the administration. The then chiefs of the opposition were not well agreed
among themselves. Mr. Pit who was considered as a party in himself, had not
joined with the duke of Newcastle, nor seemed disposed to act with any
particular body. The same general plan of peace, which many now in the
opposition had formerly approved, had been adopted in these preliminaries, and
evidently improved. It is true, it had been objected, that our additional
successes, since that time, gave us ground to expect better terms; but it was
answered, that our national burdens, and the extent of the war, had increased
in, at least, an equal proportion; and that peace was become necessary to the
nation.

These arguments whatever weight they might have in themselves, were strong
against these, upon whom they were rather retorted, than for the first time
levelled, being altogether agreeable to the system which many now in opposition
had always pursued, and to the sentiments many of them had publicly avowed,
and perhaps still secretly retained. On the whole, it was evident, that, when
the question came on, the discontented party was found not very well united,
and absolutely unprovided of any regular scheme of opposition. However, though
baffled on this occasion, it has since begun to revive and to unite; and though
peace is happily restored with foreign powers, our domestic quiet is still far
from being securely established.

With regard to the powers in Germany, the peace between England and France,
and the superiority of the king of Prussia at the close of the campaign,
inspired, at length, though unwillingly, a disposition to peace. Conferences
were opened at Hubertsberg, and a treaty concluded between his Prussian majesty
and the empress queen. As affairs in this treaty were speedily adjusted, so
they may be very concisely related. The substance of it was no more than that a
mutual restitution and oblivion should take place, and each party sit down at
the end of the war in the same situation in which they began it. Thus the king
of Prussia, after having for six years contended against the efforts of almost
all the great powers of Europe, by whose enmity he could be affected, having
stood proof against the most terrible blows of fortune, enjoys at length the
full reward of his uncommon magnanimity. He retains his dominions in their
utmost extent; and having delivered his country by his incomparable talents for
war, he now enjoys leisure to recover it by his no less admirable talents for
government. Scarcely was the war concluded, when he began to display his
attention to domestic policy, and his care for the happiness of his people. He
imediately distributed lands to his disbanded soldiery; and gave them the
horses of his artillery to aid them in their cultivation.

Europe is new pacified; and she begins to respire, after a more general and a
more bloody war than any the world had experienced since that which was
concluded by the peace of Westphalia. As far as it is safe to judge concerning
a system which is subject to so great and unforeseen variations, and sometimes
from very slight causes, this peace promises a considerable duration. The king
of Prussia will hardly again commit his affairs, so miraculously retrieved to
the chances of war. He sees how dearly he has a second time purchased his
conquest of Silesia, and he will hardly aim at new acquisitions. The empress,
since she failed to reduce Silesia, or even to recover the smallest particle of
her losses, with such an exertion of her own strength, and with such an
alliance as never was seen united before, and with which she can never flatter
herself again, must be convinced how vain it is to attempt any change in the
present system in Germany.

Whilst Russia remained circumstanced as she seems to be at present, there is a
very good prospect for the tranquillity of the North.

France has turned her thoughts to a much wanted economy and the
re-establishment of her marine, she has reduced her land forces, by above one
half. England, with out lessening the ordinary establishment of her navy, has
augmented her military, in consequence of the extent of her conquests. Both
nations seem sensible of the necessity of being prepared, and yet quiet. The
Bourbon courts are united but weakened. The mutual jealousy of the nations,
which have been lately at war, continues; but their subjects of dispute, and
occasions of animosity, are much lessened. This is as good a situation as could
reasonably be expected.

We have thus accomplished our design of laying before the public a connected
narrative of the events of the late most remarkable war, which we have pursued
from its commencement to its conclusion. We have omitted no care to make it as
perfect as the nature of such an undertaking would permit; and we flatter
ourselves, that it will be thought as impartial, and satisfactory, as any work
of the kind extant.

^^NI^

