

THE WAY TO KEEP HIM, A COMEDY In THREE ACTS: As it is performed at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

Connubio jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo. VIRG. LONDON: Printed for P.
VALLIANT, opposite Southampton-street in the Strand, MDCCLX.

(Price One Shilling and Six Pence.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Poem STREPHON and CHLOE.
of Dr. SWIFT'S, (with all due Deference to the Ladies, that Poem is mentioned)
gave the Author the first Idea of a Comedy on this Subject. He had not thought
sufficiently of it, to form any regular Plan, when La Nouvelle Ecole de Femmes,
of Monsieur De Moissy, fell into his Hands. There were Circumstances and
Sentiments in that Piece, which coincided with his Design; and he also had some
Objections. The Husband's visiting a Lady of Fashion, under his own Name, and
passing upon her for an unmarried Man; the Chevalier's Attempt upon his
Friend's Honor, without a proper Detection of either of them; the Wife singing
and dancing about the Stage through the whole Last Act, in order to reclaim her
Husband, and his Approbation of it; without any other Denouement, and without
any Situations of Embarassment, which the Story so naturally tended to, were,
in his Opinion, palpable Deficiencies. To substitute other Materials, to form a
Last Act entirely new, and to work the whole into an English Comedy, was the
Employment of some vacant Hours in the last Summer. Whether he has been able to
do it with any tolerable Spirit, either in the Dialogue, Characters, or Fable,
he now submits to the Decision of the candid Reader. He acknowledges the public
Candor, and he returns his Thanks to Mr. Garrick, for his admirable Acting;
and to all the Performers concerned in the following Scenes; and also in THE
DESERT ISLAND.

Lincoln's End, 1st Feb. 1760. ARTHUR MURPHY.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Lovemore, Mr. GARRICK. Sir Brilliant Fashion, Mr. PALMER. William, Servant to
Love-more, Mr. KING.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Lovemore, Mrs. YATES. The Widow Bellmour, Miss MACKLIN. Muslin,
Waiting Woman to Mrs. Lovemore, Mrs. CLIVE. Mignionet, Maid to Mrs. Bellmour,
Mrs. BRADSHAW. Pompey, a black Boy belonging to the Widow.
Scene LONDON.

The WAY TO KEEP HIM.
ACT. I. SCENE I.
The Hall in Lovemore's House, William at Cards with a Brother Servant. Will. A
PLAGUE on it! -- I Have turned out my Game, -- Is Forty-seven good? --


Serve. Equal. --


Will. A Plague go with it -- Tearse to a Queen! --


Serve. Equal. --


Will. I Have ruined my Game, and be hanged to me. -- I don't believe there is a
Footman in England plays with worse Luck than myself. -- Four Aces is Fourteen!


Serve. That Is hard; -- Cruel, by Jupiter!


Will. Four Aces is Fourteen -- Fifteen ( plays.)


Serve. There Is your Equality. --


Will. Very well -- Sixteen (plays) -- Seventeen (plays.)


Enter Muslin. Muslin. There Is a couple of you, indeed! -- You're so fond of
the Vices of your Betters, that you're scarce out of your Beds, when you must
pretend to imitate them and their Ways, forsooth. --


Will. Prithee, be quiet, Woman, do. -- Eighteen (plays.) --


Muslin. Set you up indeed, Mr. Coxcomb. --


Will. Nineteen! Clubs (plays)


Muslin. Have done with your Foolery, will ye? -- And send my Mistress word --


Will. Hold your Tongue, Mrs. Muslin, you will put us out. -- What shall I play?
-- I Will tell you, Woman, my Master and I desire to have nothing to say to you
or your Mistress. -- Twenty; Diamonds! (plays.)


Muslin. But I tell you, Mr, Sauce-box, that my Lady desires to know when your
Master came home last Night, and how he is this Morning?


Will. Prithee, be quiet. -- I and my Master, are resolved to be teiz'd no more
by you. -- And so, Mrs. Go-Between, you may return as you came. -- What the
Devil shall I play? -- We'll have nothing to do with you, I tell you. --


Muslin. You Will have nothing to do with us! -- But you shall have to do with
us, or I Will know the Reason why. -- (Snatches the Cards out of his Hands.)


Will. Death and Fury! -- This meddling Woman has destroyed my whole Game. --


Muslin. Now, Sir, will you be so obliging as to send my Mistress an Answer to
her Questions, how and when your rake-helly Master came home last Night? --


Will. I Will tell you what, Mrs. Muslin, -- you and my Master, will be the Death
of me at last; that is what you will. -- In the Name of Charity, what do you
both take me for? -- Whatever Appearances may be, I am but of mortal Mould. --
Nothing supernatural about me. --


Muslin. Upon my Word, Mr. PowderPuff! --


Will. I have not indeed! -- And so, do you see, Flesh and Blood cannot hold it
always. -- I cannot be for ever a Slave to your Whims, and your second-hand
Airs. --


Muslin. Second-hand Airs! --


Will. Yes, second-hand Airs! You take 'em at your Lady's Toilets with their
cast Gowns, and so you descend to us with them, -- And then, on the other hand,
there is my Master! -- Because he chooses to live upon the Principal of his
Health, and so run out his whole Stock as fast as he can, he must have the
Pleasure of my Company with him in his Devil's Dance to the other World. --
Never at home, till Three, Four, Five, Six in the Morning! --


Muslin. Ay, a vile, ungrateful Man, to have so little Regard for a Wife that
doats upon him. -- And your Love for me is all of a Piece. -- I Have no Patience
with you both. -- A couple of false, perfidious, abandoned, profligate --


Will. Hey, hey, -- Where Is your Tongue running? -- My Master is, as the World
goes, a good Sort of a civil Kind of a Husband, and I, -- Heaven help me, -- a
poor Simpleton of an amorous, constant Puppy, that bears with all the Follies
of his little Tyrant here. -- Come and kiss me, you Jade, come and kiss me. --


Muslin. Paws off, Caesar. -- Don't think to make me your Dupe. -- I know, when
you go with him to this new Lady, this Bath Acquaintance; and I know you're as
false as my Master, and give all my Dues to your Mrs. Mignionet there. --


Will. Hush, Not a Word of that. -- I Am ruined, pressed, and sent on board a
Tender directly, if you blab that I trusted you with that Secret. -- But to
charge me with Falsehood, -- Injustice and Ingratitude! My Master, to be sure,
does drink an agreeable Dish of Tea with the Widow. -- Has been there every
Night this Month past. -- How long it will last, Heaven knows! -- But thither
he goes, and I attend him. -- I ask my Master, Sir, says I, what Time would you
please to want me? -- He gives me his Answer, and then I strut by Mrs.
Mignionet, without much as tipping her one Glance; she stands watering at the
Mouth, and a pretty Fellow that, says she. -- Ay, ay, gaze on, says I, gaze on;
-- I see what you would be at: -- You Would be glad to have me, -- You Would be glad to
have me! -- But sour Grapes, my Dear! I Will go home and cherish my own lovely
Wanton; -- and so I do, you know. I do. -- Then after Toying with thee, I
hasten back to my Master; later indeed than he desires, but always too soon for
him. -- He Is loath to part; He lingers and dangles, and I stand cooling my
Heels. -- O! to the Devil I pitch such a Life. --


Muslin. Why don't you strive to reclaim the vile Man then?


William. Softly, not so fast; -- I have my Talent to be sure! yes, yes, I have
my Talent; some Influence over my Master's Mind: But can you suppose, that I
have Power to turn the Drift of his Inclinations, and lead him as I please --
and to whom? -- to his Wife!Pshaw! -- Ridiculous, -- foolish, and absurd!


Muslin. Mighty well, Sir! Can you proceed?


Will. I tell you a Wife is out of Date, now a Days; -- Time was -- but that is
all over -- a Wife's a Drug now; mere Tar-Water, with every Virtue under
Heaven, but nobody takes it. --


Muslin. Well, I swear, I could slap your impudent Face. --


Will. Come and kiss me, I say. --


Muslin. A Fiddlestick for your Kisses, -- while you encourage your Master to
open Rebellion against the best of Wives. --


Will. I tell you it is her own Fault; why don't she strive to please him, as
you do me? Come, throw your Arms about my Neck. --


Muslin. Ay, as I used to do, Mr. Brazen!


Will. Then must I force you to your own Good -- (kisses her) -- Pregnant with
Delight! Egad if my Master was not in the next Room --


Muslin. Hush! My Mistress's Bell rings, -- how long has he been up?


Will. He has been up -- He has been up -- 'Sdeath you have set me all on Fire.
--


Muslin. There, there, -- the Bell rings again -- Let me be gone -- (going,)
Well, but what must I say? When did he come home?


Will. At Five this Morning, rubbed his Forehead, damned himself for a
Blockhead, went to Bed in a peevish Humor, and is now in tip-top Spirits with
Sir Brilliant Fashion, in the next Room.


Muslin. Oh Lud! That Bell rings again -- There, there, let me be gone. (She
kisses him and Exit.


Will. There goes high and low Life contrasted in one Person; -- It Is well I
have not told her the whole of my Master's Secrets: She Will blab that he visits
this Widow from Bath. -- But if they enquire, they will be told he does not; the
Plot lies deeper than they think, and so they will only get into a Puzzle. -- So,
my Master's Bell rings too. -- Exit.


SCENE, another Apartment; Mrs. Lovemore, and a Maid attending her. Mrs. Lovem.
-- This Trash of Tea! -- I don't know why I drink so much of it. -- Heigh ho!
-- I wonder what keeps Muslin -- do you step Child, with my Compliments to your
Master, and let him know, I shall be glad of his Company to a Dish of Tea this
Morning. --


Maid. Yes, Ma'am. -- Exit.


Mrs. Lovem. Surely, never was any poor Woman treated with such cruel
Indifference; nay, with such an open undisguised Insolence of Gallantry.


Enter Muslin. Mrs. Lovem. Well, Muslin, have you seen his Prime Minister? --


Muslin. Yes, Ma'am, I have seen Mr. William, and he says, as how my Master
came home according to Custom, at Five this Morning, and in a huge Pickle. --
He Is now at Breakfast, and has Sir Brilliant Fashion with him.


Mrs. Lovem. Is he there again?


Muslin. He is Ma'am; and as I passed by Master's Study, I overheard them both
laughing as loud as any thing, --


Mrs. Lovem. About some precious Mischief; I Will be sworn; and all at my Cost
too! -- Heigh ho!


Muslin. Dear Ma'am, why will you chagrine yourself about a vile Man, that is
not worth, -- no, as I live and breathe, -- not worth a single Sigh? --


Mrs. Lovem. What can I do, Muslin?


Muslin. Do, Ma'am! Lard! -- If I was as you, I Would do for him; -- As I Am a
living Christian, I would. -- If I could not cure my Grief, I Would find some
Comforts, that is what I would.


Mrs. Lovem. Heigh ho! -- I have no Comfort. --


Muslin. No Comfort, Ma'am? -- Whose Fault then? -- Would any Body but you,
Ma'am? -- It provokes me to think of it, -- Would any body, Ma'am; young and
handsome as you are, with so many Accomplishments, Ma'am, sit at home here, as
melancholy as a poor Servant out of Place? -- And all this for what? -- Why for
a Husband, and such a Husband! -- What do you think the World will say of you,
Ma'am, if you go on this way?


Mrs. Lovem. I care not what they say, -- I am tired of the World, and the
World may be tired of me, if it will: -- My Troubles are my own only, and I
must endeavor to bear them. -- Who knows what Patience may do? -- If Mr.
Lovemore has any Feeling left, my Resignation may some Day or other have its
Effect, and incline him to do me Justice.


Muslin. But, dear Ma'am, that is waiting for dead Men's Shoes, -- Incline him
to do you Justice! -- What signifies expecting and expecting. -- Give me a Bird
in the Hand. -- Lard, Ma'am, to be for ever pining and grieving! -- Dear Heart!
-- If all the Women in London, in your Case, were to sit down and die of the
Spleen, what would become of all the public Places? -- They might turn
Vaux-Hall to a Hop-Garden, make a Brew House of Ranelagh, and let both the
Playhouses to a Methodist Preacher. We should not have the Racketting with 'em
we have now. -- John, let the Horses be put to. -- John, go to my Lady
Trumpabout's, and invite her to a small Party of twenty or thirty Card-Tables.
-- John, run to my Lady Cat-Gut, and let her Ladyship know I Will wait on her to
the new Opera. -- John, run as fast as ever you can, with my Compliments to Mr.
Varney, and tell him I shall take it as the greatest Favor on Earth, if he
will let me have a Side-Box for the new Play. -- No Excuse tell him. -- They
whisk about the Town, and rantipole it with as unconcerned Looks, and as florid
Outsides, as if they were treated at home like so many Goddesses, though every
Body knows Possession has ungoddessed them all long ago, and their Husbands
care no more for them, -- no by Jingo, no more than they do for their Husbands.
--


Mrs. Love. You run on at a strange Rate. --


Muslin. (In a Passion.) Dear Ma'am, it is enough to make a Body run on. -- If
every Body thought like you. --


Mrs. Love. If every Body loved like me. --


Muslin. A Brass Thimble for Love, if it is not answered by Love. -- What the
Deuce is here to do? -- Shall I go and fix my Heart upon a Man, that shall
despise me for that very Reason, and, "Ay," says he, poor Fool, I see she loves
me, -- The Woman's well enough, only she has one inconvenient Circumstance
about her: I Am married to her, and Marriage is the Devil. -- And then, when
he is going a roguing, smiles impudently in your Face, and, My Dear, divert
yourself, I Am just going to kill half an Hour at the Chocolate-House, or to
peep in at the Play; your Servant, my Dear, your Servant. -- Fie upon 'em! -- I
know 'em all. -- Give me a Husband that will enlarge the Circle of my innocent
Pleasures: -- But a Husband now a days, Ma'am, is no such a thing. -- A Husband
now, -- as I hope for Mercy, is nothing at all but a Scarecrow, to show you
the Fruit, but touch it if you dare. -- A Husband -- the Devil take 'em all all
-- Lord forgive one for swearing -- is nothing at all but a Bugbear, a
Snap-Dragon; a Husband, Ma'am, is --


Mrs. Love. Prithee, Peace with your Tongue, and see what keeps that Girl. --


Muslin. Yes, Ma'am, -- Why, Jenny, -- why don't you come up to my Mistress? --
What do you stand a gossiping there for? -- A Husband, Ma'am, is a mere
Monster; -- that is to say, if one makes him so; then, for certain, he is a
Monster indeed; -- and if one does not make him so, then he behaves like a
Monster; and of the two Evils, by my Troth -- Ma'am, was you ever at the Play
of Catharine and Mercutio? -- The vile Man calls his Wife his Goods, and his
Cattles, and his Household Stuff. -- There you may see, Ma'am, what a Husband
is, -- a Husband is -- But here comes one will tell you -- Here comes Sir
Brilliant Fashion. -- Ask his Advice, Ma'am.


Mrs. Love. His Advice! -- Ask Advice of the Man who has estranged Mr.
Lovemore's Affections from me!


Muslin. Well, I protect and vow, Ma'am, I think Sir Brilliant a very pretty
Gentleman. -- He Is the very Pink of the Fashion; -- He dresses fashionably,
lives fashionably, wins your Money fashionably, loses his own fashionably, and
does every thing fashionably; and then, he is so lively, and talks so lively,
and so much to say, and so never at a Loss. -- But here he comes.


Enter Sir Brilliant, singing. Sir Brill. Mrs. Lovemore, your most obedient
very humble Servant. -- But, my dear Madam, what always in a vis-a-vis Party
with your Suivante! -- You will afford me your Pardon, my dear Ma'am, if I avow
that this does a little wear the Appearance of Misanthropy.


Mrs. Love. Far from it, Sir Brilliant -- We were engaged in your Panegyric. --


Sir Brill. My Panegyric! -- Then am I come most apropos to give a helping Hand
toward making it complete. -- Mr. Lovemore will kiss your Hand presently,
Ma'am; -- He has not as yet entirely adjusted his Dress. -- In the mean Time, I
can, if you please, help you to some Anecdotes, which will perhaps enable you
to color your Canvass a little higher.


Mrs. Love. I hope you will be sure, among those Anecdotes, not to omit the
egregious Exploit of seducing Mr. Lovemore entirely from his Wife. She makes a
Sign to Muslin to go.


Sir Brill. I, Ma'am! -- Let me perish, Madam --


Mrs. Love. Oh! Sir, I am no Stranger to --


Sir Brill. May Fortune eternally forsake me, and Beauty frown on me, if ever
--


Mrs. Love. Don't protest too strongly, Sir Brilliant --


Sir Brill. May I never hold four by Honors --


Mrs. Love. Nay, but Sir. --


Sir Brill. Ma'am, I am altogether struck with Amazement. -- May I never taste
the dear Delight of breaking a Pharaoh Bank, or bullying the whole Room at a
Brag-Party, if ever I was, in Thought, Word, or Deed, accessory to his
Infidelity. -- I deny all unlawful Confederacy. --


Mrs. Love. Oh! Sir, it is in vain to deny.


Sir Brill. Nay, but my dear Mrs. Lovemore, give me leave. -- I alienate the
Affections of Mr. Lovemore! -- Consider, Madam, how would this tell in
Westminster Hall. -- Sir Brilliant Fashion, How say you, guilty of this
Indictment or not guilty? -- Not guilty, poss. -- Thus issue is joined; -- you
enter the Court, and in sober Sadness charge the whole plump upon me, without a
Word as to the how, when, and where; -- No Proof positive, -- there ends the
Prosecution.


Mrs. Love. But, Sir, your stating of the Case --


Sir Brill. Dear Ma'am, don't interrupt. --


Mrs. Love. Let me explain this Matter. --


Sir Brill. Nay, Mrs. Lovemore, allow me fair Play. -- I am now upon my
Defense. -- You will please to consider, Gentlemen of the Jury, that Mr.
Lovemore is not a Ward, nor I a Guardian; that he is his own Master to do as he
pleases; that Mr. Lovemore is fond of Gaiety, Pleasure, and Enjoyment; that he
knows how to live, and if he does not like the Bill of Fare that is catered for
him at home, he very naturally goes abroad to seek for something more palatable.

How say ye? -- Gentlemen of the Jury? -- Not guilty. -- There, Ma'am, you see,
Not guilty.


Mrs. Love. You run on finely, Sir Brilliant; -- but don't imagine that this
bantering Way --


Sir Brill. Acquitted by my Country, Ma'am, you see, -- fairly acquitted! --


Mrs. Love. Be it so then. -- But you hinted something about Mr. Lovemore's not
liking his Bill of Fare at home, -- I should be glad you would explain that
Matter, Sir --


Sir. Brill. Right, Madam, very right: -- I did touch upon that Head. -- It was
but slightly -- I did not care, in an open Court, to enlarge further upon that
Mattter. -- But to be plain, upon my Word, Mrs. Lovemore, for a fine Woman like
you to be the Dupe of your own false Delicacy, an old fashioned Kind of
Sentiment, a vulgar Prejudice, proscribed by Custom long ago; an antiquated
Principle of I know not what: -- Renounce it altogether -- vivez Ma'am, -- do
like other People of Condition; mix with other amiable Ladies, who know how to
use the Senses Nature has given them; pluck the Fruit that grows around ye, and
bid adieu to the Reign of the melancholy Pleasures for ever.


Mrs. Love. After the very edifying Counsel you give Mr. Lovemore, this loose
Strain of yours, Sir Brilliant, is not at all surprising; -- and, Sir, your
late Project: --


Sir Brill. My late Project! --


Mrs. Love. Yes, Sir: Not content with leading Mr. Lovemore into a thousand
Dissipations from all conjugal Affection and domestic Happiness, you have
lately introduced him to your Mrs. Bellmour. --


Sir Brill. Ma'am, he does not so much as know Mrs. Bellmour.


Mrs. Love. Fie upon it, Sir Brilliant! -- Falsehood is but a poor --


Sir Brill. Falsehood I disdain, Ma'am, -- and I Sir Brilliant Fashion declare,
that Mr. Lovemore, your Husband, is not acquainted with the Widow Bellmour; --
and if he was acquainted? -- What then? -- No ill Consequence could from thence
redound to you. -- You don't know that Lady, Ma'am. -- But I Will let you into
her whole History, -- her whole History, Ma'am: -- Pray be seated. The Widow
Bellmour's History, is this; -- She is one of those Ladies --

Lovemore speaks within. -- William! Is the Chariot at the Door?


Sir Brill. We are interrupted. --


Enter Lovemore. Love. Very well, -- let the Chariot be brought round directly.
-- How do you do this Morning, my Dear? Sir Brilliant, I beg your Pardon. --
How do you do my Dear? --

With an Air of cold Civility.
Mrs. Love. Only a little indisposed in Mind, and Indisposition of the Mind is
of no sort of Consequence; not worth a Cure. --


Love. I beg your Pardon, Mrs. Lovemore; Indisposition of the Mind. -- Sir
Brilliant, that is really a mighty pretty Ring you have on your Finger. --


Sir Brill. A Bauble: Will you look at it?


Mrs. Love. Though I have but few Obligations to Sir Brilliant, yet I fancy I
may ascribe to him the Favor of this Visit, Mr. Lovemore.


Love. (Looking at the Ring.) -- Nay, now positively you wrong me; -- I was
obliged to you for your civil Enquiries concerning me this Morning, and so on
my Part, I came to return the Compliment before I go abroad. -- Upon my Word
it is very prettily set. -- Gives it.


Mrs. Love. Are you going abroad, Sir? --


Love. A Matter of Business; -- I hate Business -- but Business must be done.
-- (Examining his Ruffles.) -- Pray is there any News? -- any News, my Dear? --


Mrs. Love. It would be News to me, Sir, if you would be kind enough to let me
know whether I may expect the Favor of your Company to Dinner.


Love. It would be impertinent in me to answer such a Question, because I can
give no direct positive Answer to it; -- as Things happen, -- perhaps I may, --
perhaps may not. -- But don't let me be of any Inconvenience to you; -- it is
not material where a body eats. -- Can I set you down any where, Sir Brilliant?


Sir Brill. I thank you, no -- my Chariot's in waiting. -- I have some Visits
to make, and shall rattle half the Town over presently.


Love. As you will -- a ca, your Servant, -- Mrs. Lovemore. -- My Dear,
(drawing his Gloves on,) -- I kiss your Hand. -- Who waits there? -- (going,
returns,) Apropos, you have heard what happened, ( to Sir Brilliant.)


Sir Brill. When, and where?


Love. A Word in your Ear, -- Ma'am with your Permission. --


Mrs. Love. That cold, contemptuous Civility, Mr. Lovemore --


Love. Pshaw! -- Prithee now, -- How can you, my Dear? -- That Is very peevish
now, and ill-natured. -- It is but about a mere Trifle. -- Hark ye, (whispers,)
I lost every Thing I played for after you went, -- the Foreigner, and he,
understand one another. -- I beg Pardon, Ma'am, it was only about an Affair at
the Opera.


Mrs. Love. The Opera, Mr. Lovemore, or any thing, is more agreeable than my
Company.


Love. You wrong me now, I declare you wrong me; -- and if it will give you any
Pleasure, I Will sup at home. -- Cannot we meet at the St. Alban's to Night? -- (
aside to Sir Brilliant)


Mrs. Love. I believe I need not tell you what Pleasure that would give me: But
unless the Pleasure is mutual, Mr. Lovemore --


Love. Ma'am I -- I -- I perceive all the Delicacy of that Sentiment; -- But --
a -- a I shall incommode you, -- you possibly may have some private Party --
and it would be very impolite in me, to obstruct your Sehemes of Pleasure. --
Would it not, Sir Brilliant? (Laughs.)


Sir Brill. It would be gothic to the last Degree. -- Ha! ha!


Love. Ha! ha! -- To be sure, for me to be of the Party, would look as if we
lived together like our Friend Sir Jealous Hotbrain and his scolding Wife, who
are for ever like two Game-Cocks, ready armed to goad and wound one another
most heartily. -- Ha! ha!


Sir Brill. The very Thing. -- Ha! ha!


Love. So it is, -- so it is. (Both stand laughing.)


Mrs. Love. Very well, Gentlemen; you have it all to yourselves.


Love. Odso! (looking at his Watch,) I shall be beyond my Time. -- Any Commands
into the City, Madam? --


Mrs. Love. Commands! -- I have no Commands, Sir.


Love. I have an Appointment there at my Banker's; -- Sir Brilliant, you know
old Discount? --


Sir Brill. What, he that was in Parliament? --


Love. The same; --

Entire Butt, I think, was the Name of the Borough. -- Ha! ha! ha! -- Ma'am,
your most obedient; -- Sir Brilliant, yours. -- Who waits there; -- no
Ceremony. -- Your Servant. Exit Singing.


Sir Brill. Bon Voyage! --


Enter Muslin. Muslin. Did you call, Ma'am?


Mrs. Love. Come hither, Muslin; -- (Whispers her) mind what I say. --


Muslin. I Will do it, Madam; I Will do it. Exit.


Mrs. Love. He Is gone to visit this Mrs. Bellmour, I suppose. --


Sir Brill. Dear Ma'am, how can you take such a Notion in your Head? -- But
apropos -- that brings us back to the little History I was just going to give
you of the Widow Bellmour. --


Mrs. Love. Proceed, Sir.


Sir Brill. The Widow Bellmour, Ma'am, is a Lady, who to all the Charms of
external Beauty, has added such an Elegance of Understanding, and such a
Vivacity of Wit, that it is no Wonder all the pretty Fellows are on their Knees
to her. -- Her Person youthful, blooming, and graceful; -- and then her Manner!
-- And so entertaining! -- Such Quickness in her Transition from one thing to
another; and every thing she does, does so become her! -- Does she sit still?
it is an indolent Venus before ye, -- Does she move? it is Beauty walking in
conscious Triumph! To see her smile, and hear her talk, -- I shall glow up into
Rapture, and fall a raving if I talk a Moment longer about her. --


Mrs. Love. Pray, finish your Picture, Sir. --


Sir Brill It Is from the real Life, I assure ye. -- In short, Ma'am, she is a
Lady that has been abroad, has ever kept the best Company, and has such a
Variety of Talents, that Upon my Soul, she knows the whole Theory of agreeable
Sensations better than all the Philosophers in Europe. --


Mrs. Love. And to this Theory, she has joined the Practice, I presume. --


Sir Brill. She has. --


Mrs. Love. I imagined as much. --


Sir Brill. Ma'am! --


Mrs. Love. You need not affect to be surprised, Sir, -- there is no mighty
Secret in the Affair. -- My Accounts of the Lady inform me, that she is as you
say, young and handsome; has lived a great deal Abroad, buried her Husband
there, is lately come to Town, has taken a House, -- lives at great Expense,
receives all the Men of Rank and Fortune. -- We all know what the World is apt
to infer from these Appearances. --


Sir Brill. I am no Stranger to the Way of the World. -- Every Object has its
different Aspects, its Side-lights; and the World is generally good-natured
enough to fix upon the most unfavourable Points of View.


Mrs. Love. So then, this is another antiquated Prejudice of mine.


Sir Brill. Nothing more certain. --


Mrs. Love. Oh! mighty well, Sir! -- She is a very Vestal; -- come, exhibit
your Portrait. -- A Vestal from your School of Painting will, no doubt, be very
curious. --


Sir Brill. My dear Madam, consider what you are saying! -- What is your Charge
against this Lady? That she is amiable! -- Surely Mrs. Lovemore should be the
last Person in the World, to reproach her with a Quality, which so eminently
possesses herself.


Mrs. Love. The Gallantry of that Compliment, Sir Brilliant, added to your
other Favors --


Sir. Brill. What next? -- That she has agreeable Talents! -- What then? As
Nature is liberal of Talents to but very few, she makes a kind of Recompense to
those who have none, by conducing to their Entertainment. -- But she is young
and handsome! -- So perishable a Quality might, methinks, be suffered to bloom
without Reproach. -- Ay, but she has taken a House, and sees Company. -- It is
what she is entitled to, and a fine Picture should be seen by People of Rank
and Taste; -- and surely, Madam, your Sex entrenches upon your own Happiness,
by not allowing that a Woman may partake of the innocent Pleasures of Life,
unless she has resigned her Person to a Man, and parted with her Liberty! --


Mrs. Love. And so you would persuade me that Mr. Lovemore is not acquainted
with her? --


Sir Brill. Absolutely ignorant of him! -- and I Will tell you further, she has
such a Generosity of Temper, and such a feeling Heart, that were she to know
him, and to know that his Visits gave you Pain, she would never be at home for
him again. --


Mrs. Love. Then give me leave, Sir -- If you have so exalted an Opinion of the
Lady, how comes it that you desist from paying your Addresses in that Quarter?
--


Sir Brill. Compulsion, Ma'am, -- it is not voluntary. -- The Garrison, I
thought, was upon the Point of surrendering, but up came my Lord Etheridge with
his honorable Forces to relieve the Town. -- I thought he was out of the
Kingdom, but it seems he is returned. -- I bribed the Chambermaid yesterday,
and I find he has supplanted me; and so all that remains for me, is to do
justice to the Lady, and console myself in the best way I can for my Demerits;
and the Insufficiency of my Pretensions. --


Mrs. Love. And am I really to believe all this? --


Sir Brill. May the first Woman I put the Question to, strike me to the Center
with a supercilious Eyebrow, if every Syllable is not minutely true, -- so that
you see, Ma'am, I am not the Cause of your Inquietude. -- There is not on Earth
a Man that could be more averse from such a thing, -- nor a Person in the
World, who more earnestly aspires to prove the tender Esteem he bears ye, --
and, Ma'am, -- I have long panted for an Opportunity. -- By all that is soft she
hears me. (aside.) -- I have long panted, Ma'am, for a tender Moment like this,
-- with all the Ardor of Love, which Charms like yours alone could kindle. --
(She rises disconcerted) Were it even at the Expense of my Life -- (She walks
about uneasy.) -- You see, my dear Ma'am, we both have Cause of Discontent; we
are both disappointed, -- both crossed in Love, -- and so, Ma'am, the least we
can do is, both heartily to join to sweeten each other's Cares.


Mrs. Love. Sir Brilliant, I don't understand (angrily)


Sir Brill. If you will pour the Balm of Love on this poor wounded Heart, you
may have the most delicious Revenge against a Husband, -- who, -- from his own
perverse Inclination, his own Inhumanity of Temper, -- has for a long time, --
I have seen it, Madam, -- with Vexation seen it, -- Yes, -- he has long been
false to Honor, Love, and you. --


Mrs. Love. This Usage, Sir, -- you take my Wrongs too much to Heart, Sir, --
(walking about) -- I myself, Sir, can remedy my own Afflictions. -- But this
Presumption of yours, -- upon my word! -- This is the most unparallelled. --
(walks about and flutters her Fan.)


Sir Brill. Pray, Ma'am, don't break your Fan, -- don't break it, Ma'am, -- I
beg you will not. --


Mrs. Love. This is the most affronting, -- Come to a fine Pass, indeed! --
(She stands looking at her Fan) -- Intolerable Assurance! --


Sir Brill. Now am I in a sweet Condition. -- The Poet has touched it most
exquisitely. --


She views the Sorry with attentive Eyes, And pities Procris, while her Lover
dies. Mrs. Love. Sir, I must desire you will quit my House immediately. --


Sir Brill. Don't overheat yourself, -- consider, my dear Madam. --


Mrs. Love. Sir, I desire -- was ever such Rudeness! -- (rings the Bell.)


Sir Brill. Ma'am, I desist, -- I have done, -- but when you're in a better
Humor, pray recollect. --


Mrs. Love. Will no body answer there?


Sir Brill. I retire. --

"Those eyes that tell us what the Sun is made of; --
"Those Hills of driven Snow. --

Enter Muslin hastily. Sir Brill. Ma'am, your most obedient. -- Exit.


Muslin. Did you call, Ma'am?


Mrs. Love. To show the Gentleman out. -- (walking angrily.)


Muslin. The Servants are all in the Hall.


Mrs. Love. To be insulted thus by his loose confident Carriage! --


Muslin. As I live and breathe, Ma'am, if I was as you, I would not flutter
myself about it. --


Mrs. Love. About what?


Muslin. La! -- what signifies mincing Matters? -- I overheard it all.


Mrs. Love. You did; -- did you? (angrily.)


Muslin. Ma'am! --


Mrs. Love. It does not signify at present. --


Muslin. No, Ma'am, it does not signify, and Revenge is sweet, I think; and by
my Troth, I don't see why you should stand on Ceremony with a Husband that
stands upon none with you.


Mrs. Love. Again -- prithee, Mrs. Malapert, none of your Advice. -- How dare
yon talk in this manner to me? -- Let me hear no more of this impertinent
Freedom. -- walks about.


Muslin. No, Ma'am. -- Its very well, Ma'am. -- I have done, Ma'am. --
(disconcerted, and then she speaks aside.) -- What the Devil is here to do? --
An unmannerly thing to go for to huss me in this manner! --


Mrs. Love. (Still walking about.) To make his Character public, and render him
the Subject of every Tea-Table throughout this Town, would only serve to widen
the Breach, and instead of his Neglect, might call forth his Anger, and settle
at last into a fixed Aversion. -- Lawyers, Parting, and separate Maintenance
would ensue. -- No, -- I must avoid that, -- if possible; I will avoid that. --
What must be done? --


Muslin. What can she be thinking of now? -- The sulky thing, not to be
communicative with such a Friend as I am! -- What can she mean? -- Did you
speak to me, Ma'am? --


Mrs. Love. Suppose I were to try that! -- Muslin.


Muslin. Ma'am! -- Now for it --


Mrs. Love. Did John follow your Master's Chariot, as I ordered?


Muslin. He did, Ma'am.


Mrs. Love. Where is he?


Muslin. He Is below, Ma'am; -- he followed it as far as the Chocolate House in
St. James's-Street.


Mrs. Love. Are you sure of that?


Muslin. You may rely upon it.


Mrs. Love. You heard Sir Brilliant deny that Mr. Lovemore visits at this Widow
Bellmours.


Muslin. Lard, Ma'am, he is as full of Fibs as a French Milliner, -- he does
visit there, -- I know it all from William, -- I Will be hanged in my own Garters
if he does not.


Mrs. Love. I know not what to do! -- Heigho! -- I think I Will venture. -- Let
my Chair be got ready instantly.


Muslin. Your Chair, Ma'am! -- Are you going out, Ma'am?


Mrs. Love. Don't teaze me with your talk, but do as I bid you, -- and bring my
Capuchin down to the Parlour immediately.

Exit.
Muslin. What is in the Wind now? -- An ill-natured Puss, not to tell me what
she is about! -- It Is no matter, -- she does not know what she is about. --
Before I Would lead such a Life, I Would take a Lover's Leap into Rosamond's Pond. -- I
love to see Company for my Part. -- But, Lord bless me! I had like to have
forgot, -- Mrs. Sugar-Key comes to my Rout Tonight. -- I had as live she had
staid away, -- She Is nothing but mere Lumber! -- so formal, that she will not play
above a Shilling-Whist. -- How the Devil does she think I Am to make a Shilling
Party for her? -- There Is no such a thing to be done nowadays, -- No Body
plays Shilling-Whist now.


Exit in a Passion. End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, a Room at the Widow Bellmour's, in which are disposed up and down,
several Chairs, a Toilette, a Book-case, and a Harpsicord; Mignionet her Maid,
is settling the Toilette. Enter Mrs. Bellmour, reading a Volume of Pope. Oh!
blessed with Temper, whose unclouded Ray,
Can make Tomorrow, cheerful as Today;
She who can own a Sister's Charms, and hear
Sighs for a Daughter, with unwounded Ear;
That never answers till a Husband cools,
And if she rules him, never shows she rules;
Sensible, elegant Pope!

Charms by accepting, by submitting sways,
Yet has her Humor most when she obeys;

seems to read on. Mig. Lord love my Mistress! -- She Is always so happy, and so
gay. --


Mrs. Bell. These charming Characters of Women! -- It Is like a Painter's
Gallery, where one sees the Portraits of all one's Acquaintance! -- Here,
Mignionet, put this Book in its Place.


Mig. Yes, Ma'am. -- There Ma'am, you see your Toilette looks most charmingly.


Mrs. Bell. Does it? -- I think it does. -- Apropos, where is my new Song? --
Here it lies, -- I must make myself Mistress of it. -- (Plays and sings a
little.) -- I believe I shall conquer it presently, (rises and goes toward her
Toilette) -- This Hair of mine is always tormenting me; -- always in Disorder,
and straggling out of its Place: -- I must absolutely subdue this Lock. --
Mignionet, do you know that this is a very pretty Song? -- it is written by my
Lord Etheridge; -- I positively must learn it before he comes. -- (sings a
Line) -- Do you know, Mignionet, that I think my Lord not wholly intolerable?


Mig. Yes, Ma'am, I know that.


Mrs. Bell. Do you?


Mig. And if I have any Skill, Ma'am, I fancy you think him more than tolerable.


Mrs. Bell. Really! then you think I like him, I suppose. -- Do ye think I like
him? -- I don't well know how that is, -- and yet I don't know but I do like
him; -- no, -- no, -- I don't like him neither, -- not absolutely like; -- but
I could like, if I had a mind to humor myseif. -- The Man has a Softness of
Manner, an elegant Turn of Thinking, and has a Heart -- has he a Heart? -- yes,
I think he has; -- and then he is such an Observer of the Manners, -- and shows
the ridiculous of them with so much Humor --


Mig. I Will be whipped, if you don't get into the Noose before the long Nights are
over. -- Without doubt, Ma'am, my Lord is a pretty Man enough; -- but
lack-a-day, what o'that? -- You know but very little of him, -- your
Acquaintance is but very short; -- (Mrs. Bellmour hums a Tune) Do, pray my dear
Madam, mind what I say, -- for I am at times I assure you, very speculative, --
very speculative indeed; -- and I see very plainly. -- Lord, Ma'am, what am I
doing! -- I Am talking to you for your own good, and you're all in the Air, and
no more mind one, no, no more, than if I was nothing at all.


Mrs. Bell. (Hums a tune still.) Why indeed you talk wonderfully well upon the
Subject; but as I know how the Cards lie, and can play the Game myself, and as
I don't know my Song, -- why a-body is inclined to give that the Preference.
(Sings.)


Mig. Ma'am I assure you, I am none of those Servants that bargain for their
Mistress's Inclinations; -- but I see you are going to take a Leap in the Dark.
-- I don't know what to make of his manner of coming here, with his Chair
always brought into the Hall, and the Curtains drawn close about his Ears, as
if -- May I never be married, if I don't believe there is something amiss in
the Affair. -- Dear Heart, Ma'am, if you will not listen to me, what signifies my
living with you? -- I am of no Service to you. --


Mrs. Bell. I believe I have conquered the Song; -- (runs to her Glass,) How do
I look Today? -- Well enough, I think, -- Do you think I shall play the Fool,
Mignionet, and marry my Lord?


Mig. You have it, Ma'am, through the very Heart of you, -- I see that.


Mrs. Bell. Do you think so? -- May be I may marry, and may be not. -- Poor Sir
Brilliant Fashion, -- what will become of him? But I will not think about it.


Enter Pompey. Mrs. Bell. What Is the Matter, Pompey?


Pom. There Is a Lady below in a Chair, that desires to know if you are at home,
Madam.


Mrs. Bell. Has the Lady no Name?


Pom. She did not tell her Name.


Mrs. Bell. How awkward you are! -- Well show her up.

Exit Pompey.
Mig. Had not you better receive the Lady in the Dining Room, Ma'am? -- Things
here are in such Confusion. --


Mrs. Brill. No, 'twill do very well here. I dare say it is some body I am
intimate with, though the Boy does not recollect her Name. -- Here she comes.


Enter Mrs. Lovemore. (They both look with a grave Surprise at each other, then
curtsey with an Air of distant Civility.) Mrs. Bell. Ma'am your most obedient,
-- (with a kind of Reserve.)


Mrs. Love. Ma'am I beg your Pardon for this Intrusion. -- (disconcerted)


Mrs. Bell. Pray Ma'am walk in, -- will not you please to be seated? -- Mignionet
reach a Chair.


Mrs. Love. This Chair will do mighty well.


Mrs. Bell. I beg you will sit from the Door, -- I beg you will sit here, Ma'am. --
Mrs. Lovemore crosses the Stage and they salute each other.


Mrs. Love. I Am afraid this Visit from one unknown to you, will be inconvenient
and troublesome.


Mrs. Bell. Not at all, I dare say; -- you need not be at the Trouble of an
Apology: -- Would you choose a Dish of Chocolate?


Mrs. Love. Much obliged to you, Not any.


Mrs. Bell. Mignionet, you may withdraw.

Exit Mignionet.
Mrs. Love. Though I have not the Pleasure of your Acquaintance, Ma'am, there is
a particular Circumstance which has determined me to take this Liberty with
you; for which I entreat your Pardon beforehand.


Mrs. Bell. The Request is wholly unne-cessary; -- but a particular
Circumstance, you say. -- Pray Ma'am, to what Circumstance am I indebted for
this Honor?


Mrs. Love. I shall appear perhaps very ridiculous, and indeed I am afraid I
have done the most absurd Thing. -- But Ma'am, from the Character you bear for
Tenderness of Disposition, and Generosity of Sentiment, I easily incline to
flatter myself, that you will not take Offense at any thing; and that if it is
in your Power, you will afford me your Assistance.


Mrs. Bell. You may depend upon me.


Mrs. Love. I will be very ingenuous; -- Pray Ma'am, an't you acquainted with a
Gentleman whose Name is Lovemore?


Mrs. Bell. Lovemore! -- No, -- no such Person in my List. -- Lovemore! -- I
don't know him, Ma'am.


Mrs. Love. Ma'am I beg your Pardon, -- I am but where I was. -- I will not
trouble you any further, (going.)


Mrs. Bell. It Is mighty odd, this. (aside) Madam I must own my Curiosity is a
good deal excited; -- (take's her by the Hand.) -- Pray Ma'am, give me leave --
I beg you will sit down, -- pray don't think me impertinent -- may I beg to
know who the Gentleman is?


Mrs. Love. You have such an Air of Frankness and Generosity, that I will open
myself to you: I have been married to him these two Years; I admired him for
his Understanding, his Sentiment, and Spirit; I thought myself as sincerely
loved by him, as my fond Heart could wish, but there is of late, such a strange
Revolution in his Temper, I know not what to make of it: -- Instead of the
Looks of Affection, and Expressions of Tenderness with which he used to meet
me, it is nothing now but cold, averted, superficial Civility. -- While abroad,
he runs on in a wild Career of Pleasure; and to my deep Affliction, has fixed
his Affections upon another Object.


Mrs. Bell. If you mean to consult with me in regard to this Case, I am afraid
you have made a wrong Choice; there is something in her Appearance that affects
me, (aside.) -- Pray excuse me, Ma'am, you consider this Matter too deeply. --
Men will prove false, and if there is nothing in your Complaint but mere
Gallantry on his side, -- upon my word, I cannot think your Case the worse for
that.


Mrs. Love. Not the worse!


Mrs. Bell. On the contrary, much better. If his Affections, instead of being
alienated, had been extinguished, he would have sunk into a downright stupid,
habitual Insensibility; from which it might prove impossible to recall him. --
In all Love's Bill of Mortality there is not a more fatal Disorder, -- but your
Husband is not fallen into that Way. -- By your Account, he still has
Sentiment, and where there is Sentiment, there is still Room to hope for an
Alteration. -- But in the other Case, you have the Pain of seeing yourself
neglected, and for what? -- for nothing at all; -- the Man has lost all Sense
of Feeling, and is become to the warm Beams of Wit and Beauty, as impenetrable
as an Ice-house.


Mrs. Lov. I am afraid, Ma'am, he is too much the Reverse of this, too
susceptible of Impressions from every beautiful Object.


Mrs. Bell. Why, so much the better, as I told you already; -- some new Idea
has struck his Fancy, and he will be for a while, under the Influence of that.


Mrs. Love. How light she makes of it!

(aside.)
Mrs. Bell. But it is the Wife's Business to bait the Hook for her Husband with
Variety; and to draw him daily to herself: -- That is the whole Affair, I would
not make myself uneasy, Ma'am.


Mrs. Love. Not uneasy! when his Indifference does not diminish my Regard for
him! Not uneasy, when the Man I dote on, no Longer fixes his Happiness at home!


Mrs. Bell. Ma'am, you will give me leave to speak my Mind freely. -- I have
often: observed, when the Fiend Jealousy is roused, that Women lay out a
wonderful deal of Anxiety and Vexation to no Account, when perhaps, if the
Truth were known, they, should be angry with themselves instead of their
Husbands.


Mrs. Love. Angry with myself, Madam! -- Calumny can lay nothing to my Charge,
-- the Virtue of my Conduct, Madam --


Mrs. Bell. Look ye there now, -- I would have laid my Life, you would be at
that, -- that is the Folly of us all. -- But Virtue is out of the Question at
present. -- I mean the want of Address, and proper Management! It is there that
most Women fail, -- Virtue alone cannot please the Taste of this Age. -- It is
La Belle Nature, -- Nature embellished by the Advantages of Art, that the Men
expect nowadays.


Mrs. Love. But after being married s;o long, and behaving all that time with
such an Equality --


Mrs. Bell. Ay, that Equality is the Rock so many split upon. -- The Men are
now so immersed in Luxury, that they must have eternal Variety in their
Happiness.


Mrs. Love. She justifies him.

Aside.
Mrs. Bell. I Will tell you what; I would venture to lay a Pot of Coffee, that
the Person who now rivals you in your Husband's Affection, does it without your
good Qualities, and even without your Beauty, by the mere Force of agreeable
Talents, and Assiduity to please.


Mrs. Love. I am afraid that Compliment --


Mrs. Bell. Let me ask you, Ma'am, have you ever seen this formidable Person?


Mrs. Love. I think I have.


Mrs. Bell. What fort of a Woman, Pray?


Mrs. Love. Formidable indeed! -- She was described to me as one of charming,
and rare Accomplishments: And that is fatally too true! -- I can see in her the
sensible, the spirited, the -- in short, in her I see my Ruin.


Mrs. Bell. Never throw up the Cards for all that. -- Really, Ma'am, without
Compliment, you seem to have all the Qualities that can dispute your Husband's
Heart with any Body; but the Exertion of those Qualities, I am afraid, is
suppressed. -- You Will excuse my Freedom. -- You should counterwork your Rival,
by the very same Arts she employs. -- I know a Lady now in your very Situation,
-- And what does she do? She consumes herself with eternal Jealousy; whereas,
if she would but employ half the Pains she uses in teazing herself, to vie vith
the Creature that has won her Husband from her, -- to vie with her, I say, in
the Arts of pleasing, -- for it is there a Woman's Pride should be piqued, --
would she do that, take my word for it, Victory would declare in her Favor.


Mrs. Love. Do you think so, Ma'am?


Mrs. Bell. Think so! -- I am sure of it, -- for there is this Advantage on her
Side, that Virtue is an Auxiliary in her Cause, -- and Virtue is the best
beautifying Fluid for the Complexion; it gives a Luster to the Features, that
cannot be equaled by any Artifice whatever.


Mrs. Love. What can this mean? I begin to doubt.

aside.
Mrs. Bell. But even Virtue herself must condescend to call in external Aid. --
Her own native Charms would do, if Men were perfect, but that is not the Case
and since Vice can assume Allurements, why should not Truth and Innocence have
additional Ornaments also?


Mrs. Love. I begin to think Sir Brilliant has told me truth.

aside.
Mrs. Bell. I have been married, Ma'am, and am a little in the Secret. -- It is
much more difficult to keep a Heart than win one -- After the fatal Words for
better for worse, the general way with Wives is to relax into Indolence, and
while they are guilty of no Infidelity, they think that is enough: -- But they
are mistaken, there is a great deal wanting -- an Address, a Manner, a Desire
of pleasing -- an agreeable Contrast in their Conduct, of grave, and gay; -- a
favorite Poet of mine, -- Prior, has expressed this very delicately.

Above the fixed and settled Rules
Of Vice, and Virtue, in the Schools,
The better Part should set before 'em
A Grace, a Manner, a Decorum

Mrs. Love. But when the natural Temper --


Mrs. Bell. The natural Temper must be forced, Home must be made a Place of
Pleasure to the Husband, and the Wife must throw infinite Variety into her
Manner; -- in short, she must, as it were, multiply herself, and appear to him
fundry different Women on different Occasions. -- And this, I take to be the
whole Mystery; the Way to keep a Man. -- But I run on at a strange Rate. --
Well, to be sure, I Am the giddiest Creature. -- Ma'am, will you now give me
leave to enquire, how I came to have this Favor? Who recommended me to your
Notice? -- And pray who was so kind as to intimate that I was acquainted with
Mr. Lovemore?


Mrs. Love. I beg your Pardon for all the Trouble I have given you, and I
assure you, it is entirely owing to my being told that his Visits were requent
here.


Mrs. Bell. His Visits frequent here! -- They have imposed upon you, I assure
you, -- and they have told you, perhaps, that I have robbed you of Mr.
Lovemore's Heart! -- Scandal is always buzzing about, -- but, I assure you, I
have not meddled with his Heart, -- Oh! Lud, I hear a Rap at the Door, I
positively will not be at home.

Rings a Bell.
Enter Mignionet. Mign. Did you call, Madam?


Mrs. Bell. I am not at home.


Mign. It Is Lord Etheridge, Ma'am, -- he is coming up Stairs, the Servants told
him you were within.


Mrs. Bell. Was ever any thing so cross? Tell him there is Company with me, and
he will not come in. Mignionet, run to him.


Mrs. Love. Ma'am, I beg I may not hinder you.


Mrs. Bell. Our Conversation begins to grow interestig, and I would not have
you go for the World. I will not see my Lord.


Mrs. Love. I beg you will, don't let me prevent, I Will step into another Room.


Mrs. Bell. Will you be so kind? -- There is a Study of Books in that Room, if
you will be so obliging as to amuse yourself there, I shall be glad to resume
this Conversation again. -- He sha'n't stay long.


Mrs. Love. I beg you will be in no hurry, I can wait with Pleasure.


Mrs. Bell. This is a Lover of mine; and a Husband, and a Lover should be
treated in the same manner; perhaps it will divert you to hear how I manage
him. I hear him on the Stairs, for Heaven's sake, make haste. Mignionet, show
the Way.


Mign. This way, Madam, this way.

Exeunt Mrs. Love, and Mignionet.
Mrs. Bell. Let me see how I look to receive him

Runs to her Glass.
Enter Lovemore, with a Star and Ribband as Lord Etheridge. Mrs. Bell. (
Looking in her Glass.) Lord Etheridge! Walk in, my Lord.


Love. ( Repeats.) A heavenly Image in the Glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her Eyes she rears.
Repairs her Smiles --

Mrs. Bell. Repairs her Smiles, my Lord! I don't like your Application of that
Phrase. -- Pray, my Lord, are my Smiles out of repair, like an old House in the
Country, that wants a Tenant?


Love. Nay now, that is wresting the Words from their visible Intention. -- You
cannot suppose I thought you want Repair, whatever may be the Case, Ma'am, with
regard to the want of a Tenant.


Mrs. Bell. And so you think I really want a Tenant! And perhaps you imagine
too, that I am going to put up a Bill, (Looking in her Glass) to signify to all
Passers-by, that here is a Mansion to be let, -- Well, I swear, I don't think
it would be a bad Scheme. -- I have a great mind to do so.


Love. And he who has the Preference --


Mrs. Bell. Will be very happy, I know you mean so. But I Will let it to none but
a single Gentleman, that you may depend upon.


Love. What the Devil does she mean by that? She has not got an Inkling of the
Affair, I hope. (Aside.) None else could presume, Madam, to --


Mrs. Bell. And then it must be a Lease for Life, -- but no Body will be
troubled with it -- I shall never get it off my Hands. -- Do you think I shall,
my Lord?


Love. Why that Question, Madam? You know I am devoted to you, even if it were
to be bought with Life.


Mrs. Bell. Heavens! what a dying Swain you are! And does your Lordship really
intend to be guilty of Matrimony? -- Lord, what a Question have I asked? --
Well, to be sure, I am a very Mad-cap! -- My Lord, don't you think me a strange
Mad-cap?


Love. A Wildness like yours, that arises from Vivacity and Sentiment together,
serves only to exalt your Beauty, and give new Poignancy to every Charm.


Mrs. Bell. Well, upon my word you have said it finely! -- But you are in the
right, my Lord. -- I hate your pensive, melancholy Beauty, that sits like a
well-grown Vegetable in a Room for an Hour together, 'till at last she is
animated to the violent Exertion of saying yes or no, and then enters into a
Matter-of-Fact Conversion, "Have you heard the News? Miss Beverly is going to
be married to Captain Shoulderknot. -- My Lord Mortgage has had another Tumble
at Arthur's, Sir William Squanderstock has lost his Election. They say, short
Aprons are coming into Fashion again."


Love. Oh, Lord! a Matter-of-Fact Conversation is insupportable.


Mrs. Bell. Pray, my Lord, have you ever observed the manner of one Lady's
accosting another at Ranelagh? -- She comes up to you with a demure Look of
insipid Serenity, -- makes you a solemn Salute -- "Ma'am, I am overjoyed to
meet you, -- you look charmingly. -- But, dear Madam, did you hear what
happened to us all the other Night? -- We were going home from the Opera,
Ma'am; -- you know my Aunt Roly-Poly, -- It was her Coach, -- there was she, --
and Lady Betty Fidget, -- Your most obedient Servant, Ma'am, (Curtseying to
another, as it were going by) Lady Betty, you know, is recovered -- every Body
thought it over with her, -- but Doctor Snakeroot was called in, no not Doctor
Snakeroot, Doctor Bolus it was, and so he altered the Course of the Medicines,
-- and so my Lady Betty recovered; -- well, there was she and Sir George
Bragwell, -- a pretty Man Sir George, -- finest Teeth in the World, -- Your
Ladyship's most obedient -- We expected you last Night, -- but you did not
come, -- he! he! -- And so there was he and the rest of us, -- and so turning
the Corner of Bond-Street, the Villain of a Coachman -- How do you do, Madam?
-- The Villain of a Coachman overturned us all; -- my Aunt Roly-Poly, was
frightened out of her Wits, and Lady Betty has been nervish ever since: -- Only
think of that, -- such Accidents in Life, -- Ma'am, your most obedient, -- I am
proud to see you look so well."


Love. An exact Description, -- the very thing -- ha! ha!


Mrs. Bell. And then from this Conversation they all run to Cards, --
"Quadrille has murdered Wit."


Love. Ay, and Beauty too; for upon these Occasions, "the Passions in the
Features are -- " I have seen many a beautiful Countenance change in a Moment,
into absolute Deformity; the little Loves and Graces that before sparkled in
the Eye, bloomed in the Cheek, and smiled about the Mouth, all fly off in an
Instant, and resign the Features which they before adorned, to Fear, to Anger,
to Grief; and the whole Train of fretful Passions.


Mrs. Bell. Ay, and the Rage we poor Women are often betrayed into on these
Occasions --


Love. Very true, Ma'am; and if by chance, they do bridle and hold in a little,
the Struggle they undergo is the most ridiculous Sight imaginable. -- I have
seen an Oath quivering upon the pale Lip of a reigning Toast, for Half an Hour
together; yes, and I have seen an uplifted Eye blaspheming Providence for the
Loss of an odd Trick; -- and then at last, when the whole Room burst out into
one loud universal Uproar, -- "My Lord, you flung away the Game. -- No, Ma'am,
it was you. -- Sir George, why did not you rough the Diamond? Capt. Hazard, why
did not you lead through the Honor? Ma'am, it was not the Play. -- Pardon me,
Sir, -- But Ma'am, -- But Sir, -- I would not play with you for Straws. --
Don't you know what Hoyle says? If A and B are Partners against C and D, and
the Game Nine-all, A and B have won three Tricks, and C and D four Tricks; C
leads his Suit, D puts up the King then returns the Suit, A passes, C puts up
the Queen, B roughs the next:" and so A and B, and C and D are banged about;
and all is Jargon, Confusion, Uproar, and Wrangling, and Nonsense, and Noise.
-- Ha! ha!


Mrs. Bell. Ha! ha! A fine Picture of a Rout; but one must play fometimes -- we
must let our Friends pick our Pockets sometimes, or they will drop our
Acquaintance. -- Pray my Lord, do you never play?


Love. Play, Ma'am! -- I must lie to the End of the Chapter, (aside,) play! --
now and then out of Necessity; -- otherwise, -- I never touch a Card.


Mrs. Bell. Oh! very true, you dedicate your Time to the Muses; a downright
rhyming Peer. -- Do you know, my Lord, that I am charmed with your Song?


Love. Are you?


Mrs. Bell. I am indeed; -- I think you would make a very tolerable Vauxball Poet.


Love. You flatter me, Ma'am.


Mrs. Bell. No, as I live and breathe, I don't; -- and do you know that I can
sing it already? -- Come, you shall hear me, -- you shall hear it.

(sings.)
I. Attend all ye Fair, and I Will tell ye the Art
To bind every Fancy with ease in your Chains,
To hold in soft Fetters the conjugal Heart,
And banish from Hymen his Doubts and his Pains.

II. When Juno accepted the Cestus of Love,
At first she was handsome; she charming became;
With Skill the soft Passions it taught her to move,
To kindle at once, and to keep up the Flame.

III. It Is this gives the Eyes all their Magic and Fire;
The Voice melting Accents; impassions the Kiss;
Confers the sweet Smiles that awaken Desire,
And plants round the Fair each Incentive to Bliss.

IV. Thence flows the gay Chat, more than Reason that charms;
The eloquent Blush, that can Beauty improve;
The fond Sigh, the fond Vow, the' soft Touch that alarms,
The tender Disdain, the Renewal of Love.

V. Ye Fair take the Cestus, and practice it is Art;
The Mind unaccomplish'd, mere Features are vain,
Exert your sweet Power, you conquer each Heart,
And the Loves, Joys and Graces, shall walk in your Train.

Love. My Poetry is infinitely obliged to you, for the Embellishments your
Voice and Manner confer upon it.


Mrs. BelL. Oh fulsome! -- I sing horridly, and I look horridly; (goes to the
Glass) -- How do I look, my Lord? -- but don't tell me, -- I will not be told. --
I see you are studying a Compliment, and I hate Compliments; -- well, what is
it? let us hear your Compliment, why don't you compliment me? -- I will not hear it
now. -- But pray now how came you to choose so grave a Subject as connubial
Happiness? -- Do you think there is any such Thing on Earth as connubial
Happiness?


Love. Close and particular that Question; (aside.) Why Ma'am, in general, one
does not see the Talents of a Wife, dedicated to the Happiness of the Husband.
-- I have known Ladies, who on the Eve of their Wedding appeared like the very
Graces, in a few Weeks after the Ceremony become very Slatterns, both in their
Persons and Understandings: no Solicitude on their side to appear amiable. --
Distaste insinuates itself by degrees into the Husband's Mind, the Bands of
Hymen grow loose; and thus with perhaps the best Disposition in the World, he
is obliged to start wild, and away he urges where Youth and a Career of Spirits
hurry him; and so goodnight to all real and solid Happiness. -- But with one
accomplished as you are, Ma'am --


Mrs. Bell. To be sure, with me nobody could be otherwise than happy; -- was
not that what you was going to say? -- I know it was. -- Well upon my word you
have drawn your Picture so well, that one would imagine you had a Wife at home
to sit for it.


Love. Ma'am, (embarrass'd) the Compliment, -- a -- you are but laughing at me;
-- I I -- I, -- Zouns, I am afraid she begins to smoke me, (aside,) -- A very
scanty Knowledge of the World will serve: and -- and there is no need of one's
own Experience in these Cases: -- nor had I talked so, were I not persuaded you
will make an Exception to the general Rule.


Mrs. Bell. O lard, you are going to plague me again with your odious
Solicitations, but I will not hear 'em; -- you must be gone. -- If I should be
weak enough to listen to you, what would become of Sir Brilliant Fashion?


Love. Sir Brilliant Fashion!


Mrs. Bell. Yes, don't you know Sir Brilliant Fashion?


Love. No, Ma'am, I don't know the Gentleman: -- I beg Pardon if he is your
Acquaintance, but from what I have heard of him, I should not choose him to be
among my Intimates.


Enter Mignionet in a violent Hurry. Mig. O Lud! I am frighted out of my
Senses, -- The poor Lady -- Where Is the Hartshorn-drops?


Love. The Lady! What Lady?


Mign. Never stand asking what Lady, -- she has fainted away, Ma'am, all of a
sudden. Give me the Drops. --


Mrs. Bell. Let me run to her Assistance. -- Adieu, my Lord, -- I shall be at
home in the Evening; -- Mignionet step this Way. -- My Lord, you will excuse me;
I expect you in the Evening.

Exit.
Lovemore. I shall wait on you, Ma'am. What Villain am I to carry on this
Scheme, against so much Beauty, Innocence, and Merit? -- Ay, and to have the
Impudence to assume this Badge of Honor, to cover the most unwarrantable
Purposes! -- But no Reflection, have her I must; and that quickly too. -- If I
don't prevail soon, I Am undone -- she will find me out: -- Egad, I Will be with her
betimes this Evening, and press her with all the Vehemence of Love. -- Women
have their soft, unguarded Moments, and who knows? -- But to take the Advantage
of the Openness and Gaiety of her Heart! and then my Friend Sir Brilliant, will
it be fair to supplant him? -- Prithee be quiet, my dear Con-science; don't you
be meddling; don't interrupt a Gentleman in his Amusements. -- Don't you know,
my good Friend, that Love has no Respect of Persons, knows no Laws of
Frienship; -- besides it is all my Wife's Fault -- why don't she strive to make
home agreeable?

For foreign Pleasures, foreign Joy, I roam,
No Thought of Peace or Happiness at home. -- (going.)
(Sir Brilliant is heard singing within) What the Devil is Madam Fortune at
now? -- Sir Brilliant, by all that is odious! -- No Place to conceal in! -- No
Escape! -- The Door is locked! -- Mignionet, Mignionet, open the Door. --


Mig. (within) You cannot come in here, Sir.


Love. This cursed Star, and this Ribband, will ruin me. -- Let me get off this
confounded Tell-tale Evidence. -- (takes off the Ribband in a hurry.)


Enter Sir Brilliant. Sir Brill. My dear Madam, I most heartily rejoice -- Ha!
-- Lovemere!


Love. Your Slave, Sir Brilliant, your Slave, (hiding the Star with his Hat.)


Sir Brill. How is this? I did not think you had been acquainted here!


Love. I came to look for you, -- I thought to have found you here; -- and so I
have scraped an Acquaintance with the Lady, and made it subservient to your
Purposes. -- I have been giving a great Character of you.


Sir Brill. Well, but what is the matter? -- What are you fumbling about? --
(pulls the Hat.)


Love. 'Sdeath have a care! -- for Heaven's sake -- (crams his Handkerchief
there.)


Sir Brill. What the Devil ails you?


Love. Taken so unaccountably, -- my old Complaint. -- Sir Brilliant, yours.


Sir Brill. Zouns Man, you had best sit down.


Love. Here Is a Business, -- (aside,) -- pray let me pass; -- my old Complaint.
--


Sir Brill. What Complaint?


Love. I must have a Surgeon, -- occasioned by the Stroke of a Tennis-Ball; --
my Lord Rackett's unlucky Left Hand: -- Let me pass, there is certainly
something forming there, -- let me pass. -- To be caught is the Devil, (aside,)
don't name my Name, you will ruin all that I said for you, if you do -- Sir
Brilliant, your Servant. -- There is certainly something forming.

Exit.
Sir Brill. What can this mean? I must have this explained. -- Then Mrs.
Lovemore's Suspicions are right; I must come at the Bottom of it. -- Ay, ay; --
there is something forming here! --


Enter Mrs. Bellmour. Sir Brill. My dear Mrs. Bellmour.


Mrs. Bell. Heaven's! What brings you here?


Sir Brill. I congratulate with myself upon the Felicity of meeting you thus at
home.


Mrs. Bell. Your Visit is unseasonable, you must be gone.


Sir Brill. Madam, I have a Thousand Things --


Mrs Bell. Well, well, another time.


Sir Brill. Of the tenderest Import.


Mrs. Bell. I cannot hear you now; -- fly this Moment: -- I have a Lady taken
ill in the next Room.


Sir. Brill Ay, and you have had a Gentleman taken ill here too.


Mrs. Bell. Do you dispute my Will and Pleasure; -- fly this Instant, (turns
him out.) So I Will make sure of the Door.


Enter Mrs. Lovemore, leaning on Mignionet. Mign. This way, Madam, here is more
Air in this Room.


Mrs. Bell. How do you find yourself, Ma'am? Pray sit down.


Mrs. Love. My Spirits were too weak to bear up any longer, against such a
Scene of Villainy.


Mrs. Bell. Villainy! -- What Villainy!


Mrs. Love. Of the blackest Dye! -- I see, Madam, you are acquainted with my
Husband.


Mrs. Bell. Acquainted with your Husband! (angrily.)


Mrs. Love. A Moment's Patience, Madam. -- That Gentleman that was here with
you is my Husband.


Mrs. Bell. Lord Etheridge your Husband!


Mrs. Love. Lord Etheridge, as he calls himself, and as you have been made to
call him also, is no other than Mr. Lovemore.


Mrs. Bell. And has he then been base enough to assume that Title, to ensnare
me to my undoing?


Mign. Well, for certain, I believe the Devil's in me, I am certainly a Witch,
for I always thought him a sly one.


Mrs. Love. To see my Husband carrying on this dark Business, -- to see the Man
I have loved, -- the Man I have esteemed, -- the Man, I am afraid, I must still
love, though esteem him again I cannot, -- to be a Witness to his complicated
Wickedness, -- it was too much for Sensibility like mine, -- I felt the Shock
too severely, -- and sunk under it.


Mrs. Bell. I am ready to do the same myself now. I sink into the very Ground
with Amazement. The first time I ever saw him was at old Mrs. Loveit's, -- she
introduced him to me; -- the Appointment was of her own making.


Mrs. Love. You know her Character, I suppose, Madam.


Mrs. Bell. She Is a Woman of Fashion, and sees a great deal of good Company.


Mrs. Love. Very capable of such an Action for all that.


Mrs. Bell. Well, I could never have imagined that any Woman would be so base
as to pass such a Cheat upon me. Step this Moment, and give Orders never to let
him within my Doors again. (To her Maid, who goes out.) I am much obliged to
you, Ma'am, for this Visit. To me it is highly fortunate, but I am sorry for
your Share in it, as the Discovery brings you nothing but a Conviction of your
Husband's Baseness.


Mrs. Love. I Am determined to be no further uneasy about him, nor will I live a
Day longer under his Roof.


Mrs. Bell. Hold, hold, make no violent Resolutions. -- You Will excuse me, I
cannot help feeling for you, and I think this Incident may be still converted to
your Advantage.


Mrs. Love. That can never be, -- I am lost beyond Redemption.


Mrs. Bell. Don't decide that too rashly. -- Come, come, a Man is worth
thinking a little about, before one throws the hideous thing away for ever.
Besides, you have heard his Sentiments. Perhaps you are a little to blame
yourself. -- We will talk this very coolly. Ma'am, you have saved me, -- and I
must now discharge the Obligation. -- You shall stay and dine with me.


Mrs. Love. I cannot possibly do that, -- I will not give you so much Trouble.


Mrs. Bell. It will be a Pleasure, Ma'am, -- you shall stay with me, I will not
part with you, and I will lay such a Plan, as may ensure him yours for ever. --
Come, come, my dear Madam, don't you still think he has some good Qualities to
apologize for his Vices?


Mrs. Love. I must own, I still hope he has.


Mrs. Bell. Very well then, and he may still make Atonement for all; and let me
tell you, that a Man who can make proper Atonement for his Faults sold not be
entirely despised. -- Allons!

Exeunt.
End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, An Apartment at Mr. Lovemore's. Enter Mrs, Lovemore elegantly dressed;
Muslin following her. Mustin. Why, to be sure, Ma'am, it is so for certain, and
your are very much in the right of it.


Mrs. Love. I fancy I am: -- I see the Folly of my former Conduct, and I am
determined never to let my Spirits sink into a melancholy State again.


Muslin. Why, that is the very thing, Ma'am, the very thing I have been always
preaching up to you. -- Did not I always say, see Company, Ma'am, take your
share of Pleasure, and never break your Heart for any Man. This is what I
always said.


Mrs. Love. It Is very well, you need not say any more now.


Muslin. I always said so! -- And what did the World say? Heavens bless her for
a sweet Woman! And a Plague go with him for an inhuman, barbarous, bloody,
murdering Brute.


Mrs. Love. No more of these Liberties, I desire.


Muslin. Nay, don't be angry, -- they did say so indeed. -- But dear Heart, how
every Body will be overjoyed, when they find you have plucked up a little, --
as for me, it gives me new Life, to have so much Company in the House, and such
a Racketing at the Door with Coaches and Chairs, enough to hurry a Body out of
one's Wits. -- Lard, this is another thing, and you look quite like another
thing, Ma'am, and that Dress so becomes you, -- I suppose, Ma'am, you will never
wear your Negligee again. It is not fit for you indeed, Ma'am. -- It might pass
very well with some Folks, Ma'am, but the like of you --


Mrs. Love. Prithee truce with your Tongue, and see who is coming up Stairs.


Enter Mrs. Bellmour. Mrs. Love. Mrs. Bellmour, I revive at the Sight of you.
Muslin, do you step down Stairs, and do as I have ordered you.


Muslin. What the Duce can she be at now? ( Exit.


Mrs. Bell. You see I am punctual to my time. -- Well, I admire your Dress of
all things. -- Did you buy this Silk on Ludgate Hill? -- It Is mighty pretty.


Mrs. Love. I am glad you like it, -- But under all this Appearance of Gaiety,
I have at the Bottom but an aching Heart.


Mrs. Bell. Be ruled by me, and I Will answer for the Event. -- Why really, now
you look just as you should do. -- Why should you neglect so fine a Figure?


Mrs. Love. You are so civil, Mrs. Bellmour --


Mrs. Bell. And so true too! -- what was beautiful before, is now heightened by
the additional Ornaments of Dress; and if you will but animate and inspire the
whole, by those Graces of the Mind, which I am sure you possess, the Impression
cannot fail of being effectual upon all Beholders, and even upon the depraved
Mind of Mr. Lovemore. -- You have not heard any thing of him since, -- have you?


Mrs. Love. No, -- no Account at all of him.


Mrs. Bell. I can tell you something. -- He has been at my House. You know I
had promised to be at home for him, -- not being let in, my Servants tell me,
he was strangely disconcerted, knit his Brow, stormed, raved, wondered, and
expostulated, and then at last, went off as sulky as a Russian General, when a
Garrison refuses to capitulate.


Mrs. Love. If he has no other Haunts, he may perhaps come home.


Mrs. Bell. I wish he may. -- Well, and have you got together a deal of Company?


Mrs. Love. Pretty well.


Mrs. Bell. That Is right, -- show him that you will consult your own Pleasure.
-- Is Sir Brilliant of the Party?


Mrs. Love. A -- propos, -- as soon as I came home I received a Letter from
him; my Maid had taken it in. -- He there presses his Addresses with great
Warmth, begs to see me again, and has something particular to tell me, -- you
shall see it. -- Oh! Lud, I have not it about me, -- I left it in my dressing
Room, I believe; you mall see it by and by, I took your Advice, and sent him
word he might come; -- that Lure brought him hither immediately, -- he makes no
doubt of his Success with me.


Mrs. Bell. Well! two such Friends as Sir Brilliant and Mr. Lovemore, I
believe, never existed!


Mrs. Love. Their Falsehood to each other is unparalleled. -- I left Sir
Brilliant at the Whist-Table, as soon as the Rubber's out, he will certainly quit
his Company in pursuit of me. -- ( a Rap at the Door.) As I live, I believe
this is Mr. Lovemore.


Mrs. Bell. If it is, every thing goes on swimmingly.


Mrs. Love. I hear his Voice, it is he. -- How my Heart beats!


Mrs. Bell. Courage, and the Day's our own. -- Where must I run?


Mrs. Love. In there, Ma'am. -- Make haste, -- I hear his Step on the
Stair-head,


Mrs. Bell. Success attend you, -- I am gone.

Exit.
Mrs. Love. alone. I am frightened out of my Senses, -- what the Event may be I
fear to think, -- but I must go through with it.


Enter Lovemore. Mrs. Love. Mr. Lovemore, you're welcome home.


Love. Mrs. Lovemore, your Servant,

( without looking at her.)
Mrs. Love. It Is somewhat rare to see you at home so early.


Love. I said I would come home, did not I? -- I always like to be as good as
my word. -- What could she mean by this Usage? to make an Appointment, and
break it thus abruptly!

aside.
Mrs. Love. He seems to muse upon it.

aside.
Love. I cannot tell what to make of it, -- she does not mean to do so infamous
a Thing as to jilt me. (aside.) Oh, Lord! I am wonderfully tired.

Yawns, and sinks into an armed Chair.
Mrs. Love. You an't indisposed, I hope, my Dear.


Love. No, my Dear, -- I thank you, -- I am very well; -- a little fatigued
only, with jolting over the Stones all the way from the City. -- I stayed to
dine with the old Banker, -- I have been there ever since I went out in the
Morning. -- Confoundedly tired. -- Where Is William?


Mrs. Love. Did you want any thing?


Love. Only my cap and Slippers. -- I am not in Spirits, I think, yawns.


Mrs. Love. You never are in Spirits at home, Mr. Lovemore.


Love. I beg your Pardon, -- I never am any where more cheerful, (stretching
his Arms.) I wish I may die, if I an't very happy at home, -- very (yawns) --
very happy!


Mrs. Love. I can hear otherwise. -- I Am informed that Mr. Lovemore is the
Inspirer of Mirth and good Humor wherever he goes.


Love. Oh! you over-rate me; upon my Soul you do.


Mrs. Love. I can hear, Sir, that no Person's Company is so acceptable to the
Ladies; that it is your Wit that inspirits every thing, -- that you have your
Compliment for one, your Smile for another, a Whisper for a third, and so on,
Sir, -- you divide your Favors, and are every where, but at home, all Whim,
Vivacity, and Spirit.


Love. No, -- no, -- (Laughing,) how can you talk so? -- I swear, I cannot help
laughing at the Fancy. -- I all Whim, Vivacity, and Spirit! I shall burst my
Sides. -- How can you banter one so? -- I divide my Favors too! -- Oh,
Heavens! -- I cannot stand this Raillery, -- such a Description of me! -- I that
am rather saturnine, and of a serious Cast, and inclined to be pensive! I cannot
help laughing at the Oddity of the Conceit. -- Oh Lord! Oh Lord! ( laughs.)


Mrs. Love. Just as you please, Sir. -- I see that I am ever to be treated with
Indifference. ( walks acrosi the Stage.)


Love. ( rises and walks the contrary way.) I cannot put this Widow Bellmour out
of my Head. ( aside.)


Mrs. Love. If I had done any thing to provoke this Usage, -- this cold,
insolent Contempt --


Love. I shall never be at rest 'till I know the Bottom of it. -- I wish I had
done with that Business entirely; but my Desires are kindled, and must be
satisfied. (aside.)

(They walk for some time silently by each other.)
Mrs. Love. What Part of my Conduct gives you Offense, Mr. Lovemore?


Love. Still harping upon that ungrateful String! -- but prithee don't set me a
laughing again. -- Offense! -- nothing gives me Offense, Child: -- You know I
am very fond. -- (yawns and walks) -- I like you of all Things, and think you a
most admirable Wife; -- prudent, managing, -- careless of your own Person, and
very attentive to mine; -- not much addicted to Pleasure, -- grave, -- retired,
-- and domestic; -- govern your House, -- pay the Tradesmens Bills, (yawns)
scold the Servants, and love your Husband: -- Upon my Soul, a very good Wife!
-- As good a Sort of a Wife (yawns) as a body might wish to have. -- Where Is
William? -- I must go to Bed. --


Mrs. Love. To Bed so early! -- Had not you better join the Company?


Love. I shall not go out to Night.


Mrs. Love. But I mean the Company in the Dining Room.


Love. What Company? (stares at her.)


Mrs. Love. That I invited to a Rout.


Love. A Rout in my House! -- and you dressed out too! -- What is all this?


Mrs. Love. You have no Objection, I hope --


Love. Objection! -- no, -- I like Company, you know, of all Things; -- I Will go
and join them: -- Who are they all?


Mrs. Love, You know 'em all; -- and there is your Friend Sir Brilliant there,


Love. Is he there? -- I Am glad of it. -- But pray now, how comes this about?


Mrs. Love. I intend to do it often,


Love. Do ye?


Mrs. Love. Ay, and not look tamely on, while you revel luxuriously in a Course
of Pleasure; I shall pursue my own Plan of Diversion.


Love. Do so, do so, Ma'am, the Change in your Temper will be very pleasing.


Mrs. Love. I shall indeed, Sir, -- I Am in earnest.


Love. By all means follow your own Inclinations.


Mrs. Love. And so I shall Sir, I assure ye (sings.)

No more I pine,
Content is mine;
That Sunshine of the Breast!
The Pangs of Love;
No more I prove;
No Cares disturb my Rest.

Love. What the Devil is come over her? and what in the Name of Wonder, does
all this mean?


Mrs. Love. Mean Sir! -- it means -- it means -- it means -- how can you ask me
what it means? -- Well to be sure, the Sobriety of that Question! -- Do you
think a Woman of Spirit can have Leisure to tell her Meaning, when she is all
Air, Alertness, Plcasure, and Enjoyment?


Love. She Is mad! -- Stark mad!


Mrs. Love. You're mistaken, Sir, -- not mad, but in Spirits, that is all; -- no
Offense I hope. -- Am I too flighty for you? -- perhaps I am, -- you are of a
saturnine Disposition, inclined to think a little, or so. -- Well don't let me
interrupt you; don't let me be of any Inconvenience. -- that would be the
impolitest thing -- for a married Couple to interfere and encroach on each
other's Pleasures, -- Oh hideous! it would be gothic to the last Degree Ha! ha!
ha!


Love. (forcing a Laugh,) Ha! ha! -- Ma'am, -- you, Ha! ha! you are perfectly
right.


Mrs. Love. Nay but I don't like that Laugh now, -- I positively don't like it;
-- cannot you laugh out as you were used to do? for my part, I Am determined to
do nothing else all the rest of my Life.


Love. This is the most astonishing thing! Ma'am, I don't rightly comprehend --


Mrs. Love. Oh Lud! Oh Lud! -- with that important Face. -- Well but come now,
what don't you comprehend?


Love. There is something in this Treatment that I don't so well --


Mrs. Love. Oh! are you there. Sir? -- How quickly they, who have no
Sensibility for the Peace and Happiness of others, can feel for themselves Mr.
Lovemore! -- But that is a grave Reflection, and I hate Reflection.


Love. What has she got into her Head? -- This sudden Change, Mrs. Lovemore,
let me tell you, is a little alarming, and --


Mrs. Love. Nay, don't be frightened, -- there is no harm in innocent Mirth, I
hope; -- never look so grave upon it. -- I assure ye, Sir, that though on your
Part, you seem determined to offer constant Indignities to your Wife, -- and
though the Laws of Retaliation would in some sort exculpate her, if, when
provoked to the utmost, -- exasperated beyond all enduring, she should in her
Turn, make him know what it is to receive an Injury in the tenderest Point --


Love. Madam! (angrily.)


Mrs. Love. Well, well, don't be frightened I say, I shall not retaliate: -- my
own Honor will secure you there; -- you may depend upon it. -- You will not come
and play a Game at Cards? -- Well, do as you like; -- well, -- you will not come?
No, no, I see you will not. -- What say you to a Bit of Supper with us? -- Nor
that neither? -- Follow your Inclinations, it is not meterial where a body
eats. -- The Company expects me; your Servant Mr. Lovemore, yours, yours.
(Exit, singing.)


Love. alone. This is a Frolic I never saw her in before! -- Laugh all the rest
of my Life! -- Laws of Retaliation! -- an Injury in the tenderest Point! -- the
Company expects me, -- your Servant my Dear, yours, yours! -- (mimicking her)
What the Devil is all this? -- Some of her Female Friends have been tampering
with her. -- Zouns! -- I must begin to look a little sharp after Madam. -- I Will
go this Moment into the Card-Room, and watch whom she whispers with, whom she
ogles with, and every Circumstance that can lead to -- (going)


Enter Muslin in a hurry. Muslin. Madam, Madam, -- here is your Letter, -- I
would not for all the World that my Master --


Love. What, is she mad too? What Is the matter, Woman?


Muslin. Nothing, Sir, -- nothing, -- I wanted a word with my Lady, -- that is
all, Sir.


Love. You would not for the World that your Master, -- What was you going'to
say? -- What Paper's that?


Muslin. Paper, Sir!


Love. Let me see it.


Mustin. Lard, Sir! -- how can you ask a Body for such a thing. It Is a Letter
to me, Sir, -- a Letter from the Country, -- a Letter from my Sister, Sir. --
she bids me buy her a Shiver de Fize Cap, and a Sixteenth in the Lottery; and
tells me of a Number she dreamt of, that is all, Sir, -- I Will put it up.


Love. Let me look at it, -- give it me this Moment? (reads.) To Mrs. Lovemore!
-- Brilliant Fashion. This is a Letter from the Country, is it?


Muslin. That, Sir, -- that is -- no, Sir, -- no, -- that is not Sister's
Letter. -- If you will give me that back, Sir, I Will show you the right one.


Love. Where did you get this?


Muslin. Sir?


Love. Where did you get it? -- Tell me Truth.


Muslin. Dear heart, you fright a Body so -- in the Parlour, Sir, -- I found it
there.


Love. Very well! -- Leave the Room.


Muslin. The Devil fetch it, I was never so out in my Politics, in all my
Days. Exit.


Love. alone. A pretty Epistle truly this seems to be, -- let me read it.


"Permit me, dear Madam, to throw myself on my Knees, (for on my Knees I must
address you) and in that humble Posture, to implore your Compassion." --
Compassion with a Vengeance on him -- (walks about) "Think you see me now with
tender, melting, supplicating Eyes, languishing at your Feet:" -- Very well,
Sir, -- "Can you find it in your Heart to persist in Cruelty? -- Grant me but
Access to you once more, and in addition to what I already said this Morning, I
will urge such Motives" -- urge Motives, will ye -- "as will suggest to you,
that you should no longer hesitate in Gratitude, to reward him, who still on
his Knees, here makes a Vow to you of eternal Constancy and Love. Brilliant
Fashion."

So; so! so! -- your very humble Servant, Sir Brilliant Fashion! -- This is
your Friendship for me, is it? -- you're mighty kind indeed, Sir, -- but I
thank you as much as if you had really done me the favor, -- and, Mrs
Lovemore, I Am your humble Servant too. -- She intends to laugh all the the rest
of her Life! This Letter will change her Note. -- Odso, yonder she comes along
the Gallery, and Sir Brilliant in full Chase of her. -- They come this way, --
could I but detect them both now! -- I Will step aside, and who knows but the
Devil may tempt 'em to their undoing, -- at least I Will try, -- a polite Husband
I am -- There Is the Coast clear for you, Madam. Exit.

Enter Mrs. Lovemore, Sir Brilliant after her. Mrs. Love. I tell you, Sir
Brilliant, your Civility is odious, -- your Compliments fulsome, -- and your
Solicitations impertinent, Sir. -- I must make use of harsh Language, Sir, --
you provoke me to it and I cannot refrain.


Sir Brill. By all my Hopes we are now conveniently alone, (aside.) Not
retiring to Solitude and Discontent again, I hope, Madam! -- Have a Care, my
dear Mrs. Lovemore of a Relapse.


Mrs. Love. No Danger of that, Sir, don't be solicitous about me. -- Why would
you leave the Company? let me entreat you to return, Sir.


Sir Brill. By Heaven, there is more Rapture in being one Moment vis-a-vis with
you, than in the Company of a whole Drawing Room of Beauties. -- Round you are
melting Pleasures, tender Transports, youthful Loves, and blooming Graces, all
unfelt, neglected, and despised, by a tasteless, cold, languid, unimpassion'd
Husband, while they might be all so much better employed to the Purposes of
Extacy and Bliss.


Mrs. Love. I am amazed, Sir, at this Liberty, -- what Action of my Life has
authorized such barefaced Assurance? -- and for what Reason do you think so
meanly of me, as to imagine that I have not a greater Regard for my Reputation,
and for what the World may say, Sir?


Sir Brill. The World, Ma'am, -- the World will justify you -- she served him
right -- they will all agree in it, -- there will be but one Opinion about it,
-- that is, Ma'am, if the World should know it; -- but our Loves may be as
concealed, as Secrets undiscovered yet by mortal Eye. -- By all that is soft, it
goes down with her like a Dish of Tea. (aside.) And so, Madam, since I have
convinced you, -- and since the Time, the Place, and mutual Ardor all concur --


Mrs. Love. Sir, I am not to be treated in this Manner, -- and, I assure you,
Sir, that were I not afraid of the evil Consequences that might follow, I
should not hesitate a Moment to acquaint Mr. Lovemore with your whole Behavior.


Sir Brill. She will not tell her Husband then, -- charming Creature, and
Blessings on her for so convenient a Hint, -- she yields, by all that is wicked!
-- What shall I say to overwhelm her Senses in a Flood of Nonsense? aside.


Go my Heart's Envoys, tender Sighs make haste, --
Still drink delicious Poison from thy Eye, --
Raptures and Paradise
Pant on thy Lip, and to thy Heart be pressed.
Forcing her all this time. Enter Mr. Lovemore. Love. Zoons, this is too much.


Sir Brill. What the Devil's the Matter now? (Kneels down to buckle his Shoe.)
This confounded Buckle is always plaguing me. -- My dear Boy, Lovemore, -- I
rejoice to see thee, They stand looking at each other.


Love. And have you the Confidence to look me in the Face?


Sir Brill. I was telling your Lady here, of the most whimsical Adventure --


Love. Don't add the Meanness of Falsehood, to the black Attempt of invading
your Friend's Happiness. -- I did imagine, Sir, from the long Intercourse that
has subsisted between us, that you might have had Delicacy enough, Feeling
enough, Honor enough, Sir, -- not to meditate an Injury like this.


Sir Brill. Ay, ay, it is all over, I Am detected. (aside.) Mr. Lovemore, if
begging your Pardon for this Rashness will any ways atone --


Love. No, Sir, nothing can atone. The Provocation you have given me, would
justify my drawing upon you this Instant, did not that Lady and this Roof
protect you.


Sir Brill. But Mr. Lovemore.


Love. But, Sir --


Sir Brill. I only beg --


Love. Pray, Sir, -- Sir, I insist -- I will not hear a word.


Sir Brill. I declare, upon my Honor --


Love. Honor! for Shame, Sir Brilliant, don't use the Word.


Sir Brill. If begging Pardon of that Lady --


Love. That Lady! -- I desire you will never speak to that Lady.


Sir Brill. Nay, but prithee, Lovemore.


Love. No, Sir, no, -- I have done with you for the present. -- As for you,
Madam, I am satisfied with your Conduct. -- I was indeed, a little alarmed, but
I was a Witness of your Behavior, and I Am above harboring low Suspicions.


Sir Brill. Allow me but a Word --


Love. No more, Sir, I have done --


Sir. Brill. Let me but explain --


Love. Zoons! -- I Will go into another Room to avoid you. (Going,.sees Mrs.
Bellmour.) Hell and Destruction, what Fiend is conjured up here? -- Zounds, let
me make my Escape out of the House. (Runs to the other Door.


Mrs. Love. I Will secure this Door, -- you must not go, my Dear. Stops him.


Love. God's Death, Madam, let me pass.


Mrs. Love. Nay, you shall stay, I want to introduce an Acquaintance of mine to
you.


Love. I desire, Madam --


Enter Mrs. Bellmour. Mrs. Bell. My Lord, my Lord Etheridge; I am heartily glad
to see your Lordship. (taking hold of him.)


Mrs. Love. Do my Dear, let me introduce this Lady to you. (turning, him to
her.)


Love. Here Is the Devil and all to do! (aside.)


Mrs. Bell. My Lord, this is the most fortunate Encounter --


Love. I wish I was Fifty Miles off. (aside.)


Mrs. Love. Mrs. Bellmour, give me Leave to introduce Mr. Lovemore to you.
(turning him to her.)


Mrs. Bell. No, my dear Ma'am, let me introduce Lord Etheridge to you. (pulling
him) My Lord --


Sir Brill. In the Name of Wonder, what is all this?


Mrs. Love. My dear Ma'am, you're mistaken; this is my Husband.


Mrs. Bell. Pardon me, Ma'am, it is my Lord Etheridge.


Mrs. Love. My Dear, how can you be so ill-bred in your own House? -- Mrs.
Bellmour, -- this is Mr. Lovemore.


Love. Are you going to toss me in a Blanket, Madam? -- call up the rest of
your People, if you are.


Mrs. Bell. Pshaw! -- Prithee now, my Lord, leave off your Humors; -- Mrs.
Lovemore, this is my Lord Etheridge, a Lover of mine, who has made Proposals of
Marriage to me,


Love. Confusion! let me get rid of these two Furies. (breaks away from them.)


Mrs. Bell. (follows him,) -- My Lord I say! my Lord Etheridge! -- will not your
Lordship know me?


Love. This is the most damnable Accident! (aside.)


Mrs. Bell. I hope your Lordship has not forgot your Appointment at my House
this Evening.


Love. Ay now my Turn is come, (aside.)


Mrs. Bell. Prithee, my Lord, what have I done, that you treat me with this
Coldness? Come, come, you shall have a Wife, I will take Compassion on you.


Love. Damnation! I cannot stand this, (aside.)


Mrs. Bell. Come, cheer up, my Lord; -- What the duce, your Dress is altered!
-- What Is become of the Star and the Ribband? -- And so the gay, the florid,
the magnisique Lord Etheridge, dwindles down into plain Mr. Lovemore, the
Married Man! Mr. Lovemore, your most obedient, very humble Servant, Sir.


Love. I cannot bear to feel my myself in so ridiculous a Circumstance. (aside.)


Mrs. Bell. I beg my Compliments to your Friend Mrs. Leveit; and I am much
obliged to you both for your very honorable Desigs. -- (curtseying to him.)


Love. I never was so ashamed in all my Life! --


Sir Brill. So, so, so, all his Pains were to hide the Star from me. -- The
Discovery is a perfect Cordial to my dejected Spirits.


Mrs. Bell. Mrs. Lovemore, I cannot sufficiently acknowledge the Providence,
that directed you to pay me a Visit, though I was wholly unknown to you; and I
shall henceforth consider you as my Deliverer.


Love. Zoons! It was she that fainted away in the Closet, and be damned to her
Jealousy, (aside.)


Sir Brill. By all that is whimsical, an odd sort of an Adventure this -- my
Lord, (advances to him.) My Lord, -- my Lord Etheriage, as the Man says in the
Play, "Your Lordship's right welcome back to Denmark."


Love. Now he comes upon me. -- Oh! I Am in a fine Situation, (aside.)


Sir Brill. My Lord, I hope that ugly Pain in your Lordship's Side, is abated.


Love. Absurd, and ridiculous, (aside.)


Sir Brill. There is nothing forming there I hope, my Lord.


Mrs. Love. (apart with Mrs. Bellmour,) I begin now to feel for him, and to
pity his Uneasiness.


Sir Brill. Pray, my Lord, don't you think it a base Thing to invade the
Happiness of a Friend? Or to do him a clandestine Wrong? or to injure him with
the Woman he loves?


Love. To cut the Matter short with you, Sir, we are both Rascals.


Sir Brill. Rascal!


Love. Ay both! We are two very pretty Fellows indeed!


Mrs. Bell. I am glad to find that you are at length awakened into a Sense of
your Error. ( to Lovemore.)


Love. I am, Madam, and I am frank enough to own it. -- I am above attempting
to disguise my Feelings, when I am conscious they are on the Side of Truth and
Honor; -- and Madam, with a true Remorse, -- I ask your Pardon.


Mrs. Bell. Upon certain Terms, I don't know but I may sign and seal your
Pardon.


Love. Terms! What Terms? --


Mrs. Bell. That you make due Expiation of your Guilt to that Lady.


Love. That Lady, Ma'am! -- That Lady has no Reason to complain.


Mrs. Love. No Reason to complain, Mr. Lovemore!


Love. No Madam, -- none! for whatever may have been my Imprudences, they have
had their Source in your Conduct.


Mrs. Love. In my Conduct, Sir!


Love. In your Conduct! -- I here declare before this Company, -- and I am
above palliating the Matter, I here declare, that no Man in England could be
better inclined to domestic Happiness, if you, Madam, on your Part, had been
willing to make Home agreeable.


Mrs. Love. There I confess he touches me. (aside.)


Love. You could take Pains enough before Marriage, -- you would put forth all
your Charms, -- practice all your Arts, -- and make your Features please by
Rule; -- for ever changing, -- running an eternal Round of Variety: -- And all
this to win my Affections: -- But when you had won them, you did not think them
worth your keeping. -- Never dressed, -- pensive, -- silent, -- melancholy; --
and the only Entertainment in my House, was the dear Pleasure of a dull
conjugal Tete-a-Tete; and all this Insipidity, because you think the sole Merit
of a Wife consists in her Virtue: -- A fine Way of amusing a Husband truly!


Sir Brill. Upon my Soul, and so it is. -- (laughing)


Enter Muslin. Muslin. O Gemini! Gemini! here is such a Piece of work, -- what
shall I do? -- my poor dear Lady! (Crying bitterly.)


Love. Is the Woman crazy?


Muslin. Oh! Madam, -- forgive me, my dear Madam, -- I did not do it on
purpose, -- as I hope for Mercy, I did not.


Mrs. Love. What did not you do?


Muslin. I did not intend to give it him, I would have seen him gibbetted
first. -- I found the Letter in the Parlour, Madam, -- I knew it was the same
Letter I had delivered to you, and my Curiosity did make me peep into it. --
Says my Curiosity, -- "Now, Muslin, you may gratify yourself by finding out the
Contents of that Letter, which you have such a violent Itching for." -- My
Curiosity said so, Ma'am, and then, I own, Ma'am, my Respect for you did say to
me, "Hussy, how dare you meddle with what does not belong to you? -- keep your
Distance, and let your Mistress's Secrets alone." -- But then upon that, in
comes my Curiosity again, and says my Curiosity, "Read it, I tell you, Muslin,
a Woman of Spirit should know every thing." -- "Let it alone, you Jade," says
my Respect. -- "It Is as much as your Place is worth." -- "There Is more Places
than one," says my Curiosity, "and so read it, I tell you, Muslin," -- I did
read it, -- what could I do? Heaven help me, -- I did read it, -- I don't go to
deny it, -- I don't, I don't. (Crying.)


Love. Don't keep such an Uproar, Woman.


Muslin. And then, after I read it, thinks me, I, I Will give this to my Mistress
directly, and that persidious thing her Husband shall not see it; -- and so as
my ill Stars would would have it, as I was looking for you, I run my hand full
in the Lion's mouth. Crying.


Sir Brill. What an unlucky Jade it has been! (aside.)


Mrs. Love. Well have done, Muslin; this is too much.


Mrs. Bell. Upon my word but she gives him his own. -- I suppose you own the
Truth of what she says, Mr. Lovemore.


Love. Pray, Madam, does that Lady own the Truth of what I have said?


Mrs. Love. Sir, I am sensible there is too much Truth in what you say; this
Lady has opened my Eyes, and convinced me that there was a Mistake in my former
Conduct.


Love. Come, come, you need not say any more -- I forgive you, -- I forgive you.


Mrs. Love. Forgive me! I like that Air of Confidence, when you know, that on
my Side, it is at worst, an Error in Judgment, whereas on yours --


Mrs. Bell. Come, come, you know each other's Faults and Virtues, and so you
have nothing to do but to mend the former, and enjoy the latter. -- There, --
there, kiss and Friends. -- There, Mrs. Lovemore, take your reclaimed Libertine
to your Arms.


Love. It is in your Power, Madam, to make a reclaimed Libertine of me indeed.


Mrs. Love. From this Moment it shall be our mutual Study to please each other.
They embrace.


Sir Brill. Lovemore, may I presume to hope for Pardon at that Lady's Hands?


Love. My dear Confederate in Vice, your Pardon is granted. -- Two sad Dogs we
have been, -- but come, give us your Hand, -- we have used each other damnably
-- for the future we will endeavor to make each other amends.


Sir Brill. And so we will. -- Ma'am, since my Lord decamps from before the
Town, may I presume to hope --


Mrs. Bell. I positively forbid you the least Grain of Hope; whenever I take to
myself a Husband, I must be convinced first that he will answer the Trouble of
keeping him.


Sir Brill. My dear Ma'am, by all that is --


Mrs. Bell. No Swearing -- I positively will have my own way; you shall perform
Quarantine before I speak to you again.


Love. She Is yours Man, she is yours, -- she will throw herself into your Arms
in a Day or two. -- And now I heartily congratulate the whole Company, that
this Business has had so happy a Tendency to convince each of us of our Folly.


Mrs. Bell. Pray, Sir, don't draw me into Share of your Folly.


Love. Come, come, my dear Ma'am, you are not without your Share of it. This
will teach you for the future, to be content with one Lover at a time, without
listening to a Fellow you know nothing of, -- because he assumes a Title, and
reports well of himself.


Mrs. Bell. The Reproof is just, I grant it.


Love. Come, let us join the Company cheerfully, keep our own Secrets, and not
make ourselves a Town-Talk; -- though, I don't know but if this Transaction
were sent abroad into the World, it might prove a very useful Lesson. The Men
would see how their Paffions may carry them into the Danger of wounding the
Bosom of a Friend, -- the Ladies would learn, that after the Marriage Rites,
they should not suffer their Powers of pleasing to languish away, but should
still remember to sacrifice to the Graces.

To win a Man, when all your Pains succeed.
The Way to Keep Him, is a Task indeed.

FINIS.
Just Published. Price 1s. 6d.

Adorned with a neat Frontispiece.

THE DESERT ISLAND. A Dramatic Poem. In Three Acts. As it is now performing at
the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

Te Dulcis Conjux, solo te in littore secum, Te veniente die, te decedente
canebat. VIRG.

By Mr. MURPHY.

Printed for P. Vaillant, facing Southampton-street, Strand.

Where may be had, by the same Author.

The ORPHAN of CHINA, a Tragedy. Price 1s. 6d. The APPRENTICE, A Farce. In Two
Acts. Price 1s. The UPHOLSTERER. A Farce. In Two Acts. Price 1s.

