PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS CONCERNING Human Understanding.

By the AUTHOR of the ESSAYS MORAL and POLITICAL.

LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, opposite Katharine-Street, in the Strand.
MDCCXLVIII.

CONTENTS.
ESSAY I. Of the different SPECIES of PHILOSOPHY. p. 1. ESSAY II. Of the ORIGIN
of IDEAS. p. 21. ESSAY III. Of the CONNEXIONS of IDEAS. p. 31. ESSAY IV.
SKEPTICAL DOUBTS concerning the OPERATIONS of the UNDERSTANDING. p. 47. ESSAY
V. Skeptical SOLUTION of these DOUBTS. p. 69. ESSAY VI. Of PROBABILITY. p. 93.
ESSAY VII. Of the IDEA of POWER or NECESSARY CONNECTION. p. 99. ESSAY VIII. Of
LIBERTY and NECESSITY. p. 129. ESSAY IX. Of the REASON of ANIMALS. p. 165.
ESSAY X. Of MIRACLES. p. 173. ESSAY XI. Of the PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES of
NATURAL RELIGION. p. 205. ESSAY XII. Of the SKEPTICAL or ACADEMICAL PHILOSOPHY.
p. 232.
ESSAY I. Of the different Species of PHILOSOPHY.
MORAL Philosophy, or the Science of human Nature, may be treated after two
different Manners; each of which has its peculiar Merit, and may contribute to
the Entertainment, Instruction, and Reformation of Mankind. The one considers
Man chiefly as born for Action; and as influenced in his Actions by Taste and
Sentiment; pursuing one Object and avoiding another, according to the Value,
which these Objects seem to possess, and according to the Light, in which they
present themselves. Virtue, of all Objects, is the most valuable and lovely;
and accordingly this Species of Philosophers paint her in the most amiable
Colors, borrowing all Helps from Poetry and Eloquence, and treating their
Subject in an easy and obvious Manner, such as is best fitted to please the
Imagination, and engage the Affections. They select the most striking
Observations and Instances from common Life; place opposite Characters in a
proper Contrast; and alluring us into the Paths of Virtue, by the Views of
Glory and of Happiness, direct our Steps into these Paths, by the soundest
Precepts and most illustrious Examples. They make us feel the Difference
betwixt Vice and Virtue; they excite and regulate our Sentiments; and so they
can but bend our Hearts to the Love of Probity and true Honor, they think,
that they have fully attained the End of all their Labors.

THE other Species of Philosophers treat Man rather as a reasonable than an
active Being, and endeavor to form his Understanding more than cultivate his
Manners. They regard Mankind as a Subject of Speculation; and with a narrow
Scrutiny examine human Nature, in order to find those Principles, which
regulate our Understandings, excite our Sentiments, and make us approve or
blame any particular Object, Action, or Behavior. They think it a Reproach to
all Literature, that Philosophy should not yet have fixed, beyond Controversy,
the Foundation of Morals, Reasoning, and Criticism; and should for ever talk of
Truth and Falsehood, Vice and Virtue, Beauty and Deformity, without being able
to determine the Source of these Distinctions. While they attempt this arduous
Task, they are detered by no Difficulties; but proceeding from particular
Instances to general Principles, they still push on their Enquiries to
Principles more general, and rest not satisfied till they arrive at those
original Principles, by which, in every Science, all human Curiosity must be
bounded. Though their Speculations seem abstract and even unintelligible to
common Readers, they please themselves with the Approbation of the Learned and
the Wise; and think they are sufficiently compensated for the Labors of their
whole Lives, if they can discover some hidden Truths which may contribute to
the Instruction of Posterity.

IT IS certain, that the easy and obvious Philosophy will always, with the
Generality of Mankind, have the Preference to the accurate and abstruse; and by
many will be recommended, not only as more agreeable, but more useful than the
other. It enters more into common Life; moulds the Heart and Affections; and by
touching those Principles, which actuate Men, reforms their Conduct, and brings
them nearer that Model of Perfection, which it describes. On the contrary, the
abstruse Philosophy, being founded on a Turn of Mind that cannot enter into
Business and Action, vanishes when the Philosopher leaves the Shade and comes
into open Day; nor can its Precepts and Principles easily retain any Influence
over our Conduct and Behavior. The Feelings of our Sentiments, the Agitation
of our Passions, the Vehemence of our Affections, dissipate all its
Conclusions, and reduce the profound Philosopher to a mere Plebeian.

THIS also must be confessed, that the most durable, as well as justest Fame has
been acquired by the easy Philosophy, and that abstract Reasoners seem hitherto
to have enjoyed only a momentary Reputation, from the Caprice or Ignorance of
their own Age, but have not been able to support their Renown with more
equitable Posterity. It Is easy for a profound Philosopher to commit a Mistake
in his subtle Reasonings; and one Mistake is the necessary Parent of another,
while he pushes on his Consequences, and is not detered from embracing any
Conclusion, by its unusual Appearance, or its Contradiction to popular Opinion:
But a Philosopher, who proposes only to represent the common Sense of Mankind
in more beautiful and more engaging Colors, if by Accident he commits a
Mistake, goes no farther; but renewing his Appeal to common Sense, and the
natural Sentiments of the Mind, returns into the right Path, and secures
himself from any dangerous Illusions. The Fame of Cicero flourishes at present;
but that of Aristotle is utterly decayed. La Bruyere passes the Seas, and still
increases in Renown: But the Glory of Malebranche is confined to his own Nation
and to his own Age. And Addison, perhaps, will be read with Pleasure, when
Lock shall be entirely forgotten This is not intended any way to detract from
the Merit of Mr. Lock, who was really a great Philosopher, and a just and
modest Reasoner. It Is only meant to show the common Fate of such abstract
Philosophy.
.

THE mere Philosopher is a Character, which is commonly but little acceptable
in the World, as being supposed to contribute nothing either to the Advantage
or Pleasure of Society; while he lives remote from Communication with Mankind,
and is wrapped up in Principles and Notions equally remote from their
Comprehension. On the other hand, the mere Ignorant is still more despised; nor
is any thing esteemed a surer Sign of an illiberal Genius, in an Age and Nation
where the Sciences flourish, than to be entirely void of all Taste and Relish
for those noble Entertainments. The most perfect Character is supposed to lie
betwixt those Extremes; retaining an equal Ability and Taste for Books,
Company, and Business; preserving in Conversation that Discernment and
Delicacy, which arise from polite Letters, and in Business, that Probity and
Accuracy, which are the natural Result of a just Philosophy. In order to
diffuse and cultivate so accomplished a Character, nothing can be more useful
than Compositions of the easy Style and Manner, which draw not too much from
Life, require no deep Application or Recess to be comprehended, and send back
the Student among Mankind fall of noble Sentiments and wise Precepts,
applicable to every Emergence of human Life. By means of such Compositions,
Virtue becomes amiable, Science agreeable, Company instructive, and Retirement
entertaining.

MAN is a reasonable Being; and as such, receives from Science his proper Food
and Nourishment: But so narrow are the Bounds of human Understanding, that
little Satisfaction can be hoped for, in this Particular, either from the
Extent or Security of his Acquisitions. Man is a sociable, no less than a
reasonanable Being: But neither can he always enjoy Company agreeable and
amusing, or preserve the proper Relish of them. Man is also an active Being;
and from that Disposition, as well as from the various Necessities of human
Life, must submit to Business and Occupation: But the Mind requires some
Relaxation, and cannot always support its Bent to Care and Industry. It seems,
then, that Nature has pointed out a mixed kind of Life as most suitable to human
Race, and secretly admonished them to allow none of these Byasses to draw too
much, so as to incapacitate them for other Occupations and Entertainments.
Indulge your Passion for Science, says she; but let your Science be human, and
such as may have a direct Reference to Action and Society. Abstruse Thought and
profound Researches I prohibit, and will severely punish, by the pensive
Melancholy, which they introduce, by the endless Uncertainty, in which they
involve you, and by the cold Reception, which your pretended Discoveries will
meet with, when communicated. Be a Philosopher; but amidst all your Philosophy,
be still a Man.

WERE the Generality of Mankind contented to prefer the easy Philosophy to the
abstract and profound, without throwing any Blame or Contempt on the latter, it
might not be improper, perhaps, to comply with this general Opinion, and allow
every Man to enjoy, without Opposition, his own Taste and Sentiment. But as the
Matter is often carried farther, even to the absolute rejecting all profound
Reasonings or what is commonly called Metaphysics, we shall now proceed to
consider what can reasonably be pleaded in their Behalf.

WE may begin with observing, that one considerable Advantage, which results
from the accurate and abstract Philosophy, is, its Subserviency to the easy and
humane, which, without the former, can never attain a sufficient Degree of
Exactness, in its Sentiments, Precepts, or Reasonings. All polite Letters are
nothing but Pictures of human Life in various Attitades and Situations; and
inspire us with different Sentiments of Praise or Blame, Admiration or
Ridicale, according to the Qualities of the Object, which they set before us.
An Artist must be better qualified to sacceed in this Undertaking, who, besides
a delicate Taste and a quick Apprehension, possesses an accurate Knowledge of
the internal Fabric, the Operations of the Understanding, the Workings of the
Passions, and the various Species of Sentiments, which discriminate Vice and
Virtue. However painful this inward Search or Enquiry may appear, it becomes,
in some measure, requisite to those, who would describe with Success the
obvious and outward Appearances of Life and Manners. The Anatomist presents to
the Eye the most hideous and disagreeable Objects; but his Science is highly
useful to the Painter in delineating even a Venus or an Helen. While the latter
employs all the richest Colors of his Art, and gives his Figures the most
graceful and engaging Airs; he must still carry his Attention to the inward
Structure of the human Body, the Position of the Muscles, the Fabric of the
Bones, and the Use and Figure of every Part or Organ. Accuracy is, in every
Case, advantageous to Beauty, and just Reasoning to delicate Sentiments. In
vain would we exalt the one, by depreciating the other.

BESIDES, we may observe, in every Art or Profession, even those which most
concern Life or Action, that a Spirit of Accuracy, however acquired, carries
all of them nearer their Perfection, and renders them more subservient to the
Interests of Society. And though a Philosopher may live remote from Business and
Employment, the Genius of Philosophy, if carefully cultivated by several, must
gradually diffuse itself through the whole Society, and bestow a similar Accuracy
on every Art and Calling. The Politician will acquire greater Foresight and
Subtilty, in the subdividing and ballancing of Power; the Lawyer more Method
and finer Principles in his Reasonings; and the General more Regularity in his
Discipline, and more Caution in his Plans and Operations. The Stability of
modern Governments above the ancient, and the Accuracy of modern Philosophy,
have improved and probably will still improve, by similar Gradations.

WERE there no Advantage to be reaped from these Studies beyond the
Gratification of an innocent Curiosity, yet ought not even this to be despised;
as being one Accession to those few safe and harmless Pleasures, which are
bestowed on human Race. The sweetest and most inoffensive Path of Life leads
through the Avenues of Science and Learning; and whoever can either remove any
Obstructions in this Way, or open up any new Prospect, ought so far to be
esteemed a Benefactor to Mankind. And though these Researches may appear painful
and fatiguing; it is with some Minds as with some Bodies, which, being endowed
with vigorous and florid Health, require severe Exercise, and reap a Pleasure
from what, to the Generality of Mankind, may seem burdensome and laborious.
Obscurity, indeed, is painful to the Mind as well as to the Eye; but to bring
Light from Obscurity, by whatever Labor, must needs be delightful and
rejoicing.

BUT this Obscurity, in the profound and abstract Philosophy, is objected to,
not only as painful and disagreeable, but as the inevitable Source of
Uncertainty and Error. Here indeed lie the justest and most plaufible Objection
against a considerable Part of Metaphysics, that they are not properly a
Science, but arise either from the fruitless Efforts of human Vanity, which
would penetrate into Subjects utterly inaccessible to the Understanding, or
from the Craft of popular Superstitions, which, being unable to defend
themselves on fair Ground, raise these entangling Brambles to cover and protect
their Weakness. Chased from the open Country, these Robbers fly into the
Forest, and lie in wait to break in upon every unguarded Avenue of the Mind,
and over-whelm it with religious Fears and Prejudices. The sloutest Antagonist,
if he remits his Watch a Moment, is oppressed: And many, through Cowardice and
Folly, open the Gates to the Enemies, and willingly receive them with Reverence
and Submission, as their legal Sovereigns.

BUT is this a just Cause why Philosophers should desist from such Researches,
and leave Superstition still in Possession of her Retreat? Is it not reasonable
to draw a direct contrary Conclusion, and perceive the Necessity of carrying
the War into the most secret Recesses of the Enemy? In vain do we hope, that
Men, from frequent Disappointments, will at last abandon such airy Sciences,
and discover the proper Province of human Reason. For besides, that many
Persons find too sensible an Interest in perpetually recalling such Topics;
besides this, I say, the Motive of blind Despair can never reasonably have
place in the Sciences; since, however unsuccessful former Attempts may have
proved, there is still room to hope, that the Industry, Good-fortune, or
improved Sagacity of succeeding Generations may reach Discoveries unknown to
former Ages. Each adventurous Genius will still leap at the arduous Prize, and
find himself stimulated, rather than discouraged, by the Failures of his
Predecessors; while he hopes, that the Glory of atchieving so hard an Adventure
is reserved for him alone. The only Method of freeing Learning, atonce, from
these abstruse Questions, is to enquire seriously into the Nature of human
Understanding, and show, from an exact Analysis of its Powers and Capacity,
that it is, by no means, fitted for such remote and abstruse Subjects. We must
submit to this Fatigue, in order to live at Ease ever after: And must cultivate
true Metaphysics with some Care, in order to destroy the false and adulterate.
Indolence, which, to some Persons, affords a Safeguard against this deceitful
Philosophy, is, with others, over-ballanc'd by Curiosity; and Despair, which,
at some Moments, prevails, may give place afterward to sanguine Hopes and
Expectations. Accurate and just Reasoning is the only catholic Remedy, fitted
for all Persons and all Dispositions, and is alone able to subvert that
abstruse Philosophy and metaphysical Jargon, which, being mixed up with popular
Superstition, renders it, in a manner, impenetrable to careless Reasoners, and
gives it the Air of Science and Wisdom.

BESIDE this Advantage of rejecting, after deliberate Enquiry, the most
uncertain and disagreeable Part of Learning, there are many positive
Advantages, which result from an accurate Scrutiny into the Powers and
Faculties of human Nature. It Is remarkable concerning the Operations of the
Mind, that though most intimately present to us, yet whenever they become the
Object of Reflection, they seem involved in Obscurity, nor can the Eye readily
find those Lines and Boundaries, which discriminate and distinguish them. The
Objects are too fine to remain long in the same Aspect or Situation; and must
be apprehended, in an Instant, by a superior Subtilty and Penetration, derived
from Nature, and improved by Habit and Reflection. It becomes, therefore, no
inconsiderable Part of Science barely to know the different Operations of the
Mind, to separate them from each other, to class them under their proper
Divisions, and to correct all that seeming Disorder, in which they lie
involved, when made the Object of Reflection and Enquiry. This Task of ordering
and distinguishing, which has no Merit, when performed with regard to external
Bodies, the Objects of our Senses, rises in its Value, when directed toward
the Operations of the Mind, in proportion to the Difficulty and Labor, which
we meet with in performing it. And if we can go no farther than this mental
Geography or Delineation of the distinct Parts and Powers of the Mind, it is at
least a Satisfaction to go so far; and the more contemptible this Science may
appear (and it is by no means contemptible) the more contemptible still must
the Ignorance of it appear, in all Pretenders to Learning and Philosophy.

NOR can there remain any Suspicion, that this Science is uncertain and
chimerical; unless we should entertain such a Skepticism, as is entirely
subversive of all Speculation, and even Action. It cannot be doubted, that the
Mind is endowed with several Powers and Faculties, that these Powers are
totally distinct from each other, that what is really distinct to the immediate
Perception may be distinguished by Reflection; and consequently, that there is
a Truth and Falsehood in all Propositions on this Subject, and a Truth and
Falsehood, which lies not beyond the Compass of human Understanding. There are
many obvious Distinctions of this kind, such as those betwixt the Will and
Understanding, the Imagination and Passions, which fall within the
Comprehension of every human Creature; and the finer and more philosophical
Distinctions are no less real and certain, though more difficult to be
comprehended. Some Instances, especially late ones, of Success in these
Enquiries, may give us a juster Notion of the Certainty and Solidity of this
Branch of Learning. And shall we esteem it worthy the Labor of a Philosopher
to give us a true System of the Planets, and adjust the Position and Order of
those remote Bodies; while we affect to overlook those, who, with so much
Success, delineate and describe the Parts of the Mind, in which we are so
intimately concerned That Faculty, by which we discern Truth and Falsehood, and
that by which we perceive Vice and Virtue had long been confounded with each
other, and all Morality was supposed to be built on eternal and immutable
Relations, which to every intelligent Mind were equally invariable as any
Proposition concerning Quantity or Number. But a Mr. Hutcheson.
late Philosopher has taught us, by the most convincing Arguments, that
Morality is nothing in the abstract Nature of Things, but is entirely relative
to the Sentiment or mental Taste of each particular Being; in the same Manner
as the Distinctions of sweet and bitter, hot and cold, arise from the
particular Feeling of each Sense or Organ. Moral Perceptions therefore, ought
not to be class'd with the Operations of the Understanding, but with the Tastes
or Sentiments.

It had been usual with Philosophers to divide all the Passions of the Mind
into two Classes, the selfish and benevolent, which were supposed to stand in
constant Opposition and Contrariety; nor was it thought that the latter could
ever attain their proper Object but at the Expense of the former. Among the
selfish Passions were ranked Avarice, Ambition, Revenge: Among the benevolent,
natural Affection, Friendship, public Spirit. Philosophers may now See Butler's
Sermons.
perceive the Impropriety of this Division. It has been proved, beyond all
Controversy, that even the Passions, commonly esteemed selfish, carry the Mind
beyond Self, directly to the Object; that though the Satisfaction of these
Passions gives us Enjoyment, yet the Prospect of this Enjoyment is not the
Cause of the Passion, but on the contrary the Passion is antecedent to the
Enjoyment, and without the former, the latter could never possibly exist; that
the Case is precisely the same with the Passions, denominated benevolent, and
consequently that a Man is no more interested when he seeks his own Glory than
when the Happiness of his Friend is the Object of his Wishes; nor is he any
more disinterested when he sacrifices his Ease and Quiet to public Good than
when he labors for the Gratification of Avarice and Ambition. Here therefore
is a considerable Adjustment in the Boundaries of the Passions, which had been
confounded by the Negligence or Inaccuracy of former Philosophers. These two
Instances may suffice to show us the Nature and Importance of this Species of
Philosophy.


?

BUT may we not hope, that Philosophy, if cultivated with Care, and encouraged
by the Attention of the Public, may carry its Researches still farther, and
discover, at least in some degree, the secret Springs and Principles, by which
the human Mind is actuated in its Operations? Astronomers had long contented
themselves with proving, from the Phenomenon, the true Motions, Order, and
Magnitude of the heavenly Bodies: Till a Philosopher, at last, arose, who
seems, from the happiest Reasoning, to have also determined the Laws and
Forces, by which their Revolutions are governed and directed. The like has been
performed with regard to other Parts of Nature. And there is no Reason to
despair of equal Success in our Enquiries concerning the mental Powers and
Economy, if prosecuted with equal Capacity and Caution. It Is probable, that
one Operation and Principle of the Mind depends on another; which, again, may
be resolved into one more general and universal: And how far these Researches
may possibly be carried, 'twill be difficult for us, before, or even after, a
careful Trial, exactly to determine. This is certain, that Attempts of this
Kind are every day made even by those, who philosophize the most negligently;
and nothing can be more requisite than to enter upon the Enterprise with
thorough Care and Attention; that, if it lie within the Compass of human
Understanding, it may at last be happily achieved; if not, it may, however, be
rejected with some Confidence and Security. This last Conclusion, surely, is
not desirable, nor ought it to be embraced too rashly. For how much must we
diminish from the Beauty and Value of this Species of Philosophy, upon such a
Supposition? Moralists have hitherto been accustomed, when they considered the
vast Multitude and Diversity of Actions, that excite our Approbation or
Dislike, to search for some common Principle, on which this Variety of
Sentiments might depend. And though they have sometimes carried the Matter too
far, by their Passion for some one general Principle; it must, however, be
confessed, that they are excusable, in expecting to find some general Principles,
into which all the Vices and Virtues were justly to be resolved. The like has
been the Endeavor of Critics, Logicians, and even Politicians: Nor have their
Attempts been altogether unsuccessful; though perhaps longer Time, greater
Accuracy, and more ardent Application may bring these Sciences still nearer
their Perfection. To throw up at once all Pretensions of this Kind may be
justly esteemed more rash, precipitate, and dogmatical, than even the boldest
and most affirmative Philosophy, which has ever attempted to impose its crude
Dictates and Principles on Mankind.

WHAT though those Reasonings concerning human Nature seem abstract, and of
difficult Comprehension? This affords no Presumption of their Falsehood. On the
contrary, it seems impossible, that what has hitherto escaped so many wise and
profound Philosophers can be very obvious and easy. And whatever Pains these
Researches may cost us, we may think ourselves sufficiently rewarded, not only
in point of Profit but of Pleasure, if, by that means, we can make any Addition
to our Stock of Knowledge, in Subjects of such unspeakable Importance.

BUT as, after all, the Abstractedness of these Speculations is no
Recommendation, but rather a Disadvantage to them, and as this Difficulty may
perhaps be surmounted by Care and Art, and the avoiding all unnecessary Detail,
we have, in the following Essays, attempted to throw some Light upon Subjects,
from which Uncertainty has hitherto detered the Wise, and Obscurity the
Ignorant. Happy, if we can unite the Boundaries of the different Species of
Philosophy, by reconciling profound Enquiry, with Clearness, and Truth with
Novelty! And still more happy, if, reasoning in this easy Manner, we can
undermine the Foundations of an abstruse Philosophy, which seems to have served
hitherto only as a Shelter to Superstition and a Cover to Absurdity and Error!

ESSAY II. Of the ORIGIN of IDEAS.
EVERY one will readily allow, that there is a considerable Difference betwixt
the Perceptions of the Mind, when a Man feels the Pain of excessive Heat or the
Pleasure of moderate Warmth, and when he afterward recalls to his Memory this
Sensation, or anticipates it by his Imagination. These Faculties may mimick or
copy the Perceptions of the Senses; but they never can reach entirely the Force
and Vivacity of the original Sentiment. The utmost we say of them, even when
they operate with greatest Vigor, is, that they represent their Object in so
lively a Manner, that we could almost say we feel or see it: But, except the
Mind be disordered by Disease or Madness, they never can arrive at such a pitch
of Vivacity as to render these Perceptions altogether undistinguishable. All
the Colors of Poetry, however splendid, can never paint natural Objects in
such a manner as to make the Description be taken for a real Landscape. The most
lively Thought is still inferior to the dullest Sensation.

WE may observe a like Distinction to run through all the other Perceptions of
the Mind. A Man, in a Fit of Anger, is actuated in a very different Manner from
one, who only thinks of that Emotion. If you tell me, that any Person is in
Love, I easily understand your Meaning, and form a just Conception of his
Situation; but never can mistake that Conception for the real Disorders and
Agitations of the Passion. When we reflect on all our past Sentiments and
Affections, our Thought is a faithful Mirror, and copies its Objects truly; but
the Colors it employs are faded and dead, in comparison of those, in which our
original Perceptions were clothed. It requires no nice Discernment nor
metaphysical Head to mark the Distinction betwixt them.

HERE therefore we may divide all the Perceptions of the Mind into two Classes
or Species, which are distinguished by their different Degrees of Force and
Vivacity. The less forcible and lively are commonly denominated THOUGHTS or
IDEAS. The other Species want a Name in our Language, and in most others; I
suppose, because it was not requisite for any, but philosophical Purposes, to
rank them under a general Term or Appellation. Let us, therefore, use a little
Freedom, and call them IMPRESSIONS, employing that Word in a Sense somewhat
different from the usual. By the Term, Impressions, then, we mean all our more
lively Perceptions, when we hear, or see, or feel, or love, or hate, or desire,
or will. And Impressions are contradistinguish'd from Ideas, which are the less
lively Perceptions we are conscious of, when we reflect on any of these
Sensations or Movements above mentioned.

NOTHING, at first View, may seem more unbounded than the Thought of Man, which
not only escapes all human Power and Authority, but is not even restrained
within the Limits of Nature and Reality. To form Monsters, and join incongruous
Shapes and Appearances costs it no more Trouble than to conceive the most
natural and familiar Objects. And while the Body is confined to one Planet,
along which it creeps with Pain and Difficulty; the Thought can in an Instant
transport us into the most distant Regions of the Universe; or even beyond the
Universe, into the unbounded Chaos, where Nature is supposed to lie in total
Confusion. What never was seen, nor heard of may yet be conceived; nor is any
thing beyond the Power of Thought, except what implies an absolate
Contradiction.

BUT though Thought seems to possess this unbounded Liberty, we shall find, upon
a nearer Examination, that it is really confined within very narrow Limits, and
that all this creative Power of the Mind amounts to no more than the
compounding, transposing, augmenting, or diminishing the Materials afforded us
by the Senses and Experience. When we think of a golden Mountain, we only join
two consistent Ideas, Gold, and Mountain, with which we were formerly
acquainted. A virtuous Horse we can conceive; because, from our own Feeling, we
can conceive Virtue, and this we may unite to the Figure and Shape of a Horse,
which is an Animal familiar to us. In short all the Materials of thinking are
derived either from our outward or inward Sentiment: The Mixture and
Composition of these belongs alone to the Mind and Will. Or to express myself
in more philosophical Language, all our Ideas or more feeble Perceptions are
Copies of our Impressions or more lively ones.

TO prove this, the two following Arguments will, I hope, be sufficient. First,
When we analyze our Thoughts or Ideas, however compounded or sublime, we always
find, that they resolve themselves into such simple Ideas as were copied from a
precedent Feeling or Sentiment. Even those Ideas, which, at first View, seem
the most wide of this Origin, are found, upon a narrower Scratiny, to be
derived from it. The Idea of God, as meaning an infinitely intelligent, wise,
and good Being, arises from reflecting on the Operations of our own Mind, and
augmenting those Qualities of Goodness and Wisdom, without Bound or Limit. We
may prosecute this Enquiry to what Length we please; where we shall always
find, that every Idea we examine is copied from a similar Impression. Those,
who would assert, that this Position is not absolutely universal and without
Exception, have only one, and that an easy Method of resuting it, by producing
that Idea, which, in their Opinion, is not derived from this Source. It will
then be incumbent on us, if we would maintain our Doctrine, to produce the
Impression or lively Perception, that corresponds to it.

SECONDLY. If it happen, from a Defect of the Organ, that a Man is not
susceptible of any Species of Sensations, we always find, that he is as little
susceptible of the correspondent Ideas. A blind Man can form no Notion of
Colors; a deaf Man of Sounds. Restore either of them that Sense, in which he
is deficient; by opening this new Inlet for his Sensations, you also open an
Inlet for the Ideas, and he finds no Difficulty of conceiving these Objects.
The Case is the same if the Object, proper for exciting any Sensation, has
never been applied to the Organ. A Laplander or Negro has no Notion of the
Relish of Wine. And though there are few or no Instances of a like Deficiency in
the Mind, where a Person has never felt or is altogether incapable of a
Sentiment or Passion, that belongs to his Species; yet we find the same
Observation to take place in a lesser Degree. A Man of mild Manners can form no
Notion of inveterate Revenge or Cruelty; nor can a selfish Heart easily
conceive the Heights of Friendship and Generosity. It Is readily allowed, that
other Beings may possess many Senses, of which we can have no Conception;
because the Ideas of them have never been introduced to us in the only Manner,
by which an Idea can have access to the Mind, viz. by the actual Feeling and
Sensation.

THERE is, however, one contradictory Phenomenon, which may prove, that it is
not absolutely impossible for Ideas to go before their correspondent
Impressions. I believe it will readily be allowed, that the several distinct
Ideas of Colors, which enter by the Eyes, or those of Sounds, which are
conveyed by the Hearing, are really different from each other; though, at the
same time, resembling. Now if this be true of different Colors, it must be no
less so, of the different Shades of the same Color; and each Shade produces a
distinct Idea, independent of the rest. For if this should be denied, it is
possible, by the continual Gradation of Shades, to run a Color insensibly into
what is most remote from it; and if you will not allow any of the Means to be
different, you cannot, without Absurdity, deny the Extremes to be the same.
Suppose, therefore, a Person to have enjoyed his Sight for thirty Years, and to
have become perfectly well acquainted with Colors of all kinds, excepting one
particular Shade of Blue, for Instance, which it never has been his fortune to
meet with. Let all the different Shades of that Color, except that single one,
be placed before him, descending gradually from the deepest to the lightest;
it is plain, that he will perceive a Blank, where that Shade is wanting, and
will be sensible, that there is a greater Distance in that Place betwixt the
contiguous Colors than in any other. Now I ask, whether it is possible for him,
from his own Imagination, to supply this Deficiency, and raise up to himself
the Idea of that particular Shade, though it had never been conveyed to him by
his Senses? I believe there are few but will be of Opinion that he can; and
this may serve as a Proof, that the simple Ideas are not always, in every
Instance, derived from the correspondent Impressions; though this Instance is so
particular and singular, that it is scarce worth our observing, and does not
merit, that for it alone we should alter our general Maxim.

HERE, therefore, is a Proposition, which not only seems, in itself, simple and
intelligible; but, if properly employed, might render every Dispute equally
intelligible, and banish all that Jargon, which has so long taken possession of
metaphysical Reasonings, and drawn such Disgrace upon them: All Ideas,
especially abstract ones, are naturally faint and obscure: The Mind has but a
slender Hold of them: They are apt to be confounded with other resembling
Ideas: And when we have often employed any Term, though without a distinct
Meaning, we are apt to imagine it has a determinate Idea, annexed to it. On the
contrary, all Impressions, that is, all Sensations, either outward or inward,
are strong and sensible: The Limits betwixt them are more exactly determined:
Nor is it easy to fall into any Error or Mistake with regard to them. When
therefore we entertain any Suspicion, that a philosophical Term is employed
without any Meaning or Idea (as is but too frequent) we need but enquire, from
what Impression is that supposed Idea derived? And if it be impossible to
assign any, this will serve to confirm our Suspicion. By bringing Ideas into so
clear a Light, we may reasonably hope to remove all Dispute, that may arise,
concerning their Nature and Reality It Is probable, that no more was meant by
those, who denied innate Ideas, than that all our Ideas were Copies of our
Impressions; though it must be confessed, that the Terms they employed were not
chosen with such Caution, nor so exactly defined as to prevent all Mistakes
about their Doctrine. For what is meant by innate? If innate be equivalent to
natural, then all the Perceptions and Ideas of the Mind must be allowed to be
innate or natural, in whatever Sense we take the latter Word, whether in
Opposition to what is uncommon, artificial, or miraculous. If by innate be
meant, cotemporary to our Birth, the D^^pute seems to be frivolous; nor is it
worth while to enquire (...) what time Thinking begins, whether before, at, or
after (...) Birth. Again, the Word, Idea, seems to be commonly taken in a very
loose Sense, even by Mr. Lock himself, as standing for any of our Perceptions,
our Sensations and Passions, as well as Thoughts. Now in this Sense I would
desire to know, what can be meant by asserting, that Self-Love, or Resentment
of Injuries, or the Passion betwixt the Sexes is not innate?

But admitting these Terms, Impressions and Ideas, in the Sense above
explained, and understanding by innate what is original or copied from no
pre^^^ent Perception, then may we assert, that all our Impressions are innate,
and our Ideas not innate.

To be ingenuous. I must own it to be my Opinion, that Mr. Lock was betrayed
into this Question by the Schoolmen, who making use of undefin'd Terms, draw
out their Disputes to a (...) length, without ever touching the Point in
Question. A like Ambiguity and Circumlocution seems to run through all that (...)
on this Subject.


.

ESSAY III. Of the CONNECTION of IDEAS.
IT IS evident, that there is a Principle of Connection betwixt the different
Thoughts or Ideas of the Mind, and that in their Appearance to the Memory or
Imagination, they introduce each other with a certain Degree of Method and
Regularity. In our more serious Thinking or Discourse, this is so observable,
that any particular Thought, which breaks in upon this regular Tract or Chain
of Ideas, is immediately remarked and rejected. And even in our wildest and
most wandering Reveries, nay in our very Dreams, we shall find, if we reflect,
that the Imagination run not altogether at Adventures, but that there was still
a Connection upheld among the different Ideas, which succeeded each other. Were
the loosest and freest Conversation to be transcribed, there would immediately
be observed something, which connected it in all its Transitions. Or where this
is wanting, the Person, who broke the Thread of Discourse, might still inform
you, that there had secretly revolved in his Mind a Succession of Thought,
which had gradually led him away from the Subject of Conversation. Amongst the
Languages of different Nations, even where we cannot suspect the least
Connection or Communication, it is found, that the Words, expressive of the most
compound Ideas, do yet nearly correspond to each other: A certain Proof, that
the simple Ideas, which they express, were bound together by some universal
Principle, which had an equal Influence on all Mankind.

THOUGH it be too obvious to escape our Observation, that different Ideas are
connected together; I do not find, that any Philosopher has attempted to
enumerate or class all the Principles of Connection; a Subject, however, that
seems very worthy of our Curiosity. To me, there appears to be only three
Principles of Connection among Ideas, viz. Resemblance, Contiguity in Time or
Place, and Cause or Effect.

THAT these Principles serve to connect Ideas will not, I believe, be much
doubted. A Picture naturally leads our Thoughts to the Original Resemblance.
: The Mention of one Apartment in a Building naturally introduces an Enquiry or
Discourse concerning the others Contiguity.
: And if we think of an Wound, we can scarce forbear reflecting on the Pain,
which follows it Cause and Effect.
. But that this Enumeration is complete, and that there are no other Principles
of Connection, except these, may be difficult to prove to the Satisfaction of
the Reader, or even to a Man's own Satisfaction. All we can do, in such Cases,
is to run over several Instances, and examine carefully the Principle, that
binds the different Thoughts to each other, never stoping till we render the
Principle as general as possible. The more instances we examine, and the more
Care we employ, the more Assurance shall we acquire, that the Enumeration which
we form from the Whole, is complete and entire. Instead of entering into a
Detail of this kind, which would lead us into many useless Subtilities, we
shall consider some of the Effects of this Connection upon the Passions and
Imagination; where we may open up a Field of Speculation more entertaining, and
perhaps more instructive, than the other.

AS Man is a reasonable Being, and is continually in Pursuit of Happiness,
which he hopes to find in the Gratification of some Passion or Affection, he
seldom acts or speaks or thinks without a Purpose and Intention. He has still
some Object in View; and however improper the Means may sometimes be, which he
chooses for the Attainment of his End, he never loses View of an End, nor will
he so much as throw away his Thoughts or Reflections, where he hopes not to
reap any Satisfaction from them.

IN all Compositions of Genius, therefore, it is requisite that the Writer have
some Plan or Object; and tho he may be hurried from this Plan by the Vehemence
of Thought, as in an Ode, or drop it carelessly, as in an Epistle or Essay,
there must appear some Aim or Intention, in his first setting out, if not in
the Composition of the whole Work. A Production without a Design would resemble
more the Ravings of a Madman, than the sober Efforts of Genius and Learning.

As this Rule admits of no Exception, it follows, that in narrative
Compositions, the Events or Actions, which the Writer relates, must be
connected together, by some Bond or Tie: They must be related to each other in
the Imagination, and sorm a kind of Unity, which may bring them under one Plan
or View, and which may be the Object or End of the Writer in his first
Undertaking.

THIS connecting Principle among the several Events, which form the Subject of
a Poem or History may be very different, according to the different Designs of
the Poet or Historian. Ovid has sorm'd his Plan upon the connecting Principle
of Resemblance. Every fabulous Transformation, produced by the miraculous Power
of the Gods, falls within the Compass of his Work. There needs but this one
Circumstance in any Event to bring it under his original Plan or Intention.

AN Annalist or Historian, who should undertake to write the History of Europe
during any Century, would be influenced by the Connection of Contiguity in Time
or Place. All Events, which happen in that Portion of Space, and Period of
Time, are comprehended in his Design, though in other respects different and
unconnected. They have still a Species of Unity, amidst all their Diversity.

BUT the most usual Species of Connection among the different Events, which
enter into any narrative Composition, is that of Cause and Effect; while the
Historian traces the Series of Actions according to their natural Order,
remounts to their secret Springs and Principles, and delineates their most
remote Consequences. He chooses for his Subject a certain Portion of that great
Chain of Events, which compose the History of Mankind: Each Link in this Chain
he endeavors to touch in his Narration: Sometimes, unavoidable Ignorance
renders all his Attempts fruitless: Sometimes, he supplies by Conjecture what
is wanting in Knowledge: And always, he is sensible, that the more unbroken the
Chain is, which he presents to his Readers, the more perfect is his Production.
He fees, that the Knowledge of Causes is not only the most satisfactory; this
Relation or Connection being the strongest of all others; but also the most
instructive; since it is by this Knowledge alone, we are enabled to control
Events, and govern Futurity.

HERE therefore we may attain some Notion of that Unity of Action, about which
all Critics, after Aristotle, have talked so much: Perhaps, to little Purpose,
while they directed not their Taste or Sentiment by the Accuracy of Philosophy.
It appears, that in all Productions, as well as in the Epic and Tragic, the^e
is a certain Unity required, and that, on no Occasion, our Thoughts can be
allowed to run at Adventures, if we would produce a Work, that will give any
lasting Entertainment to Mankind. It appears also, that even a Biographer, who
should write the Life of Achilles, would connect the Events, by showing their
mutual Dependence and Relation, as much as a Poet, who should make the Anger of
that Hero, the Subject of his Narration Contrary to Aristotle (...) etc. (...)
n.
. Nor only in any limited Portion of Life, a Man's Actions have a Dependence on
each other, but also during the whole Period of his Duration, from the Cradle
to the Grave; nor is it possible to strike off one Link, however minute, in
this regular Chain, without affecting the whole Series of Events, which follow.
The Unity of Action, therefore, which is to be found in Biography or History,
differs from that of Epic Poetry, not in Kind, but in Degree. In Epic Poetry,
the Connection among the Events is more close and sensible: The Narration is not
carried on through such a Length of Time: And the Actors hasten to some
remarkable Period, which satisfies the Curiosity of the Reader. This Conduct of
the Epic Poet depends on that particular Situation of the Imagination and of
the Passions, which is supposed in that Production. The Imagination, both of
Writer and Reader, is more enlivened, and the Passions more enflamed than in
History, Biography, or any Species of Narration, that confine themselves to
strict Truth and Reality. Let us consider the Effect of these two
Circumstances, of an enlivened Imagination and enflamed Passions, which belong
to Poetry, especially the Epic Kind, above any other Species of Composition;
and let us see for what Reason they require a stricter and closer Unity in the
Fable.

FIRST. All Poetry, being a Species of Painting, approches us nearer to the
Objects than any other Species of Narration, throws a stronger Light upon them,
and delineates more distinctly those minute Circumstances, which, though to the
Historian they seem superfluous, serve mightily to enliven the Imagery, and
gratify the Fancy. If it be not necessary, as in the Iliad, to inform us each
time the Hero buckles his Shoes, and ties his Garters, 'twill be requisite,
perhaps, to enter into a greater Detail than in the Henriade; where the Events
are run over with such Rapidity, that we scarce have Leizure to become
acquainted with the Scene or Action. Were a Poet, therefore, to comprehend in
his Subject any great Compass of Time or Series of Events, and trace up the
Death of Hector to its remote Causes, in the Rape of Helen, or the Judgment of
Paris; he must draw out his Poem to an immeasurable Length, in order to fill
this large Canvas with just Painting and Imagery. The Reader's Imagination,
enflamed with such a Series of poetical Descriptions, and his Passions,
agitated by a continual Sympathy with the Actors, must flag long before the
Period of the Narration, and must sink into Lassitude and Disgust, from the
repeated Violence of the same Movements.

SECONDLY. That an Epic Poet must not trace the Causes to any great Distance,
will farther appear, if we consider another Reason, which is drawn from a
Property of the Passions still more remarkable and singular. It Is evident,
that, in a just Composition, all the Affections, excited by the different
Events, described and represented, add mutual Force to eachother; and that,
while the Heroes are all engaged in one common Scene, and each Action is
strongly connected with the whole, the Concern is continually awake, and the
Passions make an easy Transition from one Object to another. The strong
Connection of the Events, as it sacilitates the Passage of the Thought or
Imagination from one to another, facilitates also the Transfusion of the
Passions, and preserves the Affection still in the same Channel and Direction.
Our Sympathy and Concern for Eve prepares the Way for a like Sympathy with
Adam: The Affection is preserved almost entire in the Transition; and the Mind
seizes immediately the new Object as strongly related to that which formerly
engaged its Attention. But were the Poet to make a total Digression from his
Subject, and introduce a new Actor, no way connected with the Personages, the
Imagination, feeling a Breach in the Transition, would enter coldly into the
new Scene; would kindle by slow Degrees; and in returning to the main Subject
of the Poem, would pass, as it were, upon foreign Ground, and have its Concern
to excite anew, in order to take Party with the principal Actors. The same
Inconvenience follows in a lesser Degree, where the Poet traces his Events to
too great a Distance, and binds together Actions, which, though not altogether
disjoined, have not so strong a Connection as is requisite to forward the
Transition of the Passions. Hence arises the Artifice of oblique Narration,
employed in the Odyssey and Aeneid; where the Hero is introduced, at first,
near the Period of his Designs, and afterward shows us, as it were in
Perspective, the more distant Events and Causes. By this means, the Reader's
Curiosity is immediately excited: The Events follow with Rapidity, and in a
very close Connection: And the Concern is preserved alive, and continually
increases, by means of the near Relation of the Objects, from the Beginning to
the End of the Narration.

THE same Rule takes place in dramatic Poetry; nor is it ever permitted, in a
regular Composition, to introduce an Actor, who has no Connection, or but a
small one, with the principal Personages of the Fable. The Spectator's Concern
must not be diverted by any Scenes, disjoined and separate from the rest. This
breaks the Course of the Passions, and prevents that Communication of the
several Emotions, by which one Scene adds Force to another, and transfuses the
Pity and Terror it excites upon each succeeding Scene, 'till the whole produces
that Rapidity of Movement, which is peculiar to the Theater. How must it
extinguish this Warmth of Affection to be entertained, on a sudden, with a new
Action and new Personages, no way related to the former; to find so sensible a
Breach or Vacuity in the Course of the Passions, by means of this Breach in the
Connection of Ideas; and instead of carrying the Sympathy of one Scene into the
following, to be obliged, every Moment, to excite a new Concern, and take Party
in a new Scene of Action?

BUT though this Rule of Unity of Action be common to dramatic and epic Poetry;
we may still observe a Difference betwixt them, which may, perhaps, deserve our
Attention. In both these Species of Composition, it is requisite the Action be
one and simple, in order to preserve the Concern or Sympathy entire and
undiverted: But in epic or narrative Poetry, this Rule is also established upon
another Foundation, viz. the Necessity, that is incumbent on every Writer, to
form some Plan or Design, before he enter on any Discourse or Narration, and to
comprehend his Subject in some general Aspect or united View, which may be the
constant Object of his Attention. As the Author is entirely lost in dramatic
Compositions, and the Spectator supposes himself to be really present at the
Actions represented; this Reason has no Place with regard to the Stage; but any
Dialogue or Conversation may be introduced, which, without Improbability, might
have passed in that determinate Portion of Space, represented by the Theater.
Hence in all our English Comedies, even those of Congreve, the Unity of Action
is never strictly observed; but the Poet thinks it sufficient, if his
Personages be any way related to each other, by Blood, or by living in the same
Family; and he afterward introduces them in particular Scenes, where they
display their Humors and Characters, without much forwarding the main Action.
The double Plots of Terence are Licenses of the same Kind; but in a lesser
Degree. And though this Conduct be not perfectly regular, it is not wholly
unsuitable to the Nature of Comedy, where the Movements and Passions are not
raised to such a height as in Tragedy; at the same time, that the Fiction or
Representation palliates, in some Degree, such Licenses. In a narrative Poem,
the first Proposition or Design confines the Author to one Subject; and any
Digressions of this Nature would, at first View, be rejected, as absurd and
monstrous. Neither Boccace, la Fontaine, nor any Author of that Kind, though
Pleasantry be their chief Object, have ever indulged them.

TO return to the Comparison of History and epic Poetry, we may conclude, from
the foregoing Reasonings, that as a certain Unity is requisite in all
Productions, it cannot be wanting to History more than to any other; that in
History, the Connection among the several Events, which unites them into one
Body, is the Relation of Cause and Effect, the same which takes place in epic
Poetry; and that in the latter Composition, this Connection is only required to
be closer and more sensible, on account of the lively Imagination and strong
Passions, which must be touched by the Poet in his Narration. The Peloponnesian
War is a proper Subject for History, the Siege of Athens for an epic Poem, and
the Death of Alcibiades for a Tragedy.

AS the Difference, therefore, betwixt History and epic Poetry consists only in
the Degrees of Connection, which bind together those several Events, of which
their Subject is composed, 'twill be difficult, if not impossible, by Words, to
determine exactly the Bounds, which separate them from each other. That is a
Matter of Taste more than of Reasoning; and perhaps, this Unity may often be
discovered in a Subject, where, at first View, and from an abstract
Consideration, we should least expect to find it.

IT IS evident, that Homer, in the Course of his Narration, exceeds the first
Proposition of his Subject; and that the Anger of Achilles, which caused the
Death of Hector, is not the same with that which produced so many Ills to the
Greeks. But the strong Connection betwixt these two Movements, the quick
Transition from one to the other, the Contraste Contraste or Contrariety is a
Species of Connection among Ideas, which may, perhaps, be considered as a
Species of Resemblance. Where two Objects are contrary, the one destroys the
other, i. e. is the Cause of its Annihilation, and the Idea of the Annihilation
of an Object implies the Idea of its former Existence.
betwixt the Effects of Concord and Discord amongst the Princes, and the
natural Curiosity we have to see Achilles in Action, after so long Repose; all
these Causes carry on the Reader, and produce a sufficient Unity in the Subject.

IT may be objected to Milton, that he has traced up his Causes to too great a
Distance, and that the Rebellion of the Angels produces the Fall of Man by a
Train of Events, which is both very long and very casual. Not to mention that
the Creation of the World, which he has related at Length, is no more the Cause
of that Catastrophe, than of the Battle of Pharsalia, or any other Event, that
has ever happened. But if we consider, on the other hand, that all these
Events, the Rebellion of the Angels, the Creation of the World, and the Fall of
Man, resemble each other, in being miraculous and out of the common Course of
Nature; that they are supposed to be contiguous in Time; and that being
detached from all other Events, and being the only original Facts, which
Revelation discovers, they strike the Eye at once, and naturally recall each
other to the Thought or Imagination: If we consider all these Circumstances, I
say, we shall find, that these Parts of the Action have a sufficient Unity to
make them be comprehended in one Fable or Narration. To which we may add, that
the Rebellion of the Angels and the Fall of Man have a peculiar Resemblance as
being Counterparts to each other, and presenting to the Reader, the same Moral,
of Obedience to our Creator.

THESE loose Hints I have thrown together, in order to excite the Curiosity of
Philosophers, and beget a Suspicion at least, if not a full Persuasion, that
this Subject is very copious, and that many Operations of the human Mind depend
on the Connection or Association of Ideas, which is here explained.
Particularly, the Sympathy betwixt the Passions and Imagination will, perhaps,
appear remarkable; while we observe that the Affections, excited by one Object,
pass easily to another connected with it; but transfuse themselves with
Difficulty, or not at all, along different Objects, which have no manner of
Connection together. By introducing, into any Composition, Personages and
Actions, foreign to each other, an injudicious Author loses that Communication
of Emotions, by which alone he can interest the Heart, and raise the Passions
to their proper Height and Period. The full Explication of this Principle and
all its Consequences would lead us into Reasonings too profound and too copious
for these Essays. It Is sufficient for us, at present, to have established this
Conclusion, that the three connecting Principles of all Ideas are the Relations
of Resemblance, Contiguity, and Causation.

ESSAY IV. SKEPTICAL DOUBTS concerning the OPERATIONS of the UNDERSTANDING.
PART I.
ALL the Objects of human Reason or Enquiry may naturally be divided into two
Kinds, viz. Relations of Ideas and Matters of Fact. Of the first Kind are the
Propositions in Geometry, Algebra, and Arithmetic; and in short, every
Proposition, that is either intuitively or demonstratively certain. That the
Square of the Hypothenuse is equal to the Squares of the two Sides, is a
Proposition, that expresses a Relation betwixt these Figures. That three times
five is equal to the half of thirty, expresses a Relation betwixt these
Numbers. Propositions of this Kind are discoverable by the mere Operation of
Thought, without Dependence on what is any where existent in the Universe. Though
there never were a true Circle or Triangle in Nature, the Propositions,
demonstrated by Euclid, would for ever retain all their Truth and Evidence.

MATTERS of Fact, which are the second Objects of human Reason, are not
ascertained to us in the same Manner; nor is our Evidence of their Truth,
however great, of a like Nature with the foregoing. The contrary of every
Matter of Fact is still possible; because it can never imply a Contradiction,
and is conceived by the Mind with equal Distinctness and Facility, as if ever
so conformable to Truth and Reality. That the Sun will not rise Tomorrow is no
less intelligible a Proposition, and implies no more Contradiction, than the
Affirmation, that it will rise. We should in vain, therefore, attempt to
demonstrate its Falsehood. Were it demonstratively false, it would imply a
Contradiction, and could never be distinctly conceived by the Mind.

IT may, therefore, be a Subject, worthy Curiosity, to enquire what is the
Nature of that Evidence, which assures us of any real Existence and Matter of
Fact, beyond the present Testimony of our Senses, or the Records of our Memory.
This Part of Philosophy, it is observable, has been little cultivated, either by
the Ancients or Moderns; and therefore our Doubts and Errors, in the
Prosecution of so important an Enquiry, may be the more excusable, while we
mare through such difficult Paths, without any Guide or Direction. They may even
prove useful, by exciting Curiosity, and destroying that implicit Faith and
Security, which is the Bane of all Reasoning and free Enquiry. The Discovery of
Defects in the common Philosophy, if any such there be, will not, I presume, be
a Discouragement, but rather an Incitement, as is usual, to attempt something
more full and satisfactory, than has yet been proposed to the Public.

ALL Reasonings concerning Matter of Fact seem to be founded on the Relation of
Cause and Effect. By Means of that Relation alone can we go beyond the Evidence
of our Memory and Senses. If you were to ask a Man, why he believes any Matter
of Fact, which is absent; for Instance, that his Friend is in the Country, or
in France; he would give you a Reason; and this Reason would be some other
Fact; as a Letter received from him, or the Knowledge of his former Resolutions
and Promises. A Man, finding a Watch or any other Machine in a desert Island,
would conclude, that there had once been Men in that Island. All our Reasonings
concerning Fact are of the same Nature. And here it is constantly supposed, that
there is a Connection betwixt the present Fact and that inferred from it. Were
there nothing to bind them together, the Inference would be altogether
precarious. The hearing of an articulate Voice and rational Discourse in the
Dark assures us of the Presence of some Person: Why? Because these are the
Effects of the human Make and Fabric, and closely connected with it. If we
anatomize all the other Reasonings of this Nature, we shall find, that they are
founded on the Relation of Cause and Effect, and that this Relation is either
near or remote, direct or collateral. Heat and Light are collateral Effects of
Fire, and the one Effect may justly be inferred from the other.

IF we would satisfy ourselves, therefore, concerning the Nature of that
Evidence, which assures us of all Matters of Fact, we must enquire how we
arrive at the Knowledge of Causes and Effects.

I SHALL venture to affirm, as a general Proposition, which admits of no
Exception, that the Knowledge of this Relation of Cause and Effect is not, in
any Instance, attained by Reasonings a priori; but arises entirely from
Experience, when we find, that particular Objects are constantly conjoined with
each other. Let any Object be presented to a Man of ever so strong natural
Reason and Abilities; if that Object be entirely new to him, he will never be
able, by the most accurate Examination of its sensible Qualities, to discover
any of its Causes or Effects. Adam, though his rational Faculties be supposed, at
the very first, ever so perfect, could not have inferred from the Fluidity and
Transparency of Water, that it would suffocate him, or from the Light and
Warmth of Fire, that it would consume him. No Object ever discovers, by the
Qualities, which appear to the Senses, either the Causes, which produced it, or
the Effects, which will arise from it; nor can our Reason, unassisted by
Experience, ever draw any Inferences concerning real Existence and Matter of
Fact.

THIS Proposition, that Causes and Effects are discoverable, not by Reason, but
by Experience, will readily be admitted with regard to such Objects, as we
remember, to have been once altogether unknown to us; since we must be
conscious of the utter Inability we then lay under of foretelling what would
arise from them. Present two smooth Pieces of Marble to a Man, who has no
Tincture of natural Philosophy; and whatever Degree of Sense or Reason he may
be endowed with, he will never discover, that they will adhere together in such
a Manner as to require great Force to separate them in a direct Line, while
they make so small Resistance to a lateral Pressure. Such Events, as bear
little Analogy to the common Course of Nature, are also readily acknowledged to
be known only by Experience; nor does any Man imagine that the Explosion of
Gunpowder, or the Attraction of a Loadstone could ever be discovered by
Arguments a priori. In like manner, when an Effect is supposed to depend upon
an intricate Machinery or secret Structure, of Parts, we make no Difficulty to
attribute all our Knowledge of it to Experience. Who will assert, that he can
give the ultimate Reason, why Milk or Bread is proper Nourishment for a Man,
not for a Lion or a Tiger?

BUT the same Truth may not appear, at first View, to have the same Evidence
with regard to Events, which have become familiar to us from our first
Appearance in the World, which bear a close Analogy to the whole Course of
Nature, and which are supposed to depend on the simple Qualities of Objects,
without any secret Structure of Parts. We are apt to imagine, that we could
discover these Effects, by the mere Operations of our Reason, without
Experience. We fancy, that, were we brought, of a sudden, into this World, we
could at first have inferred, that one Billiard-ball would communicate Motion to
another upon Impulse; and that we needed not to have waited for the Event, in
order to pronounce with Certainty concerning it. Such is the Influence of
Custom, that, where it is strongest, it not only covers our natural Ignorance,
but even conceals itself, and seems not to take place, merely because it is
found in the highest Degree.

BUT to convince us, that all the Laws of Nature and all the Operations of
Bodies, without Exception, are known only by Experience, the following
Reflections may, perhaps, suffice. Were any Object presented to us, and were we
required to pronounce concerning the Effect, that will result from it, without
consulting past Observation; after what Manner, I beseech you, must the Mind
proceed in this Operation? It must invent or imagine some Event, which it
ascribes to the Object as its Effect; and it is plain this Invention must be
entirely arbitrary. It can never possibly find the Effect in the supposed
Cause, by the most accurate Scrutiny and Examination. For the Effect is totally
different from the Cause, and consequently can never be discovered in it.
Motion in the second Billiard-ball is a quite distinct Event from Motion in the
first; nor is there any thing in the one to suggest the smallest Hint of the
other. A Stone or Piece of Metal raised into the Air, and left without any
Support, immediately falls: But to consider the Matter a priori; is there any
thing we discover in this Situation, which can beget the Idea of a downward,
rather than an upward, or any other Motion, in the Stone or Metal?

AND as the first Imagination or Invention of a particular Effect, in all
natural Operations, is arbitrary, where we consult not Experience; so must we
also esteem the supposed Tie or Connection betwixt the Cause and Effect, which
binds them together, and renders it impossible, that any other Effect could
result from the Operation of that Cause. When I see, for Instance, a
Billiard-ball moving in a strait Line toward another; even suppose Motion in
the second Ball should by Accident be suggested to me, as the Result of their
Contact or Impulse; might I not conceive, that a hundred other different Events
might as well follow from that Cause? May not both these Balls remain at
absolute Rest? May not the first Ball return in a strait Line, or leap off from
the second in any Line or Direction? All these Suppositions are consistent and
conceivable. Why then should we give the Preference to one, which is no more
consistent nor conceivable than the rest? All our Reasonings a priori will
never be able to show us any Foundation for this Preserence.

IN a word, then, every Effect is a distinct Event from its Cause. It could
not, therefore, be discovered in the Cause, and the first Invention or
Conception of it, a priori, must be entirely arbitrary. And even after it is
suggested, the Conjunction of it with the Cause must appear equally arbitrary;
since there are always many other Effects, which, to Reason, must seem fully as
consistent and natural. 'Twould, therefore, be in vain for us to pretend to
determine any single Event, or infer any Cause or Effect, without the
Assistance of Observation and Experience.

HENCE we may discover the Reason, why no Philosopher, that has been rational
and modest, has ever pretended to assign the ultimate Causes of any of the
Operations of Nature, or to show distinctly the Actions of that Power, which
produces any single Effect in the Universe. It Is confessed, that the utmost
Effort of human Reason is, to reduce the Principles, productive of natural
Phenomenon, to a greater Simplicity, and to resolve the many particular Effects
into a few general Causes, by Means of Reasonings from Analogy, Experience, and
Observation. But as to the Causes of these general Causes, we should in vain
attempt their Discovery; nor shall we ever be able to satisfy ourselves, by any
particular Explication of them. These ultimate Springs and Principles are
totally shut up from human Curiosity and Enquiry. Elasticity, Gravity, Cohesion
of Parts, Communication of Motion by Impulse; these are probably the ultimate
Causes and Principles we shall ever discover in Nature; and we may esteem
ourselves sufficiently happy, if, by accurate Enquiry and Reasoning, we can
trace up the particular Phenomenon to, or near to, these general Principles.
The most perfect Philosophy of the natural Kind does only stave off our
Ignorance a little longer: As perhaps the most perfect Philosophy of the moral
or metaphysical Kind serves only to discover larger Portions of our Ignorance.
Thus the Observation of human Ignorance and Weakness is the Result of all our
Philosophy, and meets us, at every Turn, in spite of our Endeavors to conquer,
or avoid it.

NOR is Geometry, when taken into the Assistance of natural Philosophy, ever
able to remedy this Defect, or lead us into the Knowledge of ultimate Causes,
by all that Accuracy of Reasoning, for which it is so justly celebrated. Every
Part of mixed Mathematics still upon the Supposition, that certain Laws are
established by Nature in her Operations; and abstract Reasonings are employed,
either to assist Experience in the Discovery of these Laws, or to determine
their Influence in particular Instances, where it depends upon any precise
Degrees of Distance and Quantity. Thus it is a Law of Motion, discovered by
Experience, that the Moment or Force of any Body in Motion is in the compound
Ratio or Proportion of its solid Contents and its Velocity; and consequently,
that a small Force may remove the greatest Obstacle or raise the greatest
Weight, if by any Contrivance or Machinery we can increase the Velocity of that
Force, so as to make it an Overmatch for its Antagonist. Geometry assists us in
the Application of this Law, by giving us the just Dimensions of all the Parts
and Figures, which can enter into any Species of Machine; but still the
Discovery of the Law itself is owing merely to Experience, and all the abstract
Reasonings in the World could never lead us one Step toward the Knowledge of
it. When we reason a priori, and consider merely any Object or Cause, as it
appears to the Mind, independent of all Observation, it never could suggest to
us the Notion of any distinct Object, such as its Effect; much less, show us
the inseparable and inviolable Connection betwixt them. A Man must be very
sagacious, who could discover by Reasoning, that Crystal is the Effect of Heat
and Ice of Cold, without being previously acquainted with the Operations of
these Qualities.

PART II.
BUT we have not, as yet, attained any tolerable Satisfaction with regard to
the Question first proposed. Each Solution still gives rise to a new Question
as difficult as the foregoing, and leads us on to farther Enquiries. When it is
asked, What is the Nature of all our Reasonings concerning Matter of Fact? the
proper Answer seems to be, that they are founded on the Relation of Cause and
Effect. When again it is asked, What is the Foundation of all our Reasonings
and Conclusions concerning that Relation? it may be replied in one Word,
EXPERIENCE. But if we still carry on our sifting and examining Humor, and ask,
What is the Foundation of all our Conclusions from Experience? this produces a
new Question, which may be of more difficult Solution and Explication.
Philosophers, that give themselves Airs of superior Wisdom and Sufficiency,
have a hard Task, when they encounter Persons of inquisitive Dispositions, who
push them from every Corner, to which they retreat, and who are sure at last to
bring them to some dangerous Dilemma. The best Expedient to prevent this
Confusion is to be modest in our Pretensions; and even to discover the
Difficulty ourselves before it is objected to us. By this Means, we may make a
kind of Merit of our very Ignorance.

I SHALL content myself, in this Essay, with an easy Task, and shall pretend
only to give a negative Answer to the Question here proposed. I say then, that
even after we have Experience of the Operations of Cause and Effect, our
Conclusions from that Experience are not founded on Reasoning or any Process of
the Understanding. This Answer we must endeavor, both to explain, and to
defend.

IT must certainly be allowed, that Nature has kept us at a great Distance from
all her Secrets, and has afforded us only the Knowledge of a few superficial
Qualities of Objects, while she conceals from us those Powers and Principles,
on which the Influence of these Objects entirely depends. Our Senses inform us
of the Color, Weight, and Consistence of Bread; but neither Senses nor Reason
ever can inform us of those Qualities, which fit it for the Nourishment and
Support of a human Body. Sight or Feeling convey an Idea of the actual Motion
of Bodies; but as to that wonderful Force or Power, which would carry on a
moving Body for ever in a continued Change of Place, and which Bodies never
lose but by communicating it to others; of this we cannot from the most distant
Conception. But notwithstanding this Ignorance of natural Powers and
Principles, we always presume, where we see like sensible Qualities, that they
have like secret Powers, and lay our Account, that Effects, similar to those,
which we have experienced, will follow from them. If a Body of like Color and
Consistence with that Bread, which we have formerly eat, be presented to us, we
make no Scruple of repeating the Experiment, and expect, with Certainty, like
Nourishment and Support. Now this is a Process of the Mind or Thought, of which
I would willingly know the Foundation. It Is allowed on all hands, that there is
no known Connection betwixt the sensible Qualities and the secret Powers; and
consequently, that the Mind is not led to form such a Conclusion concerning
their constant and regular Conjunction, by any thing it knows of their Nature.
As to past Experience, it can be allowed to give direct and certain Information
only of those precise Objects, and that precise Period of Time, which fell
under its Cognizance: But why this Experience should be extended to future
Times, and to other Objects, which, for aught we know, may be only in
Appearance similar; this is the main Question I would insist on. The Bread I
formerly eat nourished me; that is, a Body, of such sensible Qualities, was, at
that Time, endowed with such secret Powers: But does it follow, that other
Bread must also nourish me at another Time, and that like sensible Qualities
must always be attended with like secret Powers? The Consequence seems no way
necessary. At least, it must be acknowleg'd, that there is here a Consequence
drawn by the Mind; that there is a certain Step taken; a Process of Thought,
and an Inference, which wants to be explained. These two Propositions are far
from being the same, I have found that such an Object has always been attended
with such an Effect, and I foresee, that other Objects, which are, to
Appearance, similar, will be attended with similar Effects. I shall allow, if
you please, that the one Proposition may justly be inferred from the other: I
know in fact, that it always is inferred. But if you insist, that the Inference
is made by a Chain of Reasoning, I desire you may produce that Reasoning. The
Connection betwixt these Propositions is not intuitive. There is required a
Medium, which may enable the Mind to draw such an Inference if indeed it be
drawn by Reasoning and Argument. What that Medium is, I must confess, passes my
Comprehension; and it is incumbent on those to produce it, who assert, that it
really exists, and is the Origin of all our Conclusions concerning Matter of
Fact.

THIS negative Argument must certainly, in Process of Time, become altogether
convincing, if many penetrating and able Philosophers shall turn their
Enquiries this Way; and no one be ever able to discover any connecting
Proposition or intermediate Step, which supports the Understanding in this
Conclusion. But as the Question is yet new, every Reader may not trust so far
to his own Penetration, as to conclude, because an Argument escapes his
Research and Enquiry, that therefore it does not really exist. For this Reason
it may be requisite to venture upon a more difficult Task; and enumerating all
the Branches of human Knowledge, endeavor to show, that none of them can
afford such an Argument.

ALL Reasonings may be divided into two Kinds, viz. demonstrative Reasonings,
or those concerning Relations of Ideas, and moral or probable Reasonings, or
those concerning Matter of Fact and Existence. That there are no demonstrative
Arguments in the Case, seems evident; since it implies no Contradiction, that
the Course of Nature may change, and that Objects seemingly like those we have
experienced may be attended with different or contrary Effects. May I not
clearly and distinctly conceive, that a Body falling from the Clouds, and
which, in all other respects, resembles Snow, has yet the Taste of Salt or
Feeling of Fire? Is there any more intelligible Proposition than to affirm,
that all the Trees flourish in December and January, and decay in May and June?
Now whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no
Contradiction, and can never be proved false by any demonstrative Arguments or
abstract Reasonings a priori.

IF we be, therefore, engaged by Arguments to put trust in past Experience, and
make it the Standard of our future Judgment, these Arguments must be probable
only, or such as regard Matter of Fact and real Existence, according to the
Division above mentioned. But that there are no Arguments of this Kind, must
appear, if our Explication of that Species of Reasoning be admitted as solid
and satisfactory. We have said, that all Arguments concerning Existence are
founded on the Relation of Cause and Effect; that our Knowledge of that
Relation is derived entirely from Experience; and that all our experimental
Conclusions proceed upon the Supposition, that the future will be conformable
to the past. To endeavor, therefore, the Proof of this last Supposition by
probable Arguments, or Arguments regarding Existence, must be evidently going
in a Circle, and taking that for granted, which is the very Point in Question.

IN Reality, all Arguments from Experience are founded on the Similarity, which
we discover among natural Objects, and by which we are induced to expect
Effects similar to those, which we have found to follow from such Objects. And
though none but a Fool or Madman will ever pretend to dispute the Authority of
Experience, or to reject that great Guide of human Life; it may surely be
allowed a Philosopher to have so much Curiosity, at least, as to examine the
Principle of human Nature, which gives this mighty Authority to Experience, and
makes us draw Advantage from that Similarity, which Nature has placed among
different Objects. From Causes, which appear similar, we expect similar
Effects. This is the Sum of all our experimental Conclusions. Now it seems
evident, that if this Conclusion were formed by Reason, it would be as perfect
at first, and upon one Instance, as after ever so long a Course of Experience.
But the Case is far otherwise. Nothing so like as Eggs; yet no one, on account
of this apparent Similarity, expects the same Taste and Relish in all of them.
It Is only after a long Course of uniform Experiments in any Kind, that we
attain a firm Reliance and Security with regard to a particular Event. Now
where is that Process of Reasoning, which from one Instance draws a Conclusion,
so different from that which it infers from a hundred Instances, that are no
way different from that single Instance? This Question I propose as much for
the Sake of Information, as with an Intention of raising Difficulties. I cannot
find, I cannot imagine any such Reasoning. But I keep my Mind still open to
Instruction, if any one will vouchsafe to bestow it on me.

SHOULD it be said, that from a Number of uniform Experiments, we infer a
Connection betwixt the sensible Qualities and the secret Powers; this, I must
confess, seems the same Difficulty, couched in different Terms. The Question
still recurs, On what Process of Argument this Inference is founded? Where is
the Medium, the interposing Ideas, which join Propositions so very wide of each
other? It Is confessed, that the Color, Consistence, and other sensible
Qualities of Bread appear not, of themselves, to have any Connection with the
secret Powers of Nourishment and Support. For otherwise we could infer these
secret Powers from the first Appearance of these sensible Qualities, without
the Aid of Experience, contrary to the Sentiment of all Philosophers; and
contrary to plain Matter of Fact. Here then is our natural State of Ignorance
with regard to the Powers and Influence of all Objects. How is this remedied by
Experience? It only shows us a Number of uniform Effects, resulting from
certain Objects, and teaches us, that those particular Objects, at that
particular Time, were endowed with such Powers and Forces. When a new Object of
similar sensible Qualities is produced, we expect similar Powers and Forces,
and lay our Account with a like Effect. From a Body of a like Color and
Consistence with Bread, we look for like Nourishment and Support. But this
surely is a Step or Progress of the Mind, which wants to be explained. When a
Man says, I have found, in all past Instances, such sensible Qualities,
conjoined with such secret Powers: And when he says, similar sensible Qualities
will always be conjoined with similar secret Powers; he is not guilty of a
Tautology, nor are these Propositions in any respect the same. You say the one
Proposition is an Inference from the other. But you must confess, that the
Inference is not intuitive; neither is it demonstrative: Of what Nature is it
then? To say it is experimental is begging the Question. For all Inferences
from Experience suppose, as their Foundation, that the future will resemble the
past, and that similar Powers will be conjoined with similar sensible
Qualities. If there be any Suspicion, that the Course of Nature may change, and
that the past may be no Rule for the future, all Experience becomes useless,
and can give rise to no Inferences or Conclusions. It Is impossible, therefore,
that any Arguments from Experience can prove this Resemblance of the past to
the future; since all these Arguments are founded on the Supposition of that
Resemblance. Let the Course of Things be allowed hitherto never so regular;
that alone, without some new Argument or Inference, proves not, that, for the
future, it will continue so. In vain do you pretend to have learnt the Nature
of Bodies from your past Experience. Their secret Nature, and consequently, all
their Effects and Influence may change, without any Change in their sensible
Qualities. This happens sometimes, and with regard to some Objects: Why may it
not happen always, and with regard to all Objects? What Logic, what Process of
Argument secures you against this Supposition? My Practice, you say, refutes my
Doubts. But you mistake the Purport of my Question. As an Agent, I am quite
satisfied in the Point: But as a Philosopher, who has some Share of Curiosity,
I will not say Skepticism, I want to learn the Foundation of this Inference. No
Reading, no Enquiry has yet been able to remove my Difficulty, or give me
Satisfaction in a Matter of such vast Importance. Can I do better than propose
the Difficulty to the Public, even though, perhaps, I have small Hopes of
obtaining a Solution? We shall at least, by this Means, be sensible of our
Ignorance, if we do not augment our Knowledge.

I MUST confess, that a Man is guilty of unpardonable Arrogance, who concludes,
because an Argument has escaped his own Investigation and Enquiry, that
therefore it does not really exist. I must also confess, that though all the
Learned, for several Ages, should have employed their Time in fruitless Search
upon any Subject, it may still perhaps, be rash to conclude positively, that
the Subject must, therefore, pass all human Comprehension. Even though we examine
all the Sources of our Knowledge, and conclude them unfit for such a Subject,
there may still remain a Suspicion, that the Enumeration is not complete, or
the Examination not accurate. But with regard to the present Subject, there are
some Considerations, which seem to remove all this Accusation of Arrogance or
Suspicion of Mistake.

IT IS certain, that the most ignorant and stupid Peasants, nay Infants, nay
even brute Beasts improve by Experience, and learn the Qualities of natural
Objects, by observing the Effects, which result from them. When a Child has
felt the Sensation of Pain from touching the Flame of a Candle, he will be
careful not to put his Hand near any Candle; but will expect a similar Effect
from a Cause, which is similar to its sensible Qualities and Appearance. If you
assert, therefore, that the Understanding of the Child is led into this
Conclusion by any Process of Argument or Ratiocination, I may justly require
you to produce that Argument; nor have you any Pretext to refuse so equitable a
Demand. You cannot say, that the Argument is abstruse, and may possibly escape
your Search and Enquiry; since you confess, that it is obvious to the Capacity
of a mere Infant. If you hesitate, therefore, a Moment, or if, after
Reflection, you produce any intricate and profound Argument, you, in a Manner,
give up the Question, and confess, that it is not Reasoning, which engages us
to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar Effects from
Causes, which are, to Appearance, similar. This is the Proposition, which I
intended to enforce by the present Essay. If I be right, I pretend to have made
no mighty Discovery. And if I be wrong, I must acknowledge myself to be indeed
a very backward Scholar; since I cannot now discover an Argument, which, it
seems, was perfectly familiar to me, long before I was out of my Cradle.

ESSAY V. SKEPTICAL SOLUTION of these DOUBTS.
PART I.
THE Passion for Philosophy, like that for Religion, seems liable to this
Inconvenience, that, though it aims at the Correction of our Manners and
Extirpation of our Vices, it may only serve, by imprudent Management, to foster
a predominant Inclination, and push the Mind, with more determined Resolution,
toward that Side, which already draws too much, by the Bias and Propensity of
the natural Temper. It Is certain, that, while we aspire to the magnanimous
Firmness of the philosophic Sage, and endeavor to confine our Pleasures
altogether within our own Minds, we may, at last, render our Philosophy, like
that of Epictetus and other Stoics, only a more refined System of Selfishness,
and reason ourselves out of all Virtue, as well as social Enjoyment. While we
study with Attention the Vanity of human Life, and turn all our Thoughts on the
empty and transitory Nature of Riches and Honors, we are, perhaps, all the
while flattering our natural Indolence, which, hating the Bustle of the World
and Drudgery of Business, seeks a Pretext of Reason, to give itself a full and
uncontrolled Indulgence. There is, however, one Species of Philosophy, which
seems little liable to this Inconvenience, and that because it strikes in with
no disorderly Passion of the human Mind, nor can mingle itself with any natural
Affection or Propensity; and that is the ACADEMIC or SKEPTICAL Philosophy. The
Academics talk always of Doubts and Suspense of Judgment, of Danger in hasty
Determinations, of confining to very narrow Bounds the Enquiries of the
Understanding, and of renouncing all Speculations that lie not within the
Limits of common Life and Practice. Nothing, therefore, can be more contrary
than such a Philosophy to the supine Indolence of the Mind, its rash Arrogance,
its lofty Pretensions, and its superstitious Credulity. Every Passion is
mortified by it, except the Love of Truth; and that Passion never is, nor can
be carried to too high a Degree. It Is surprising, therefore, that this
Philosophy, which, in almost every Instance, must be harmless and innocent,
should be the Subject of so much groundless Reproach and Obloquy. But, perhaps,
the very Circumstance, which renders it so innocent, is what chiefly exposes it
to the public Hatred and Resentment. By flattering no irregular Passion, it
gains few Partisans: By opposing so many Vices and Follies, it raises to itself
abundance of Enemies, who stigmatize it as libertine, profane, and irreligious.

NOR need we fear, that this Philosophy, while it endeavors to limit our
Enquiries to common Life, should ever undermine the Reasonings of common Life,
and carry its Doubts so far as to destroy all Action, as well as Speculation.
Nature will always maintain her Rights, and prevail in the End over any
abstract Reasoning whatsoever. Though we should conclude, for Instance, as in the
foregoing Essay, that, in all Reasonings from Experience, there is a Step taken
by the Mind, which is not supported by any Argument or Process of the
Understanding; there is no Danger, that these Reasonings, on which almost all
Knowledge depends, will ever be affected by such a Discovery. If the Mind be
not engaged by Argument to make this Step, it must be induced by some other
Principle of equal Weight and Authority; and that Principle will preserve its
Influence as long as human Nature remains the same. What that Principle is, may
well be worth the Pains of Enquiry.

SUPPOSE a Person, though endowed with the strongest Faculties of Reason and
Reflection, to be brought of a sudden into this World; he would, indeed,
immediately observe a continual Succession of Objects, and one Event following
another; but he would not be able to discover any thing farther. He would not,
at first, by any Reasoning, be able to reach the Idea of Cause and Effect;
since the particular Powers, by which all natural Operations are performed,
never appear to the Senses; nor is it reasonable to conclude, merely because
one Event, in one Instance, precede^ another, that therefore the one is the
Cause, and the other the Effect. Their Conjunction may be arbitrary and casual.
There may be no Reason to infer the Existence of the one from the Appearance of
the other. And in a word, such a Person, without more Experience, could never
employ his Conjecture or Reasoning concerning any Matter of Fact, or be assured
of any thing beyond what was immediately present to his Memory and Senses.

SUPPOSE again, that he has acquired more Experience, and has lived so long in
the World as to have observed similar Objects or Events to be constantly
conjoined together; What is the Consequence of this Experience? He immediately
infers the Existence or the one Object from the Appearance of the other. Yet he
has not, by all his Experience, acquired any Idea or Knowledge of the secret
Power, by which the one Object produces the other; nor is it, by any Process of
Reasoning, he is engaged to draw this Inference. But still he finds himself
determined to draw it: And though he should be convinced, that his Understanding
has no Part in the Operation, he would nevertheless continue in the same Course
of Thinking. There is some other Principle, which determines him to form such a
Conclusion.

THIS Principle is CUSTOM or HABIT. For wherever the Repetition of any
particular Act or Operation produces a Propensity to renew the same Act or
Operation, without being impelled by any Reasoning or Process of the
Understanding; we always say, that this Propensity is the Effect of Custom. By
employing that Word, we pretend not to have given the ultimate Reason of such a
Propensity. We only point out a Principle of human Nature, which is universally
acknowledged, and which is well known by its Effects. Perhaps, we can push our
Enquiries no farther, or pretend to give the Cause of this Cause; but must rest
contented with it as the ultimate Principle, which we can assign, of all our
Conclusions from Experience. It Is sufficient Satisfaction, that we can go so
far; without repining at the Narrowness of our Faculties, because they will
carry us no farther. And it is certain we here advance a very intelligible
Proposition, at least, if not a true one, when we assert, that, after the
constant Conjunction of two Objects, Heat and Flame, for Instance, Weight and
Solidity, we are determined by Custom alone to expect the one from the
Appearance of the other. This Hypothesis seems even the only one, which
explains the Difficulty, why we draw an Inference from a thousand Instances,
which we are not able to draw from one Instance, that is, in no respect,
different from them. Reason is incapable of any such Variation. The Conclusions
it draws from considering one Circle are the same, which it would form upon
surveying all the Circles in the Universe. But no Man, having seen only one
Body move after being impelled by another, could infer, that every other Body
will move after a like Impulse. All Inferences from Experience, therefore, are
Effects of Custom, not of Reasoning Nothing is more usual than for Writers even
on moral, political, or physical Subjects, to distinguish betwixt Reason and
Experience, and to suppose, that these Species of Argumentation are entirely
different from each other. The former are taken for the mere Result of our
intellectual Faculties, which, by considering a priori the Nature of Things,
and examining the Effects, that must follow from their Operation, establish
particular Principles of Science and Philosophy. The latter are supposed to be
derived entirely from Sense and Observation, by which we learn what has
actually resulted from the Operation of particular Objects, and are thence able
to infer what will, for the future, result from them. Thus, for Instance, the
Limitations and Restraints of civil Government and a legal Constitution may be
defended, either from Reason, which, reflecting on the great Frailty and
Corruption of human Nature, teaches, that no Man can safely be trusted with
unlimited Authority; or from Experience and History, which inform us of the
enormous Abuses, that Ambition, in every Age and Country, has been found to
make of so imprudent a Confidence.

The same Distinction betwixt Reason and Experience is maintained in all our
Deliberations concerning the Conduct of Life; while the experienced Statesman,
General, Physician, or Merchant is trusted and followed; and the unpractic'd
Novice, with whatever natural Talents endowed, neglected and despised. Though it
be allowed, that Reason may form very plausible Conjectures with regard to the
Consequences of such a particular Conduct in such particular Circumstances;
it is still supposed imperfect, without the Assistance of Experience, which is
alone able to give Stability and Certainty to the Maxims, derived from Study
and Reflection.

But notwithstanding that this Distinction be thus universally received, both
in the active and speculative Scenes of Life, I shall not scruple to pronounce,
that, in my Opinion, it is, at the Bottom, erroneous, or at least, superficial.

If we examine those Arguments, which, in any of the Sciences above mentioned,
are supposed to be the mere Effects of Reasoning and Reflection, they will all
be found to terminate, at last, in some general Principle or Conclusion, for
which we can assign no Reason but Observation and Experience. The only
Difference betwixt them and those Maxims, which are vulgarly esteemed the
Result of pure Experience, is, that the former cannot be established without
some Process of Thought, and some Reflection on what we have observed, in order
to distinguish its Circumstances, and trace its Consequences: Whereas in the
latter the experienced Event is exactly and fully similar to that which we
infer as the Result of any particular Situation. The History of a Tiberius or a
Nero makes us dread a like Tyranny were our Monarchs freed from the Restraints
of Laws and Senates: But the Observation of any Fraud or Cruelty in private
Life is sufficient, with the Aid of a little Thought, to give us the same
Apprehension; while it serves as an Instance of the general Corruption of human
Nature, and shows us the Danger we must incur by reposing an entire Confidence
in Mankind. It Is Experience, in both Cases, which is ultimately the Foundation
of our Inference and Conclusion.

There is no Man so young and unexperienced, as not to have formed, from
Observation, many general and just Maxims concerning human Affairs and the
Conduct of Life; but it must be confessed, that, when he comes to put these in
Practice, he will be extremely liable to Error, till Time and farther
Experience, both enlarge these Maxims, and teach him their proper Use and
Application. In every Situation or Incident, there are many particular and
seemingly minute Circumstances, which the Man of greatest Talents is, at first,
apt to overlook, though on them the Justness of his Conclusions, and
consequently, the Prudence of his Conduct, entirely depend. Not to mention,
that, to a young Beginner, the general Observations and Maxims occur not always
on the proper Occasions, nor can be immediately applied with due Calmness and
Distinction. The Truth is, an unexperienced Reasoner could be no Reasoner at
all, were he absolutely unexperienced; and when we assign that Character to any
one, we mean it only in a comparative Sense, and suppose him possessed of
Experience in a smaller and more imperfect Degree.


.

CUSTOM, then, is the great Guide of human Life. It Is that Principle alone,
which renders our Experience useful to us, and makes us expect for the future a
similar Train of Events with those which have appeared in the past. Without the
Influence of Custom, we should be entirely ignorant of every Matter of Fact,
beyond what is immediately present to the Memory and Senses. We should never
know how to adjust Means to Ends, or to employ our natural Powers in the
Production of any Effect. There would be an End at once of all Action, as well
as of the chief Part of Speculation.

BUT here it may be proper to remark, that though our Conclusions from Experience
carry us beyond our Memory and Senses, and assure us of Matters of Fact, which
happened in the most distant Places and most remote Ages; yet some Fact must
always be present to the Senses or Memory, from which we may first proceed in
drawing these Conclusions. A Man, who should find in a desert Country the
Remains of pompous Buildings, would conclude, that the Country had, in ancient
Times, been cultivated by civilized Inhabitants; but did nothing of this Nature
occur to him, he could never be able to form such an Inference. We learn the
Events of former Ages from History; but then we must peruse the Volumes, in
which this Instruction is contained, and thence carry up our Inferences from
one Testimony to another, till we arrive at the Eyewitnesses and Spectators of
these distant Events. In a word, if we proceed not upon some Fact, present to
our Memory or Senses, our Reasonings would be merely hypothetical; and however
the particular Links might be connected with each other, the whole Chain of
Inferences would have nothing to support it, nor could we ever, by its Means,
arrive at the Knowledge of any real Existence. If I ask, why you believe any
particular Matter of Fact, which you relate, you must tell me some Reason; and
this Reason will be some other Fact, connected with it: But as you cannot
proceed after this Manner, in infinitum, you must at last terminate in some
Fact, which is present to your Memory or Senses; or must allow, that your
Belief is entirely without Foundation.

WHAT then is the Conclusion of the whole Matter? A simple one; though it must be
confessed, pretty remote from the common Theories of Philosophy. All Belief of
Matter of Fact or real Existence is derived merely from some Object, present to
the Memory or Senses, and a customary Conjunction betwixt that and any other
Object. Or in other Words; having found, in many Instances, that any two Kinds
of Objects, Flame and Heat, Snow and Cold, have always been conjoined together;
if Flame or Snow be presented anew to our Senses; the Mind is carried by Custom
to expect Heat or Cold, and to believe, that such a Quality does exist, and
will discover itself upon a nearer Approach. This Belief is the necessary
Result of placing the Mind in such Circumstances. It Is an Operation of the
Soul, when we are so situated, as unavoidable as to feel the Passion of Love,
when we receive Benefits, or Hatred, when we meet with Injuries. All these
Operations are a Species of natural Instincts, which no Reason or Process of
the Thought and Understanding is able, either to produce, or to prevent.

AT this Point, 'twould be very allowable for us to stop our philosophical
Researches. In most Questions, we can never make a single Step farther; and in
all Questions, we must terminate here at last, after our most restless and
curious Enquiries. But still our Curiosity will be pardonable, perhaps
commendable, if it carry us on to still farther Researches, and make us examine
more accurately the Nature of this Belief, and of the customary Conjunction,
whence it is derived. By this Means, we may meet with some Explications and
Analogies, that will give Satisfaction; at least to such as love the abstract
Sciences, and can be entertained with Speculations, which, however accurate,
may still retain a Degree of Doubt and Uncertainty. As to Readers of a
different Taste; the remaining Part of this Essay is not calculated for them,
and the following Essays may well be understood, though it be neglected.

PART II.
THERE is nothing more free than the Imagination of Man; and though it cannot
exceed that original Stock of Ideas, which is furnished by our internal and
external Senses, it has unlimited Power of mixing, compounding, separating and
dividing these Ideas, to all the Varieties of Fiction and Vision. It can feign
a Train of Events, with all the Appearance of Reality, ascribe to them a
particular Time and Place, conceive them as existent, and paint them out to
itself with every Circumstance, that belongs to any historical Fact, which it
believes with the greatest Certainty. Wherein, therefore, consists the
Difference betwixt such a Fiction and Belief? It lies not merely in any
peculiar Idea, which is annexed to a Conception, that commands our assent, and
which is wanting to every known Fiction. For as the Mind has Authority over all
its Ideas, it could voluntarily annex this particular Idea to any Fiction, and
consequently be able to believe whatever it pleases; contrary to what we find
by daily Experience. We can, in our Conception, join the Head of a Man to the
Body of a Horse; but it is not in our Power to believe, that such an Animal has
ever really existed.

IT follows, therefore, that the Difference betwixt Fiction and Belief lies in
some Sentiment or Feeling, which is annexed to the latter, not to the former,
and which depends not on the Will, nor can be commanded at Pleasure. It must be
excited by Nature, like all other Sentiments; and must arise from the
particular Situation, in which the Mind is placed at any particular Juncture.
Whenever any Object is presented to the Memory or Senses, it immediately, by
the Force of Custom, carries the Imagination to conceive that Object, which is
usually conjoined to it; and this Conception is attended with a Feeling or
Sentiment, different from the loose Reveries of the Fancy. Herein consists the
whole Nature of Belief. For as there is no Matter of Fact we believe so firmly,
that we cannot conceive the contrary, there would be no Difference betwixt the
Conception assented to, and that which is rejected, were it not for some
Sentiment, that distinguishes the one from the other. If I see a Billiard-Ball
moving toward another, on a smooth Table, I can easily conceive it to stop
upon Contact. This Conception implies no Contradiction; but still it feels very
differently from that Conception, by which I represent to myself the Impulse,
and the Communication of Motion from one Ball to another.

WERE we to attempt a Definition or Description of this Sentiment, we should,
perhaps, find it a very difficult, if not impossible Task; in the same Manner
as if we should endeavor to define the Feeling of Cold or Passion of Anger, to
such as never had an Experience of these Sentiments. BELIEF is the true and
proper Name of this Feeling; and no one is ever at a loss to know the Meaning
of that Term; because every Man is every Moment conscious of the Sentitiment,
represented by it. It may not, however, be improper to attempt a Description of
this Sentiment; in hopes we may, by that means, arrive at some Analogies, that
may afford a more perfect Explication of it. I say then, that Belief is nothing
but a more vivid, lively, forcible, firm, steady Conception of an Object, than
what the Imagination alone is ever able to attain. This Variety of Terms, which
may seem so unphilosophical, is intended only to express that Act of the Mind,
which renders Realities, or what is taken for such, more present to us than
Fictions, causes them to weigh more in the Thought, and gives them a superior
Influence on the Passions and Imagination. Provided we agree about the Thing,
it is needless to dispute about the Terms. The Imagination has the Command over
all its Ideas, and can join and mix and vary them, in all the Ways possible.
(...) may conceive fictitious Objects with all the Circumstances of Place and
Time. It may set them, in a Manner, before our Eyes, in their true Colors,
(...) as they might have existed. But as it is impossible that that Faculty of
Imagination can ever, of itsel^ teach Belief; it is evident, that Belief
consists not (...) the peculiar Nature or Order of Ideas, but in (...) Manner
of their Conception, and in their Feeling to the Mind. I confess, that it is
impossible perfectly to explain this Feeling or Manner of Conception. We may
make use of Words, that express something near it. But its true and proper
Name, as we observed before, is Belief; which is a Term, that every one
sufficiently understands in common Life. And in Philosophy, we can go no
farther than assert, that Belief is something felt by the Mind, which
distinguishes the Ideas of the Judgment from the Fictions of the Imagination.
It gives them more Force and Influence; makes them appear of greater
Importance; inforces them in the Mind, and renders them the governing Principle
of all our Actions. I hear at present, for Instance, a Person's Voice, whom I
am acquainted with; and this Sound comes as from the next Room. This Impression
of my Senses immediately conveys my Thoughts to the Person, along with all the
surrounding Objects. I paint them out to myself as existing at present, with
the same Qualities and Relations, that I formerly knew them possessed of. These
Ideas take saster hold of my Mind, than Ideas of an enchanted Castle. They are
very different to the Feeling, and have a much greater Influence of every Kind,
either to give Pleasure or Pain, Joy or Sorrow.

LET us, then, take in the whole Compass of this Doctrine, and allow, that the
Sentiment of Belief is nothing but a Conception of an Object more intense and
steady than what attends the mere Fictions of the Imagination, and that this
Manner of Conception arises from a customary Conjunction of the Object with
something present to the Memory or Senses: I believe it will not be difficult,
upon these Suppositions, to find other Operations of the Mind analogous to it,
and to trace up these Phenomenon to Principles still more general.

WE have already observed, that Nature has established Connexions among
particular Ideas, and that no sooner one occurs to our Thoughts than it
introduces its correlative, and carries our Attention toward it, by a gentle
and insensible Movement. These Principles of Connection or Association we have
reduced to three, viz. Resemblance, Contiguity, and Causation; which are the
only Bonds, that unite our Thoughts together, and beget that regular. Train of
Reflection or Discourse, which, in a greater or lesser Degree, takes place
amongst all Mankind. Now here arises a Question, on which the Solution of the
present Difficulty will depend. Does it happen, in all these Relations, that
when one of the Objects is presented to the Senses or Memory, the Mind is not
only carried to the Conception of the Correlative, but reaches a steadier and
stronger Conception of it than what otherwise it would have been able to
attain? This seems to be the Case with that Belief, which arises from the
Relation of Cause and Effect. And if the Case be the same with the other
Relations or Principles of Association, we may establish this as a general Law,
that takes place in all the Operations of the Mind.

WE may, therefore, observe, as the first Experiment to our present Purpose,
that upon the Appearance of the Picture of an absent Friend, our Idea of him is
evidently enlivened by the Resemblance, and that every Passion, which that Idea
occasions, whether of Joy or Sorrow, acquires new Force and Vigoursn producing
this Effect, there concur both a Relation and a present Impression. Where the
Picture bears him no Resemblance, or at least was not intended for him, it
never so much as conveys our Thought to him: And where it is absent, as well as
the Person; though the Mind may pass from the Thought of the one to that of the
other; it feels its Idea to be rather weakened than enlivened by that
Transition. We take a Pleasure in viewing the Picture of a Friend, when it is
set before us; but when it is removed, rather choose to consider him directly,
than by Reflection in an image, which is equally distant and obscure.

THE Ceremonies of the Roman Catholic Religion may be considered as Experiments
of the same Nature. The Devotees of that strange Superstition usually plead in
Excuse of the Mummeries, with which they are upbraided, that they feel the good
Effect of those external Motions, and Postures, and Actions, in enlivening
their Devotion and quickening their Fervor, which otherwise would decay away,
if directed entirely to distant and immaterial Objects. We shadow out the
Objects of our Faith, say they, in sensible Types and Images, and render them
more present to us by the immediate Presence of these Types, than it is possible
for us to do, merely by an intellectual View and Contemplation. Sensible
Objects have always a greater Insluence on the Fancy than any other; and this
Influence they readily convey to those Ideas, to which they are related, and
which they resemble. I shall only infer from these Practices, and this
Reasoning, that the Effect of Resemblance in enlivening the Idea is very
common; and as in every Case a Resemblance and a present Impression must
concur, we are abundantly supplied with Experiments to prove the Reality of the
foregoing Principle.

WE may add Force to these Experiments by others of a different Kind, in
considering the Effects of Contiguity as well as of Resemblance. It Is certain
that Distance diminishes the Force of every Idea, and that upon our Approach to
any Object; though it does not discover itself to our Senses; it operates upon
the Mind with an Influence, that imitates an immediate Impression. The thinking
on any Object readily transports the Mind to what is contiguous; but it is only
the actual Presence of an Object, that transports it with a superior Vivacity.
When I am a few Miles from home, whatever relates to it touches me more nearly
than when I am two hundred Leagues distant; though even at that Distance the
reflecting on any thing in the Neighborhood of my Friends or Family naturally
produces an Idea of them. But as in this latter Case, both the Objects of the
Mind are Ideas; notwithstanding there is an easy Transition betwixt them; that
Transition alone is not able to give a superior Vivacity to any of the Ideas,
for want of some immediate Impression Naturane nobis, inquit, datum dicam, an
errore quodam, ut, cum ea loca videamus, in quibus memoria dignos viros
acceperimus multum esse versatos, magis moveamur, quam siquando eorum ipsorum
aut facta audiamus aut scriptum aliquod legamus? Velut ego nunc moveor. Venit
enim mihi Platonis in mentem, quem accepimus primum hic disputare solitum:
Cujus etiam illi hortuli propinqui non memoriam solum mihi asserunt, sed ipsum
videntur in conspectu meo hic ponere. Hic Speusippus, hic Xenocrates, hic ejus
auditor Polemo; cujus ipsa illa sessio fuit, quam videamus. Equidem etiam
curiam nostram, Hostilium dico, non hanc novam, quae mihi minor esse videtur
postquam est major, solcbam intuent, Scipionem, Catonem, Laelium, nostrum vero
in primis avum cogitare. Tanta vis admonitionis est in locis; ut non sine causa
ex his memoriae deducta sit disciplina. Cicero de Finibus. Lib. 5.
.

NO one can doubt but Causation has the same Influence as the other two
Relations of Resemblance and Contiguity. Superstitious People are fond of the
Relicts of Saints and holy Men, for the same Reason, that they seek after Types
or Images, in order to enliven their Devotion, and give them a more intimate
and strong Conception of those exemplary Lives, which they desire to imitate.
Now it is evident one of the best Relicts a Devotee could procure would be the
Handywork of a Saint; and if his Clothes and Furniture are ever to be
considered in this Light, it is because they were once at his Disposal, and were
moved and affected by him; in which Respect they are to be considered as
imperfect Effects, and as connected with him by a shorter Chain of Consequences
than any of those, by which we learn the Reality of his Existence.

SUPPOSE the Son of a Friend, who had been long dead or absent, were presented
to us; it is evident, that this Object would instantly revive its correlative
Idea, and recall to our Thoughts all our past Intimacies and Familiarities in
more lively Colors than they would otherwise have appeared to us. This is
another Phenomenon, which seems to prove the Principle above mentioned.

WE may observe, that in these Phenomenon the Belief of the correlative Object
is always pre-suppos'd; without which the Relation could have no Effect in
inlivening the Idea. The Influence of the Picture supposes, that we believe our
Friend to have once existed. Contiguity to Home can never excite our Ideas of
Home, unless we believe that it really exists. Now I assert, that this Belief,
where it reaches beyond the Memory or Senses, is of a similar Nature, and
arises from similar Causes, with the Transition of Thought and Vivacity of
Conception here explained. When I throw a Piece of dry Wood into a Fire, my
Mind is immediately carried to conceive, that its augments, not extinguishes
the Flame. This Transition of Thought from the Cause to the Effect proceeds not
from Reason. It derives its Origin altogether from Custom and Experience. And
as it first begins from an Object, present to the Senses, it renders the Idea
or Conception of Flame more strong and lively than any loose, floating Reverie
of the Imagination. That Idea arises immediately. The Thought passes instantly
to it, and conveys to it all that Force of Conception, which is derived from
the Impression present to the Senses. When a Sword is levelled at my Breast,
does not the Idea of Wound and Pain strike me more strongly, than when a Glass
of Wine is presented to me, even though by Accident this Idea should be presented
after the Appearance of the latter Object? But what is there in this whole
Matter to cause such a strong Conception, but only a present Object and a
customary Transition to the Idea of another Object, which we have been
accustomed to conjoin with the former? This is the whole Operation of the Mind
in all our Conclusions concerning Matter of Fact and Existence; and it is a
Satisfaction to find some Analogies, by which it may be explained. The
Transition from a present Object does in all Cases give Strength and Solidity
to the related Idea.

HERE is a kind of pre-establish'd Harmony betwixt the Course of Nature and the
Successions of our Ideas; and though the Powers and Forces, by which the former
is governed, be wholly unknown to us, yet our Thoughts and Conceptions have
still, we find, gone on in the same Train with the other Works of Nature.
Custom is that admirable Principle, by which this Correspondence has been
effected; so necessary to the Subsistence of our Species, and the Regulation of
our Conduct, in every Circumstance and Occurrence of human Life. Had not the
Presence of an Object instantly excited the Idea of those Objects, commonly
conjoined with it, all our Knowledge must have been limited to the narrow
Sphere of our Memory and Senses; and we should never have been able to adjust
Means to Ends, nor employ our natural Powers, either to the producing of Good,
or avoiding of Evil. Those, who delight in the Discovery and Contemplation of
final Causes, have here ample Subject to employ their Wonder and Admiration.

I SHALL add, as a farther Confirmation of the foregoing Theory, that as this
Operation of the Mind, by which we infer like Effects from like Causes, and
vice versa, is so essential to the Subsistence of all human Creatures, it is
not probable it could be trusted to the fallacious Deductions of our Reason,
which is slow in its Operations, appears not, in any Degree, during the first
Years of Infancy, and at best is, in every Age and Period of human Life,
extremely liable to Error and Mistake. It Is more like the ordinary Prudence of
Nature to secure so necessary an Act of the Mind, by some Instinct or
mechanical Tendency, which may be infallible in its Operations, may discover
itself at the first Appearance of Life and Thought, and may be independent of
all the labored Deductions of the Understanding. As Nature has taught us the
Use of our Limbs, without giving us the Knowledge of the Muscles and Nerves, by
which they are actuated; so has she implanted in us an Instinct, that carries
forward the Thought in a correspondent Course to that which she has established
among external Objects; though we are ignorant of those Powers and Forces, on
which this regular Course and Succession of Objects totally depends.

ESSAY VI. Of PROBABILITY Mr. Lock divides all Arguments into demonstrative
and probable. In this View, we must say, that it is only probable all Men must
die or that the Sun will rise Tomorrow. But to conform our Language more to
common Use, we should divide Arguments into Demonstrations, Proofs, and
Probabilities. By Proofs meaning such Arguments from Experience as leave no
room for Doubt or Opposition.
.
THO there be no such Thing as Chance in the World; our Ignorance of the real
Cause of any Event has the same Influence on the Understanding, and begets a
like Species of Belief or Opinion.

THERE is certainly a Probability, which arises from a Superiority of Chances
on any Side; and according as this Superiority increases, and surpasses the
opposite Chances, the Probability receives a proportionable Increase, and
begets still a higher Degree of Belief or Assent to that Side, in which we
discover the Superiority. If a Dye were marked with one Figure or Number of
Spots on four Sides, and with another Figure or Number of Spots on the two
remaining Sides, 'twould be more probable, that the former should turn up than
the latter; though if it had a thousand Sides marked in the same Manner, and only
one opposite Side, the Probability would be much higher, and our Belief or
Expectation of the Event more steady and secure. This Process of the Thought or
Reasoning may seem trivial and obvious; but to those, who consider it more
narrowly, it may, perhaps, afford Matter for very curious Speculation.

IT seems evident, that when the Mind looks forward to discover the Event,
which may result from the Throw of such a Dye, it considers the turning up of
each particular Side as alike probable; and this is the very Nature of Chance
to render all the particular Events, comprehended in it, entirely equal. But
finding a greater Number of Sides concur in the one Event than in the other,
the View is carried more frequently to that Event, and meets it oftener, in
revolving the various Possibilities or Chances, on which the ultimate Result
depends. This Concurrence of the several Views in one particular Event begets
immediately, by an inexplicable Contrivance of Nature, the Sentiment of Belief,
and gives that Event the Advantage over its Antagonist, which is supported by a
lesser Number of Views, and recurs less frequently to the Mind. If we allow,
that Belief is nothing but a firmer and stronger Conception of an Object than
what attends the mere Fictions of the Imagination, this Operation may, perhaps,
in some measure, be accounted for. The Concurrence of these several Views or
Glimpses imprints its Idea more strongly on the Imagination; gives it superior
Force and Vigor; renders its Influence on the Passions and Affections more
sensible; and in a word, begets that Reliance or Security, which constitutes
the Nature of Belief and Opinion.

THE Case is the same with the Probability of Causes as with that of Chance.
There are some Causes, which are entirely uniform and constant in producing a
particular Effect; and no Instance has ever yet been found of any Failure or
Irregularity in their Operation. Fire has always burnt, and Water suffocated
every human Creature: The Production of Motion by Impulse and Gravity is an
universal Law, that has hitherto admitted of no Exception. But there are other
Causes which have been found more irregular and uncertain; nor has Rhubarb
proved always a Purge, or Opium a Soporific to every one, who has taken these
Medicines. It Is true; when any Cause fails of producing its usual Effect,
Philosophers ascribe not this to any Irregularity in Nature; but suppose, that
some secret Causes, in the particular Structure of Parts, have prevented the
Operation. Our Reasonings, however, and Conclusions concerning the Event are
the same as if this Principle had no Place. Being determined by Custom to
transfer the past to the future, in all our Inferences; where the past has been
entirely regular and uniform, we expect the Event with the greatest Assurance,
and leave no room for any contrary Supposition. But where different Effects
have been sound to follow from Causes, which are to Appearance exactly similar,
all these various Effects must occur to the Mind in transferring the past to
the future, and enter into our Consideration, when we determine the Probability
of the Event. Though we give the Preference to that which has been found most
usual, and believe that this Effect will exist, we must not overlook the other
Effects, but must give each of them a particular Weight and Authority, in
Proportion as we have found it to be more or less frequent. It Is more probable,
in every Place of Europe, that there will be Frost sometime in January, than
that the Weather will continue fresh throughout that whole Month; though this
Probability varies according to the different Climates, and approaches to a
Certainty in the more northern Kingdoms. Here then it seems evident that when
we transfer the past to the future, in order to determine the Effect that will
result from any Cause, we transfer all the different Events, in the same
Proportion as they have appeared in the past, and conceive one to have existed
a hundred Times, for Instance, another ten Times, and another once. As a great
Number of Views do here concur in one Event, they fortify and confirm it to the
Imagination, beget that Sentiment we call Belief, and give it the Preference
above its Antagonist, which is not supported by an equal Number of Experiments,
and occurs not so frequently to the Thought in transferring the past to the
future. Let any one try to account for this Operation of the Mind upon any of
the received Systems of Philosophy, and he will be sensible of the Difficulty.
For my part, I shall think it sufficient, if the present Hints excite the
Curiosity of Philosophers, and make them sensible how extremely defective all
received Theories are, in treating of such curious and such sublime Subjects.

ESSAY VII. Of the IDEA of POWER or necessary CONNECTION.
PART I.
THE great Advantage of the mathematical Sciences above the moral consists in
this, that the Ideas of the former, being sensible, are always clear and
determinate, the smallest Distinction betwixt them is immediately perceptible,
and the same Terms are still expressive of the same Ideas, without Ambiguity or
Variation. An Oval is never mistaken for a Circle, nor an Hyperbola for an
Ellipsis. The Isoceles and Scalenum are distinguished by Boundaries more exact
than Vice and Virtue, Right and Wrong. If any Term be defined in Geometry, the
Mind readily, of itself, substitutes, on all Occasions, the Definition for the
Term defined: Or even when no Definition is employed, the Object itself may be
presented to the Senses, and by that Means be steadily and clearly apprehended.
But the finer Sentiments of the Mind, the Operations of the Understanding, the
various Agitations of the Passions, though really in themselves distinct, easily
escape us, when surveyed by Reflection; nor is it in our Power to recall the
original Object, as often as we have occasion to contemplate it. Ambiguity, by
this Means, is gradually introduced into our Reasonings: Similar Objects are
readily taken to be the same: And the Conclusion becomes, at last, very wide of
the Premises.

ONE may safely, however, affirm, that if we consider these Sciences in a
proper Light, their Advantages and Disadvantages do very nearly compensate each
other, and reduce both of them to a State of Equality. If the Mind with greater
Facility retains the Ideas of Geometry clear and determinate, it must carry on
a much longer and more intricate Chain of Reasoning, and compare Ideas much
wider of each other, in order to reach the abstruser Truths of that Science.
And if more Ideas are apt, without extreme Care, to fall into Obscurity and
Confusion, the Inferences are always much shorter in these Disquisitions, and
the intermediate Steps, that lead to the Conclusion, much fewer th^^ in the
Sciences, which treat of Quantity and Number. In reality, there is scarce a
Proposition of Euclid (...) simple as not to consist of more Parts, than are to
be found in any moral Reasoning, which runs not into Chimera and Conceit. If we
can trace the Principles of the human Mind through a few Steps, we may be very
well satisfied with our Progress; considering how soon Nature throws a Bar to
all our Enquiries concerning Causes, and reduces us to an Acknowledgment of our
Ignorance. The chief Obstacle, therefore, to our Improvement in the moral or
metaphysical Sciences is the Obscurity of the Ideas, and Ambiguity of the
Terms. The principal Difficulty in the Mathematics in the Length of Inferences
and Compass of Thought, requisite to the forming any Conclusion. And perhaps,
our Progress in natural Philosophy is mostly retarded by the Want of proper
Experiments and Phenomena, which often are discovered by Chance, and cannot
always be found, when requisite, even by the most diligent and prudent Enquiry.
A moral Philosophy seems hitherto to have received less Improvements than
either Geometry or Physics, we may conclude, that, if there be any Difference
in this Respect amongst these Sciences, the Difficulties, which obstruct the
Progress of the former, require the greatest Care and Capacity to be surmounted.

THERE are no Ideas, that occur in Metaphysics, more obscure and uncertain,
than those of Power, Force, Energy, or necessary Connection, which it is every
Moment necessary for us to treat of in all our Disquisitions. We shall,
therefore, endeavor, in this Essay, to fix, if possible, the precise Meaning
of these Terms, and thereby remove some Part of that Obscurity, which is so
much complained of in this Species of Philosophy.

IT seems a Proposition, which will not admit of much Dispute, that all our
Ideas are nothing but Copies of our Impressions, or in other Words, that it is
impossible for us to think of any Thing, which we have not antecedently felt,
either by our external or internal Senses. I have endeavored in a former Essay
Essay II.
to explain and prove this Proposition, and have expressed my Hopes, that, by a
proper Application of it, Men may be able to reach a greater Clearness and
Precision in philosophical Reasonings, than what they have hitherto been ever
able to attain. Complex Ideas may, perhaps, be well known by Definition, which
is nothing but an Enumeration of those Parts or simple Ideas, that compose
them. But when we have pushed up Definitions to the most simple Ideas, and find
still some Ambiguity and Obscurity; what Resource are we then possessed of? By
what Invention can we throw Light upon these Ideas, and render them altogether
precise and determinate to our intellectual View? Produce the Impressions or
original Sentiments, from which the Ideas are copied. These Impressions are all
strong and sensible. They admit not of Ambiguity and Obscurity. They are not
only placed in a full Light themselves, but may throw Light on their
correspondent Ideas, which lie in Obscurity. And by this Means, we may,
perhaps, attain a new Microscope or Species of Optics, by which, in the moral
Sciences, the most minute and most simple Ideas, may be so enlarged as to fall
readily under our Apprehension, and be equally known with the grossest and most
sensible Objects, that can be the Subjects of our Disquisition and Enquiry.

To be fully acquainted, therefore, with the Idea of Power or necessary
Connection, let us examine its Impression; and in order to find that with
greater Certainty, let us search for all the Sources, from which it may
possibly be derived.

WHEN we look about us toward external Objects, and consider the Operation of
Causes, we are never able, in any single Instance, to discover any Power or
necessary Connection; any Quality, which binds the Effect to the Cause, and
renders the one an insallible Consequence of the other. We only find, that the
one does actually, in fact, follow the other. The Impulse of one Billiard-Ball
is attended with Motion in the second. This is the whole, that appears to the
outward Senses. The Mind feels no Sentiment or inward Impression from this
Succession of Objects: Consequently, there is nothing in any single, particular
Instance of Cause and Effect, which can suggest the Idea of Power or necessary
Connection.

FROM the first Appearance of an Object, we never can conjecture what Effect
will result from it. But (...) the Power or Energy of any Cause discoverable by
the Mind, we could foresee the Effect, even without Experience, and might, at
first, pronounce with Certainty concerning it, by the mere Dint of Thought and
Reasoning.

IN Reality, there is no Part of Matter, that does ever, by its sensible
Qualities, discover any Power or Energy, or give us ground to imagine, that it
could produce any thing, or be followed by any other Object, which we could
denominate its Effect. Solidity, Extension, Motion; these Qualities are all
complete in themselves, and never point out any other Event, which may result
from them. The Scenes of the Universe are continually shifting, and one Object
follows another in an uninterrupted Succession; but the Power or Force, which
actuates the whole Machine, is entirely concealed from us, and never discovers
itself in any of the sensible Qualities of Body. We know, that, in fact, Heat
is a constant Attendant of Flame; but what is the Connection betwixt them, we
have no room so much as to conjecture or imagine. It Is impossible, therefore,
that the Idea of Power can be derived from the Contemplation of Bodies, in
single Instances of their Operation; because no Bodies ever discover any Power,
which can be the Original of this Idea Mr. Lock, in his Chapter of Power,
says, that finding from Experience, that there are several new Productions in
Matter, and concluding that there must somewhere be a Power, capable of
producing them, we arrive at last by this Reasoning at the Idea of Power. But
no Reasoning can ever give us a new, original, simple Idea; as this Philosopher
confesses. This, therefore, can never be the Original of that Idea.
.

SINCE, therefore, external Objects, as they appear to the Senses, give us no
Idea of Power or necessary Connection, by their Operations in particular
Instances; let us see, if this Idea be derived from Reflection on the
Operations of our own Minds, and be copied from any internal Impression. It may
be said, that we are every Moment conscious of Power in our own Minds, while we
feel, that, by the simple Command of our Will, we can move the Organs of our
Body, or direct the Faculties of our Minds, in their Operation. An Act of
Volition produces Motion in our Limbs, or raises a new Idea in our Imagination.
This Influence of the Will we know by Consciousness. Hence we acquire the Idea
of Power or Energy; and are certain, that we ourselves and all other
intelligent Beings are possessed of Power. The Operations and mutual Influence
of Bodies are, perhaps, sufficient to prove, that they also are possessed of
it. However this may be, the Idea of Power must certainly be allowed to be an
Idea of Reflection, since it arises from reflecting on the Operations of our
own Minds, and on the Command, which is exercised by Will over the Organs of
the Body and Faculties of the Mind.

WE shall proceed to examine this Pretension, and shall endeavor to avoid, as
far as we are able, all Jargon and Confusion, in treating of such subtle and
such profound Subjects.

I ASSERT, then, in the first Place, that the Influence of Volition over the
Organs of the Body, is a Fact, which, like all other natural Operations, could
be known only by Experience, and could never be foreseen from any apparent
Energy or Power in the Cause, which connects it with the Effect, and renders
the one a necessary Consequence of the other. The Motions of our Body follow
upon the Command of our Will. This we are every Moment conscious of: But the
Means, by which this is effected; the Energy, by which the Will performs so
extraordinary an Operation; this we are so far from being immediately conscious
of, that it must for ever escape our most diligent Search and Enquiry.

FOR first; Is there any Principle in all Nature more mysterious than the Union
of the Soul with the Body; by which a supposed spiritual Substance acquires
such an Influence over a material one, that the most refined Thought is able to
actuate the grossest Body? Were we empowered, by a secret Wish, to remove
Mountains, or control the Planets in their Orbits; this extensive Authority
over Matter would not be more extraordinary, nor more beyond the Bounds of our
Comprehension. But if by Consciousness we perceived any Power or Energy in the
Will, we must know this Power; we must know its Connection with the Effect; we
must know the secret Union of Soul and Body, and the Nature of both these
Substances; by which the one is able to operate, in so many Instances, upon the
other.

Secondly, We are not able to move all the Organs of the Body with a like
Authority; though we cannot assign any other Reason, besides Experience, for so
remarkable a Difference betwixt the one and the other. Why has the Will an
Influence over the Tongue and Fingers, and not over the Heart or Liver? This
Question would never embarrass us, were we conscious of a Power in the former
Case, and not in the latter. We should, then, perceive, independent of
Experience, why the Authority of Will over the Organs of the Body is
circumscribed within such particular Limits. Being in that Case fully
acquainted with the Power or Force, by which it operates, we should also know,
why its Influence reaches precisely to such Boundaries, and no farther.

A MAN, struck suddenly with a Palsy in the Leg or Arm, or who had newly lost
those Members, frequently endeavors, at first, to move them, and employ them
to their usual Offices. Here he is as much conscious of Power to command such
Limbs, as a Man in perfect Health is to actuate any Member, which remains in
its natural State and Condition. But Consciousness never deceives.
Consequently, neither in the one Case nor the other, are we ever conscious of
any Power. We only learn the Influence of our Will from Experience. And
Experience only teaches us, how one Event constantly follows another, without
instructing us in the secret Connection, which binds them together, and renders
them inseparable.

Thirdly, We learn from Anatomy, that the immediate Object of Power in
voluntary Motion, is not the Member itself, which is moved, but certain
Muscles, and Nerves, and animal Spirits, and perhaps, something still more
minute and more unknown, through which the Motion is successively propagated,
'ere it reach the Member itself, whose Motion is the immediate Object of
Volition. Can there be a more certain Proof, that the Power, by which this
whole Operation is performed, so far from being directly and fully known by an
inward Sentiment or Consciousness, is, to the last degree, mysterious and
unintelligible? Here the Mind wills a certain Event: Immediately, another
Event, unknown to ourselves, and totally different from that intended, is
produced: This Event produces another, equally unknown: Till at last, through a
long Succession, the desired Event is produced. But if the original Power were
felt, it must be known: Were it known, its Effect must also be known; since all
Power is relative to its Effect. And vice versa, if the Effect be not known,
the Power cannot be known or felt. How indeed can we be conscious of a Power to
move our Limbs, when we have no such Power; but only that to move certain
animal Spirits, which, though they produce at last the Motion of our Limbs, yet
operate in a Manner, that is altogether beyond our Comprehension?

WE may, therefore, conclude from the whole, I hope, without any Temerity, though
with Assurance; that our Idea of Power is not copied from any Sentiment or
Consciousness of Power within ourselves, when we give rise to animal Motion, or
apply our Limbs to their proper Use and Office. That their Motion follows the
Command of the Will is a Matter of common Experience, like other natural
Events: But the Power or Energy, by which this is effected, like that in other
natural Events, is unknown and inconceivable It may be pretended, that the
Resistance, which we meet with in Bodies, obliging us frequently to exert our
Force, and call up all our Power; this gives us the Idea of Force and Power.
It Is this Nisus or strong Endeavor, of which we are conscious, that is the
original Impression, from which this Idea is copied. But, first, we attribute
Power to a vast Number of Objects, where we never can suppose this Resistance
or Exertion of Power to take place: To the supreme Being, who never meets with
any Resistance; to the Mind in its Command over our Ideas and Limbs, in common
Thinking and Motion, where the Effect follows immediately upon the Will,
without any Exertion or summoning up of Force; to inanimate Matter, which is
not capable of this Sentiment. Secondly, This Sentiment of an Endeavor to
overcome Resistance has no known Connection with any Event: What follows it, we
know by Experience, but could not know a priori.
.

SHALL we then assert, that we are conscious of a Power or Energy in our own
Minds, when, by an Act or Command of our Will, we raise up a new Idea, fix the
Mind to a Contemplation of it, turn it on all Sides, and at last dismiss it for
some other Idea, when we think, that we have surveyed it with sufficient
Accuracy? I believe the same Arguments will prove, that even this Command of
the Will gives us no real Idea of Force or Energy.

First, It must be allowed, that when we know a Power, we know that very
Circumstance in the Cause, by which it is enabled to produce the Effect: For
these are supposed to be synonimous. We must, therefore, know both the Cause
and Effect, and the Relation betwixt the one and the other. But do we pretend
to be acquainted with the Nature of the human Soul and the Nature of an Idea,
or the Aptitude of the one to produce the other? This is a real Creation; a
Production of something out of nothing: Which implies a Power so great, that it
may seem, at first Sight, beyond the Reach of any Being, less than infinite. At
least, it must be owned, that such a Power is not felt, nor known, nor even
conceivable by the Mind. We only feel the Event, viz. the Existence of an Idea,
consequent to a Command of the Will: But the Manner, by which this Operation is
persorm'd; the Power, by which it is produced; is entirely beyond our
Comprehension.

Secondly, The Command of the Mind over itself is limited, as well as its
Command over the Body; and these Limitations are not known by Reason, or any
Contemplation of the Nature of the Cause and the Effect; but only by Experience
and Observation, as in all other natural Events and in the Operation of
external Objects. Our Authority over our Sentiments and Passions is much weaker
than that over our Ideas; and even the latter Authority is circumscribed within
very narrow Limits. Will any one pretend to assign the ultimate Reason of these
Limits, or snow why the Power is deficient in one Case and not in another?

Thirdly, This Self-command is very different at different Times. A Man in
Health posseffes more of it, than one languishing with Sickness. We are more
Masters of our Thoughts in the Morning than in the Evening: Fasting, than after
a full Meal. Can we give any Reason for these Variations, except Experience?
Where then is the Power, of which we pretend to be conscious? Is there not here
some secret Mechanism or Structure of Parts, either in a spiritual or material
Substance or both, upon which the Effect depends, and which being altogether
unknown to us, renders the Power or Energy of the Will equally unknown and
incomprehensible?

VOLITION is surely an Act of the Mind, with which we are sufficiently
acquainted. Reflect upon it. Consider it on all Sides. Do you find any thing in
it like this creative Power, by which it raises from nothing a new Idea, and by
a kind of FIAT, imitates the Omnipotence of its Maker, if I may be allowed so
to speak, who called forth into Existence all the various Scenes of Nature? So
far from being conscious of this Energy in the Will, it requires as certain
Experience, as that which we are possessed of in the Case, to convince us, that
such extraordinary Effects do ever result from a simple Act of Volition.

THE Generality of Mankind never find any Difficulty in accounting for the more
common and familiar Operations of Nature; such as the Descent of heavy Bodies,
the Growth of Plants, the Generation of Animals, or the Nourishment of Bodies
by Food; but suppose, that, in all these Cases, they perceive the very Force
and Energy of the Cause, by which it is connected with its Effect, and is for
ever infallible in its Operation. They acquire, by long Habit, such a Turn of
Mind, that, upon the Appearance of the Cause, they immediately expect with
Assurance its usual Attendant, and hardly conceive it possible, that any other
Event could result from it. It Is only on the Discovery of extraordinary
Phenomenon, such as Earthquakes, Pestilences, and Prodigies of any Kind, that
they find themselves at a Loss to assign a proper Cause, and to explain the
Manner, in which the Effect is produced by it. It Is usual for Men, in such
Difficulties, to have recourse to some invisible, intelligent Principle, (
quasi Deus ex machina) as the immediate Cause of that Event, which surprises
them, and which, they think, cannot be accounted for from the common Powers of
Nature. But Philosophers, who carry their Scrutiny a little farther,
immediately perceive, that, even in the most familiar Events, the Energy of the
Cause is as unintelligible as in the most extraordinary and unusual, and that
we only learn by Experience the frequent CONJUNCTION of one Object with
another, without being ever able to comprehend any thing like CONNECTION betwixt
them. Here then many Philosophers think themselves obliged by Reason to have
recourse, on all Occasions, to the same Principle, which the Vulgar never
appeal to but in Cases, that appear miraculous and supernatural. They
acknowledge Mind and Intelligence to be, not only the ultimate and original
Cause of all Things, but the immediate and sole Cause of every Event, that
appears in Nature. They pretend, that those Objects, which are commonly
denominated Causes, are in Reality nothing but Occasions; and that the true and
direct Principle of every Effect is not any Power or Force in Nature, but a
Volition of the supreme Being, who wills, that such particular Objects should
be for ever conjoined with each other. Instead of saying, that one
Billiard-Ball moves another, by a Force, which it has derived from the Author
of Nature; it is the Deity himself, they say, who, by a particular Volition,
moves the second Ball, being determined to this Operation by the Impulse of the
first Ball; in Consequence of those general Laws, which he has laid down to
himself in the Government of the Universe. But Philosophers, advancing still in
their Enquiries, discover, that, as we are totally ignorant of the Power, on
which depends the mutual Operation of Bodies, we are no less ignorant of that
Power, on which depends the Operation of Mind on Body, or of Body on Mind; nor
are we able, either from our Senses or Consciousness, to assign the ultimate
Principle, in the one Case more than in the other. The same Ignorance,
therefore, reduces them to the same Conclusion. They assert, that the Deity is
the immediate Cause of the Union betwixt Soul and Body, and that they are not
the Organs of Sense, which, being agitated by external Objects, produce
Sensations in the Mind; but that it is a particular Volition of our omnipotent
Maker, which excites such a Sensation, in Consequence of such a Motion in the
Organ. In like manner, it is not any Energy in the Will, that produces local
Motion in our Members: It Is God himself, who is pleased to second our Will, in
itself impotent, and to command that Motion, which we erroneously attribute to
our own Power and Efficacy. Nor do Philosophers stop at this Conclusion. They
sometimes apply the same Inferences to the Mind itself, in its internal
Operations. Our mental Vision or Conception of Ideas is nothing but a
Revelation made to us by our Maker. When we voluntarily turn our Thoughts to
any Object, and raise up its Image in the Fancy; it is not the Will, which
creates that Idea: It Is the universal Creator of all Things, who discovers it
to the Mind, and renders it present to us.

THUS, according to these Philosophers, every Thing is full of God. Not
contented with the Principle, that nothing exists but by his Will, that nothing
possesses any Power but by his Concession: They (...) Nature, and all created
Beings of every Power, in order to render their Dependence on the Deity still
more sensible and immediate. They consider not, that by this Theory they
diminish, instead of magnifying, the Grandeur of those Attributes, which they
affect so much to celebrate. It argues surely more Power in the Deity to
delegate a certain Degree of Power to his inferior Creatures than to operate
every Thing by his immediate Volition. It argues more Wisdom to contrive at
first the Fabric of the World with such perfect Foresight, that, of itself, and
by its own proper Operation, it may serve all the Purposes of Providence, than
if the great Creator were obliged every Moment to adjust its Parts, and animate
by his Breath all the Wheels of that stupendous Machine.

BUT if we would have a more philosophical Confutation of this Theory, perhaps
the two following Reflections may suffice.

First, It seems to me, that this Theory, of the universal Energy and Operation
of the supreme Being, is too bold ever to carry Conviction with it to a Man,
who is sufficiently appriz'd of the Weakness of human Reason, and the narrow
Limits, to which it is confined in all its Operations. Though the Chain of
Arguments, that lead to it, were ever so conclusive and logical, there must
arise a strong Supicion, if not an absolute Assurance, that it has led us quite
beyond the Reach of our Faculties, when it establishes Conclusions so
extraordinary, and so remote from common Life and Experience. We are got into
Fairy-land, long ere we have reached the last Steps of our Theory; and there we
have no Reason to trust our common Methods of Argument, or think that our usual
Analogies and Probabilities have any Weight or Authority. Our Line is too short
to fathom such immense Abysses. And however we may flatter ourselves, that we
are guided in every Step we take by a kind of Verisimilitude and Experience; we
may be assured, that this fancied Experience has no Authority, when we thus
apply it to Subjects, that lie entirely out of the Sphere of Experience. But on
this we shall have Occasion to touch afterward Essay XII.
.

Secondly, I cannot perceive any Force in the Arguments, on which this Theory
is founded. We are ignorant, it is true, of the Manner, in which Bodies operate
on each other: Their Force or Energy is entirely incomprehensible. But are we
not equally ignorant of the Manner or Force, by which a Mind, even the supreme
Mind, operates either on itself or on Body? Whence, I beseech you, do we
acquire any Idea of it? We have no Sentiment or Consciousness of this Power in
ourselves: We have no Idea of the supreme Being, but what we learn from
Reflection on our own Faculties. Were our Ignorance, therefore, a good Reason
for our rejecting any Thing, we should be led into that Principle of refusing
all Energy to the supreme Being as much as to the grossest Matter. We surely
comprehend as little the Operations of the one as of the other. Is it more
difficult to conceive, that Motion may arise from Impulse, than that it may
arise from Volition? All we know is our profound Ignorance in both Cases I need
not examine at length the vis inertioe, which is so much talked of in the new
Philosophy, and which is ascribed to Matter. We find by Experience, that a Body
at Rest or in Motion continues for ever in its present State, till put from it
by some new Cause: And that a Body impelled takes as much Motion from the
impelling Body as it acquires itself. These are Facts. When we call this a vis
inertiae, we only mark these Facts, without pretending to have any Idea of the
inert Power; in the same Manner as when we talk of Gravity, we mean certain
Effects without comprehending that active Power. It was never the Meaning of
Sir Isaac Newton to rob Matter of all Force or Energy; though some of his
Followers have endeavored to establish that Theory upon his Authority. On the
contrary that great Philosopher had recourse to an etherial active Matter to
explain his universal Attraction; though he was so cautious and modest as to
allow, that it was a mere Hypothesis, not to be insisted on, without more
Experiments. I must confess, that there is something in the Fate of Opinions a
little extraordinary. Descartes insinuated that Doctrine of the universal and
sole Efficacy of the Deity, without insisting on it. Malebranche and other
Cartesians made it the Foundation of all their Philosophy. It had, however, no
Authority in England. Lock, Clarke, and Cudworth, never so much as take notice
of it, but suppose all along, that Matter has a real, though subordinate and
derived Power. By what Means has it become so prevalent among our modern
Metaphysicians?
.

PART II.
BUT to hasten to a Conclusion of this Argument, which is already drawn out to
too great a Length: We have sought, in vain, for an Idea of Power or necessary
Connection in all the Sources, from which we could suppose it to be derived. It
appears, that, in single Instances of the Operation of Bodies, we never can, by
our outmost Scrutiny, discover any Thing but one Event following another,
without being able to comprehend any Force or Power, by which the Cause
operates, or any Connection betwixt it and its supposed Effect. The same
Difficulty occurs in contemplating the Operations of Mind on Body; where we
observe the Motion of the latter to follow upon the Volition of the former; but
are not able to observe or conceive the Tie, which binds them together, or the
Energy, by which the Mind produces this Effect. The Authority of the Will over
our own Faculties and Ideas is not a whit more comprehensible: So that upon the
whole, there appears not, through all Nature, any one Instance of Connection, that
is conceivable by us: All Events seem entirely loose and separate. One Event
follows another; but we never can observe any Tie betwixt them: They seem
conjoined, but never connected. And as we can have no Idea of any Thing, that
never appeared to our outward Sense or inward Sentiment, the necessary
Conclusion seems to be, that we have no Idea of Connection or Power at all, and
that these Words are absolutely without any Meaning, when employed either in
philosophical Reasonings, or common Life.

BUT we have still one Method of avoiding this Conclusion, and one Source,
which we have not yet examined. When any natural Object or Event is presented,
it is impossible for us, by any Sagacity or Penetration, to discover, or even
conjecture, without Experience, what Event will result from it, or to carry our
Foresight beyond those Objects, which are immediately present to the Memory and
Senses. Even after one Instance or Experiment, where we have observed a
particular Event to follow upon another, we are not entitled to form a general
Rule, or foretell what will happen in like Cases; it being justly esteemed an
unpardonable Rashness and Temerity to judge of the whole Course of Nature from
one single Experiment, however accurate or certain. But when one particular
Species of Events has always, in all Instances, been conjoined with another, we
make no longer any Scruple to foretell the one upon the Appearance of the
other, and to employ that Reasoning, which can alone assure us of any Matter of
Fact or Existence. We then call the one Object, Cause; and the other, Effect:
We suppose, that there is some Connection betwixt them; some Power in the one,
by which it infallibly produces the other, and operates with the greatest
Certainty and strongest Necessity.

IT appears, then, that this Idea of a necessary Connection amongst Objects or
Events arises from a Number of similar Instances of the constant Conjunction of
these Events, and can never be suggested by any one of these Instances,
surveyed in all possible Lights and Positions. But what is there in a Number of
Instances, different from every single Instance, which is supposed to be
exactly similar? Nothing but this, that after a Repetition of similar
Instances, the Mind is carried by Habit, upon the Appearance of one Event, to
expect its usual Attendant, and to believe, that it will exist. This Connection,
therefore, which we feel in the Mind, or customary Transition of the
Imagination from one Object to its usual Attendant, is the only Sentiment or
Impression, from which we form the Idea of Power or necessary Connection.
Nothing farther is in the Case. Contemplate the Subject on all Sides, you will
never find any other Origin of this Idea. There is no other Difference betwixt
one Instance, from which we never can receive the Idea of Connection, and a
Number of similar Instances, by which it is suggested. The first Time a Man saw
the Communication of Motion by Impulse, as by the Shock of two Billiard-balls,
he could not pronounce that the one Effect was connected; but only that it was
conjoined, with the other. After he has observed several Instances of this
Nature, he then pronounces them to be connected. What Alteration has happened
to give rise to this new Idea of Connection? Nothing but this, that he now feels
these Events to be connected in his Imagination, and can readily foretell the
Existence of the one from the Appearance of the other. When, therefore, we say,
that one Object is connected with another, we mean only, that they have
acquired a Connection in our Thoughts, and give rise to this Inference, by which
they become Proofs of each other's Existence. A Conclusion, which is somewhat
extraordinary; but which seems founded on sufficient Evidence. Nor will its
Evidence be weakened by any general Diffidence of the Understanding, or
skeptical Suspicion concerning every Conclusion, that is new and extraordinary.
No Conclusion can be more agreeable to Skepticism than such as make Discoveries
concerning the Weakness and narrow Limitations of human Reason and Capacity.

AND what stronger Instance can be produced of the surprising Ignorance and
Weakness of the Understanding, than the present? For surely, if there be any
Relation among Objects, which it imports us to know perfectly, it is that of
Cause and Effect. On this are founded all our Reasonings concerning Matter of
Fact or Existence. By Means of it alone we attain any Assurance concerning
Objects, that are removed from the present Testimony of our Memory and Senses.
The only immediate Utility of all Science is to teach us, how to control and
regulate future Events by their Causes. Our Thoughts and Enquiries are,
therefore, every Moment employed concerning this Relation. And yet so imperfect
are the Ideas we form concerning it, that it is impossible to give any just
Definition of Cause, except what is drawn from something extraneous and foreign
to it. Similar Objects are always conjoined with similar. Of this we have
Experience. Suitable to this Experience, therefore, we may define a Cause to be
an Object, followed by another, and where all the Objects, similar to the
first, are followed by Objects, similar to the second. The Appearance of a
Cause does always convey the Mind, by a customary Transition, to the Idea of
the Effect. Of this also we have Experience. We may, therefore, suitable to
this Experience, form another Definition of Cause, and call it, an Object,
followed by another, and whose Appearance always conveys the Thought to that
other. But though both these Definitions be drawn from Circumstances, foreign to
the Cause, we cannot remedy this Inconvenience, or attain any more perfect
Definition, which may point out that Circumstance in the Cause, which gives it
a Connection with its Effect. We have no Idea of this Connection; nor even any
Notion what it is we desire to know, when we endeavor at a Conception of it.
We say, for Instance, that the Vibration of this String is the Cause of this
particular Sound. But what do we mean by that Affirmation? We either mean, that
this Vibration is followed by this Sound, and that all similar Vibrations have
been followed by similar Sounds: Or, that this Vibration is followed by this
Sound, and that upon the Appearance of the one, the Mind anticipates the
Senses, and forms immediately an Idea of the other. We may consider the
Relation of Cause and Effect in either of these two Lights; but beyond these,
we have no Idea of it.

To recapitulate, therefore, the Reasonings of this Essay: Every Idea is copied
from some preceding Impression or Sentiment; and where we cannot find any
Impression, we may be certain there is no Idea. In all single Instances of the
Operation of Bodies or Minds, there is nothing that produces any Impression,
nor consequently can suggest any Idea of Power or necessary Connection. But when
many uniform Instances appear, and the same Object is always followed by the
same Event; we then begin to entertain the Notion of Cause and Connection. We
then feel a new Sentiment or Impression, viz. a customary Connection in the
Thought or Imagination betwixt one Object and its usual Attendant; and this
Sentiment is the Original of that Idea we seek for. For as this Idea arises
from a Number of similar Instances, and not from any single Instance; it must
arise from that Circumstance, in which the Number of Instances differ from
every individual Instance. But this customary Connection or Transition of the
Imagination is the only Circumstance, in which they differ. In every other
particular, they are alike. The first Instance we saw of Motion, communicated
by the Shock of two Billiard-balls (to return to this obvious Instance) is
exactly similar to any one, that may, at present, occur to us; except only,
that we could not, at first, infer the one Event from the other; which we are
enabled to do at present, after so long a Course of uniform Experience. I know
not, if the Reader will readily apprehend this Reasoning. I am afraid, that,
should I multiply Words about it, or throw it into a greater Variety of Lights,
it would only become more obscure and intricate. In all abstract Reasonings,
there is one Point of View, which, if we can happily hit, we shall go farther
toward illustrating the Subject, than by all the Eloquence and copious
Expression of the World. This we should endeavor to attain, and reserve the
Flowers of Rhetoric for Subjects, that are more adapted to them.

ESSAY VIII. Of LIBERTY and NECESSITY.
PART I.
IT might reasonably be expected, that, in Questions, which have been canvass'd
and disputed with great Eagerness since the first Origin of Science and
Philosophy, the Meaning of all the Terms, at least, should have been agreed
upon among the Disputants; and our Enquiries, in the Course of two thousand
Years, been able to pass from Words to the true and real Subject of the
Controversy. For how easy may it seem to give exact Definitions of the Terms
employed in Reasoning, and make these Definitions, not the mere Sound of Words,
the Object of future Scrutiny and Examination! But if we consider the Matter
more narrowly, we shall be apt to draw a quite opposite Conclusion. From that
Circumstance alone, that a Controversy has been long kept afoot, and remains
still undecided, we may presume, that there is some Ambiguity in the
Expression, and that the Disputants affix different Ideas to the Terms employed
in the Controversy. For as the Faculties of the Soul are supposed to be
naturally alike in all Men; otherwise nothing could be more fruitless than to
reason or dispute together; 'twere impossible, if they affixed the same Ideas
to their Terms, they could so long form different Opinions of the same Subject;
especially when they communicate their Views, and each Party turn themselves on
all Sides, in Search of Arguments, which may give them the Victory over their
Antagonists. It Is true; if they attempt the Discussion of Questions, that lie
entirely beyond the Reach of human Capacity, such as those concerning the
Origin of Worlds, or the Economy of the intellectual System or Region of
Spirits, they may long beat the Air in their fruitless Contests, and never
arrive at any determinate Conclusion. But if the Question regard any Subject of
common Life and Experience; nothing, one would think, could preserve the
Dispute so long undecided, but some ambiguous Expressions, which keep the
Antagonists still at a Distance, and hinder them from grappling with each other.

THIS has been the Case in the long-disputed Question concerning Liberty and
Necessity; and to so remarkable a Degree, that, If I be not much mistaken, we
shall find all Mankind, both learned and ignorant, to have been always of the
same Opinion with regard to that Subject, and that a few intelligible
Definitions would immediately have put an end to the whole Controversy. I own,
that this Dispute has been so much canvass'd on all hands, and has led
Philosophers into such a Labyrinth of obscure Sophystry, that it is no Wonder,
if a sensible and polite Reader indulge his Ease so far as to turn a deaf Ear
to the Proposal of such a Question, from which he can expect neither
Instruction nor Entertainment. But the State of the Argument here proposed may,
perhaps, serve to renew his Attention, as it has more Novelty, promises, at
least, some Decision of the Controversy, and will not much disturb his Ease, by
any intricate or obscure Reasoning.

I HOPE, therefore, to make appear, that all Men have ever agreed in the
Doctrines both of Necessity, and of Liberty, according to any reasonable Sense,
that can be put on these Expressions; and that the whole Controversy has
hitherto turned merely upon Words. We shall begin with examining the Doctrine
of Necessity.

It Is universally allowed, that Matter, in all its Operations, is actuated by a
necessary Force, and that every Effect is so precisely determined by the Nature
and Energy of its Cause, that no other Effect, in such particular
Circumstances, could possibly have resulted from the Operation of that Cause.
The Degree and Direction of every Motion is, by the Laws of Nature, prescribed
with such Exactness, that a living Creature may as soon arise from the Shock of
two Bodies, as Motion in any other Degree or Direction, than what is actually
produced by it. Would we, therefore, form a just and precise Idea of Necessity,
we must consider, whence that Idea arises, when we apply it to the Operation of
Bodies.

IT seems evident, that, if all the Scenes of Nature were shifted continually
in such a Manner, that no two Events bore any Resemblance to each other, but
every Object was entirely new, without any Similitude to whatever had been seen
before, we should never, in that Case, have attained the least Idea of
Necessity, or of a Connection amongst these Objects. We might say, upon such a
Supposition, that one Object or Event has followed another; not that one was
produced by the other. The Relation of Cause and Effect must be utterly unknown
to Mankind. Inference and Reasoning concerning the Operations of Nature would,
from that Moment, be at an End; and the Memory and Senses remain the only
Canals, by which the Knowledge of any real Existence could possibly have access
to the Mind. Our Idea, therefore, of Necessity and Causation arises entirely
from that Uniformity, observable in the Operations of Nature; where similar
Objects are constantly conjoined together, and the Mind is determined by Custom
to infer the one from the Appearance of the other. These two Circumstances form
the whole of that Necessity, which we ascribe to Matter. Beyond the constant
Conjunction of similar Objects, and the consequent Inference from one to the
other, we have no Notion of any Necessity or Connection.

IF it appear, therefore, that all Mankind have ever allowed, without any Doubt
or Hesitation, that these two Circumstances, take place in the voluntary
Actions of Men, and in the Operations of the Mind; it must follow, that all
Mankind have ever agreed in the Doctrine of Necessity, and that they have
hitherto disputed, merely for Want of understanding each other.

As to the first Circumstance, the constant and regular Conjunction of similar
Events; we may possibly satisfy ourselves by the following Considerations. It
is universally acknowledged, that there is a great Uniformity amongst the
Actions of Men, in all Nations and Ages, and that human Nature remains still
the same, in its Principles and Operations. The same Motives produce always the
same Actions: The same Events follow from the same Causes. Ambition, Avarice,
Self-love, Vanity, Friendship, Generosity, public Spirit; these Passions, mixed
in various Degrees, and distributed through Society, have been, from the
Beginning of the World, and still are, the Sources of all the Actions and
Enterprises, that have ever been observed amongst Mankind. Would you know the
Sentiments, Inclinations, and Course of Life of the Greeks and Romans? Study
well the Temper and Actions of the French and English. You cannot be much
mistaken in transferring to the former most of the Observations you have made
with regard to the latter. Mankind are so much the same, in all Times and
Places, that History informs us of nothing new or strange in this particular.
Its chief Use is only to discover the constant and universal Principles of
human Nature, by showing Men in all Varieties of Circumstances and Situations,
and furnishing us with Materials, from which we may form our Observations, and
become acquainted with the regular Springs of human Action and Behavior. These
Records of Wars, Intrigues, Factions, and Revolutions are so many Collections
of Experiments, by which the Politician or moral Philosopher fixes the
Principles of his Science; in the same Manner as the Physician or natural
Philosopher becomes acquainted with the Nature of Plants, Minerals, and other
external Objects, by the Experiments, which he forms concerning them. Nor are
the Earth, Water, and other Elements, examined by Aristctle, and Hypocrates,
more like those, which at present lie under our Observation, than the Men,
described by Polybius and Tacitus, are to those who now govern the World.

SHOULD a Traveller, returning from a far Country, bring us an Account of Men,
entirely different from any we were ever acquainted with; Men, who were
entirely divested of Avarice, Ambition, or Revenge; who knew no Pleasure but
Friendship, Generosity, and public Spirit; we should immediately, from these
Circumstances, detect the Falsehood, and prove him a Liar, with the same
Certainty as if he had stuffed his Narration with Stories of Centaurs and
Dragons, Miracles and Prodigies. And if we would explode any Forgery in
History, we cannot make use of a more convincing Argument, than to prove, that
the Actions, ascribed to any Person, are directly contrary to the Course of
Nature, and that no human Motives, in such Circumstances, could ever induce him
to such a Conduct. The Veracity of Quintus Curtius is as suspicious, when he
describes the supernatural Courage of Alexander, by which he was hurried on
singly to attack Multitudes, as when he describes his supernatural Force and
Activity, by which he was able to resist them. So readily and universally do we
acknowledge a Uniformity in human Motives and Actions as well as in the
Operations of Body.

HENCE likewise the Benefit of that Experience, acquired by a long Life and a
Variety of Business and Company, in order to instruct us in the Principles of
human Nature, and regulate our future Conduct, as well as Speculation. By Means
of this Guide, we mount up to the Knowledge of Men's Inclinations and Motives,
from their Actions, Expressions, and even Gestures; and again, descend to the
Interpretation of their Actions from the Knowledge of their Motives and
Inclinations. The general Observations, treasured up by a Course of Practice
and Experience, give us the Clue of human Nature, and teach us to unravel all
its Labyrinths and Intricacies. Pretexts and Appearances no longer deceive us.
Public Declarations pass for the specious Coloring of a Cause: And though Virtue
and Honor be allowed their proper Weight and Authority, that perfect
Disinterestedness, so often pretended, is never expected in Multitudes and
Parties; seldom in their Leaders; and scarcely even in Individuals of any Rank
or Station. But were there no Uniformity in human Actions, and were every
Experiment we could form of this Kind irregular and anomolous, 'twere
impossible to collect any general Observations concerning Mankind; and no
Experience, however accurately digested by Reflection, would ever serve to any
Purpose. Why is the ancient Husbandman more skilful in his Calling than the
young Beginner, but because there is a certain Uniformity in the Operation of
the Sun, Rain, and Earth, toward the Production of Vegetables; and Experience
teaches the old Practitioner the Rules, by which this Operation is governed and
directed?

WE must not, however, expect, that this Uniformity of human Actions should be
carried such a Length, as that all Men, in the same Circumstances, should
always act precisely in the same Manner, without any Allowance for the
Diversity of Characters, Prejudices, and Opinions. Such a Uniformity, in every
Particular, is found in no Part of Nature. On the contrary, from observing the
Variety of Conduct and Behavior in different Men, we are enabled to form a
greater Variety of Rules and Maxims, which still suppose a Degree of Uniformity
and Regularity.

ARE the Manners of Men different in different Ages and Countries? We learn
thence the great Force of Custom and Education, which mold the human Mind from
its Infancy, and form it into a fixed and established Character. Is the
Behavior and Conduct of the one Sex very unlike that of the other? It Is from
thence we become acquainted with the different Characters, which Nature has
impressed upon the Sexes, and which she preserves with Constancy and
Regularity. Are the Actions of the same Person much diversified in the
different Periods of his Life, from Infancy to old Age? This affords Room for
many general Observations concerning the gradual Change of our Sentiments and
Inclinations, and the different Maxims, which prevail in the different Ages of
human Creatures. Even the Characters which are peculiar to each Individual,
have a Constancy and Uniformity in their Influence, otherwise our Acquaintance
with the Persons, and our Observations of their Conduct could never teach us
their Dispositions, nor serve to direct our Behavior with regard to them.

I GRANT it possible to find some Actions, which seem to have no regular or
uniform Connection with any known Motives, and are Exceptions to all the
Measures of Conduct, which have ever been established for the Government of
Men. But if we would willingly know, what Judgment should be formed of such
irregular and extraordinary Actions; we may consider the Sentiments that are
commonly entertained with regard to those irregular Events, which appear in the
Course of Nature, and the Operations of external Objects. All Causes are not
conjoined to their usual Effects, with like Constancy and Uniformity. An
Artificer, who handles only dead Matter, may be disappointed of his Scope and
Aim as well as the Politician, who directs the Conduct of sensible and
intelligent Agents.

THE Vulgar, who take Things according to their first Appearance, attribute the
Uncertainty of Events to such an Uncertainty in the Causes as makes them often
fail of their usual Influence; though they meet with no Obstacle nor Impediment
in their Operation. But Philosophers, observing, that almost in every Part of
Nature there is contained a vast Variety of Springs and Principles, which are
hid, by reason of their Minuteness or Remoteness, find, that it is at least
possible the Contrariety of Events may not proceed from any Contingency in the
Cause, but from the secret Operation of contrary Causes. This Possibility is
converted into Certainty by farther Observation, when they remark, that, upon
an exact Scrutiny, a Contrariety of Effects always betrays a Contrariety of
Causes, and proceeds from their mutual Hindrance and Opposition. A Peasant can
give no better Reason for the stopping of any Clock or Watch than to say it
commonly does not go right: But an Artizan easily perceives, that the same
Force in the Spring or Pendulum has always the same Influence on the Wheels;
but fails of its usual Effect, perhaps by Reason of a Grain of Dust, which puts
a stop to the whole Movement. From the Observation of several parallel
Instances, Philosophers form a Maxim, that the Connection betwixt all Causes and
Effects is equally necessary, and that its seeming Uncertainty in some
Instances proceeds from the secret Opposition of contrary Causes.

THUS for Instance, in the human Body, when the usual Symptoms of Health or
Sickness disappoint our Expectations; when Medicines operate not with their
wonted Powers; when irregular Events follow from any particular Causes; the
Philosopher and Physician are not surpised at the Matter, nor are ever tempted
to deny, in general, the Necessity and Uniformity of those Principles, by which
the animal Ceconomy is conducted. They know, that a human Body is a mighty
complicated Machine: That many secret Powers lurk in it, which are altogether
beyond our Comprehension: That to us it must often appear very uncertain in its
Operations: And that therefore the irregular Events, which outwardly discover
themselves, can be no Proof, that the Laws of Nature are not observed with the
greatest Strictness and Regularity in its internal Operations and Government.

THE Philosopher, if he be consistent, must apply the same Reasonings to the
Actions and Volitions of intelligent Agents. The most irregular and unexpected
Resolutions of Men may frequently be accounted for by those who know every
particular Circumstance of their Character and Situation. A Person of an
obliging Disposition gives a peevish Answer: But he has the Tooth-ake, or has
not dined. A stupid Fellow discovers an uncommon Alacrity in his Carriage: But
he has met with a sudden Piece of Good-fortune. Or even when an Action, as
sometimes happens, cannot be particularly accounted for, either by the Person
himself or by others; we know, in general, that the Characters of Men are, to a
certain Degree, inconstant and irregular. This is, in a Manner, the constant
Character of human Nature; though it be applicable, in a more particular Manner,
to some Persons, who have no fixed Rule for their Conduct, but proceed in a
continued Course of Caprice and Inconstancy. The internal Principles and
Motives may operate in a uniform Manner, notwithstanding these seeming
Irregularities; in the same Manner as the Winds, Rain, Clouds, and other
Variations of the Weather are supposed to be governed by steady Principles;
though not easily discoverable by human Sagacity and Enquiry.

THUS it appears, not only that the Conjunction betwixt Motives and voluntary
Actions is as regular and uniform, as that betwixt the Cause and Effect in any
Part of Nature; but also that this regular Conjunction has been universally
acknowledged amongst Mankind, and has never been the Subject of Dispute, either
in Philosophy or common Life. Now as it is from past Experience, that we draw
all Inferences concerning the future, and as we conclude, that Objects will
always be conjoined together, which we find always to have been conjoined; it
may seem superfluous to prove, that this experienced Uniformity in human
Actions is the Source of all the Inserences we form concerning them. But in
order to throw the Argument into a greater Variety of Lights, we shall also
insist, though briefly, on this latter Topic.

THE mutual Dependence of Men is so great, in all Societies, that scarce any
human Action is entirely complete in itself, or is performed without some
Reference to the Actions of others, which are requisite to make it answer fully
the Intention of the Actor. The poorest Artificer, who labors alone, expects
at least the Protection of the Magistrate, to ensure the Enjoyment of the
Fruits of his Labor. He also expects, that, when he carries his Goods to
Market, and offers them at a reasonable Price, he shall find Buyers; and shall
be able, by the Money he acquires, to engage others to supply him with those
Commodities, which are requisite for his Subsistence. In Proportion as Men's
Dealings are more extensive, and their Intercourse with others more
complicated, they always comprehend, in their Schemes of Life, a greater
Variety of voluntary Actions, which they expect, from their proper Motives, to
cooperate with their own. In all these Conclusions, they take their Measures
from past Experience, in the same Manner as in their Reasonings concerning
external Objects; and firmly believe, that Men, as well as all the Elements,
are to continue, in their Operations, the same, which they have ever found
them. A Manufacturere reckons upon the Labor of his Servants, for the
Execution of any Work, as much as upon the Tools he employs, and would be
equally surpised, in the one Case, were his Expectations disappointed, as in
the other. In short, this experimental Inference and Reasoning concerning the
Actions of others enters so much into human Life, that no Man, while awake, is
ever a Moment without employing it. Have we not Reason, therefore, to affirm,
that all Mankind have always agreed in the Doctrine of Necessity, according to
the foregoing Definition and Explication of it?

NOR have Philosophers ever entertained a different Opinion from the People in
this Particular. For not to mention, that almost every Action of their Life
supposes it; there are even few of the speculative Parts of Learning, to which
it is not essential. What would become of History, had we not a Dependence on
the Veracity of the Historian, according to the Experience we have had of
Mankind? How could Politics be a Science, if Laws and Forms of Government had
not a uniform and regular Influence upon Society? Where would be the Foundation
of Morals, if particular Characters had no certain nor determinate Power to
produce particular Sentiments, and if these Sentiments had no constant
Operation on Actions? And with what Pretext could we employ our Criticism upon
any Poet or polite Author, if we could not pronounce the Conduct and Sentiments
of his Actors, either natural or unnatural, to such Characters, and in such
Circumstances? It seems almost impossible, therefore, to engage, either in
Science or Action of any Kind, without acknowledging the Doctrine of Necessity,
and this Inference from Motives to voluntary Actions; from Characters to
Conduct.

AND indeed, when we consider how aptly natural and moral Evidence link
together, and form only one Chain of Argument betwixt them, we shall make no
Scruple to allow, that they are of the same Nature, and derived from the same
Principles. A Prisoner, who has neither Money nor Interest, discovers the
Impossibility of his Escape, as well from the Obstinacy of the Jailer, as from
the Walls and Bars, with which he is surrounded; and in all Attempts for his
Freedom, chooses rather to work upon the Stone and Iron of the one, than upon
the inflexible Nature of the other. The same Prisoner, when conducted to the
Scaffold, foresees his Death as certainly from the Constancy and Fidelity of
his Guards as from the Operation of the Ax or Wheel. His Mind runs along a
certain Train of Ideas: The Refusal of the Soldiers to consent to his Escape;
the Action of the Executioner; the Separation of the Head and Body; Bleeding,
convulsive Motions, and Death. Here is a connected Chain of natural Causes and
voluntary Actions; but the Mind feels no Difference betwixt them, in passing
from one Link to another: nor is less certain of the future Event than if it
were connected with the Objects present to the Memory or Senses, by a Train of
Causes, cemented together by what we are pleased to call a physical Necessity.
The same experienced Union has the fame Effect on the Mind, whether the united
Objects be Motives, Volitions, and Actions; or Figure and Motion. We may change
the Names of Things; but their Nature and their Operation on the Understanding
never change.

I HAVE frequently considered, what could possibly be the Reason, why all
Mankind, though they have ever, without Hesitation, acknowledged the Doctrine of
Necessity, in their whole Practice and Reasoning, have yet discovered such a
Reluctance to acknowledge it in Words, and have rather shown a Propensity, in
all Ages, to profess the contrary Opinion. The Matter, I think, may be
accounted for, after the following Manner. If we examine the Operations of
Bodies and the Production of Effects from their Causes, we shall find, that all
our Faculties can never carry us farther in our Knowledge of this Relation,
than barely to observe, that particular Objects are constantly conjoined
together, and that the Mind is carried, by a customary Transition, from the
Appearance of the one to the Belief of the other. But though this Conclusion
concerning human Ignorance be the Result of the strictest Scrutiny and
Examination of this Subject, Men still entertain a strong Propensity to
believe, that they penetrate farther into the Powers of Nature, and perceive
something like a necessary Connection betwixt the Cause and the Effect. When
again they turn their Reflections toward the Operations of their own Minds,
and feel no such Connection of the Motive and the Action; they are apt, from
thence, to suppose, that there is a Difference betwixt the Effects, resulting
from material and brute Force, and those which arise from Thought and
Intelligence. But being once convinced, that we know nothing farther of
Causation of any Kind, than merely the constant Conjunction of Objects, and the
consequent Inference of the Mind from one to another, and finding, that these
two Circumstances are universally acknowledged to have place in voluntary
Actions; we may thence be more easily led to own the same Necessity, common to
all Causes. And though this Reasoning may contradict the Systems of many
Philosophers, in ascribing Necessity to the Determinations of the Will, we
shall find, upon Reflection, that they dissent from it in Words only, not in
their real Sentiments. Necessity, according to the Sense in which it is here
taken, has never yet been rejected, nor can ever, I think, be rejected, by any
Philosopher. It may only, perhaps, be pretended, that the Mind can perceive, in
the Operations of Matter, some farther Connection betwixt the Cause and Effect;
and a Connection, which has not Place in the voluntary Actions of intelligent
Beings. Now whether it be so or not, can only appear upon Examination, and it
is incumbent on these Philosophers to make good their Assertion, by defining or
describing that Necessity, and pointing it out to us, in the Operations of
material Causes.

IT would seem, indeed, that Men begin at the wrong End of this Question
concerning Liberty and Necessity, when they enter upon it by examining the
Faculties of the Soul, the Influence of the Understanding, and the Operations
of the Will. Let them first discuss a more simple Question, viz. the Operations
of Body and of brute unintelligent Matter; and try if they can there form any
Idea of Causation and Necessity, except that of a constant Conjunction of
Objects, and subsequent Inference of the Mind from one to another. If these
Circumstances form, in reality, the whole of that Necessity, which we can
conceive in Matter, and if these Circumstances be also universally acknowledged
to take place in the Operations of the Mind, the Dispute is at an End; or, at
least, must be owned to be thenceforward merely verbal. But as long as we will
rashly suppose, that we have some farther Idea of Necessity and Causation in
the Operations of external Objects; at the same time, that we can find nothing
farther, in the voluntary Actions of the Mind; there is no Possibility of
bringing the Dispute to any determinate Issue, while we proceed upon so
erroneous a Supposition. The only Method of undeceiving us, is, to mount up
higher; to examine the narrow Extent of our Knowledge, when applied to material
Causes; and to convince ourselves, that all we know of them, is, the constant
Conjunction and Inference abovementioned. We may, perhaps, find, that it is
with Difficulty we are induced to fix such narrow Limits to human
Understanding: But we can afterward find no Difficulty, when we come to apply
this Doctrine to the Actions of the Will. For as it is evident, that these have
a regular and constant Conjunction with Motives and Circumstances and
Characters, and as we always draw Inferences from the one to the other, we must
be obliged to acknowledge, in Words, that Necessity, which we have already
avowed, in every Deliberation and Reflection of our Lives, and in every Step of
our Conduct and Behavior The Prevalence of the Doctrine of Liberty may be
accounted for, from another Cause, viz. a false Sensation or seeming Experience
which we have, or may have of Liberty or Indifference, in many of our Actions.
The Necessity of any Action, whether of Matter or of Mind, is not, properly
speaking, a Quality in the Agent, but in any thinking or intelligent Being, who
may consider the Action; and it consists chiefly in the Determination of his
Thought to infer the Existence of that Action from some preceding Objects, as
Liberty, when opposed to Necessity, is nothing but the Want of that
Determination, and a certain Looseness or Indifference, which we feel, in
passing or not passing, from the Idea of one Object to that of any succeeding
one. Now we may observe, that, though in reflecting on human Actions we seldom
feel such a Looseness or Indifference, but are commonly able to infer them with
considerable Certainty from their Motives, and from the Dispositions of the
Agent; yet it frequently happens, that, in performing the Actions themselves,
we are sensible of something like it: And as all resembling Objects are readily
taken for each other, this has been employed as a demonstrative and even an
intuitive Proof of human Liberty. We feel, that our Actions are subject to our
Will, on most Occasions; and imagine we feel, that the Will itself is subject
to nothing, because, when by a Denial of it we are provoked to try, we feel
that it moves easily every Way, and produces an Image of itself, (or a
Velleity, as it is called in the Schools) even on that Side, on which it did
not settle. This Image, or faint Motion, we persuade ourselves, could, at that
Time, have been completed into the Thing itself; because, should that be
denied, we find, upon a second Trial, that, at present, it can. We consider
not, that the fantastical Desire of showing Liberty is here the Motive of our
Actions. And it seems certain, that however we may imagine we feel a Liberty
within ourselves, a Spectator can commonly infer our Actions from our Motives
and Character; and even where he cannot, he concludes in general, that he
might, were he perfectly acquainted with every Circumstance of our Situation
and Temper, and the most secret Springs of our Complexion and Disposition. Now
this is the very Essence of Necessity, according to the foregoing Doctrine.
.

BUT to proceed in this reconciling Project with regard to the Doctrine of
Liberty and Necessity, the most contentious Question, of Metaphysics, the most
contentious Science; it will not require many Words to prove, that all Mankind
have ever agreed in the Doctrine of Liberty as well as in that of Necessity,
and that the whole Dispute, in this respect also, has been hitherto merely
verbal. For what is meant by Liberty, when applied to voluntary Actions? We
cannot surely mean, that Actions have so little Connection with Motives,
Inclinations, and Circumstances, that the one does not follow, with a certain
Degree of Uniformity, from the other, and that the one affords no Inference,
from which we can conclude the Existence of the other. For these are plain and
acknowledged Matters of Fact. By Liberty, then, we can only mean, a Power of
acting or not acting, according to the Determinations of the Will; that is, if
we choose to remain at rest, we may; if we choose to move, we also may. Now this
hypothetical Liberty is universally allowed to belong to every Body, who is not
a Prisoner, and in Chains. Here then is no Subject of Dispute.

WHATEVER Definition we may give of Liberty, we should be careful to observe
two requisite Circumstances; first, that it be consistent with plain Matter of
Fact; secondly, that it be consistent with itself. If we observe these
Circumstances, and render our Definition intelligible, I am persuaded that all
Mankind will be found of one Opinion with regard to it.

IT IS universally allowed, that nothing exists without a Cause of its
Existence, and that Chance, when strictly examined, is a mere negative Word,
and means not any real Power, which has, any where, a Being in Nature. But it is
pretended that some Causes are necessary, and some are not necessary. Here then
is the admirable Advantage of Definitions. Let any one define a Cause, without
comprehending, as a Part of the Definition, a necessary Connection with its
Effect; and let him show distinctly the Origin of the Idea, expressed by the
Definition; and I shall frankly give up the whole Controversy. But if the
foregoing Explication of the Matter be received, this must be absolutely
impracticable. Had not Objects a regular and constant Conjunction with each
other, we should never have entertained any Notion of Cause and Effect; and
this constant Conjunction produces that Inference of the Understanding, which
is the only Connection, that we can have any Comprehension of. Whoever attempts
a Definition of Cause, exclusive of these Circumstances, will be obliged,
either to employ unintelligible Terms, or such as are synonimous to the Term
which he endeavors to define Thus if a Cause be defined, that which produces
any thing; it is easy to observe, that producing is synonimous to causing. In
like manner, if a Cause be defined, that by which any thing exists; this is
liable to the same Objection. For what is meant by these Words, by which? Had
it been said, that a Cause is that after which any thing constantly exists; we
should have understood the Terms. For this is, indeed, all we know of the
Matter. And this Constancy forms the very Essence of Necessity, nor have we any
other Idea of it.
. And if the Definition above mentioned, be admitted; Liberty, when opposed to
Necessity, not to Constraint, is the same Thing with Chance; which is
universally allowed to have no Existence.

PART II.
THERE is no Method of Reasoning more common, and yet none more blameable, than
in philosophical Debates, to endeavor the Refutation of any Hypothesis, by a
Pretext of its dangerous Consequences to Religion and Morality. When any
Opinion leads into Absurdities, it is certainly false; but it is not certain an
Opinion is false, because it is of dangerous Consequence. Such Topics,
therefore, ought entirely to be forborne, as serving nothing to the Discovery of
Truth, but only to make the Person of an Antagonist odious. This I observe in
general, without pretending to draw any Advantage from it. I submit frankly to
an Examination of this Kind, and shall venture to affirm, that the Doctrines,
both of Necessity and Liberty, as above explained, are not only consistent with
Morality and Religion, but are absolutely essential to them. And first, of
Necessity.

NECESSITY may be defined two Ways, conformable to the two Definitions of
Cause, of which it makes an essential Part. It consists either in the constant
Union and Conjunction of like Objects, or in the Inference of the Understanding
from one Object to another. Now Necessity, in both these Senses, (which,
indeed, are, at the Bottom, the same) has universally, though tacitly, in the
Schools, in the Pulpit, and in common Life, been allowed to belong to the Will
of Man; and no one has ever pretended to deny, that we can draw Inferences
concerning human Actions, and that those Inferences are founded on the
experienced Union of like Actions, with like Motives, Inclinations, and
Circumstances. The only Particular, in which any one can differ, is, that
either, perhaps, he will refuse to give the Name of Necessity to this Property
of human Actions: But as long as the Meaning is understood, I hope the Word can
do no Harm: Or that he will maintain it possible to discover something farther
in the Operations of Matter. But this, it must be acknowledged, can be of no
Consequence to Morality or Religion, whatever it may be to natural Philosophy
or Metaphysics. We may be mistaken in asserting, that there is no Idea of any
other Necessity or Connection in the Actions of Body: But surely we here ascribe
nothing to the Actions of the Mind, but what every one does, and must readily
allow of. We change no Circumstance in the received orthodox System with regard
to the Will, but only in that with regard to material Objects and Causes.
Nothing therefore can be more innocent, at least, than this Doctrine. All Laws
being founded on Rewards and Punishments, it is supposed as a fundamental
Principle, that these Motives have a regular and uniform Influence on the Mind,
and both produce the good and prevent the evil Actions. We may give to this
Influence, what Name we please; but as it is usually conjoined with the Action,
it must be esteemed a Cause, and be looked upon as an Instance of that
Necessity, which we would establish.

THE only proper Object of Hatred or Vengeance, is a Person, or Creature,
endowed with Thought and Consciousness; and when any criminal or injurious
Actions excite that Passion, it is only by their Relation to the Person, or
Connection with him. Actions are, by their very Nature, temporary and perishing;
and where they proceed not from some Cause in the Characters and Disposition of
the Person, who performed them, they can neither redound to his Honor, if
good, nor Infamy, if evil. The Actions themselves may be blameable; they may be
contrary to all the Rules of Morality and Religion: But the Person is not
responsible for them; and as they proceeded from nothing in him, that is
durable and constant, and leave nothing of that Nature behind them, it is
impossible he can, upon their Account, become the Object of Punishment or
Vengeance. According to the Principle therefore, which denies Necessity, and
consequently Causes, a Man is as pure and untainted, after having committed the
most horrid Crimes, as at the first Moment of his Birth, nor is his Character
any way concerned in his Actions; since they are not derived from it, and the
Wickedness of the one can never be used as a Proof of the Depravity of the
other.

MEN are not blamed for such Actions as they perform ignorantly and casually,
whatever may be the Consequences. Why? but because the Principles of these
Actions are only momentary, and terminate in them alone. Men are less blamed
for such evil Actions as they perform hastily and unpremeditately, than from
such as proceed from Thought and Deliberation. For what Reason? but because a
hasty Temper, though a constant Cause or Principle in the Mind, operates only by
Intervals, and infects not the whole Character. Again, Repentance wipes off
every Crime, if attended with a Reformation of Life and Manners. How is this to
be accounted for? but by asserting, that Actions render a Person criminal,
merely as they are Proofs of criminal Passions or Principles in the Mind; and
when, by any Alteration of these Principles, they cease to be just Proofs, they
likewise ceaso to be criminal. But except upon the Doctrine of Necessity, they
never were just Proofs, and consequently never were criminal.

IT will be equally easy to prove, and from the same Arguments, that Liberty,
according to that Definition abovementioned, in which all Men agree, is also
essential to Morality, and that no human Actions, where it is wanting, is
susceptible of any moral Qualities, or can be the Object either of Approbation
or Dislike. For as Actions are the Objects of our moral Sentiments, so far only
as they are Indications or Proofs of the internal Character, Passions, and
Affections; it is impossible they can give rise either to Praise or Blame, where
they proceed not from these Principles, but are derived altogether from
external Force and Violence.

I PRETEND not to have obviated or removed all Objections to this Theory, with
regard to Necessity and Liberty. I can foresee other Objections, derived from
Topics, which have not here been treated of. It may be said, for Instance, that
if voluntary Actions be subjected to the same Laws of Necessity with the
Operations of Matter, there is a continued Chain of necessary Causes,
pre-ordain'd and pre-determin'd, reaching from the original Cause of all, to
every single Volition of every human Creature. No Contingency any where in the
Universe; no Indifference; no Liberty. While we act, we are, at the same time,
acted upon. The ultimate Author of all our Volitions is the Creator of the
World, who first bestowed Motion on this immense Machine, and placed all Beings
in that particular Position, whence every subsequent Event, by an inevitable
Necessity, must result. Human Actions, therefore, can either have no Turpitude
at all, as proceeding from so good a Cause; or if they can have any moral
Turpitude, they must involve our Creator in the same Guilt, while he is
acknowledged to be their ultimate Cause and Author. For as a Man, who fired a
Mine, is answerable for all the Consequences, whether the Train he employed be
long or short; so wherever a continued Chain of necessary Causes are fixed,
that Being, either finite or infinite, who produces the first, is likewise the
Author of all the rest, and must both bear the Blame, and acquire the Praise,
which belongs to them. Our clearest and most unalterable Ideas of Morality
establish this Rule, upon unquestionable Reasons, when we examine the
Consequences of any human Action; and these Reasons must still have greater
Force, when applied to the Volitions and Intentions of a Being, infinitely wise
and powerful. Ignorance or Impotence may be pleaded for so limited a Creature
as Man; but those Imperfections have no Place in our Creator. He foresaw, he
ordained, he intended all those Actions of Men, which we so rashly pronounce
criminal. And we must conclude, therefore, either that they are not criminal,
or that the Deity, not Man, is responsible for them. But as either of these
Positions is absurd and impious, it follows, that the Doctrine, from which they
are deduced, cannot possibly be true, as being liable to all the same
Objections. An absurd Consequence, if necessary, proves the original Doctrine
to be absurd; in the same Manner, that criminal Actions render criminal the
original Cause, if the Connection betwixt them be necessary and inevitable.

THIS Objection consists of two Parts, which we shall examine separately;
First, that if human Actions can be traced up, by a necessary Chain, to the
Deity, they can never be criminal; on account of the infinite Goodness and
Perfection of that Being, from whom they are derived, and who can intend
nothing but what is altogether good and right. Or Secondly, if they be
criminal, we must retract those Attributes of Goodness and Perfection, which we
ascribe to the Deity, and must acknowledge him to be the ultimate Author of
Guilt and moral Turpitude in all his Creatures.

THE Answer to the first Objection seems obvious and convincing. There are many
Philosophers, who, after an exact Scrutiny of all the Phenomenon of Nature,
conclude, that the WHOLE, considered as one System, is, in every Period of its
Existence, ordered with perfect Benevolence and Goodness; and that the utmost
possible Happiness will, in the End, result to every created Being, without any
Mixture of positive or absolute Ill and Misery. Every physical Ill, say they,
makes an essential Part of this benevolent System, and could not possibly be
removed, even by the Deity himself, considered as a wise Agent, without giving
Entrance to greater Ill, or excluding greater Good, which will result from it.
From this Theory, some Philosophers, and the ancient Stoics among the rest,
derived a Topic of Consolation, under all Afflictions, while they taught their
Pupils, that those Ills, they labored under, were, in reality, Goods to the
Universe; and that to an enlarged View, which could comprehend the whole System
of Nature, every Event became an Object of Joy and Exultation. But though this
Topic be specious and sublime, it was soon found in Practice weak and
ineffectual. You would surely more irritate, than appease a Man, lying under
the racking Pains of the Gout, by preaching up to him the Rectitude of those
general Laws, which produced the malignant Humors in his Body, and led them,
through the proper Canals, to the Nerves and Sinews, where they now excite such
acute Torments. These enlarged Views may, for a Moment, please the Imagination
of a speculative Man, who is placed in Ease and Security; but neither can they
dwell with Constancy on his Mind, even though undisturbed by the Emotions of Pain
or Passion; much less can they maintain their Ground, when attacked by such
powerful Antagonists. The Affections take a narrower and more natural Survey of
their Object; and by an Economy, more suitable to the Infirmity of human
Minds, regard alone the Objects around us, and are actuated by such Events as
appear good or ill to the private System. The Case is the same with moral as
with physical Ill; nor can it reasonably be supposed, that those remote
Considerations, which are found of so little Efficacy with regard to the one,
will have a more powerful Influence with regard to the other. The Mind of Man
is so formed by Nature, that, upon the Appearance of certain Characters,
Dispositions, and Actions, it immediately feels the Sentiment of Approbation or
Blame; nor are there any Feelings or Emotions more essential to its Frame and
Constitution. The Characters, which engage its Approbation, are chiefly such as
contribute to the Peace and Security of human Society; as the Characters, which
excite Blame, are chiefly such as tend to its Detriment and Disturbance: Whence
we may reasonably presume, that the moral Sentiments arise, either mediately or
immediately, from a Reflection on these opposite Interests. What though
philosophical Meditations establish a different Opinion or Conjecture, that
every Thing is right with regard to the WHOLE, and that the Qualities, which
disturb Society, are, in the main, as beneficial, and are as suitable to the
primary Intention of Nature, as those which more directly promote its Happiness
and Welfare? Are such remote and uncertain Speculations able to counterbalance
the Sentiments, which arise from the natural and immediate View of the Objects?
A Man, who is robbed of a considerable Sum; does he find his Vexation for the
Loss a whit diminished by these sublime Reflections? Why then should his moral
Resentment against the Crime be supposed incompatible with them? Or why should
not the Acknowledgment of a real Distinction betwixt Vice and Virtue be
reconcilable to all speculative Systems of Philosophy, as well as that of a
real Distinction betwixt personal Beauty and Deformity? Both these Distinctions
are founded on the natural Sentiments of the human Mind: And these Sentiments
are not to be controlled or altered by any philosophical Theory or Speculation
whatsoever.

THE second Objection admits not of so easy and satisfactory an Answer; nor is
it possible to explain distinctly, how the Deity can be the mediate Cause of
all the Actions of Men, without being the Author of Sin and moral Turpitude.
These are Mysteries, which mere natural and unassisted Reason is very unfit to
handle; and whatever System it embraces, it must find itself involved in
inextricable Difficulties, and even Contradictions, at every Step it takes with
regard to such Subjects. To reconcile the Indifference and Contingency of human
Actions with Prescience; or to defend absolute Decrees, and yet free the Deity
from being the Author of Sin, has been found hitherto to exceed all the Skill
of Philosophy. Happy, if she be thence sensible of her Temerity when she pries
into these sublime Mysteries; and leaving a Scene so full of Obscurities and
Perplexities, return, with suitable Modesty, to her true and proper Province,
the Examination of common Life; where she will find Difficulties enough to employ
her Enquiries, without launching into so boundless an Ocean of Doubts,
Uncertainties and Contradictions!

ESSAY IX. Of the REASON of ANIMALS.
ALL our Reasonings concerning Matter of Fact are founded on a Species of
ANALOGY, which leads us to expect from any Cause the same Events, which we have
observed to result from similar Causes. Where the Causes are entirely similar,
the Analogy is perfect, and the Inference, drawn from it, is regarded as
certain and conclusive; nor does any Man ever entertain a Doubt, where he sees
a Piece of Iron, that it will have Weight and Cohesion of Parts; as in all
other Instances, which have ever fallen under his Observation. But where the
Objects have not so exact a Similarity, the Analogy is less perfect, and the
Inference is less conclusive; though still it has some Force, in Proportion to
the Degrees of Similarity and Resemblance. The Anatomical Observations, formed
upon one Animal, are, by this Species of Reasoning, extended to all Animals;
and it is certain, that when the Circulation of the Blood, for Instance, is
proved clearly to have place in one Creature, as a Frog or Fish, it forms a
strong Presumption, that the same Principle has place in all of them. These
analogical Observations may be carried farther, even to this Science, of which
we are now treating; and any Theory, by which we explain the Operations of the
Understanding or the Origin and Connection of the Passions, in Man, will acquire
additional Authority, if we find, that the same Theory is requisite to explain
the same Phenomenon, in all other Animals. We shall make Trial of this, with
regard to the Hypothesis, by which, in the foregoing Essays, we have
endeavored to account for all experimental Reasonings; and it is hoped, that
this new Point of View will serve to confirm all our former Observations.

First. It seems evident, that Animals, as well as Men, learn many Things from
Experience, and infer, that the same Events will always follow from the same
Causes. By this Principle, they become acquainted with the more obvious
Properties of external Objects, and gradually, from their Birth, treasure up a
Knowledge of the Nature of Fire, Water, Earth, Stones, Heights, Depths, etc.
and of the Effects that result from their Operation. The Ignorance and
Inexperience of the Young, is here plainly distinguishable from the Cunning and
Sagacity of the Old, who have learnt, by long Observation, to avoid what hurt
them, and to pursue what gave Ease or Pleasure. A Horse, that has been
accustomed to the Field, becomes acquainted with the proper Height, which he
can leap, and will never attempt what exceeds his Force and Ability. An old
Greyhound will trust the more fatiguing Part of the Chase to the younger, and
will place himself so as to meet the Hare in her Doubles; nor are the
Conjectures, which he forms on this Occasion founded on any Thing but his
Observation and Experience.

THIS is still more evident from the Effects of Discipline and Education on all
Animals, who, by the proper Application of Rewards and Punishments, may be
taught any Course of Action, the most contrary to their natural Instincts and
Propensities. Is it not Experience, which renders a Dog apprehensive of Pain,
when you menace him, or lift up the Whip to beat him? Is it not even
Experience, which makes him answer to his Name, and infer, from such an
arbitrary Sound, that you mean him, rather than any of his Fellows, and intend
to call him, when you pronounce it in a certain Manner, and with a certain Tone
and Accent?

IN all these Cases, we may observe, that the Animal infers some Fact beyond
what immediately strikes his Senses; and that this Inference is altogether
founded on past Experience, while the Creature expects from the present Object
the same Events, which it has always found in its Observation to result from
similar Objects.

Secondly. It Is impossible, that this Inference of the Animal can be founded on
any Process of Argument or Reasoning, by which he concludes, that like Events
must follow like Objects, and that the Course of Nature will always be regular
in its Operations. For if there be in reality any Arguments of this Nature,
they surely lie too abstruse for the Observation of such imperfect
Understandings; since it may well employ the utmost Care and Attention of a
philosophic Genius to discover and observe them. Animals, therefore, are not
guided in these Inferences by Reasoning: Neither are Children: Neither are the
Generality of Mankind, in their ordinary Actions and Conclusions: Neither are
Philosophers themselves, who, in all the active Parts of Life, are, in the
main, the same with the Vulgar, and are governed by the same Maxims. Nature
must have provided some other Principle, of more ready, and more general Use
and Application; nor can an Operation of such immense Consequence in Life, as
that of inferring Effects from Causes, be trusted to the uncertain Process of
Reasoning and Argumentation. Were this doubtful with regard to Men, it seems to
admit of no Question with regard to the Brute-Creation; and the Conclusion
being once firmly established in one, we have a strong Presumption, from all
the Rules of Analogy, that it ought to be universally admitted, without any
Exception or Reserve. It Is Custom alone, which engages Animals, from every
Object, that strikes their Senses, to infer its usual Attendant, and carries
their Imagination, from the Appearance of the one, to conceive the other, in
that strong and lively Manner, which we denominate Belief. No other Explication
can be given of this Operation, in all the higher, as well as lower Classes of
sensitive Beings, that fall under our Notice and Observation.

BUT though Animals learn many Parts of their Knowledge from Observation, there
are also many Parts of it, which they derive from the original Hand of Nature,
which must exceed the Share of Capacity they possess on ordinary Occasions, and
in which they improve, little or nothing, by the longest Practice and
Experience. These we denominate INSTINCTS, and are so apt to admire, as
something very extraordinary, and inexplicable by all the Disquisitions of
human Understanding. But our Wonder will, perhaps, cease or diminish; when we
consider, that the experimental Reasoning itself, which we possess in common
with Beasts, and on which the whole Conduct of Life depends, is nothing but a
Species of Instinct or mechanical Power, that acts in us unknown to ourselves,
and in its chief Operations; is not directed by any such Relations or
Comparisons of Ideas, as are the proper Objects of our intellectual Faculties.
Though the Instinct be different, yet still it is an Instinct, which teaches a Man
to avoid the Fire; as much as that, which teaches a Bird, with such Exactness,
the Art of Incubation, and the whole Economy and Order of its Nursery.

ESSAY X. Of MIRACLES.
PART I.
THERE is in Dr. Tillotson's Writings an Argument against the real Presence,
which is as concise and elegant, and strong as any Argument can possibly be
supposed against a Doctrine, that is so little worthy of a serious Refutation.
It Is acknowledged on all hands, says that learned Prelate, that the Authority,
either of the Scripture or of Tradition, is founded merely on the Testimony of
the Apostles, who were Eyewitnesses to those Miracles of our Savior, by which
he proved his divine Mission. Our Evidence, then, for the Truth of the
Christian Religion is less than the Evidence for the Truth of our Senses;
because, even in the first Authors of our Religion, it was no greater; and it is
evident it must diminish in passing from them to their Disciples; not can any
one be so certain of the Truth of their Testi money as of the immediate Objects
of his Senses. But a weaker Evidence can never destroy a stronger; und
therefore, were the Doctrine of the real Presence ever so clearly revealed in
Scripture, 'twere directly contrary to the Rules of just Reasoning to give our
Assent to it. It contradicts Sense, though both the Scripture and Tradition, on
which it is supposed to be built, carry not such Evidence with them as Sense;
when they are considered merely as external Evidences, and are not brought home
to every one's Breast, by the immediate Operation of the Holy Spirit.

NOTHING is so convenient as a decisive Argument of this Kind, which must at
least silence the most arrogant Bigotry and Superstition, and free one from
their impertinent Solicitations. I flatter myself, that I have discovered an
Argument of a like Nature, which, if just, will, with the Wise and Learned, be
an everlasting Check to all Kinds of superstitious Delusion, and consequently,
will be useful as long as the World endures. For so long, I presume, will the
Accounts of Miracles and Prodigies be found in all profane History.

THOUGH Experience be our only Guide in reasoning concerning Matters of Fact; it
must be acknowledged, that this Guide is not altogether infallible, but in some
Cases is apt to lead us into Errors and Mistakes. One, who, in our Climate,
should expect better Weather in any Week of June than in one of December, would
reason justly and conformable to Experience; but it is certain, that he may
happen, in the Event, to find himself mistaken. However, we may observe, that,
in such a Case, he would have no Cause to complain of Experience; because it
commonly informs us beforehand of the Uncertainty, by that Contrariety of
Events, which we may learn from a diligent Observation. All Effects follow not
with a like Certainty from their supposed Causes. Some Events are found, in all
Countries and all Ages, to have been constantly conjoined together: Others are
found to have been more variable, and sometimes to disappoint our Expectations;
so that in our Reasonings concerning Matter of Fact, there are all imaginable
Degrees of Assurance, from the highest Certainty to the lowest Species of moral
Evidence.

A WISE Man, therefore, proportions his Belief to the Evidence. In such
Conclusions as are founded on an infallible Experience, he expects the Event
with the last Degree of Assurance, and regards his past Experience as a full
Proof of the future Existence of that Event. In other Cases, he proceeds with
more Caution: He weighs the opposite Experiments: He considers which Side is
supported by the greatest Number of Experiments: To that Side he inclines, with
Doubt and Hesitation; and when at last he fixes his Judgment, the Evidence
exceeds not what we properly call Probability. All Probability, then, supposes
an Opposition of Experiments and Observations; where the one Side is found to
over-balance the other, and to produce a Degree of Evidence, proportioned to
the Superiority. A hundred Instances or Experiments on one Side, and fifty on
another, afford a very doubtful Expectation of any Event; though a hundred
uniform Experiments, with only one contradictory one, does reasonably beget a
very strong Degree of Assurance. In all Cases, we must balance the opposite
Experiments, where they are opposite, and deduct the lesser Number from the
greater, in order to know the exact Force of the superior Evidence.

To apply these Principles to a particular Instance; we may observe, that there
is no Species of Reasoning more common, more useful, and even necessary to
human Life, than that derived from the Testimony of Men, and the Reports of
Eyewitnesses and Spectators. This Species of Reasoning, perhaps, one may deny
to be founded on the Relation of Cause and Effect. I shall not dispute about a
Word. 'Twill be sufficient to observe, that our Assurance in any Argument of
this Kind is derived from no other Principle than our Observation of the
Veracity of human Testimony, and of the usual Conformity of Facts to the
Reports of Witnesses. It being a general Maxim, that no Objects have any
discoverable Connection together, and that all the Inferences we can draw from
one to another are founded merely on our Experience of their constant and
regular Conjunction; it is evident we ought not to make an Exception to this
Maxim in Favor of human Testimony, whose Connection with any Events seems, in
itself, as little necessary as any other. Did not Men's Imagination naturally
follow their Memory; had they not commonly an Inclination to Truth and a
Sentiment of Probity; were they not sensible to Shame, when detected in a
Falsehood: Were not these, I say, discovered by Experience to be Qualities,
inherent in human Nature, we should never repose the least Confidence in human
Testimony. A Man delirious, or noted for Falsehood and Villainy, has no Manner of
Weight or Authority with us.

AND as the Evidence, derived from Witnesses and human Testimony, is founded on
past Experience, so it varies with the Experience, and is regarded either as a
Proof or a Probability, according as the Conjunction betwixt any particular
Kind of Report and any Kind of Objects has been found to be constant or
variable. There are a Number of Circumstances to be taken into Consideration in
all Judgments of this Kind; and our ultimate Standard, by which we determine
all Disputes, that may arise concerning them, is always derived from Experience
and Observation. Where this Experience is not entirely uniform on any Side,
it is attended with an unavoidable Contrariety in our Judgments, and with the
same Opposition and mutual Destruction of Arguments as in every other Kind of
Evidence. We frequently hesitate concerning the Reports of others. We balance
the opposite Circumstances, that cause any Doubt or Uncertainty; and when we
discover a Superiority on any Side, we incline to it; but still with a
Diminution of Assurance, in proportion to the Force of its Antagonist.

THIS Contrariety of Evidence, in the present Case, may be derived from several
different Causes; from the Opposition of contrary Testimony; from the Character
or Number of the Witnesses; from the Manner of their delivering their
Testimony; or from the Union of all these Circamstances. We entertain a
Suspicion concerning any Matter of Fact, when the Witnesses contradict each
other; when they are but few, or of a suspicious Character; when they have an
Interest in what they affirm; when they deliver their Testimony with Doubt and
Hesitation, or on the contrary, with too violent Asseverations. There are many
other Pariculars of the same Kind, which may diminish or destroy the Force of
any Argument, derived from human Testimony.

SUPPOSE, for Instance, that the Fact, which the Testimony endeavors to
establish, partakes of the Extraordinary and the Mavelous; in that Case, the
Evidence, resulting from the Testimony, receives a Diminution, greater or less,
in proportion as the Fact is more or less unusual. The Reason, why we place any
Credit in Witnesses and Historians is not from any Connection we perceive a
priori betwixt Testimony and Reality, but because we are accustomed to find a
Conformity betwixt them. But when the Fact attested is such a one as has seldom
fallen under our Observation, here is a Contest of two opposite Experiences; of
which the one destroys the other as far as its Force goes, and the Superior can
only operate on the Mind by the Force, which remains. The very same Principle
of Experience, which gives us a certain Degree of Assurance in the Testimony of
Witnesses, gives us also, in this Case, another Degree of Assurance against the
Fact, which they endeavor to establish; from which Contradiction there
necessarily arises a Counterpoize, and mutual Destruction of Belief and
Authority.

BUT in order to increase the Probability against the Testimony of Witnesses,
let us suppose, that the Fact, which they affirm, instead of being only
mavelous, is really miraculous; and suppose also, that the Testimony,
considered apart, and in itself, amounts to an entire Proof; in that Case there
is Proof against Proof, of which the strongest must prevail, but still with a
Diminution of its Force, in proportion to that of its Antagonist.

A MIRACLE is a Violation of the Laws of Nature; and as a firm and inalterable
Experience has established these Laws, the Proof against a Miracle, from the
very Nature of the Fact, is as entire as any Argument from Experience can
possibly be imagined, Why is it more than probable, that all Men must die; that
Lead cannot, of itself, remain suspended in the Air; that Fire consumes Wood,
and is extinguished by Water; unless it be that these Events are found
agreeable to the Laws of Nature, and there is required a Violation of these
Laws, or in other Words, a Miracle, to prevent them? Nothing is esteemed a
Miracle if it ever happen in the common Course of Nature. It Is no Miracle that
a Man in seeming good Health should die of a sudden; because such a Kind of
Death, though more unusual than any other, has yet been frequently observed to
happen. But it is a Miracle, that a dead Man should come to Life; because that
has never been observed, in any Age or Country. There must, therefore, be an
uniform Experience against every miraculous Event, otherwise the Event would
not merit that Appellation. And as an uniform Experience amounts to a Proof,
there is here a direct and full Proof, from the Nature of the Fact, against the
Existence of any Miracle; nor can such a Proof be destroyed, or the Miracle
rendered credible, but by an opposite Proof, that is superior Sometimes an
Event may not, in itself, seem to be contrary to the Laws of Nature, and yet,
if it were real, it might, by reason of some Circumstances, be denominated a
Miracle, because, in Fact, it is contrary to these Laws. Thus if a Person,
claiming a divine Authority, should command a sick Person to be well, a
healthful Man to fall down dead, the Clouds to pour Rain, the Winds to blow, in
short, should order many natural Events, which immediately follow upon his
Command; these might justly be esteemed Miracles, because they are really, in
this Case, contrary to the Laws of Nature. For if any Suspicion remain, that
the Event and Command concurred by Accident, there is no Miracle and no
Transgression of the Laws of Nature. If this Suspicion be removed, there is
evidently a Miracle, and a Transgression of these Laws; because nothing can be
more contrary to Nature than that the Voice or Command of a Man should have
such an Influence. A Miracle may be accurately defined, a Transgression of a
Law of Nature by a particular Volition of the Deity, or by the Interposal of
some invisible Agent. A Miracle may either be discoverable by Men or not. This
alters not its Nature and Essence. The raising of a House or Ship into the Air
is a visible Miracle. The raising a Feather, when the Wind wants ever so little
of a Force requisite for that Purpose, is as real a Miracle, though not so
sensible with regard to us.
.

THE plain Consequence is (and it is a general Maxim worthy of our Attention)
"That no Testimony is sufficient to establish a Miracle, unless the Testimony
be of such a Kind, that its Falsehood would be more miraculous, than the Fact,
which it endeavors to establish: And even in that Case, there is a mutual
Destruction of Arguments, and the Superior only gives us an Assurance suitable
to that Degree of Force, which remains, after deducting the Inferior." When any
one tells me, that he saw a dead Man restored to Life, I immediately consider
with myself, whether it be more probable, that this Person should either
deceive or be deceived, or that the Fact he relates should really have
happened. I weigh the one Miracle against the other, and according to the
Superiority, which I discover, I pronounce my Decision, and always reject the
greater Miracle. If the Flashood of his Testimony would be more miraculous,
than the Event, which he relates; then, and not till then, can he pretend to
command my Belief or Opinion.

PART II.
IN the foregoing Reasoning we have supposed, that the Testimony, upon which a
Miracle is founded, may possibly amount to an entire Proof, and that the
Falsehood of that Testimony would be a kind of Prodigy. But it is easy to show,
that we have been a great deal too liberal in our Concessions, and that there
never was a miraculous Event, in any History, established on so full an
Evidence.

FOR first, there is not to be found, in all History, any Miracle attested by a
sufficient Number of Men, of such unquestioned Good-sense, Education, and
Learning as to secure us against all Delusion in themselves; of such undoubted
Integrity, as to place them beyond all Suspicion of any Design to deceive
others; of such Credit and Reputation in the Eyes of Mankind as to have a great
deal to lose in case of being detected in any Falsehood; and at the same time
attesting Facts, performed in such a public Manner, and in so celebrated a Part
of the World, as to render the Detection unavoidable: All which Circumstances
are requisite to give us a full Assurance in the Testimony of Men.

SECONDLY. We may observe in human Nature a Principle, which, if strictly
examined, will be found to diminish extremely the Assurance we might have, from
human Testimony, in any Kind of Prodigy. The Maxim, by which we commonly
conduct ourselves in our Reasonings, is, that the Objects, of which we have no
Experience, resemble those, of which we have; that what we have found to be
most usual is always most probable; and that where there is any Opposition of
Arguments we ought to give the Preference to such of them as are founded on the
greatest Number of past Observations. But though in proceeding by this Rule, we
readily reject any Fact, that is unusual and incredible in an ordinary Degree;
yet in advancing farther, the Mind observes not always the same Rule; but when
any Thing is affirmed utterly absurd and miraculous, it rather the more readily
admits such a Fact, upon account of that very Circumstance, which ought to
destroy all its Authority. The Passion of Surprise and Wonder, arising from
Miracles, being an agreeable Emotion, gives a sensible Tendency toward the
Belief of those Events, from which it is derived. And this goes so far, that
even those who cannot enjoy this Pleasure immediately, nor can believe those
miraculous Events, of which they are informed, yet love to partake of the
Satisfaction at Second-hand, or by Rebound, and place a Pride and Delight in
exciting the Admiration of others.

WITH what Greediness are the miraculous Accounts of Travelers received, their
Descriptions of Sea and Land-Monsters, their Relations of wonderful Adventures,
strange Men, and uncouth Manners? But if the Spirit of Religion join itself to
the Love of Wonder, there is an End of common Sense; and human Testimony, in
these Circumstances, loses all Pretensions to Authority. A Religionist may be
an Enthusiast, and imagine he sees what has no Reality: He may know his
Narration to be false, and yet persevere in it, with the best Intentions in the
World, for the sake of promoting so holy a Cause: Or even where this Delusion
has no Place, Vanity, excited by so strong a Temptation, operates on him more
powerfully than on the rest of Mankind in any other Circumstances; and
Self-Interest with equal Force. His Auditors may not have, and commonly have
not sufficient Judgment to canvass his Evidence: What Judgment they have, they
renounce by Principle, in these sublime and mysterious Subjects: Or if they
were ever so willing to employ it, Passion and a heated Imagination disturb the
Regularity of its Operations. Their Credulity increases his Impudence: And his
Impudence over-powers their Credulity.

ELOQUENCE, when in its highest Pitch, leaves little room for Reason or
Reflection; but addressing itself entirely to the Fancy or the Affections,
captivates the willing Hearers, and subdues their Understanding. Happily, this
Pitch it seldom attains. But what a Cicero or a Demosthenes could scarcely
operate over a Roman or Athenian Audience, every Capuchin, every itinerant or
stationary Teacher can perform over the Generality of Mankind, and in a higher
Degree, by touching such gross and vulgar Passions The many Instances of forged
Miracles, and Prophecies and supernatural Events, which, in all Ages, have
either been detected by contrary Evidence, or which detect themselves by their
Absurdity, mark sufficiently the strong Propensity of Mankind to the
Extraordinary and the Mavelous, and ought reasonably to beget a Suspicion
against all Relations of this Kind. This is our natural Way of thinking even
with regard to the most common and most credible Events. For Instance: There is
no Kind of Report, which rises so easily, and spreads so quickly, especially in
Country-places and Provincial Towns, as those concerning Marriages; insomuch as
two young Persons of equal. Condition never see each other twice, but the whole
Neighborhood immediately join them together. The Pleasure of telling a Piece
of News so interesting, of propagating it, and of being the first Reporters of
it, spreads the Intelligence. And this is so well known, that no Man of Sense
gives attention to these Reports, till he finds them confirmed by some greater
Evidence. Do not the same Passions, and others still stronger, incline the
Generality of Mankind to the believing and reporting, with the greatest
Vehemence and Assurance, all religious Miracles?
.

THIRDLY. It forms a very strong Presumption against all supernatural and
miraculous Relations, that they are always found chiefly to abound amongst
ignorant and barbarous Nations; or if a civilized People has ever given
Admission to any of them, that People will be found to have received them from
ignorant and barbarous Ancestors, who transmitted them with that inviolable
Sanction and Authority, which always attends ancient and received Opinions.
When we peruse the first Histories of all Nations, we are apt to imagine
ourselves transported into some new World, where the whole Frame of Nature is
disjointed, and every Element performs its Operations in a different Manner,
from what it does at present. Battles, Revolutions, Pestilences, Famines, and
Deaths are never the Effects of those natural Causes, which we experience.
Prodigies, Omens, Oracles, Judgments quite obscure and over-shadow the few
natural Events, that are intermingled with them. But as these grow thinner
every Page, in Proportion as we advance nearer the enlightened Ages of Science
and Knowledge, we soon learn, that there is nothing mysterious or supernatural
in the Case, but that all proceeds from the usual Propensity of Mankind toward
the Mavelous and Extraordinary, and that though this Inclination may at
Intervals receive a Check from Sense and Learning, it can never be thoroughly
extirpated from human Nature.

It Is strange, a judicious Reader is apt to say, upon the Perusal of these
wonderful Historians, that such prodigious Events never happen in our Days. But
it is nothing strange, I hope, that Men should lie in all Ages. You must surely
have seen Instances enough of that Frailty. You have yourself heard many such
prodigious Relations started, which being treated with Scorn by all the Wise
and Judicious, have at last been abandoned, even by the Vulgar. Be assured,
that those renowned Lies, which have spread and flourished to such a monstrous
Height, arose from like Beginnings; but being sown on a more proper Soil, shot
up at last into Prodigies almost equal to those, which they relate.

'Twas a wise Policy in that cunning Impostor, Alexander, who, though now
forgotten, was once so famous, to lay the first Scene of his Impostures in
Paphlagonia, where, as Lucian tells us, the People were extremely ignorant and
stupid, and ready to swallow even the grossest Delusion. People at a Distance,
who are weak enough to think the Matter at all worth Enquiry, have no
Opportunity of receiving better Information. The Stories come magnified to them
by a hundred Circumstances. Fools are industrious to propagate the Delusion;
while the Wise and Learned are contented, in general, to deride its Absurdity,
without informing themselves of the particular Facts, by which it may be
distinctly refuted. And thus the Impostor abovementioned was enabled to
proceed, from his ignorant Paphlagonians, to the inlisting of Votaries, even
among the Grecian Philosophers, and Men of the most eminent Rank and
Distinction in Rome. Nay could engage the Attention of that sage Emperor,
Marcus Aurelius; so far as to make him trust the Success of a military
Expedition to his delusive Prophecies.

THE Advantages are so great of starting an Imposture amongst an ignorant
People, that even tho, the Delusion should be too gross to impose on the
Generality of them ( which, though seldom, is sometimes the Case) it has a much
better Chance of succeeding in remote Countries, than if the first Scene had
been laid in a City renowned for Arts and Knowledge. The most ignorant and
barbarous of these Barbarians carry the Report abroad. None of their Countrymen
have large enough Correspondence or sufficient Credit and Authority to
contradict and beat down the Delusion. Men's Inclination to the Mavelous has
full Opportunity to display itself. And thus a Story shall pass for certain at
a thousand Miles Distance, which is universally exploded in the Place where it
was first started. But had Alexander fixed his Residence at Athens, the
Philosophers of that renowned Mart of Learning, had ^mmediately spread, through
the whole Roman Empire, their Sense of the Matter, which, being supported by so
great Authority, and displayed by all the Force of Reason and Eloquence, had
entirely opened the Eyes of Mankind. It Is true; Lucian passing by chance through
Paphlagonia had an Opportunity of performing this good Office. But, though much
to be wished, it does not always happen, that every Alexander meets with a
Lucian, ready to expose and detect his Impostures It may here, perhaps, be
objected, that I proceed rashly, and form my Notions of Alexander merely from
the Account, given of him by Lucian, a professed Enemy. It were indeed to be
wished, that some of the Accounts published by his Followers and Accomplices
had remained. The Opposition and Contrast betwixt the Character and Conduct of
the same Man, as drawn by a Friend or an Enemy is as strong, even in common
Life, much more in these religious Matters, as that betwixt any two Men in the
World, betwixt Alexander and St. Paul, for Instance. See Letter to Gilbert West
Esquire on the Conversion and Apostleship St. Paul.
.

I MAY add as a fourth Reason, which diminishes the Authority of Prodigies,
that there is no Testimony for any, even those which have not been expressly
detected, that is not opposed by an infinite Number of Witnesses; so that not
only the Miracle destroys the Credit of the Testimony, but even the Testimony
destroys itself. To make this the better understood, let us consider, that, in
Matters of Religion, whatever is different is contrary, and that it is
impossible the Religions of ancient Rome, of Turkey, of Siam, and of China
should all of them be established on any solid Foundation. Every Miracle,
therefore, pretended to have been wrought in any of these Religions (and all of
them abound in Miracles) as its direct Scope is to establish the particular
System, to which it is attributed; so it has the same Force, though more
indirectly, to overthrow every other System. In destroying a Rival-System, it
likewise destroys the Credit of those Miracles, on which that System was
established; so that all the Prodigies of different Religions are to be
regarded as contrary Facts, and the Evidences of these Prodigies, whether weak
or strong, as opposite to each other. According to this Method of Reasoning,
when we believe any Miracle of Mahomet or any of his Successors, we have for
our Warrant the Testimony of a few barbarous Arabians: and on the other side,
we are to regard the Authority of Titas Livius, Platarch, Tacitus, and in short
of all the Authors and Witnesses, Grecian, Chinese, and Roman Catholic, who
have related any Miracles in their particular Religion; I say, we are to regard
their Testimony in the same Light as if they had mentioned that Mohammedan
Miracle, and had in express Terms contradicted it, with the same Certainty as
they have for the Miracles they relate. This Argument may appear over-subtile
and refined; but is not in Reality different from the Reasoning of a Judge, who
supposes, that the Credit of two Witnesses, maintaining a Crime against any
one, is destroyed by the Testimony of two others, who affirm him to have been
two hundred Leagues distant, at the same Instant when the Crime is said to have
been committed.

ONE of the best attested Miracles in all profane History is that which
Tacitus reports of Vespasian, who cured a blind Man in Alexandria, by Means of
his Spittle, and a lame Man by the mere Touch of his Foot; in Obedience to a
Vision of the God, Serapis, who had enjoined them to have recourse to the
Emperor, for these miraculous and extraordinary Cures, The Story may be seen in
that fine Historian Hist. Lib. 4. Cap. 8.
; where every Circumstance seems to add Weight to the Testimony, and might be
displayed at large with all the Force of Argument and Eloquence, if any one
were now concerned to enforce the Evidence of that exploded and idolatrous
Superstition. The Gravity, Solidity, Age, and Probity of so great an Emperor,
who, through the whole Coarse of his Life, conversed in a familiar Way with his
Friends and Courtiers, and never affected those extraordinary Airs of Divinity,
assumed by Alexander and Demetrius. The Historian, a contemporary Writer, noted
for Candor and Veracity, and withal, the greatest and most penetrating Genius,
perhaps, of all Antiquity; and so free from any Tendency to Superstition and
Credulity, that he even lies under the contrary Imputation, of Atheism and
Profaneness: The Persons, from whose Testimony he related the Miracle, of
established Character for Judgment and Veracity, as we may well suppose;
Eyewitnesses of the Fact, and confirming their Verdict, after the Flavian
Family were despoiled of the Empire, and could no longer give any Reward, as
the Price of a Lie. Utrumque, qui interfuere, nunc quoque memorant, postquam
nullum mendacis pretium. To which if we add the public Nature of the Fact, as
related, it will appear, that no Evidence can well be supposed stronger for so
gross and so palpable a Falsehood.

THERE is also a very memorable Story related by Cardinal de Retz, and which
may well deserve our Consideration. When that intriguing Politician fled into
Spain, to avoid the Persecution of his Enemies, he passed through Saragossa, the
Capital of Arragon, where he was shown, in the Cathedral Church, a Man, who had
served twenty Years as a Doorkeeper of the Church, and was well known to every
Body in Town, that had ever paid their Devotions at that Cathedral. He had been
seen, for so long a Time, wanting a Leg; but recovered that Limb by the rubbing
of holy Oil upon the Stump; and when the Cardinal examined it, he found it to
be a true natural Leg, like the other. This Miracle was vouched by all the
Canons of the Church; and the whole Company in Town was appealed to for a
Confirmation of the Fact; whom the Cardinal found, by their zealous Devotion,
to be thorough Believers of the Miracle. Here the Relater was also contemporary
to the supposed Prodigy, of an incredulous and libertine Character as well as
of great Genius, the Miracle of so singular a Nature as could scarce admit of a
Counterfeit, and the Witnesses very numerous, and all of them, in a Manner,
Spectators of the Fact, to which they gave their Testimony. And what adds
mightily to the Force of the Evidence, and may double our Surprise on this
Occasion, is, that the Cardinal himself, who relates the Story, seems not to
give any Credit to it, and consequently cannot be suspected of any Concurrence
in the holy Fraud. He considered justly, that it was not requisite, in order to
reject a Fact of this Nature, to be able accurately to disprove the Testimony,
and to trace its Falsehood, through all the Circumstances of Knavery and
Credulity, which produced it. He knew, that as this was commonly altogether
impossible, at any small Distance of Time and Place; so was it extremely
difficult, even where one was immediately present, by Reason of the Bigotry,
Ignorance, Cunning, and Roguery of a great Part of Mankind. He therefore
concluded, like a just Reasoner, that such an Evidence carried Falsehood upon
the very Face of it, and that a Miracle, supported by any human Testimony, was
more properly a Subject of Derision than of Argument.

THERE surely never was so great a Number of Miracles ascribed to one Person,
as those, which were lately said to have been wrought in France upon the Tomb
of Abbe Paris, the famous Jansenist, with whose Sanctity the People were so
long deluded. The curing of the Sick, giving Hearing to the Deaf, and Sight to
the Blind were every where talked of, as the usual Effects of that holy
Sepulcher. But what is more extraordinary; many of the Miracles were
immediately proved, upon the Spot, before Judges of unquestioned Integrity,
attested by Witnesses of Credit and Distinction, in a learned Age, and on the
most eminent Theater, that is now in the World. Nor is this all: A Relation of
them was published, and dispersed every where; nor were the Jesuits, though a
learned Body, supported by the civil Magistrate, and determined Enemies to
those Opinions, in whose Favor the Miracles were said to have been wrought,
ever able distinctly to refute or detect them. Where shall we find such a
Number of Circumstances, agreeing to the Corroboration of one Fact? And what
have we to oppose to such a Cloud of Witnesses, but the absolute Impossibility
or miraculous Nature of the Events, which they relate? And this surely, in the
Eyes of all reasonable People, will alone be regarded as a sufficient
Refutation.

Is the Consequence just; because some human Testimony has the utmost Force and
Authority in some Cases, when it relates the Battles of Philippi or Pharsalia,
for Instance; that therefore all Kinds of Testimony must, in all Cases, have
equal Force and Authority? Suppose the Caesarean and Pompeian Factions had,
each of them, challenged the Victory in these Battles, and the Historians of
each Party had uniformly ascribed the Advantage to their own Side; how could
Mankind, at this Distance, have been able to determine betwixt them? The
Contrariety is equally strong betwixt the Miracles related by Herodotus or
Plutarch, and those related by Mariana, Bid, or any monkish Historian.

THE Wise lend a very academic Faith to every Report, which favors the Passion
of the Reporter, whether it magnifies his Country, his Family, or himself, or
in any other Way strikes in with his natural Inclinations and Propensities. But
what greater Temptation than to appear a Missionary, a Prophet, an Ambassador
from Heaven? Who would not encounter many Dangers and Difficulties, to attain
so sublime a Character? Or if, by the Help of Vanity and a heated Imagination,
a Man has first made a Convert of himself, and entered seriously into the
Delusion; who ever scruples to make use of pious Frauds, in support of so holy
and meritorious a Cause?

THE smallest Spark may here kindle into the greatest Flame; because the
Materials are always prepared for it. The avidum genus auricularum, swallow
greedily, without Examination, whatever sooths Superstition, and promotes
Wonder.

How many Stories of this Nature have, in all Ages, been detected and exploded
in their Infancy? How many more have been celebrated for a Time, and have
afterward sunk into Neglect and Oblivion? Where such Reports, therefore, fly
about, the Solution of the Phenomenon is obvious; and we judge in Conformity
to regular Experience and Observation, when we account for it by the known and
natural Principles of Credulity and Delusion. And shall we, rather than have
Recourse to so natural a Solution, allow of a miraculous Violation of the most
known and most established Laws of Nature?

I NEED not mention the Difficulty of detecting a Falsehood in any private or
even public History, at the Time and Place, where it is said to happen; much
more where the Scene is removed to ever so small a Distance. Even a Court of
Judicature, with all the Authority, Accuracy, and Judgment, which they can
employ, find themselves often at a loss to distinguish betwixt Truth and
Falsehood in the most recent Actions. But the Matter never comes to any Issue,
if trusted to the common Method of Altercation and Debate and flying Rumors;
especially when Men's Passions have taken party on either Side.

IN the Infancy of new Religions, the Wise and Learned commonly esteem the
Matter too inconsiderable to deserve their Attention or Regard: And when
afterward they would willingly detect the Cheat, in order to undeceive the
deluded Multitude, the Season is now gone, and the Records and Witnesses, who
might clear up the Matter, have perished beyond Recovery.

NO Means of Detection remain, but those which must be drawn from the very
Testimony itself of the Reporters: And these, though always sufficient with the
Judicious and Knowing, are commonly too fine to fall under the Comprehension of
the Vulgar.

UPON the whole, then, it appears, that no Testimony for any Kind of Miracle
can ever possibly amount to a Probability, much less to a Proof; and that even
supposing it amounted to a Proof, 'twould be opposed by another Proof, derived
from the very Nature of the Fact, which it would endeavor to establish. It Is
Experience only, which gives Authority to human Testimony; and it is the same
Experience, which assures us of the Laws of Nature. When, therefore, these two
Kinds of Experience are contrary, we have nothing to do but subtract the one
from the other, and embrace an Opinion, either on the one Side or the other,
with that Assurance, which arises from the Remainder. But according to the
Principle here explained, this Subtraction, with regard to all popular
Religions, amounts to an entire Annihilation; and therefore we may establish it
as a Maxim, that no human Testimony can have such Force as to prove a Miracle,
and make it a just Foundation for any such System of Religion I beg the
Limitation here made may be remarked, when I say, that a Miracle can never be
proved, so as to be the Foundation of a System of Religion. For I own, that
otherwise, there may possibly be Miracles, or Violations of the usual Course of
Nature, of such a Kind as to admit of Proof from human Testimony; though,
perhaps, it will be impossible to find any such in all the Records of History.
Thus suppose, all Authors, in all Languages, agree, that from the first of
January 1600, there was a total Darkness over the whole Earth for eight Days:
Suppose that the Tradition of this extraordinary Event, is still strong and
lively among the People: That all Travelers, who return from foreign
Countries, bring us Accounts of the same Tradition, without the least Variation
or Contradiction; it is evident, that our present Philosophers, instead of
doubting of that Fact, ought to receive it for certain, and ought to search for
the Causes, whence it might be derived.

But suppose, that all the Historians, who treat of England, should agree, that
on the first of January 1600, Queen Elizabeth died; that both before and after
her Death she was seen by her Physicians and the whole Court, as is usual with
Persons of her Rank; that her Successor was acknowledged and proclaimed by the
Parliament; and that, after having been interred a Month, she again appeared,
took Possession of the Throne, and governed England for three Years: I must
confess I should be surpised at the Concurrence of so many odd Circumstances,
but should not have the least Inclination to believe so miraculous an Event. I
should not doubt of her pretended Death, and of those other public
Circumstances, that followed it: I should only assert it to have been
pretended, and that it neither was, nor possibly could be real. You would in
vain object to me the Difficulty, and almost Impossibility of deceiving the
World in an Affair of such Consequence; the Wisdom and Integrity of that
renowned Queen; with the little or no Advantage she could reap from so poor an
Artifice: All this might astonish me; but I would still reply, that the Knavery
and Folly of Men are such common Phenomenon, that I should rather believe the
most extraordinary Events to arise from their Concurrence than admit so single
a Violation of the Laws of Nature.

But should this Miracle be ascribed to any new System of Religion; Men, in all
Ages, have been so much imposed on by ridiculous Stories of that Kind; that
this very Circumstance would be a full Proof of a Cheat, and sufficient, with
all Men of Sense, not only to make them reject the Fact, but even reject it
without farther Examination. Though the Being, to whom the Miracle is ascribed,
be, in this Case, Almighty, it does not, upon that Account, become a whit more
probable; since it is impossible for us to know the Attributes or Actions of
such a Being, otherwise than from the Experience, which we have, of his
Productions, in the usual Course of Nature. This still reduces us to past
Observation, and obliges us to compare the Instances of the Violations of Truth
in the Testimony of Men with those of the Violation of the Laws of Nature by
Miracles, in order to judge which of them is most likely and probable. As the
Violations of Truth are more common in the Testimony concerning religious
Miracles than in that concerning any other Matter of Fact; this must diminish
very much the Authority of the former Testimony, and make us form a general
Resolution never to lend any Attention to it, with whatever specious Pretext it
may be covered.


.

I AM the better pleased with this Method of Reasoning, as I think it may serve
to confound those dangerous Friends or disguised Enemies to the Christian
Religion, who have undertaken to defend it by the Principles of human Reason.
Our most holy Religion is founded on Faith, not on Reason; and it is a sure
Method of exposing it to put it to such a Trial as it is, by no Means, fitted
to endure. To make this more evident, let us examine those Miracles, related in
Scripture; and not to lose ourselves in too wide a Field, let us confine
ourselves to such as we find in the Pentateuch, which we shall examine, as
these pretended Christians would have us, not as the Word or Testimony of God
himself, but as the Production of a mere human Writer and Historian. Here then
we are first to consider a Book, presented to us by a barbarous and ignorant
People, wrote in an Age when they were still more barbarous, and in all
Probability long after the Facts it relates; corroborated by no concurring
Testimony, and resembling those fabulous Accounts, which every Nation gives of
its Origin. Upon reading this Book, we find it full of Prodigies and Miracles.
It gives an Account of a State of the World and of human Nature entirely
different from the present: Of our Fall from that State: Of the Age of Man,
extended to near a thousand Years: Of the Destruction of the World by a Deluge:
Of the arbitrary Choice of one People, as the Favorites of Heaven; and that
People, the Countrymen of the Author: Of their Deliverance from Bondage by
Prodigies the most astonishing imaginable: I desire any one to lay his Hand
upon his Heart, and after serious Consideration declare, whether he thinks,
that the Falsehood of such a Book, supported by such a Testimony, would be more
extraordinary and miraculous than all the Miracles it relates; which is,
however, necessary to make it be received, according to the Measures of
Probability above established.

WHAT we have said of Miracles may be applied, without any Variation, to
Prophecies; and indeed, all Prophecies are real Miracles, and as such only, can
be admitted as Proofs of any Revelation. If it did not exceed the Capacity of
human Nature to foretell future Events, 'twould be absurd to employ any
Prophecy as a Proof of a divine Mission or Authority from Heaven. So that, upon
the whole, we may conclude, that the Christian Religion, not only was at first
attended with Miracles, but even at this Day cannot be believed by any
reasonable Person without one. Mere Reason is insufficient to convince us of
its Veracity: And whoever is moved by Faith to assent to it, is conscious of a
continued Miracle in his own Person, which subverts all the Principles of his
Understanding, and gives him a Determination to believe what is most contrary
to Custom and Experience.

ESSAY XI. Of the PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES of NATURAL RELIGION.
I WAS lately engaged in Conversation with a Friend, who loves skeptical
Paradoxes; where, though he advanced many Principles, which I can by no means
approve of, yet as they seem to be curious, and bear some relation to the Chain
of Reasoning carried on through these Essays, I shall here copy them from my
Memory as accurately as I can, in order to submit them to the Judgment of the
Reader.

OUR Conversation began with my admiring the singular good Fortune of
Philosophy, which, as it requires entire Liberty, above all other Privileges,
and flourishes chiefly from the free Opposition of Sentiments and
Argumentation, received its first Birth in an Age and Country of Freedom and
Toleration, and was never cramped, even in its most extravagant Principles, by
any Creeds, Confessions, or penal Statutes. For except the Banishment of
Protagoras, and the Death of Socrates, which last Event proceeded partly from
other Motives, there are scarce any Instances to be met with, in ancient
History, of this bigoted Jealousy and Persecution, with which the present Age
is so much infested. Epicurus lived at Athens to an advanced Age, in Peace and
Tranquillity: Epicureans Luciani (...)
were even admitted to receive the sacerdotal Character, and to officiate at
the Altar, in the most sacred Rites of their Religion: And the public
Encouragement Id. (...)
of Pensions and Salaries was afforded equally, by the wisest of all the Roman
Emperors Id. and Dio.
, to the Professors of every Sect of Philosophy. How requisite such kind of
Treatment was to Philosophy, in its first Origin, will easily be conceived, if
we reflect, that even at present, when it may be supposed more hardy and
robust, it bears with much Difficulty the Inclemency of the Seasons, and those
harsh Winds of Calumny and Persecution, which blow upon it.

YOU admire, says my Friend, as the singular Good-Fortune of Philosophy, what
seems to result from the natural Course of things, and to be unavoidable in
every Age and Nation. This pertinacious Bigotry, of which you complain, as so
fatal to Philosophy, is really her Offspring, who after allying with
Superstition, separates himself entirely from the Interest of his Parent, and
becomes her most inveterate Enemy and Persecutor. Speculative Dogmas and
Principles of Religion, the present Occasions of such furious Dispute, could
not possibly be conceived or admitted in the early Ages of the World; when
Mankind, being wholly illiterate, formed an Idea of Religion, more suitable to
their weak Apprehension, and composed their sacred Tenets chiefly of such Tales
and Stories as were the Objects of traditional Belief, more than of Argument or
Disputation. After the first Alarm, therefore, was over, which arose from the
new Paradoxes and Principles of the Philosophers; they seem, ever after, during
the Ages of Antiquity, to have lived in great Harmony with the established
Superstitions, and to have made a fair Partition of Mankind betwixt them; the
former claiming all the Learned and the Wise, and latter possessing all the
Vulgar and Illiterate.

IT seems then, says I, that you leave Politics entirely out of the Question;
and never suppose, that a wise Magistrate can justly be jealous of certain
Tenets of Philosophy, such as those of Epicurus, which denying a divine
Existence, and consequently a Providence and a future State, seem to loosen, in
a great Measure, the Ties of Morality, and may be supposed, for that Reason,
pernicious to the Peace of civil Society.

I KNOW, replied he, that in Fact these Persecutions never, in any Age,
proceeded from calm Reason, or any Experience of the pernicious Consequences of
Philosophy; but arose entirely from Passion and Prejudice. But what if I should
advance farther, and assert, that if Epicurus had been accused before the
People, by any of the Sycophants or Informers of those Days, he could easily
have defended his Cause, and proved his Principles of Philosophy to be as
salutary as those of his Adversaries, who endeavored, with such Zeal, to
subject him to the public Hatred and Jealousy?

I WISH, says I, you would try your Eloquence upon so extraordinary a Topic,
and make a Speech for Epicurus, which might satisfy, not the Mob of Athens, if
you will allow that ancient and polite City to have contained any Mob, but the
more philosophical Part of his Audience, such as might be supposed capable of
comprehending his Arguments.

THE Matter would not be difficult, upon such Conditions, replied he: And if
you please, I shall suppose myself Epicurus for a Moment, and make you stand
for the Athenian People, and shall give you such an Harangue as will fill all
the Urn with white Beans, and leave not a black one to gratify the Malice of my
Adversaries.

VERY well: Pray proceed upon these Suppositions.

I COME hither, O ye Athenians, to justify in your Assembly what I maintained
in my School, and find myself impeached by furious Antagonists, instead of
reasoning with calm and dispassionate Enquirers. Your Deliberations, which of
right should be directed to Questions of public Good and the Interest of the
Commonwealth, are diverted to the Disquisitions of speculative Philosophy; and
these magnificent, but, perhaps, fruitless Enquiries, take place of your more
familiar but more useful Occupations. But so far as in me lies, I will prevent
this Abuse. We shall not here dispute concerning the Origin and Government of
Worlds. We shall only enquire how far such Questions concern the public
Interest. And if I can persuade you, that they are entirely indifferent to the
Peace of Society and Security of Government, I hope you will presently send us
back to our Schools, there to examine at leisure the Question the most sublime,
but, at the same time, the most speculative, of all Philosophy.

YOUR religious Philosophers, not satisfied with the Tradition of your
Forefathers, and Doctrines of your Priests (in which I willingly acquiesce)
indulge a rash Curiosity, in trying how far they can establish Religion upon
the Principles of Reason; and they thereby excite, instead of satisfying the
Doubts, which naturally arise from a diligent and scrutinous Enquiry. They
paint, in the most magnificent Colors, the Order, Beauty, and wise Arrangement
of the Universe; and then ask, if such a glorious Display of Intelligence and
Wisdom could proceed from the fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, or if Chance could
produce what the highest Genius can never sufficiently admire. I shall not
examine the Justness of this Argument. I shall allow it to be as solid as my
Antagonists and Accusers can desire. It Is sufficient, if I can prove, from this
very Reasoning, that the Question is entirely speculative, and that when, in my
philosophical Disquisitions, I deny a Providence and a future State, I
undermine not the Foundations of Society and Government, but advance
Principles, which they themselves, upon their own Topics, if they argue
consistently, must allow to be solid and satisfactory.

YOU then, who are my Accusers, have acknowledged, that the chief or sole
Argument for a divine Existence (which I never questioned) is derived from the
Order of Nature; where there appears such Marks of Intelligence and Design,
that you think it extravagant to assign for its Cause, either Chance, or the
blind and unguided Force of Matter. You allow, that this is an Argument, drawn
from Effects to Causes. You infer, from the Order of the Work, that there must
have been Project and Forethought in the Workman. If you cannot make out this
Point, you allow, that your Conclusion fails; and you pretend not to establish
the Conclusion in a greater Latitude than the Phenomenon of Nature will
justify. These are your Concessions. I desire you to mark the Consequences.

WHEN we infer any particular Cause from an Effect, we must proportion the one
to the other, and can never be allowed to ascribe to the Cause any Qualities,
but what are exactly sufficient to produce the Effect. A Body of ten Ounces
raised in any Scale may serve as a Proof, that the counter-ballancing Weight
exceeds ten Ounces; but can never afford a Reason, that it exceeds a hundred.
If the Cause, assigned for any Effect, be not sufficient to produce it, we must
either reject that Cause, or add to it such Qualities as will give it a just
Proportion to the Effect. But if we ascribe to it farther Qualities, or affirm
it capable of producing other Effects, we can only indulge the License of
Conjecture, and arbitrarily suppose the Existence of Qualities and Energies,
without Reason or Authority.

THE same Rule holds, whether the Cause assigned be brute unconscious Matter or
a rational intelligent Being. If the Cause be known only by the Effect, we
never ought to assign to it any Qualities, beyond what are precisely requisite
to produce the Effect; nor can we, by any Rules of just Reasoning, return back
from the Cause, and infer other Effects from it, beyond those by which alone it
is known to us. No one, merely from the Sight of one of Zeuxis's Pictures,
could know, whether he was also a Statuary or Architect, and was an Artist no
less skilful in Stone and Marble than in Colors. The Talents and Taste
displayed in the particular Work before us; these we may safely conclude the
Workman was possessed of. The Cause must be proportioned to the Effect: And if
we exactly and precisely proportion it, we shall never find in it any
Qualities, that point farther, or afford an Inference concerning any other
Design or Performance. Such Qualities must be somewhat beyond what is merely
requisite to produce the Effect, which we examine.

ALLOWING, therefore, the Gods to be the Authors of the Existence or Order of
the Universe; it follows, that they possess that precise Degree of Power,
Intelligence, and Benevolence, which appear in their Workmanship; but nothing
farther can ever be proved, except we call in the Assistance of Exaggeration
and Flattery to supply the Defects of Argument and Reasoning. So far as the
Traces of any Attributes, at present, appear, so far may we conclude these
Attributes to exist. The Supposition of farther Attributes is mere Hypothesis;
much more, the Supposition, that, in distant Periods of Place and Time, there
has been, or will be a more magnificent Display of these Attributes, and a
Scheme or Order of Administration more suitable to such imaginary Virtues. We
can never be allowed to mount up from the Universe, the Effect, to Jupiter, the
Cause; and then descend downwards, to infer any new Effect from that Cause; as
if the present Effects alone were not entirely worthy of the glorious
Attributes we ascribe to that Deity. The Knowledge of the Cause being derived
solely from the Effect, they must be exactly adjusted to each other, and the
one can never point toward any thing farther, or be the Foundation of any new
Inference and Conclusion.

You find certain Phenomenon in Nature. You seek a Cause or Author. You imagine
you have found him. You afterward become so enamored of this Offspring of
your Brain, that you imagine it impossible but he must produce something
greater and more perfect than the present Scene of Things, which is so full of
Ill and Disorder. You forget, that this superlative Intelligence and
Benevolence is entirely imaginary, or at least, without any Foundation in
Reason, and that you have no ground to ascribe to him any Qualities, but what
you see he has actually exerted and displayed in his Productions. Let your
Gods, therefore, O Philosophers, be suited to the present Appearances of
Nature: And presume not to alter these Appearances by arbitrary Suppositions,
in order to suit them to the Attributes, which you so fondly ascribe to your
Deities.

WHEN Priests and Poets, supported by your Authority, O Athenians, talk of a
Golden or a Silver Age, which preceded the present Scene of Vice and Misery, I
hear them with Attention and with Reverence. But when Philosophers, who pretend
to neglect Authority, and to cultivate Reason, hold the same Discourse, I own,
I pay them not the same obsequious Submission and pious Deference. I ask; Who
carried them into the celestial Regions, who admitted them into the Councils of
the Gods, who opened to them the Book of Fate, that they thus rashly affirm
their Deities have executed, or will execute, any Purpose, beyond what has
actually appeared? If they tell me, that they have mounted on the Steps or
Scale of Reason, and by drawing Inferences from Effects to Causes, I still
insist, that they have aided the Scale of Reason by the Wings of Imagination;
otherwise they could not thus change their Manner of Inference, and argue from
Causes to Effects; presuming, that a more perfect Production than the present
World would be more suitable to such perfect Beings as the Gods, and
forgetting, that they have no Reason to ascribe to these celestial Beings any
Perfection or any Attribute, but what can be found in the present World.

HENCE all the fruitless Industry to account for the ill Appearances of Nature,
and save the Honor of the Gods; while we must acknowledge the Reality of that
Evil and Disorder, with which the World so much abounds. The obstinate and
intractable Qualities of Matter, we are told, or the Observance of general
Laws, or some such Reason is the sole Cause, which controlled the Power and
Benevolence of Jupiter, and obliged him to create Mankind and every sensible
Creature so imperfect and so unhappy. These Attributes, then, are, it seems,
beforehand, taken for granted, in their greatest Latitude. And upon that
Supposition, I own, that such Conjectures may, perhaps, be admitted as
plausible Solutions of the Phenomenon. But still I ask; Why take these
Attributes for granted, or why ascribe to the Cause any Qualities but what
actually appear in the Effect? Why torture your Brain to justify the Course of
Nature upon Suppositions, which, for aught you know, may be entirely imaginary,
and of which there are to be found no Traces in the Course of Nature?

THE religious Hypothesis, therefore, must be considered only as a particular
Method of accounting for the visible Phenomenon of the Universe: But no just
Reasoner will ever presume to infer from it any single Fact, and alter or add
to these Phenomenon, in any single Particular. If you think, that the
Appearances of Things prove such Causes, it is allowable for you to draw an
Inference concerning their Existence. In such complicated and sublime Subjects,
every one should be indulged in the Liberty of Conjecture and Argument. But
here you ought to rest. If you come backward, and arguing from your inferred
Causes, conclude, that any other Fact has existed, or will exist, in the Course
of Nature, which may serve for a fuller Display of particular Attributes; I
must admonish you, that you have departed from the Method of Reasoning,
attached to the present Subject, and must certainly have added something to the
Attributes of the Cause, beyond what appears in the Effect; otherwise you could
never, with tolerable Sense or Propriety, add any thing to the Effect, which
might render it more worthy of the Cause.

WHERE, then, is the Odiousness of that Doctrine, which I teach in my School,
or rather, which I examine in my Gardens? Or what do you find in this whole
Question, wherrein the Security of good Morals, or the Peace and Order of
Society is in the least concerned?

I DENY a Providence, you say, and supreme Governor of the World, who guides
the Course of Events, and punishes the Vicious with Infamy, and Disappointment,
and rewards the Virtuous with Honor and Success, in all their Undertakings.
But surely, I deny not the Course itself of Events, which lies open to every
one's Enquiry and Examination. I acknowledge, that, in the present Order of
Things, Virtue is attended with more Peace of Mind than Vice; and meets with a
more favorable Reception from the World. I am sensible, that, according to the
past Experience of Mankind, Friendship is the chief Joy of human Life, and
Moderation the only Source of Tranquillity and Happiness. I never balance
betwixt the virtuous and the vicious Course of Life; but am sensible, that, to
a well-dispos'd Mind, every Advantage is on the Side of the former: And what
can you say more, allowing all your Suppositions and Reasonings? You indeed
tell me, that this Disposition of Things proceeds from Intelligence and Design.
But whatever it proceeds from, the Disposition itself, on which depends our
Happiness or Misery, and consequently our Conduct and Deportment in Life, is
still the same. It Is still open for me, as well as you, to regulate my
Behavior, by my past Experience of Events. And if you affirm, that, while a
divine Providence is allowed, and a supreme distributive Justice in the
Universe, I ought to expect some more particular Favor of the Good, and
Punishment of the Bad, beyond the ordinary Course of Events; I here find the
same Fallacy, which I have before endeavored to detect. You persist in
imagining, that, if we grant that divine Existence, for which you so earnestly
contend, you may safely infer Consequences from it, and add something to the
experienced Order of Nature, by arguing from the Attributes, which you ascribe
to your Gods. You seem not to remember, that all your Reasonings on this
Subject can only be drawn from Effects to Causes; and that every Argument,
deduced from Causes to Effects, must of Necessity be a gross Sophysm; since it
is impossible for you to know any thing of the Cause, but what you have
antecedently, not inferred, but discovered to the full, in the Effect.

BUT what must a Philosopher judge of those vain Reasoners, who, instead of
regarding the present Life and the present Scene of Things, as the sole Object
of their Contemplation, so far reverse the whole Course of Nature, as to render
it merely a Passage to something farther; a Porch, which leads to a greater,
and vastly different Building; a Prologue, which serves merely to introduce the
Piece, and give it more Grace and Propriety? Whence, do you think, can such
Philosophers derive their Idea of the Gods? From their own Conceit and
Imagination surely. For if they derived it from the present Phenomenon, it
would never point to any thing farther, but must be exactly adjusted to them.
That the Divinity may possibly possess Attributes, which we have never seen
exerted; may be governed by Principles of Action, which we cannot discover to
be satisfied: All this will freely be allowed. But still this is mere
Possibility and Hypothesis. We never can have Reason to infer any Attributes,
or any Principles of Action in him, but so far as we know them to have been
exerted and satisfied.

Are there any Marks of a distributive Justice in the World? If you answer in
the Affirmative, I conclude, that, since Justice here exerts itself, it is
satisfied. If you reply in the Negative, I conclude, that you have then no
Reason to ascribe Justice to the Gods. If you hold a Medium betwixt Affirmation
and Negation, by saying, that the Justice of the Gods, at present, exerts
itself in Part, but not in its full Extent; I answer, that you have no Reason
to give it any particular Extent, but only so far as you see it, at present,
exert itself.

THUS I bring the Dispute, O Athenians, to a short Issue with my Antagonists.
The Course of Nature lies open to my Contemplation as well as theirs. The
experienced Train of Events is the great Standard, by which we all regulate our
Conduct. Nothing else can be appealed to, in the Field, or in the Senate.
Nothing else ought ever to be heard of, in the School, or in the Closet. In
vain, would our limited Understandings break through these Bounds, which are too
narrow for our fond Imagination. While we argue from the Course of Nature, and
infer a particular intelligent Cause, which first bestowed, and still preserves
Order in the Universe, we embrace a Principle, which is both uncertain and
useless. It Is uncertain; because the Subject lies entirely beyond the Reach of
human Experience. It Is useless; because our Knowledge of this Cause being
derived entirely from the Course of Nature, we can never, according to any
Rules of just Reasoning, return back from the Cause with any new Inferences, or
making Additions to the common and experienced Course of Nature, establish any
new Principles of Conduct and Behavior.

I OBSERVE, (says I, finding he had finished his Harangue) that you neglect not
the Artifice of the Demagogues of old; and as you was pleased to make me stand
for the People, you insinuate yourself into my Favor, by embracing those
Principles, to which, you know, I have always expressed a particular
Attachment. But allowing you to make Experience (as indeed I think you ought)
the only Standard of your Judgment concerning this, and all other Questions of
Fact; I doubt not but it may be possible, from the very same Experience you
appeal to, to refute this Reasoning, which you have put into the Mouth of
Epicurus. If you saw, for Instance, a half-finish'd Building, surrounded with
Heaps of Bricks and Stones and Mortar, and all the Instruments of Masonry;
could you not infer from the Effect, that it was a Work of Design and
Contrivance? And could you not return again, from this inferred Cause, to infer
new Additions to the Effect, and conclude, that the Building would soon be
finished, and receive all the farther Improvements, which Art could bestow upon
it? If you saw, upon the Seashore, the Print of one human Foot, you would
conclude, that a Man had passed that Way, and that he had also left the Traces
of the other Foot, though effaced by the rolling of the Sands or Inundation of
the Waters. Why then do you refuse to admit the same Method of Reasoning with
regard to the Order of Nature? Consider the World and the present Life only as
an imperfect Building, from which you can infer a superior Intelligence; and
arguing from that superior Intelligence, which can leave nothing imperfect; why
may you not infer a more finished Scheme or Plan, which will receive its
Completion in some distant Period of Space or Time? Are not these Methods of
Reasoning exactly parallel? And under what Pretext, can you embrace the one,
while you reject the other?

THE infinite Difference of the Subjects, replied he, is a sufficient
Foundation for this Difference in my Arguments and Conclusions. In Works of
human Art and Contrivance, it is allowable to advance from the Effect, to the
Cause, and returning back from the Cause, form new Inferences concerning the
Effect, and examine the Alterations, which it has probably undergone, or may
still undergo. But what is the Foundation of this Method of Reasoning? Plainly
this; that Man is a Being, whom we know by Experience, whose Motives and
Designs we are acquainted with, and whose Projects and Inclinations have a
certain Connection and Coherence, according to the Laws, which Nature has
established for the Government of such a Creature. When, therefore, we find,
that any Work has proceeded from the Skill and Industry of Man; as we are
otherwise acquainted with the Nature of the Animal; we can draw a hundred
Inferences concerning what may be expected from him; and these Inferences will
all be founded on Experience and Observation. But did we know Man only from the
single Work or Production, which we examine, 'twere impossible for us to argue
in this Manner; because our Knowledge of all the Qualities, which we ascribe to
him, being in that Case derived from the Production, it is impossible they could
point to any thing farther, or be the Foundation of any new Inferences. The
Print of a Foot in the Sand can only prove, when considered alone, that there
was some Pigure adapted to it, by which it was produced: But the Print of a
human Foot proves likewise, from our other Experience, that there was probably
another Foot, which also left its Impression, though essac'd by Time or other
Accidents. Here we mount from the Effect to the Cause; and descending again
from the Cause, infer Alterations in the Effect; but this is not a Continuation
of the same simple Chain of Reasoning. We comprehend in this Case a hundred
other Experiences and Observations, concerning the usual Figure and Members of
that Species of Animal, without which this Method of Argument must be
considered as altogether fallacious and sophistical.

THE Case is not the same with our Reasonings from the Works of Nature. The
Deity is known to us only by his Productions, and is a single Being in the
Universe, not comprehended under any Species or Genus, from whose experienced
Attributes or Qualities, we can by Analogy, infer any Attribute or Quality in
him. As the Universe shows Wisdom and Goodness, we infer Wisdom and Goodness:
As it shows a particular Degree of these Perfections, we infer a particular
Degree of them, precisely adapted to the Effect we examine. But farther
Attributes or farther Degrees of the same Attributes, we can never be
authorized to infer or suppose, by any Rules of just Reasoning. Now without
some such License of Supposition, it is impossible for us to argue from the
Cause, or infer any Alteration in the Effect, beyond what has immediately
fallen under our Observation. Greater Good produced by this Being must still
prove a greater Degree of Goodness: More impartial Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments must proceed from a superior Regard to Justice and Equity. Every
supposed Addition to the Works of Nature makes an Addition to the Attributes of
the Author of Nature; and consequently, being altogether unsupported by any
Reason or Argument, can never be admitted but as mere Conjecture and Hypothesis.

IN general, it may, I think, be established as a Maxim, that where any Cause
is known only by its particular Effects, it must be impossible to infer any new
Effects from that Cause; since the Qualities, which are requisite to produce
these new Effects, along with the former, must either be different, or
superior, or of more extensive Operation, than those which simply produced the
Effect, whence alone the Cause is supposed to be known to us To say that the
new Effects proceed only from a Continuation of the same Energy, which is
already known from the first Effects, will not remove the Difficulty. For even
granting this to be the Case, (which can seldom be supposed) the very
Continuation and Exertion of a like Energy (for it is impossible it can be
absolutely the same) I say, this Exertion of a like Energy in a different
Period of Space and Time is a very arbitrary Supposition, and what there cannot
possibly be any Traces of in the Effects, from which all our Knowledge of the
Cause is originally derived. Let the inferred Cause be exactly proportioned (as
it should be) to the known Effect; and it is impossible it can possess any
Qualities, from which new or different Effects can be inferred.
. We can never, therefore, have any Reason to suppose the Existence of these
Qualities.

THE great Source of our Mistake in this Subject, and of the unbounded License
of Conjecture, which we indulge, is, that we tacitly consider ourselves, as in
the Place of the supreme Being, and conclude, that he will, on every Occasion,
observe the same Conduct, which we ourselves, in his Situation, would have
embraced as reasonable and eligible. But besides, that the ordinary Course of
Nature may convince us, that almost every Thing is regulated by Principles and
Maxims very different from ours; besides this, I say, it must evidently appear
contrary to all Rules of Analogy to reason from the Intentions and Projects of
Men to those of a Being so different, and so much superior. In human Nature,
there is a certain experienced Consistency and Coherence of Designs and
Inclinations; so that when, from any Facts, we have discovered one Aim or
Intention of any Man, it may often be reasonable, from Experience, to infer
another, and draw a long Chain of Conclusions concerning his past or future
Conduct. But this Method of Reasoning never can take place with regard to a
Being, so remote and incomprehensible, who bears less Analogy to any other
Being in the Universe than the Sun to a waxen Taper, and who discovers himself
only by some faint Traces or Outlines, beyond which we have no Authority to
ascribe to him any Attribute or Perfection. What we imagine to be a superior
Perfection may really be a Defect. Or were it ever so much a Perfection, the
ascribing it to the supreme Being, where it appears not to have been really
exerted, to the full, in his Works, savours more of Flattery and Panegyric,
than of just Reasoning and sound Philosophy. All the Philosophy, therefore, in
the World, and all the Religion, which is nothing but a Species of Philosophy,
will never be able to carry us beyond the usual Course of Experience, or give
us different Measures of Conduct and Behavior, from those which are furnished
by Reflections on common Life. No new Fact can ever be inferred from the
religious Hypothesis; no Event foreseen or foretold; no Reward or Punishment
expected or dreaded, beyond what is already known by Practice and Observation.
So that my Apology for Epicurus will still appear solid and satisfactory; nor
have the political Interests of Society any Connection with the philosophical
Disputes concerning Metaphysics and Religion.

THERE is still one Circumstance, replied I, which you seem to have overlooked.
Though I should allow your Premises, I must still deny your Conclusion. You
conclude, that religious Doctrines and Reasonings can have no Influence on
Life, because they ought to have no Influence; never considering, that Men
reason not in the same Manner you do, but draw many Consequences from the
Belief of a divine Existence, and suppose, that the Deity will inflict
Punishments on Vice, and bestow Rewards on Virtue, beyond what appears in the
ordinary Course of Nature. Whether this Reasoning of theirs be just or not, is
no Matter. Its Influence on their Life and Conduct must still be the same. And
those, who attempt to disabuse them of such Prejudices, may, for aught I know,
be good Reasoners, but I cannot allow them to be good Citizens and Politicians;
since they free Men from one Restraint upon their Passions, and make the
Infringement of the Laws of Equity and Society, in one Respect, more easy and
secure.

AFTER all, I may, perhaps, agree to your general Conclusion in favor of
Liberty, though upon different Premises from those, on which you endeavor to
found it. I think the State ought to tolerate every Principle of Philosophy;
nor is there an Instance of any Government's suffering in its political
Interests by such Indulgence. There is no Enthusiasm among Philosophers; their
Doctrines are not very alluring to the People; and no Restraint can be put upon
their Reasonings, but what must be of dangerous Consequence to the Sciences,
and even to the State, by paving the Way for Persecution and Oppression in
Points, wherein the Generality of Mankind are more deeply interested and
concerned.

BUT there occurs to me, (continued I) with regard to your main Topic a
Difficulty, which I shall just propose to you, without insisting on it, lest it
lead into Reasonings of too nice and delicate a Nature. In a Word, I much
doubt, whether it be possible for a Cause to be known only by its Effect (as
you have all along supposed) or to be of so singular and particular a Nature as
to have no Parallel and no Similarity with any other Cause or Object, that has
ever fallen under our Observation. It Is only when two Species of Objects are
found to be constantly conjoined, that we can infer the one from the other; and
were an Effect presented, which was entirely singular, and could not be
comprehended under any known Species; I do not see, that we could form any
Conjecture or Inference at all concerning its Cause. If Experience and
Observation and Analogy be, indeed, the only Guides we can reasonably follow in
Inferences of this Nature; both the Effect and Cause must bear a Similarity and
Resemblance to other Effects and Causes, which we know, and which we have
found, in many Instances, to be conjoined with each other. I leave it to your
own Reflections to prosecute the Consequences of this Principle. I shall just
observe, that as the Antagonists of Epicurus always suppose the Universe, an
Effect quite singular and unparalled, to be the Proof of a Deity, a Cause no
less singular and unparalled; your Reasonings, upon that Supposition, seem,
at least, to merit our Attention. There is, I own, some Difficulty, how we can
ever return from the Cause to the Effect, and reasoning from our Ideas of the
former, infer any Alteration on, or Addition to, the latter.

ESSAY XII. Of the ACADEMICAL or SKEPTICAL PHILOSOPHY.
PART I.
THERE is not a greater Number of philosophical Reasonings, displayed upon any
Subject, than those to prove the Existence of a Deity, and refute the Fallacies
of Atheists; and yet the most religious Philosophers still dispute whether any
Man can be so blinded as to be a speculative Atheist. How shall we reconcile
these Contradictions? The Knight-Errants, who wandered about to clear the World
of Dragons and Giants, never entertained the least Doubt concerning the
Existence of these Monsters.

THE Skeptic is another Enemy of Religion, who naturally provokes the
Indignation of all Divines and graver Philosophers; though it is certain no one
ever met with any such absurd Creature, or conversed with a Man, who had no
Opinion or Principle concerning any Subject, either of Action or Speculation.
This begets a very natural Question; What is meant by a Skeptic? And how far it
is possible to push these philosophical Principles of Doubt and Uncertainty?

THERE is a Species of Skepticism, antecedent to all Study and Philosophy,
which is much inculcated by Des Carts and others, as a sovereign Preservative
against Error and precipitate Judgment. It recommends an universal Doubt, not
only of all our former Opinions and Principles, but also of our very Faculties;
of whose Veracity, say they, we must assure ourselves, by a Chain of Reasoning,
deduced from some original Principle, which cannot possibly be fallacious or
deceitful. But neither is there any such original Principle, which has a
Prerogative above others, that are self-evident and convincing: Or if there
were, could we advance a Step beyond it, but by the Use of those very
Faculties, of which we are supposed to be already diffident. The Cartesian
Doubt, therefore, were it ever possible, to be attained by any human Creature
(as it plainly is not) would be altogether incurable; and no Reasoning could
ever bring us to a State of Assurance and Conviction upon any Subject.

IT must, however, be confessed, that this Species of Skepticism, when more
moderate, may be understood in a very reasonable Sense, and is a necessary
Preparative to the Study of Philosophy, by preserving a proper Impartiality in
our Judgments, and weaning our Minds from all those Prejudices, which we may
have imbibed from Education or rash Opinion. To begin with clear and
self-evident Principles, to advance by timorous and sure Steps, to review
frequently our Conclusions, and examine accurately all their Consequences; though
by this Means we shall make both a slow and a short Progress in our Systems; is
the only Method, by which we can ever hope to reach Truth, and attain a proper
Stability and Certainty in our Determinations.

THERE is another Species of Skepticism, consequent to Science and Enquiry;
where Men are supposed to have discovered, either the absolute Fallaciousness
of their Mental Faculties, or their Unfitness to reach any fixed Determination
in all those curious Subjects of Speculation, about which they are commonly
employed. Even our very Senses are brought into Dispute by this Species of
Philosophers; and the Maxims of common Life are subjected to the same Doubt as
the most profound Principles or Conclusions of Metaphysics and Theology. As
these paradoxical Tenets (if they may be called so) are to be met with in some
Philosophers, and the Refutation of them in several, they naturally excite our
Curiosity, and make us enquire into the Arguments, on which they may be founded.

I NEED not insist upon the more trite Topics, employed by the Skeptics in all
Ages, against the Evidence of Sense; such as those derived from the
Imperfection and Fallaciousness of our Organs, on numberless Occasions; the
crooked Appearance of an Oar in Water; the various Aspects of Objects,
according to their different Distances; the double Images, that arise from the
pressing one Eye with the Finger; with many other Appearances of a like Nature.
These skeptical Topics, indeed, are only sufficient to prove, that the Senses
alone are not implicitly to be depended on; but that we must correct their
Evidence by Reason, and by Considerations, derived from the Nature of the
Medium, the Distance of the Object, and the Disposition of the Organ, in order
to render them, within their Sphere, the proper Criteria of Truth and Falsehood.
There are other more profound Arguments against the Senses, which admit not of
so easy a Solution.

IT seems evident, that Men are carried, by a natural Instinct or
Prepossession, to repose Faith in their Senses; and that, without any
Reasoning, or even almost before the Use of Reason, we always suppose an
external Universe, which depends not on our Perception, but would exist, though
we and every sensible Creature were absent or annihilated. Even the Animal
Creation are governed by a like Opinion, and preserve this Belief of external
Objects, in all their Thoughts, Designs, and Actions.

IT seems also evident, that when Men follow this blind and powerful Instinct
of Nature, they always suppose the very Images, presented by the Senses, to be
the external Objects, and never entertain any Suspicion, that the one are
nothing but Representations of the other. This very Table, which we see white,
and which we feel hard, is believed to exist, independent of our Perception,
and to be something external to our Mind, which perceives it. Our Presence
bestows not Being on it: Our Absence annihilates it not. It preserves its
Existence, uniform and entire, independent of the Situation of intelligent
Beings, who perceive or contemplate it.

BUT this universal and primary Opinion of all Men is soon destroyed by the
slightest Philosophy, which teaches us, that nothing can ever be present to the
Mind but an Image or Perception, and that the Senses are only the Inlets, through
which these Images are received, without being ever able to produce any
immediate Intercourse betwixt the Mind and the Object. The Table we see seems
to diminish as we remove farther from it: But the real Table, which exists,
independent of us, suffers no Alteration: It was, therefore, nothing but its
Image, which was present to the Mind. These are the obvious Dictates of Reason;
and no Man, who reflects, ever doubted, that the Existences, which we consider,
when we say, this House and that Tree, are nothing but Perceptions in the Mind,
and fleeting Copies or Representations of other Existences, which remain
uniform and independent.

SO far, then, are we necessitated by Reasoning to depart from, or contradict
the primary Instincts of Nature, and embrace a new System with regard to the
Evidence of our Senses. But here Philosophy finds itself extremely embarrass'd,
when it would justify this new System, and obviate the Cavils and Objections of
the Skeptics. It can no longer plead the infallible and irresistible Instinct
of Nature: For that led us to a quite different System, which is acknowledged
fallible and even erroneous. And to justify this pretended philosophical
System, by a Chain of clear and convincing Argument, or even any Appearance of
Argument, exceeds the Power of all human Capacity.

BY what Argument can it be proved, that the Perceptions of the Mind must be
caused by external Objects, entirely different from, though resembling them (if
that be possible) and could not arise either from the Energy of the Mind
itself, or from the Suggestion of some invisible and unknown Spirit, or from
some other Cause still more unknown to us? It Is acknowledged, that, in fact,
many of these Perceptions arise not from any thing external, as in Dreams,
Madness, and other Diseases. And nothing can be more inexplicable than the
Manner, in which Body should so operate upon Mind as ever to convey an Image of
itself to a Substance supposed of so different, and even contrary a Nature.

IT IS a Question of Fact, whether the Perceptions of the Senses be produced by
external Objects, resembling them: How shall this Question be determined? By
Experience surely, as all other Questions of a like Nature. But here Experience
is, and must be entirely silent. The Mind has never any thing present to it but
the Perceptions, and cannot possibly reach any Experience of their Connection
with Objects. The Supposition of such a Connection is, therefore, without any
Foundation in Reasoning.

To have recourse to the Veracity of the supreme Being, in order to prove the
Veracity of our Senses, is surely making a very unexpected Circuit. If his
Veracity were at all concerned in this Matter, our Senses would be entirely
infallible; because it is not possible he can ever deceive. Not to mention,
that if the external World be once called in doubt, we shall be at a loss to
find Arguments, by which we may prove the Existence of that Being or any of his
Attributes.

This therefore is a Topic, in which the profounder and more philosophical
Skeptics will always triumph, when they endeavor to introduce an universal
Doubt into all Subjects of human Knowledge and Enquiry. Do you follow the
Instincts and Propensities of Nature, may they say, in assenting to the
Veracity of Sense? But these lead you to believe, that the very Perception or
sensible Image is the external Object. Do you disclaim this, in order to
embrace a more rational Principle, that the Perceptions are only
Representations of something external? You here depart from your natural
Propensities and more obvious Sentiments; and yet are not able to satisfy your
Reason, which can never find any convincing Argument from Experience to prove,
that the Perceptions are connected with any external Objects.

THERE is another Skeptical Topic of a like Nature, derived from the most
profound Philosophy; which might merit our Attention were it requisite to dive
so deep, in order to discover Arguments and Reasonings, that can serve so
little any serious Purpose or Intention. It Is universally allowed by modern
Enquirers, that all the sensible Qualities of Objects, such as hard, soft, hot,
cold, white, black, etc. are merely secondary, and exist not in the Objects
themselves, but are Perceptions in the Mind, without any external Archetype or
Model, which they represent. If this be allowed, with regard to secondary
Qualities, it must also follow with regard to the supposed primary Qualities of
Extension and Solidity; nor can the latter be any more entitled to that
Denomination than the former. The Idea of Extension is entirely acquired from
the Senses of Sight and Feeling; and if all the Qualities, perceived by the
Senses, be in the Mind, not in the Object, the same Conclusion must reach the
Idea of Extension, which is wholly dependent on the sensible Ideas or the Ideas
of secondary Qualities. Nothing can save us from this Conclusion, but the
asserting, that the Ideas of those primary Qualities are attained by
Abstraction; which, if we examine accurately, we shall find to be
unintelligible, and even absurd. An Extension, that is neither tangible nor
visible, cannot possibly be conceived: and a tangible or visible Extension,
which is neither hard nor soft, black nor white, is equally beyond the Reach of
human Conception. Let any Man try to conceive a Triangle in general, which is
neither Isoceles, nor Scalenum, nor has any particular Length nor Proportion of
Sides; and he will soon perceive the Absurdity of all the scholastic Notions
with regard to Abstraction and general Ideas This Argument is drawn from Dr.
Berkeley; and indeed most of the Writings of that ingenious Author form the
best Lessons of Skepticism, which are to be found either among the ancient or
modern Philosophers, Bail not excepted. He professes, however, in his
Title Page, and undoubtedly, with great Truth, to have composed his Book
against the Skeptics as well as against the Atheists and Free-Thinkers. But
that all his Arguments, though otherwise intended, are, in reality, merely
skeptical, appears evidently from this, that they admit of no Answer and
produce no Conviction. Their only Effect is to cause that momentary Amazement
and Irresolution and Confusion, which is the Result of Skepticism.
.

THUS the first philosophical Objection to the Evidence of Sense or to the
Opinion of external Existence consists in this, that such an Opinion, if rested
on natural Instinct, is contrary to Reason, and if referred to Reason, is
contrary to natural Instinct, and at the same time, carries no rational
Evidence with it, to convince an impartial Enquirer. The second Objection goes
farther, and represents this Opinion as contrary to Reason; at least, if it be
a Principle of Reason, that all sensible Qualities are in the Mind, not in the
Object.

PART II.
IT may seem a very extravagant Attempt of the Skeptics to destroy Reason by
Argument and Ratiocination; yet this is the grand Scope of all their Enquiries
and Disputes. They endeavor to find Objections, both to our abstract
Reasonings, and to those which regard Matter of Fact and Existence.

THE chief Objection against all abstract Reasonings is derived from the Nature
of Space and Time, which, in common Life and to a careless View, seem very
clear and intelligible, but when they pass through the Scrutiny of the profound
Sciences (and they are the chief Object of these Sciences) afford Principles
and Notions full of Absurdity and Contradiction. No priestly Dogmas, invented
on purpose to tame and subdue the rebellious Reason of Mankind, ever shocked
common Sense more than the Doctrine of the infinite Divisibility of Extension,
with all its Consequences; as they are pompously displayed by all Geometricians
and Metaphysicians, with a kind of Triumph and Exultation. A real Quantity,
infinitely less than any finite Quantity, containing Quantities, infinitely
less than itself, and so on, in infinitum; this is an Edifice so bold and
prodigious, that it is too weighty for any pretended Demonstration to support,
because it shocks the clearest and most natural Principles of human Reason
Whatever Disputes there may be about mathematical Points, we must allow, that
there are physical Points; that is, Parts of Extension, which cannot be divided
or lessened, either by the Eye or Imagination. These Images, then, which are
present to the Fancy or Senses, are absolutely indivisible, and consequently
must be allowed by Mathematicians to be infinitely less than any real Part of
Extension; and yet nothing appears more certain to Reason, than that an
infinite Number of them composes an infinite Extension. How much more an
infinite Number of those infinitely small Parts of Extension, which are still
supposed infinitely divisible?
. But what renders the Matter more extraordinary, is, that these absurd
Opinions are supported by a Chain of Reason, the clearest and most natural; nor
does it seem possible for us to allow the Premises, without admitting the
Consequences. Nothing can be more convincing and satisfactory than all the
Conclusions concerning the Properties of Circles and Triangles; and yet, when
these are once received, how can we deny, that the Angle of Contact betwixt a
Circle and its Tangent is infinitely less than any rectilineal Angle, that as
you may increase the Diameter of the Circle in infinitum, this Angle of Contact
becomes still less, even in infinitum, and that the Angle of Contact betwixt
other Curves and their Tangents may be infinitely less than those betwixt any
Circle and its Tangent, and so on, in infinitum? The Demonstration of these
Principles seems as unexceptionable as that which proves the three Angles of a
Triangle to be equal to two right ones; though the latter Opinion be natural and
easy, and the former big with Contradiction and Absurdity. Reason here seems to
be thrown into a kind of Amazement and Suspense, which, without the Suggestions
of any Skeptic, gives her a Diffidence of herself, and of the Ground she treads
on. She sees a full Light, which illuminates certain Places; but that Light
borders upon the most profound Darkness. And betwixt these she is so dazzled
and confounded, that she scarce can pronounce with Certainty and Assurance
concerning any one Object.

THE Absurdity of these bold Determinations of the abstract Sciences becomes,
if possible, still more palpable with regard to Time than Extension. An
infinite Number of real Parts of Time, passing in Succession, and exhausted one
after another, is so evident a Contradiction, that no Man, one should think,
whose Judgment is not corrupted, instead of being improved, by the Sciences,
would ever be able to admit of it,

YET still Reason must remain restless and unquiet, even with regard to that
Skepticism, to which she is led by these Absurdities and Contradictions. How
any clear, distinct Idea can contain Circumstances, contradictory to itself, or
to any other clear, distinct Idea, is absolutely incomprehensible; and is,
perhaps, as absurd as any Proposition, which can be formed. So that nothing can
be more skeptical, or more full of Doubt and Hesitation, than this Skepticism
itself, which arises from some of the absurd Conclusions of Geometry or the
Science of Quantity It seems to me not impossible to avoid these Absurdities
and Contradictions, if it be admitted, that there is no such Thing as abstract
or general Ideas, properly speaking; but that all general Ideas are, in
Reality, particular ones, attached to a general Term, which recalls, upon
Occasion, other particular ones, that resemble, in certain Circumstances, the
Idea, present to the Mind. Thus when the Term, Horse, is pronounced, we
immediately figure to ourselves the Idea of a black or a white Animal of a
particular Size or Figure: But as that Term is also used to be applied to
Animals of other Figures and Sizes, these Ideas, though not actually present to
the Imagination, are easily recalled, and our Reasoning and Conclusion proceed
in the same Way, as if they were actually present. If this be admitted (as
seems reasonable) it follows that all the Ideas of Quantity, upon which
Mathematicians reason, are nothing but particular, and such as are suggested by
the Senses and Imagination, and consequently, cannot be infinitely divisible.
In general, we may pronounce, that the Ideas of greater, less, or equal, which
are the chief Objects of Geometry, are far from being so exact or determinate
as to be the Foundation of such extraordinary Inferences. Ask a Mathematician
what he means, when he pronounces two Quantities to be equal, and he must say,
that the Idea of Equality is one of those, which cannot be defined, and that
it is sufficient to place two equal Quantities before any one, in order to
suggest it. Now this is an Appeal to the general Appearances of Objects to the
Imagination or Senses, and consequently can never afford Conclusions so
directly contrary to these Faculties. It Is sufficient to have dropped this Hint
at present, without prosecuting it any farther. It certainly concerns all
Lovers of Science not to expose themselves to the Ridicule and Contempt of the
Ignorant by their absurd Conclusions; and this seems the readiest Solution of
these Difficulties.
.

THE skeptical Objections to moral Evidence or to the Reasonings concerning
Matter of Fact are either popular or philosophical. The popular Objections are
derived from the natural Weakness of human Understanding; the contradictory
Opinions, which have been entertained in different Ages and Nations; the
Variations of our Judgment in Sickness and Health, Youth and Old Age,
Prosperity and Adversity; the perpetual Contradiction of each particular Man's
Opinions and Sentiments; with many other Topics of that Kind. It Is needless to
insist farther on this Head. These Objections are but weak. For as in common
Life, we reason every Moment concerning Fact and Existence, and cannot possibly
subsist, without continually employing this Species of Argument, any popular
Objections, derived from thence, must be insufficient to destroy that Evidence.
The great Subverter of Pyrrhonism or the excessive Principles of Skepticism, is
Action, and Employment, and the Occupations of common Life. They may flourish
and triumph in the Schools; where it is, indeed, difficult, if not impossible
to refute them. But as soon as they leave the Shade, and by the Presence of the
real Objects, which actuate our Passions and Sentiments, are put in Opposition
to the more powerful Principles of our Nature, they vanish, like Smoke, and
leave the most determined Skeptic in the same Condition as other Mortals.

THE Skeptic, therefore, had better keep in his proper Sphere, and display
those philosophical Objections, which arise from more profound Researches. Here
he seems to have ample Matter of Triumph; while he justly insists, that all our
Evidence for any Matter of Fact, which lies beyond the Testimony of Sense or
Memory, is derived entirely from the Relation of Cause and Effect; that we have
no other Idea of this Relation than that of two Objects, which have been
frequently conjoined together; that we have no Arguments to convince us, that
Objects, which have, in our Experience, been frequently conjoined, will
likewise, in other Instances, be conjoined in the same Manner; and that nothing
leads us to this Inference but Custom or a certain Instinct of our Nature,
which it is indeed difficult to resist; but which, like other Instincts, may
also be fallacious and deceitful. While the Skeptic insists upon these Topics,
he shows his Force, or rather, indeed, his own and our Weakness; and seems, for
the Time, at least, to destroy all Assurance and Conviction. These Arguments
might be displayed at a greater Length, if any durable Good or Benefit to
Society could ever be expected to result from them.

FOR here is the chief and most confounding Objection to excessive Skepticism,
that no durable Good can ever result from it; while it remains in its full
Force and Vigor. We need only ask such a Skeptic, What his Meaning is? And
what he proposes by all these curious Researches? He is immediately at a stand,
and knows not what to answer. A Copernican or Ptolemaic, who supports, each his
different System of Astronomy, may hope to produce a Conviction, which will
remain, constant and durable, with his Audience. A Stoic or Epicurean displays
Principles, which may not only be durable, but which have a mighty Effect on
Conduct and Behavior. But a Pyrrhonian cannot propose, that his Philosophy
will have any constant Influence on the Mind: Or if it had, that its Influence
would be beneficial to Society. On the contrary, he must acknowledge, if he
will acknowledge any thing, that all human Life must immediately perish, were
his Principles universally and steadily to prevail. All Discourse, all Action
must immediately cease; and Men remain in a total Lethargy, till the
Necessities of Nature, unsatisfied, put an end to their miserable Existence.
It Is true; so fatal an Event is very little to be dreaded. Nature is always too
strong for Principle. And though a Pyrrhonian may throw himself or others into a
momentary Amazement and Confusion by his profound Reasonings; the first and
most trivial Event in Life will immediately put to flight all his Doubts and
Scruples, and leave him the same, in every Point of Action and Speculation,
with the Philosophers of every other Sect, or with those who never concerned
themselves with any philosophical Researches. When he awakes from his Dream, he
will be the first to join in the Laugh against himself, and to confess, that
all his Objections are mere Amusements, and can have no other Tendency than to
show us the whimsical Condition of Mankind, who must act and reason and
believe; though they are not able, by their most diligent Enquiry, to satisfy
themselves concerning the Foundation of these Operations, or to remove the
Objections that may be raised against them.

PART III.
THERE is, indeed, a more mitigated Skepticism or academical Philosophy, which
may be both durable and useful, and which may, in Part, be the Result of this
Pyrrhonism, or excessive Skepticism, when its undistinguished Doubts are, in
some measure, corrected by common Sense and Reflection. The greatest Part of
Mankind are naturally apt to be affirmative and dogmatical in their Opinions;
and while they see Objects only on one Side, and have no Idea of any
counterbalancing Arguments, they throw themselves precipitately into the
Principles, which they are inclined to; nor have they any Indulgence for those
who entertain opposite Sentiments. To hesitate or balance perplexes their
Understanding, checks their Passion, and suspends their Actions. They are,
therefore, impatient till they get out of a State of Mind, which to them is so
uneasy; and they think they can never remove themselves far enough from it, by
the Violence of their Affirmations and Obstinacy of their Belief. But could
such dogmatical Reasoners become sensible of the strange Infirmities of human
Understanding, even in its most perfect State, and when most exact and cautious
in its Determinations; such a Reflection would naturally inspire them with more
Modesty and Reserve, and diminish their fond Opinion of themselves, and their
Prejudice against Antagonists. The Illiterate may reflect on the Disposition of
the Learned, who, amidst all the Advantages of Study and Reflection, are
commonly still modest and reserved in their Determinations: And if any of the
Learned are inclined, from their natural Temper, to Haughtiness and Obstinacy,
a small Tincture of Pyrrhonism may abate their Pride, by showing them, that the
few Advantages, which they may have attained over their Fellows, are but
inconsiderable, if compared with the universal Perplexity and Confusion, which
is inherent in human Nature. In general, there is a Degree of Doubt, and
Caution, and Modesty, which, in all kinds of Scrutiny and Decision, ought for
ever to accompany a just Reasoner.

ANOTHER Species of mitigated Skepticism, which may be of Advantage to Mankind,
and which may be the natural Result of the Pyrrhonian Doubts and Scruples, is
the Limitation of our Enquiries to such Subjects as are best adapted to the
narrow Capacity of human Understanding. The Imagination of Man is naturally
sublime, delighted with whatever is remote and extraordinary, and running,
without Control, into the most distant Parts of Space and Time, to avoid the
Objects, which Custom has rendered too familiar to it. A correct Judgment
observes a contrary Method; and avoiding all distant and high Enquiries,
confines itself to common Life, and to such Subjects as fall under daily
Practice and Experience; leaving the more sublime Topics to the Embellishment
of Poets and Orators, or the Arts of Priests and Politicians. To bring us to so
salutary a Determination, nothing can be more serviceable, than to be once
thoroughly convinced of the Force of the Pyrrhonian Doubt, and of the
Impossibility of any Thing, but the strong Power of natural Instinct, to free
us from it. Those, who have a Propensity to Philosophy, will still continue
their Researches; because they reflect, that, beside the immediate Pleasure,
attending such an Occupation, philosophical Decisions are nothing but the
Reflections of common Life, methodiz'd and corrected. But they will never be
tempted to go beyond common Life, so long as they consider the Imperfection of
those Faculties they employ, their narrow Reach, and their inaccurate
Operations. While we cannot give a satisfactory Reason, why we believe, after a
thousand Experiments, that a Stone will fall, or Fire burn; can we ever satisfy
ourselves concerning any Determinations we may form with regard to the Origin
of Worlds, and the Situation of Nature, from, and to Eternity?

THIS narrow Limitation, indeed, of our Enquiries, is, in every Respect, so
reasonable, that it suffices to make the slightest Examination of the natural
Powers of the human Mind, and compare them to their Objects, in order to
recommend it to us. We shall then find what are the proper Subjects of Science
and Enquiry.

IT seems to me, that the only Object of the abstract Sciences or of
Demonstration is Quantity and Number, and that all Attempts to extend this more
perfect Species of Knowledge beyond these Bounds are mere Sophistry and
Illusion. As the component Parts of Quantity and Number are entirely similar,
their Relations become intricate and involved; and nothing can be more curious,
as well as useful, than to trace, by a Variety of Mediums, their Equality or
Inequality, through their different Appearances. But as all other Ideas are
clearly distinct and different from each other, we can never advance farther,
by all our Scrutiny, than to observe this Diversity, and, by an obvious
Reflection, pronounce one Thing not to be another. Or if there be any
Difficulty in these Decisions, it proceeds entirely from the undetermined
Meaning of Words, which is corrected by juster Definitions. That the Square of
the Hypotenuse is equal to the Squares of the other two Sides, cannot be known,
let the Terms be ever so exactly defined, without a Train of Reasoning and
Enquiry. But to convince us of the Truth of this Proposition, that where there
is no Property, there can be no Injustice, it is only necessary to define the
Terms, and explain Injustice to be a Violation of Property. This Proposition
is, indeed, nothing but a more imperfect Definition. It Is the same Case with
all those pretended syllogistical Reasonings, which may be found in every other
Branch of Learning, except the Sciences of Quantity and Number; and these may
safely, I think, be pronounced the only proper Objects of Knowledge and
Demonstration.

ALL other Enquiries of Men regard only Matter of Fact and Existence; and these
are evidently incapable of Demonstration. Whatever is may not be. No Negation
of a Fact can involve a Contradiction. The Nonexistence of any Being, without
Exception, is as clear and distinct an Idea as its Existence. The Proposition,
which affirms it not to be, is no less conceivable and intelligible, than that
which affirms it to be. The Case is different with the Sciences, properly so
called. Every false Proposition is there confused and unintelligible. That the
Cube Root of 64 is equal to the half of 10, is a false Proposition, and can
never be distinctly conceived. But that Caesar, or the Angel Gabriel, or any
Being never existed, may be a false Proposition, but still is perfectly
conceivable, and implies no Contradiction.

THE Existence, therefore, of any Being can only be proved by Arguments from
its Cause or its Effect; and these Arguments are founded entirely on
Experience. If we reason a priori, any Thing may appear able to produce any
Thing. The Falling of a Peeble may, for aught we know, extinguish the Sun; or
the Wish of a Man control the Planets in their Orbits. It Is only Experience,
that teaches us the Nature and Bounds of Cause and Effect, and enables us to
infer the Existence of one Object from that of another That impious Maxim of
the ancient Philosophy, Ex nihilo, nihil fit, by which the Creation of Matter
was excluded, ceases to be a Maxim, according to this Philosophy. Not only the
Will of the supreme Being may create Matter; but, for aught we can know a
priori, the Will of any other Being might create it, or any other Cause, that
the most whimsical Imagination can assign.
. Such is the Foundation of moral Reasoning, which forms the greatest Part of
human Knowledge, and is the Source of all human Action and Behavior.

MORAL Reasonings are either concerning particular or general Facts. All
Deliberations in Life regard the former; as also all Disquisitions in History,
Chronology, Geography, and Astronomy.

THE Sciences, which treat of general Facts, are Politics, natural Philosophy,
Physic, Chemistry, etc. where the Qualities, Causes, and Effects of a whole
Species of Objects are enquired into.

DIVINITY or Theology, as it proves the Existence of a Deity, and the
Immortality of Souls, is composed partly of Reasonings concerning particular,
and partly concerning general Facts. It has a Foundation in Reason, so far as
it is supported by Experience. But its best and most solid Foundation is Faith
and divine Revelation.

MORALS and Criticism are not so properly Objects of the Understanding as of
Taste and Sentiment. Beauty, whether moral or natural, is felt, more properly
than perceived. Or if we reason concerning it, and endeavor to fix its
Standard, we regard a new Fact, viz. the general Taste of Mankind, or some such
Fact, which may be the Object of Reasoning and Enquiry.

WHEN we run over Libraries, persuaded of these Principles, what Havoc must we
make? If we take in hand any Volume; of Divinity or School Metaphysics, for
Instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract Reasonings concerning
Quantity or Number? No. Does it contain any experimental Reasonings concerning
Matters of Fact or Existence? No. Commit it then to the Flames: For it can
contain nothing but Sophistry and Illusion.

FINIS.

