POLITICAL DISCOURSES.

BY DAVID HUME ESQUIRE.

EDINBURGH, Printed by R. FLEMING, For A. KINCAID and A. DONALDSON.

M.DCC.LII.

CONTENTS.
DISCOURSE

I. Of Commerce. II. Of Luxury. III. Of Money. IV. Of Interest. V. Of the
Balance of Trade. VI. Of the Balance of Power. VII. Of Taxes. VIII. Of Public
Credit. IX. Of some Remarkable Customs. X. Of the Populousness of Ancient
Nations. XI. Of the Protestant Succession. XII. Idea of a perfect Commonwealth.
ERRATA.
PAGE 9. line 18. read, He takes the field in his turn; and during his service,
is chiefly maintained by himself. P. 49. add to the note, And as a recoinage of
our silver begins to be requisite by the continual wearing of our shillings and
sixpences, it is doubtful, whether we ought to imitate the example in king
William 's reign, when the clipped money was raised to the old standard. P. 72.
l. 11. r. the price. P. 76. l. 14. for occasion r. accession. P. 89. l. 7. r.
the entry of those wines of Languedoc, Guienne and other Southern provinces. P.
183. l. 11. r. of the government. P. 267. l. 3. for their r. the. P. 274. l. 6.
r. exclude all high claims like those of their father and grandfather.

Political Discourses.
DISCOURSE I. Of Commerce.
THE greatest part of mankind may be divided into two classes; that of shallow
thinkers, who fall short of the truth, and that of abstruse thinkers, who go
beyond it. The latter class are by far the most uncommon, and I may add, by far
the most useful and valuable. They suggest hints, at least, and start
difficulties, which they want, perhaps, skill to pursue, but which may produce
very fine discoveries, when handled by men who have a more just way of
thinking. At worst, what they say is uncommon; and if it should cost some pains
to comprehend it, one has, however, the pleasure of hearing something that is
new. An author is little to be valued, who tells us nothing but what we can
learn from every coffee-house conversation.

ALL people of shallow thought are apt to decry even those of solid
understanding as abstruse thinkscience ers and metaphysicians and refiners; and
never will allow any thing to be just, which is beyond their own weak
conceptions. There are some cases, I own, where an extraordinary refinement
affords a strong presumption of falsehood, and where no reasoning is to be
trusted but what is natural and easy. When a man deliberates concerning his
conduct in any particular affair, and forms schemes in politics, trade,
economy, or any business in life, he never ought to draw his arguments too
fine, or connect too long a chain of consequences together. Something is sure
to happen, that will disconcert his reasoning, and produce an event different
from what he expected. But when we reason upon general subjects, one may justly
affirm, that our speculations can scarce ever be too fine, provided they be
just; and that the difference betwixt a common man and a man of genius, is
chiefly seen in the shallowness or depth of the principles, upon which they
proceed. General reasonings seem intricate, merely because they are general;
nor is it easy for the bulk of mankind to distinguish, in a great number of
particulars, that common circumstance, in which they all agree, or to extract
it, pure and unmixt, from the other superfluous circumstances. Every judgment
or conclusion, with them, is particular. They cannot enlarge their view to
those universal propositions, which comprehend under them an infinite number of
individuals, and include a whole in a single theorem. Their eye is confounded
with such an extensive prospect, and the conclusions derived from it, even though
clearly expressed, seem intricate and obscure. But however intricate they may
seem, it is certain, that general principles, if just and sound, must always
prevail in the general course of things, though they may fail in particular
cases; and it is the chief business of philosophers to regard the general course
of things. I may add, that it is also the chief business of politicians;
especially in the domestic government of the state, where the public good,
which is, or ought to be their object, depends on the concurrence of a
multitude of cases; not, as in foreign politics, upon accidents, and chances,
and the caprices of a few persons. This therefore makes the difference betwixt
particular deliberations and general reasonings, and renders subtilty and
refinement much more suitable to the latter than to the former.

I THOUGHT this introduction necessary before the following discourses on
commerce, luxury, money, interest, etc. where, perhaps, there will occur some
principles, which are uncommon, and which may seem too refined and subtle for
such vulgar subjects. If false, let them be rejected: but no one ought to
entertain a prejudice against them, merely because they are out of the common
road.

THE greatness of a state and the happiness of its subjects, however
independent they may be supposed in some respects, are commonly allowed to be
inseparable with regard to commerce; and as private men receive greater
security, in the possession of their trade and riches, from the power of the
public, so the public becomes powerful in proportion to the riches and
extensive commerce of private men. This maxim is true in general; though I cannot
forbear thinking, that it may possibly admit of some exceptions, and that we
often establish it with too little reserve and limitation. There may be some
circumstances, where the commerce and riches and luxury of individuals, instead
of adding strength to the public, may serve only to thin its armies, and
diminish its authority among the neighboring nations. Man is a very variable
being and susceptible of many different opinions, principles, and rules of
conduct. What may be true while he adheres to one way of thinking, will be
found false, when he has embraced an opposite set of manners and opinions.

THE bulk of every state may be divided into husbandmen and manufacturers. The
former are employed in the culture of the land. The latter work up the
materials furnished by the former, into all the commodities, which are
necessary or ornamental to human life. As soon as men quit their savage state,
where they live chiefly by huntthe ing and fishing, they must fall into these
two classes; though the arts of agriculture employ at first the most numerous
part of the society Mons. Melon in his political essay on commerce asserts,
that even at present, if you divide France into 20 parts, 16 are laborers or
peasants, 2 only artizans, one belonging to the law, church and military, and
one merchants, financiers and bourgeois. This calculation is certainly very
erroneous. In France, England, and indeed most parts of Europe, half of the
inhabitants live in cities, and even of those who live in the country, a very
great number are artizans, perhaps above a third,
. Time and experience improve so much these arts, that the land may easily
maintain a much greater number of men, than those who are immediately employed
in its cultivation, or who furnish the more necessary manufactures to such as
are so employed.

IF these superfluous hands be turned toward the finer arts, which are
commonly denominated the arts of luxury, they add to the happiness of the
state; since they afford to many the opportunity of receiving enjoyments, with
which they would otherways have been unacquainted. But may not another scheme
be proposed for the employment of these superfluous hands? May not the
sovereign lay claim to them, and employ them in fleets and armies, to increase
the dominions of the state abroad, and spread its fame over distant nations?
It Is certain, that the fewer desires and wants are found in the proprietors and
laborers of land, the fewer hands do they employ; and consequently
superfluities of the land, instead of maintaining tradesmen and manufacturers,
may support fleets and armies to a much greater extent, than where a great many
arts are required to minister to the luxury of particular persons. Here
therefore seems to be a kind of opposition betwixt the greatness of the state
and the happiness of the subjects. A state is never greater than when all its
superfluous hands are employed in the service of the public. The ease and
convenience of private persons require, that these hands should be employed in
their service. The one can never be satisfied, but at the expense of the other.
As the ambition of the sovereign must entrench on the luxury of individuals; so
the luxury of individuals must diminish the force, and check the ambition of
the sovereign.

NOR is this reasoning merely chimerical; but is founded on history and
experience. The republic of Sparta was certainly more powerful than any state
now in the world, consisting of an equal number of people; and this was owing
entirely to the want of commerce and luxury. The Helotes were the laborers:
The Spartans were the soldiers or gentlemen. It Is evident, that the labor of
the Helotes could not have maintained so great a number of Spartans, had these
latter lived in ease and delicacy, and given employment to a great variety of
trades and manufactures. The like policy may be remarked in Rome; and indeed,
through all ancient history, it is observable, that the smallest republics raised
and maintained greater armies than states, consisting of triple the number of
inhabitants, are able to support at present. It Is computed that, in all
European nations, the proportion betwixt soldiers and people does not exceed
one to a hundred. But we read, that the city of Rome alone, with its small
territory, raised and maintained, in early times, ten legions against the
Latins. Athens, whose whole dominions were not larger than Yorkshire, sent to
the expedition against Sicily near forty thousand men Thucydides, lib. 7.
. Dionysius the elder, it is said, maintained a standing army of a hundred
thousand foot and ten thousand horse, beside a large fleet of four hundred
sail; Diod. Sic. lib. 2. This account, I own, is somewhat suspicious, not to
say worse; chiefly because this army was not composed of citizens, but of
mercenary forces. See discourse X.
though his territories extended no farther than the city of Syracuse, about a
third part of the island of Sicily, and some seaport towns or garrisons on the
coast of Italy and Illyricum. It Is true, the ancient armies, in time of war,
subsisted much upon plunder: But did not the enemy plunder in their turn? which
was a more ruinous way of levying a tax, than any other that could be devised.
In short, no probable reason can be given for the great power of the more
ancient states above the modern, but their want of commerce and luxury. Few
artizans were maintained by the labor of the farmers, and therefore more
soldiers might live upon it. Titus Livius says, that Rome, in his time, would
find it difficult to raise as large an army as that which, in her early days,
she sent out against the Gauls and Latins Titi Livit l.b. 7. cap. 25. Adeo in
quae laboramus, says he, sola crevimus, divitias luxurianque.
. Instead of those soldiers who fought for liberty and empire in Camillus's
time, there were, in Augustus's days, musicians, painters, cooks, players and
tailors. And if the land was equally cultivated at both periods, it is evident
it could maintain equal numbers in the one profession as in the other. They
added nothing to the mere necessaries of life, in the latter period more than
in the former.

IT IS natural on this occasion to ask, whether sovereigns may not return to the
maxims of ancient policy, and consult their own interest, in this respect, more
than the happiness of their subjects? I answer, that it appears to me almost
impossible; and that because ancient policy was violent, and contrary to the
more natural and usual course of things. It Is well known with what peculiar
laws Sparta was governed, and what a prodigy that republic is justly esteemed
by every one, who has considered human nature, as it has displayed itself in
other nations and other ages. Were the testimony of history less positive and
circumstantial, such a government would appear a mere philosophical whim or
fiction, and impossible ever to be reduced to practice. And though the Roman and
other ancient republics were supported on principles somewhat more natural, yet
was there a very extraordinary concurrence of circumstances to make them submit
to such grievous burdens. They were free states; they were small ones; and the
age being martial, all the neighboring states were continually in arms.
Freedom naturally begets public spirit, especially in small states; and this
public spirit, this amor patriae, must increase, when the public is almost in
continual alarm, and men are obliged, every moment, to expose themselves to the
greatest dangers for its defense. A continual succession of wars makes every
citizen a soldier: They take the field in their turn; and during their service
are chiefly maintained by themselves. And, notwithstanding that this service is
equivalent to a very severe tax, it is less felt by a people addicted to arms,
who fight for honor and revenge more than pay, and are unacquainted with gain
and industry as well as pleasure. The more ancient Romans lived in perpetual
war with all their neighbors, and in old Latin, the term, hostis, expressed both
a stranger and an enemy. This is remarked by Cicero; but by him is ascribed to
the humanity of his ancestors, who softened, as much as possible, the
denomination of an enemy, by calling him by the same appellation which
signified a stranger: De off. lib. 2. It Is however much more probable, from the
manners of the times, that the ferocity of those people was so great as to make
them regard all strangers as enemies, and call them by the same name. It is
not, besides, consistent with the most common maxims of policy or of nature,
that any state should regard its public enemies with a friendly eye, or
preserve any such sentiments for them as the Roman orator would ascribe to his
ancestors. Not to mention, that the early Romans really exercised piracy, as we
learn from their first treaties with Carthage, preserved by Polybius, lib. 3.
and consequently, like the Sall^e and Algerine rovers, were actually at war
with most nations, and a stranger and an enemy were with them almost synonimous.
Not to mention the great equality of fortunes amongst the inhabitants of the
ancient republics, where every field, belonging to a different proprietor, was
able to maintain a family, and rendered the numbers of citizens very
considerable, even without trade and manufactures.

BUT though the want of trade and manufactures, amongst a free and very martial
people, may sometimes have no other effect than to render the public more
powerful; it is certain, that, in the common course of human affairs, it will
have a quite contrary tendency. Sovereigns must take mankind as they find them,
and cannot pretend to introduce any violent change in their principles and ways
of thinking. A long course of time, with a variety of accidents and
circumstances, are requisite to produce those great revolutions, which so much
diversify the face of human affairs. And the less natural any set of principles
are, which support a particular society, the more difficulty will a legislator
meet with in raising and cultivating them. It Is his best policy to comply with
the common bent of mankind, and give it all the improvements, of which it is
susceptible. Now, according to the most natural course of things, industry and
arts and trade increase the power of the sovereign as well as the happiness of
the subjects; and that policy is violent, which aggrandizes the public by the
poverty of individuals. This will easily appear from a few considerations,
which will present to us the consequences of sloth and barbarity.

WHERE manufactures and mechanic arts are not cultivated, the bulk of the
people must apply themselves to agriculture; and if their skill and industry
increase, there must arise a great superfluity from their labor beyond what
suffices to maintain them. They have no temptation, therefore, to increase
their skill and industry; since they cannot exchange that superfluity for any
commodities, which may serve either to their pleasure or vanity. A habit of
indolence naturally prevails. The greater part of the land lies uncultivated.
What is cultivated, yields not its utmost, for want of skill or assiduity in
the farmers. If at any time, the public exigencies require, that great numbers
should be employed in the public service, the labor of the people furnishes
now no superfluities, by which these numbers can be maintained. The laborers
cannot increase their skill and industry on a sudden. Lands uncultivated cannot
be brought into tillage for some years. The armies, mean while, must either
make sudden and violent conquests, or disband for want of subsistence. A
regular attack or defense, therefore, is not to be expected from such a people,
and their soldiers must be as ignorant and unskilful as their farmers and
manufacturers.

EVERY thing in the world is purchased by labor; and our passions are the only
causes of labor. When a nation abounds in manufactures and mechanic arts, the
proprietors of land, as well as the farmers, study agriculture as a science,
and redouble their industry and attention. The superfluity, which arises from
their labor, is not lost; but is exchanged with the manufacturers for those
commodities, which men's luxury now makes them covet. By this means, land
furnishes a great deal more of the necessaries of life, than what suffices for
those who cultivate it. In times of peace and tranquillity, this superfluity
goes to the maintenance of manufacturers and the improvers of liberal arts. But
it is easy for the public to convert many of these manufacturers into soldiers,
and maintain them by that superfluity, which arises from the labor of the
farmers. Accordingly we find, that this is the case in all civilized
governments. When the sovereign raises an army, what is the consequence? He
imposes a tax. This tax obliges all the people to retrench what is least
necessary to their subsistence. Those, who labor in such commodities, must
either enlist in the troops, or turn themselves to agriculture, and thereby
oblige some laborers to enlist for want of business. And to consider the
matter abstractly, manufactures increase the power of the state only as they
store up so much labor, and that of a kind, which the public may lay claim to,
without depriving any one of the necessaries of life. The more labor,
therefore, is employed beyond mere necessaries, the more powerful is any state;
since the persons engaged in that labor may easily be converted to the public
service. In a state without manufactures, there may be the same number of
hands; but there is not the same quantity of labor, nor of the same kind. All
the labor is there bestowed upon necessaries, which can admit of little or no
abatement.

THUS the greatness of the sovereign and the happiness of the state are, in a
great measure, united with regard to trade and manufactures. It Is a violent
method, and in most cases impracticable, to oblige the labourer to toil, in
order to raise from the land more than what subsists himself and family.
Furnish him with manufactures and commodities, and he will do it of himself.
Afterward, you will find it easy to seize some part of his superfluous labor,
and employ it in the public service, without giving him his wonted return.
Being accustomed to labor, he will think this less grievous, than if, at once,
you obliged him to an augmentation of labor without any reward. The case is
the same with regard to the other members of the state. The greater is the
stock of labor of all kinds, the greater quantity may be taken from the heap,
without making any sensible alteration upon it.

A PUBLIC granary of corn, a storehouse of cloth, a magazine of arms; all
these must be allowed to be real riches and strength in any state. Trade and
industry are really nothing; but a stock of labor, which, in time of peace and
tranquillity, is employed for the ease and satisfaction of individuals, but in
the exigencies of state, may, in part, be turned to public advantage. Could we
convert a city into a kind of fortified camp; and infuse into each breast so
martial a genius, and such a passion for public good as to make every one
willing to undergo the greatest hardships for the sake of the public; these
affections might now, as in ancient times, prove alone a sufficient spur to
industry, and support the community. It would then be advantageous, as in
camps, to banish all arts and luxury; and, by restrictions on equipage and
tables, make the provisions and forage last longer than if the army were loaded
with a number of superfluous retainers. But as these principles are too
disinterested and too difficult to support, it is requisite to govern men by
other passions, and animate them with a spirit of avarice and industry, art and
luxury. The camp is, in this case, loaded with a superfluous retinue; but the
provisions flow in proportionably larger. The harmony of the whole is still
supported; and the natural bent of men's minds being more complied with,
individuals, as well as the public, find their account in the observance of
those maxims.

THE same method of reasoning will let us see the advantage of foreign
commerce, in augmenting the power of the state, as well as the riches and
happiness of the subjects. It increases the stock of labor in the nation; and
the sovereign may convert what share of it he finds necessary to the service of
the public. Foreign trade, by its imports, furnishes materials for new
manufactures. And by its exports, it produces labor in particular commodities,
which could not be consumed at home. In short, a kingdom, that has a large
import and export, must abound more with labor, and that upon delicacies and
luxuries, than a kingdom, which rests contented with its native commodities. It
is, therefore, more powerful, as well as richer and happier. The individuals
reap the benefit of these commodities, so far as they gratify the senses and
appetites. And the public is also a gainer, while a greater stock of labor is,
by this means, stored up against any public exigency; that is, a greater number
of laborious men are maintained, who may be diverted to the public service,
without robbing any one of the necessaries, or even the chief conveniences of
life.

IF we consult history, we shall find, that in most nations foreign trade has
preceded any refinement in home manufactures, and given birth to domestic
luxury. The temptation is stronger to make use of foreign commodities, which
are ready for use, and which are entirely new to us, than to make improvements
on any domestic commodity, which always advance by slow degrees, and never
affect us by their novelty. The profit is also very great, in exporting what is
superfluous at home, and what bears no price, to foreign nations, whose soil or
climate is not favorable to that commodity. Thus men become acquainted with
the pleasures of luxury and the profits of commerce; and their delicacy and
industry, being once awakened, carry them to farther improvements, in every
branch of domestic as well as foreign trade. And this perhaps is the chief
advantage, which arises from a commerce with strangers. It rouses men from
their lethargic indolence; and presenting the gayer and more opulent part of
the nation with objects of luxury, which they never before dreamed of, raises
in them a desire of a more splendid way of life than what their ancestors
enjoyed. And, at the same time, the few merchants, who possess the secret of
this importation and exportation, make exorbitant profits; and becoming rivals
in wealth to the ancient nobility, tempt other adventurers to become their
rivals in commerce. Imitation soon diffuses all those arts; while domestic
manufacturers emulate the foreign in their improvements, and work up every
home-commodity to the utmost perfection, of which it is susceptible. Their own
steel and iron, in such laborious hands, become equal to the gold and rubies of
the Indies.

WHEN the affairs of the society are once brought to this situation, a nation
may lose most of its foreign trade, and yet continue a great and powerful
people. If strangers will not take any particular commodity of ours, we must
cease to labor in it. The same hands will turn themselves toward some
refinement in other commodities, which may be wanted at home. And there must
always be materials for them to work upon; till every person in the state, who
possesses riches, possesses as great plenty of home-commodities, and those in
as great perfection, as he desires; which can never possibly happen. China is
represented as one of the most flourishing empires in the world; though it has
very little commerce beyond its own territories.

IT will not, I hope, be considered as a superfluous digression, if I here
observe, that, as the multitude of mechanical arts is advantageous, so is the
great number of persons, to whose share the productions of these arts fall. A
too great disproportion among the citizens weakens any state. Every person, if
possible, ought to enjoy the fruits of his labor, in a full possession of all
the necessaries, and many of the conveniences of life. No-one can doubt, but
such an equality is most suitable to human nature, and diminishes much less
from the happiness of the rich than it adds to that of the poor. It also
augments the power of the state, and makes any extraordinary taxes or
impositions be paid with much more cheerfulness. Where the riches are engrossed
by a few, these must contribute very largely to the supplying the public
necessities. But when the riches are dispersed among multitudes, the burden
feels light on every shoulder, and the taxes make not a very sensible
difference on any one's way of living.

ADD to this, that where the riches are in few hands, these must enjoy all the
power, and will readily conspire to lay the whole burden on the poor, and
oppress them still farther, to the discouragement of all industry.

IN this circumstance consists the great advantage of England above any nation
at present in the world, or that appears in the records of any story. It Is
true, the English feel some disadvantages in foreign trade by the high price of
labor, which is in part the effect of the riches of their artizans, as well as
of the plenty of money: But as foreign trade is not the most material
circumstance, it is not to be put in competition with the happiness of so many
millions. And if there were no more to endear to them that free government,
under which they live, this alone were sufficient. The poverty of the common
people is a natural, if not an infallible consequence of absolute monarchy;
though I doubt, whether it be always true, on the other hand, that their riches
are an infallible consequence of liberty. That seems to depend on particular
accidents and a certain turn of thinking, in conjunction with liberty. My lord
Bacon, accounting for the great advantages obtained by the English in their
wars with France, ascribes them chiefly to the superior ease and plenty of the
common people, amongst the former; yet the governments of the two kingdoms
were, at that time, pretty much alike. Where the laborers and artizans are
accustomed to work for low wages, and to retain but a small part of the fruits
of their labor, it is difficult for them, even in a free government, to better
their condition, or conspire among themselves to heighten their wages. But even
where they are accustomed to a more plentiful way of life, it is easy for the
rich, in a despotic government, to conspire against them, and throw the whole
burden of the taxes on their shoulders.

IT may seem an odd position, that the poverty of the common people in France,
Italy, and Spain is, in some measure, owing to the superior riches of the soil
and happiness of the climate; and yet there want not many reasons to justify
this paradox. In such a fine mold or soil as that of those more southern
regions, agriculture is an easy art; and one man, with a couple of sorry
horses, will be able, in a season, to cultivate as much land as will pay a
pretty considerable rent to the proprietor. All the art, which the farmer
knows, is to leave his ground fallow for a year, as soon as it is exhausted;
and the warmth of the sun alone and temperature of the climate enrich it, and
restore its fertility. Such poor peasants, therefore, require only a simple
maintenance for their labor. They have no stock nor riches, which claim more;
and at the same time, they are for ever dependent on their landlord, who gives
no leases, nor fears that his land will be spoiled by the ill methods of
cultivation. In England, the land is rich, but coarse; must be cultivated at a
great expense; and produces slender crops, when not carefully managed, and by a
method, which gives not the full profit but in a course of several years. A
farmer, therefore, in England must have a considerable stock and a long lease;
which beget proportional profits. The fine vineyards of Champagne and Burgundy,
that often yield to the landlord above five pounds per acre, are cultivated by
peasants, who have scarce bread: And the reason is, that such peasants need no
stock but their own limbs, along with instruments of husbandry, which they can
buy for 20 shillings. The farmers are commonly in some better circumstances in
those countries. But the graziers are most at their ease of all those, who
cultivate the land. The reason is still the same. Men must have profits
proportionable to their expense and hazard. Where so considerable a number of
the laboring poor as the peasants and farmers, are in very low circumstances,
all the rest must partake of their poverty, whether the government of that
nation be monarchical or republican.

WE may form a similar remark with regard to the general history of mankind.
What is the reason, why no people living betwixt the tropics could ever yet
attain to any art or civility, or reach even any police in their government and
any military discipline; while few nations in the temperate climates have been
altogether deprived of these advantages? It Is probable, that one cause of this
phenomenon is the warmth and equality of weather in the torrid zone, that
render clothes and houses less requisite for the inhabitants, and thereby
remove, in part, that necessity, which is the great spur to industry and
invention. Curis acuens mortalia corda. Not to mention, that the fewer goods or
possessions of this kind any people enjoy, the fewer quarrels are likely to
arise amongst them; and the less necessity will there be for a settled police
or regular authority to protect and defend them from foreign enemies or from
each other.

DISCOURSE II. Of Luxury.
LUXURY is a word of a very uncertain signification, and may be taken in a good
as well as a bad sense. In general, it means great refinement in the
gratification of the senses; and any degree of it may be innocent or blameable,
according to the age or country or condition of the person. The bounds betwixt
the virtue and the vice cannot here be fixed exactly, more than in other moral
subjects. To imagine, that the gratifying any of the senses, or the indulging
any delicacy in meats, drinks, or apparel is, of itself, a vice, can never
enter into any head, that is not disordered by the frenzies of a fanatical
enthusiasm. I have, indeed, heard of a monk abroad, who, because the windows of
his cell opened upon a very noble prospect, made a covenant with his eyes never
to turn that way, or receive so sensual a gratification. And such is the crime
of drinking Champagne or Burgundy, preferably to small beer or porter. These
indulgences are only vices, when they are pursued at the expense of some
virtue, as liberality or charity: In like manner, as they are follies, when for
them a man ruins his fortune, and reduces himself to want and beggary. Where
they entrench upon no virtue, but leave ample subject, whence to provide for
friends, family, and every proper object of generosity or compassion, they are
entirely innocent, and have in every age been acknowledged such by almost all
moralists. To be entirely occupy'd with the luxury of the table, for instance,
without any relish for the pleasures of ambition, study or conversation, is a
mark of gross stupidity, and is incompatible with any vigor of temper or
genius. To confine one's expense entirely to such a gratification, without
regard to friends or family, is an indication of a heart entirely devoid of
humanity or benevolence. But if a man reserve time sufficient for all laudable
pursuits, and money sufficient for all generous purposes, he is free from every
shadow of blame or reproach.

SINCE luxury may be considered, either as innocent or blameable, one may be
surprised at those preposterous opinions, which have been entertained
concerning it; while men of libertine principles bestow praises even on vicious
luxury, and represent it as highly advantageous to society; and on the other
hand, men of severe morals blame even the most innocent luxury, and represent
it as the source of all the corruptions, disorders, and factions, incident to
civil government. We shall here endeavor to correct both these extremes, by
proving, first, that the ages of refinement and luxury are both the happiest
and most virtuous; secondly, that wherever luxury ceases to be innocent, it
also ceases to be beneficial, and when carried a degree too far, is a quality
pernicious, though perhaps not the most pernicious, to political society.

To prove the first point, we need but consider the effects of luxury both on
private and on public life. Human happiness, according to the most received
notions, seems to consist in three ingredients, action, pleasure, and
indolence; and though these ingredients ought to be mixed in different
proportions, according to the particular dispositions of the person, yet no one
ingredient can be entirely wanting, without destroying, in some measure, the
relish of the whole composition. Indolence or repose, indeed, seems not, of
itself, to contribute much to our enjoyment; but like sleep, is requisite as an
indulgence to the weakness of human nature, which cannot support an
uninterrupted course of business or pleasure. That quick march of the spirits,
which takes a man from himself, and chiefly gives satisfaction, does in the end
exhaust the mind, and requires some intervals of repose, which, though agreeable
for a moment, yet, if prolonged, beget a languor and lethargy, that destroy all
enjoyment. Education, custom, and example have a mighty influence in turning
the mind to any of these pursuits; and it must be owned, that, where they
promote a relish for action and pleasure, they are so far favorable to human
happiness. In times, when industry and arts flourish, men are kept in perpetual
occupation, and enjoy, as their reward, the occupation itself, as well as those
pleasures, which are the fruits of their labor. The mind acquires new vigor;
enlarges its powers and faculties; and by an affiduity in honest industry, both
satisfies its natural appetites, and prevents the growth of unnatural ones,
which commonly spring up, when nourished with ease and idleness. Banish those
arts from society, you deprive men both of action and of pleasure; and leaving
nothing but indolence in their place, you even destroy the relish of indolence,
which never is agreeable, but when it succeeds to labor, and recruits the
spirits, exhausted by too much application and fatigue.

ANOTHER advantage of industry and of refinements in the mechanical arts is,
that they commonly produce some refinements in the liberal arts; nor can the
one be carried to perfection, without being accompanied, in some degree, with
the other. The same age, which produces great philosophers and politicians,
renowned generals and poets, usually abounds with skilful weavers and
ship-carpenters. We cannot reasonably expect, that a piece of woolen cloth will
be wrought to perfection in a nation, that is ignorant of astronomy, or where
ethics are neglected. The spirit of the age affects all the arts; and the minds
of men, being once roused from their lethargy, and put into a fermentation,
turn themselves on all fides, and carry improvements into every art and
science. Profound ignorance is totally banished, and men enjoy the privilege of
rational creatures, to think as well as to act, to cultivate the pleasures of
the mind as well as those of the body.

THE more these refined arts advance, the more sociable do men become; nor is
it possible, that, when enriched with science, and possessed of a fund of
conversation, they should be contented to remain in solitude, or live with
their fellow citizens in that distant manner, which is peculiar to ignorant and
barbarous nations. They flock into cities; love to receive and communicate
knowledge; to show their wit or their breeding; their taste in conversation or
living, in clothes or furniture. Curiosity allures the wise: Vanity the
foolish: And pleasure both. Particular clubs and societies are every where
formed: Both sexes meet in an easy and sociable manner, and men's tempers, as
well as behavior, refine a-pace. So that beside the improvements they receive
from knowledge and the liberal arts, it is impossible but they must feel an
increase of humanity, from the very habit of conversing together, and
contributing to each other's pleasure and entertainment. Thus industry,
knowledge, and humanity are linkt together by an indissoluble chain, and are
found, from experience as well as reason, to be peculiar to the more polished
and luxurious ages.

NOR are these advantages attended with disadvantages, that bear any proportion
to them. The more men refine upon pleasure, the less will they indulge in
excesses of any kind; because nothing is more destructive to true pleasure than
such excesses. One may safely affirm, that the Tartars are oftener guilty of
beastly gluttony, when they feast on their dead horses, than European courtiers
with all their refinements of cookery. And if libertine love, or even
infidelity to the marriage bed, be more frequent in polite ages, when it is
often regarded only as a piece of gallantry, drunkenness, on the other hand, is
much less common: A vice more odious and more pernicious both to mind and body.
And in this matter I would appeal not only to an Ovid or a Petronius, but to a
Seneca or a Cato. We know, that Caesar, during Cataline's conspiracy, being
necessitated to put into Cato's hands a billetdoux, which discovered an
intrigue with Servilia, Cato's own sister, that stern philosopher threw it back
to him with indignation, and in the bitterness of his wrath gave him the
appellation of drunkard, as a term more opprobrious than that with which he
could more justly have reproached him.

BUT industry, knowledge, and humanity are not advantageous in private life
alone: They diffuse their beneficial influence on the Public, and render the
government as great and flourishing as they make individuals happy and
prosperous. The increase and consumption of all the commodities, which serve to
the ornament and pleasure of life, are advantageous to society; because at the
same time that they multiply those innocent gratifications to individuals, they
are a kind of storehouse of labor, which, in the exigencies of state, may be
turned to the public service. In a nation, where there is no demand for such
superfluities, men sink into indolence, lose all the enjoyment of life, and are
useless to the public, which cannot maintain nor support its fleets and armies,
from the industry of such slothful members.

THE bounds of all the European kingdoms are, at present, pretty near the same
they were two hundred years ago: But what a difference is there in the power
and grandeur of those kingdoms? Which can be ascribed to nothing but the
increase of art and industry. When Charles the VIII. of France invaded Italy,
he carried with him about 20,000 men: And yet this armament so exhausted the
nation, as we learn from Guicciardin, that for some years it was not able to
make so great an effort. The late king of France, in time of war, kept in pay
above 400,000 men; The inscription on the Place-de-Vendome says 440,000.
though from Mazarine's death to his own he was engaged in a course of wars, that
lasted near thirty years.

THIS industry is much promoted by the knowledge, inseparable from the ages of
arts and luxury; as on the other hand, this knowledge enables the public to
make the best advantage of the industry of its subjects. Laws, order, police,
discipline; these can never be carried to any degree of perfection, before
human reason has refined itself by exercise, and by an application to the more
vulgar arts, at least, of commerce and manufactures. Can we expect, that a
government will be well modeled by a people, who know not how to make a
spinning wheel, or to employ a loom to advantage? Not to mention, that all
ignorant ages are infested with superstition, which throws the government off
its bias, and disturbs men in the pursuit of their interest and happiness.

KNOWLEDGE in the arts of government naturally begets mildness and moderation,
by instructing men in the advantages of humane maxims above rigor and
severity, which drive subjects into rebellion, and render the return to
submission impracticable, by cutting off all hopes of pardon. When men's temper
is softened as well as their knowledge improved, this humanity appears still
more conspicuous, and is the chief characteristic, that distinguishes a
civilized age from times of barbarity and ignorance. Factions are then less
inveterate; revolutions less tragical; authority less severe; and seditions
less frequent. Even foreign wars abate of their cruelty; and after the field of
battle, where honor and interest steel men against compassion as well as fear,
the combatants divest themselves of the brute, and resume the man.

NOR need we fear, that men, by losing their ferocity, will lose their martial
spirit, or become less undaunted and vigorous in defense of their country or
their liberty. The arts have no such effect in enervating either the mind or
body. On the contrary, industry, their inseparable attendant, adds new force to
both. And if anger, which is said to be the whetstone of courage, loses
somewhat of its asperity, by politeness and refinement; a sense of honor,
which is a stronger, more constant, and more governable principle, acquires
fresh vigor by that elevation of genius, which arises from knowledge and a
good education. Add to this, that courage can neither have any duration, nor be
of any use, when not accompanied with discipline and martial skill, which are
seldom found among a barbarous people. The ancients remarked that Datames was
the only barbarian that ever knew the art of war. And Pyrrhus seeing the Romans
marshal their army with some art and skill, said with surprise These barbarians
have nothing barbarous in their discipline! It Is observable, that as the old
Romans, by applying themselves solely to war, were the only unciviliz'd people
that ever possessed military discipline; so the modern Italians are the only
civilized people, among Europeans, that ever wanted courage and a martial
spirit. Those who would ascribe this effeminacy of the Italians to their luxury
or politeness, or application to the arts, need but consider the French and
English, whose bravery is as uncontestable as their love of luxury, and their
assiduity in commerce. The Italian historians give us a more satisfactory
reason for this degeneracy of their countrymen. They show us how the sword was
dropped at once by all the Italian sovereigns; while the Venetian aristocracy was
jealous of its subjects, the Florentine democracy applied itself entirely to
commerce; Rome was governed by priests, and Naples by women. War then became
the business of soldiers of fortune, who spared one another, and to the
astonishment of the world, could engage a whole day in what they called a
battle, and return at night to their camps without the least bloodshed.

WHAT has chiefly induced severe moralists to declaim against luxury and
refinement in pleasure is the example of ancient Rome, which, joining, to its
poverty and rusticity, virtue and public spirit, rose to such a surprising
height of grandeur and liberty; but having learned from its conquered provinces
the Grecian and Asiatic luxury, fell into every kind of corruption; whence
arose sedition and civil wars, attended at last with the total loss of liberty.
All the Latin classics, whom we peruse in our infancy, are full of these
sentiments, and universally ascribe the ruin of their state to the arts and
riches imported from the East: insomuch that Sallust represents a taste for
painting as a vice no less than lewdness and drinking. And so popular were
these sentiments during the latter ages of the republic, that this author
abounds in praises of the old rigid Roman virtue, though himself the most
egregious instance of modern luxury and corruption; speaks contemptuously of
Grecian eloquence, though the most elegant writer in the world; nay, employs
preposterous digressions and declamations to this purpose, though a model of
taste and correctness.

BUT it would be easy to prove, that these writers mistook the cause of the
disorders in the Roman state, and ascribed to luxury and the arts what really
proceeded from an ill modeled government, and the unlimited extent of
conquests. Luxury or refinement on pleasure has no natural tendency to beget
venality and corruption. The value, which all men put upon any particular
pleasure, depends on comparison and experience; nor is a porter less greedy of
money, which he spends on bacon and brandy, than a courtier, who purchases
champagne and ortolans. Riches are valuable at all times and to all men,
because they always purchase pleasures, such as men are accustomed to and
desire; nor can any thing restrain or regulate the love of money but a sense of
honor and virtue; which, if it be not nearly equal at all times, will
naturally abound most in ages of luxury and knowledge.

OF all European kingdoms, Poland seems the most defective in the arts of war
as well as peace, mechanical as well as liberal; and yet it is there that
venality and corruption do most prevail. The nobles seem to have preserved
their crown elective for no other purpose, but regularly to sell it to the
highest bidder. This is almost the only species of commerce, with which that
people are acquainted.

THE liberties of England, so far from decaying since the origin of luxury and
the arts, have never flourished so much as during that period. And though
corruption may seem to increase of late years; this is chiefly to be ascribed
to our established liberty, when our princes have found the impossibility of
governing without parliaments, or of terrifying parliaments by the fantom of
prerogative. Not to mention, that this corruption or venality prevails
infinitely more among the electors than the elected; and therefore cannot
justly be ascribed to any refinements in luxury.

IF we consider the matter in a proper light, we shall find, that luxury and
the arts are rather favorable to liberty, and have a natural tendency to
preserve, if not produce a free government. In rude unpolished nations, where
the arts are neglected, all the labor is bestowed on the cultivation of the
ground; and the whole society divides into two classes, proprietors of land,
and their vassals or tenants. The latter are necessarily dependent and fitted
for slavery and subjection; especially where they possess no riches, and are
not valued for their knowledge in agriculture; as must always be the case where
the arts are neglected. The former naturally erect themselves into petty
tyrants; and must either submit to an absolute master for the sake of peace and
order; or if they will preserve their independency, like the Gothic barons,
they must fall into feuds and contests amongst themselves, and throw the whole
society into such confusion as is perhaps worse than the most despotic
government. But where luxury nourishes commerce and industry, the peasants, by
a proper cultivation of the land, become rich and independent; while the
tradesmen and merchants acquire a share of the property, and draw authority and
consideration to that middling rank of men; who are the best and firmest basis
of public liberty. These submit not to slavery, like the poor peasants, from
poverty and meanness of spirit; and having no hopes of tyrannizing over others,
like the barons, they are not tempted, for the sake of that gratification, to
submit to the tyranny of their sovereign. They covet equal laws, which may
secure their property, and preserve them from monarchical, as well as
aristocratical tyranny.

THE house of commons is the support of our popular government; and all the
world acknowledge, that it owed its chief influence and consideration to the
increase of commerce, which threw such a balance of property into the hands of
the commons. How inconsistent, then, is it to blame so violently luxury, or a
refinement in the arts, and to represent it as the bane of liberty and public
spirit!

TO declaim against present times, and magnify the virtue of remote ancestors,
is a propensity almost inherent in human nature; and as the sentiments and
opinions of civilized ages alone are transmitted to posterity, hence it is that
we meet with so many severe judgments pronounced against luxury and even
science, and hence it is that at present we give so ready an assent to them.
But the fallacy is easily perceived from comparing different nations that are
contemporaries; where we both judge more impartially, and can better set in
opposition those manners with which we are sufficiently acquainted. Treachery
and cruelty, the most pernicious and most odious of all vices, seem peculiar to
unciviliz'd ages; and by the refined Greeks and Romans were ascribed to all the
barbarous nations, which surrounded them. They might justly, therefore, have
presumed, that their own ancestors, so highly celebrated, possessed no greater
virtue, and were as much inferior to their posterity in honor and humanity as
in taste and science. An ancient Frank or Saxon may be highly extolled: But I
believe every man would think his life or fortune much less secure in the hands
of a Moor or Tartar, than in those of a French or English gentleman, the rank
of men the most civilized, in the most civilized nations.

WE come now to the second position, which we proposed to illustrate, viz. that
as innocent luxury or a refinement in pleasure is advantageous to the public;
so wherever luxury ceases to be innocent, it also ceases to be beneficial, and
when carried a degree farther, begins to be a quality pernicious, though,
perhaps, not the most pernicious, to political society.

LET us consider what we call vicious luxury. No gratification, however
sensual, can, of itself, be esteemed vicious. A gratification is only vicious,
when it engrosses all a man's expense, and leaves no ability for such acts of
duty and generosity as are required by his situation and fortune. Suppose, that
he correct the vice, and employ part of his expense in the education of his
children, in the support of his friends, and in relieving the poor; would any
prejudice result to society? On the contrary, the same consumption would arise;
and that labor, which, at present, is employed only in producing a slender
gratification to one man, would relieve the necessitous, and bestow
satisfaction on hundreds. The same care and toil, which raise a dish of peace at
Christmas, would give bread to a whole family during six months. To say, that,
without a vicious luxury, the labor would not have been employed at all, is
only to say, that there is some other defect in human nature, such as
indolence, selfishness, inattention to others, for which luxury, in some
measure, provides a remedy; as one poison may be an antidote to another. But
virtue, like wholesome food, is better than poisons, however corrected.

SUPPOSE the same number of men, that are, at present, in Britain, with the
same soil and climate; I ask, is it not possible for them to be happier, by the
most perfect way of life, that can be imagined, and by the greatest
reformation, which omnipotence itself could work in their temper and
disposition? To assert, that they cannot, appears evidently ridiculous. As the
land is able to maintain more than all its inhabitants, they could never, in
such an Utopian state, feel any other ills, than those which arise from bodily
sickness; and these are not the half of human miseries. All other ills spring
from some vice, either in ourselves or others; and even many of our diseases
proceed from the same origin. Remove the vices, and the ills follow. You must
only take care to remove all the vices. If you remove part, you may render the
matter worse. By banishing vicious luxury, without curing sloth and an
indifference to others, you only diminish industry in the state, and add
nothing to men's charity or their generosity. Let us, therefore, rest contented
with asserting, that two opposite vices in a state may be more advantageous
than either of them alone; but let us never pronounce vice, in it self,
advantageous. Is it not very inconsistent for an author to assert in one page,
that moral distinctions are inventions of politicians for public interest; and
in the next page maintain, that vice is advantageous to the public? Fable of
the he is.
And indeed, it seems, upon any system of morality, little less than a
contradiction in terms, to talk of a vice, that is in general beneficial to
society.

I THOUGHT this reasoning necessary, in order to give some light to a
philosophical question, which has been much disputed in Britain. I call it a
philosophical question, not a political one. For whatever may be the
consequence of such a miraculous transformation of mankind, as would endow them
with every species of virtue, and free them from every vice, this concerns not
the magistrate, who aims only at possibilities. He cannot cure every vice, by
substituting a virtue in its place. Very often he can only cure one vice by
another; and in that case, he ought to prefer what is least pernicious to
society. Luxury, when excessive, is the source of many ills; but is in general
preferable to sloth and idleness, which would commonly succeed in its place,
and are more pernicious both to private persons and to the public. When sloth
reigns, a mean uncultivated way of life prevails amongst individuals, without
society, without enjoyment. And if the sovereign, in such a situation, demands
the service of his subjects, the labor of the state suffices only to furnish
the necessaries of life to the laborers, and can afford nothing to those, who
are employed in the public service.

DISCOURSE III. Of Money.
MONEY is not, properly speaking, one of the subjects of commerce; but only the
instrument, which men have agreed upon to facilitate the exchange of one
commodity for another. It Is none of the wheels of trade: It Is the oil, which
renders the motion of the wheels more smooth and easy. If we consider any one
kingdom by itself, it is evident, that the greater or less plenty of money is of
no consequence; since the prices of commodities are always proportioned to the
plenty of money, and a crown in Harry the VII's. time served the same purpose
as a pound does at present. It Is only the public, that draws any advantage from
the greater plenty of money; and that only in its wars and negociations with
foreign states. And this is the reason, why all rich and trading countries,
from Carthage to Britain and Holland, have employed mercenary troops, which
they hired from their poorer neighbors. Were they to make use of their native
subjects, they would find less advantage from their superior riches, and from
their great plenty of gold and silver; since the pay of all their servants must
rise in proportion to the public opulence. Our small army in Britain of 20,000
men are maintained at as great expense as a French army thrice as numerous. The
English fleet, during the late war, required as much money to support it as all
the Roman legions, which kept the whole world in subjection, during the time of
the emperors APRIVATE soldier in the Roman infantry had a denarius a day,
somewhat less than 8 pence. The Roman emperors had commonly 25 legions in pay,
which, allowing 5000 men to a legion, makes 125,000. Tacit. ann. lib. 4. It Is
true, there were also auxiliaries to the legions; but their numbers are
uncertain as well as their pay. To consider only the legionaries, the pay of
the private men could not exceed 1600,000 pound. Now the parliament in the last
war commonly allowed for the fleet 2500,000. We have therefore 900,000 over for
the officers and other expenses of the Roman legions. There seem to have been
but few officers in the Roman armies, in comparison of what are employed in all
our modern troops, except some Swiss corpse: And these officers had very small
pay: A centurion, for instance, only double a common soldier. And as the
soldiers from their pay (Tacit. ann. lib. 1.) bought their own clothes, arms,
tents and baggage; this must also diminish considerably the other charges of
the army. So little expensive was that mighty government, and so easy was its
yoke over the world. And indeed, this is the more natural conclusion from the
foregoing calculations. For money, after the conquest of Egypt, seems to have
been nearly in as great plenty at Rome, as it is at present in the richest of
the European kingdoms.


THE greater number of people and their greater industry are serviceable in all
cases; at home and abroad, in private and in public. But the greater plenty of
money is very limited in its use, and may even sometimes be a loss to a nation
in its commerce with foreigners.

THERE seems to be a happy concurrence of causes in human affairs, which check
the growth of trade and riches, and hinder them from being confined entirely to
one people; as might naturally at first be dreaded from the advantages of an
established commerce. Where one nation has got the start of another in trade,
it is very difficult for the latter to regain the ground it has lost; because of
the superior industry and skill of the former, and the greater stocks, which
its merchants are possest' of, and which enable them to trade for so much
smaller profits. But these advantages are compensated, in some measure, by the
low prices of labor in every nation, that has not an extensive commerce, and
does not very much abound in gold and silver. Manufactures, therefore,
gradually shift their places, leaving those countries and provinces, which they
have already enriched, and flying to others, whither they are allured by the
cheapness of provisions and labor; till they have enriched these also, and are
again banished by the same causes. And in general, we may observe, that the
dearness of every thing, from plenty of money, is a disadvantage, that attends
an established commerce, and sets bounds to it in every country, by enabling
the poorer states to undersell the richer in all foreign markets.

THIS has made me entertain a great doubt concerning the benefit of banks and
paper credit, which are so generally esteemed advantageous to every nation.
That provisions and labor should become dear by the increase of trade and
money, is, in many respects, an inconvenience; but an inconvenience that is
unavoidable, and the effect of that public wealth and prosperity, which are the
end of all our wishes. It Is compensated by the advantages we reap from the
possession of these precious metals, and the weight which they give the nation
in all foreign wars and negotiations. But there appears no reason for
increasing that inconvenience by a counterfeit money, which foreigners will
never accept of, and which any great disorder in the state will reduce to
nothing. There are, it is true, many people in every rich state, who, having
large sums of money, would prefer paper with good security; as being of more
easy transport and more safe custody. If the public provide not a bank, private
bankers will take advantage of this circumstance; as the goldsmiths formerly
did in London, or as the bankers do at present in Dublin: And therefore it is
better, it may be thought, that a public company should enjoy the benefit of
that paper credit, which always will have place in every opulent kingdom. But
to endeavor artificially to increase such a credit, can never be the interest
of any trading nation; but must lay them under disadvantages, by increasing
money beyond its natural proportion to labor and commodities, and thereby
heightening their price to the merchant and manufacturer. And in this view, it
must be allowed, that no bank could be more advantageous than such a one as
locked up all the money it received, and never augmented the circulating coin,
as is usual, by returning part of its treasure into commerce. A public bank, by
this expedient, might cut off much of the dealings of private bankers and money
jobbers; and though the state bore the charge of salaries to the directors and
tellers of this bank, (for according to the preceding supposition, it would
have no profit from its dealings) the national advantage, resulting from the
low price of labor and the destruction of paper credit, would be a sufficient
compensation. Not to mention, that so large a sum, lying ready at command,
would be a great convenience in times of public danger and distress; and might
be replac'd at leisure, when peace and tranquillity were restored to the nation.

BUT of this subject of paper credit, we shall treat more largely hereafter.
And I shall finish this essay of money, by proposing and explaining two
observations, which may, perhaps, serve to employ the thought of our
speculative politicians. For to these only I all along address myself. It Is
enough that I submit to the ridicule sometimes, in this age, attached to the
character of a philosopher, without adding to it that which belongs to a
projector.

I. 'T WAS a shrewd observation of Anacharsis Plut. Quomodo quis suos profectus
in virtute sentire possit.
the Scythian, who had never seen money in his own country, that gold and
silver seemed to him of no use to the Greeks, but to assist them in numeration
and arithmetic. It Is indeed evident, that money is nothing but the
representation of labor and commodities, and serves only as a method of rating
or estimating them. Where coin is in greater plenty; as a greater quantity of
it is then required to represent the same quantity of goods; it can have no
effect, either good or bad, taking a nation within itself: no more than it
would make any alteration on a merchant's books, if instead of the Arabian
method of notation, which requires few characters, he should make use of the
Roman, which requires a great many. Nay the greater plenty of money, like the
Roman characters, is rather inconvenient and troublesome; and requires greater
care to keep and transport it. But notwithstanding this conclusion, which must
be allowed just, it is certain, that since the discover of the mines in America,
industry has increased in all the nations of Europe, except in the possessors
of those mines; and this may justly be ascribed, amongst other reasons, to the
increase of gold and silver. Accordingly we find, that in every kingdom, into
which money begins to flow in greater abundance than formerly, every thing
takes a new face; labor and industry gain life; the merchant becomes more
enterprizing; the manufacturer more diligent and skillful; and even the farmer
follows his plough with greater alacrity and attention. This is not easily to
be accounted for, if we consider only the influence, which a greater abundance
of coin has in the kingdom itself, by heightening the price of commodities, and
obliging every one to pay a greater number of these little yellow or white
pieces for every thing he purchases. And as to foreign trade, it appears, that
great plenty of money is rather disadvantageous, by raising the price of every
kind of labor.

To account, then, for this phenomenon, we must consider, that though the high
price of commodities be a necessary consequence of the increase of gold and
silver, yet it follows not immediately upon that increase; but some time is
required before the money circulate through the whole state, and make its effects
be felt on all ranks of people. At first, no alteration is perceived; by
degrees, it raises the price first of one commodity, then of another; till the
whole at last rises to a just proportion, with the new quantity of specie,
which is in the kingdom. In my opinion, it is only in this interval or
intermediate situation, betwixt the acquisition of money and rise of prices,
that the increasing quantity of gold and silver is favorable to industry. When
any quantity of money is imported into a nation, it is not at first dispersed
into many hands; but is confined to the coffers of a few persons, who
immediately seek to employ it to the best advantage. Here are a set of
manufacturers or merchants, we shall suppose, who have received returns of gold
and silver for goods, which they sent to Cadiz. They are thereby enabled to
employ more workmen than formerly, who never dream of demanding higher wages,
but are glad of employment from such good paymasters. If workmen become scarce,
the manufacturer gives higher wages; but at first requires an increase of
labor, and this is willingly submitted to by the artizan, who can now eat and
drink better to compensate his additional toil and fatigue. He carries his
money to market, where he finds every thing at the same price as formerly, but
returns with greater quantity and of better kinds, for the use of his family.
The farmer and gardener, finding that all their commodities are taken off,
apply themselves with alacrity to the raising of more; and at the same time,
can afford to take better and more clothes from their tradesmen, whose price is
the same as formerly, and their industry only whetted by so much new gain. It Is
easy to trace the money in its progress through the whole commonwealth; where we
shall find, that it must first quicken the diligence of every individual,
before it increase the price of labor.

AND that the specie may increase to a considerable pitch, before it have this
latter effect, appears, amongst other reasons, from the frequent operations of
the French king on the money; where it was always found, that the augmenting
the numerary value did not produce a proportional rise of the prices, at least
for some time. In the last year of Louis the XIV. money was raised three
sevenths, but prices augmented only one. Corn in France is now sold at the same
price, or for the same number of livres, it was in 1683, though silver was then
at 30 livres the mark, and is now at 50. THESE facts I give upon the authority
of Mons. de Tot in his Reflections politiques, an author of reputation. Though I
must confess, that the facts, which he advances on other occasions, are often
so suspicious as to make his authority less in this matter. However, the
general observation, that the augmenting the money in France does not at first
proportionably augment the prices, is certainly just.

By the bye, this seems to be one of the best reasons for a gradual and
universal augmentation of the money, which can be given, though it has been
entirely overlooked in all those volumes, which have been wrote on that
question by Melon, Du Tot, and Paris de Verney. Were all our money, for
instance, recoin'd, and a penny's worth of silver taken from every shilling,
the new shilling would probably purchase every thing that could have been
bought by the old; the prices of every thing would thereby be insensibly
diminished; foreign trade enlivened; and domestic industry, by the circulation
of a greater number of pounds and shillings, would receive some increase and
encouragement. In executing such a project, 'twou'd be better to make the new
shilling pass for 24 halfpence, in order to preserve the illusion, and make it
be taken for the same.


Not to mention, the great addition of gold and silver, which may have come
into that kingdom, since the former period.

FROM the whole of this reasoning we may conclude, that it is of no manner of
consequence, with regard to the domestic happiness of a state, whether money be
in a greater or less quantity. The good policy of the magistrate consists only
in keeping it, if possible, still increasing; because, by that means, he keeps
a spirit of industry alive in the nation, and increases the stock of labor,
wherein consists all real power and riches. A nation, whose money decreases, is
actually, at that time, much weaker and more miserable, than another nation,
who possesses no more money, but is on the increasing hand. This will be easily
accounted for, if we consider, that the alterations in the quantity of money,
either on the one side or the other, are not immediately attended with
proportionable alterations in the prices of commodities. There is always an
interval before matters be adjusted to their new situation; and this interval
is as pernicious to industry, when gold and silver are diminishing, as it is
advantageous, when these metals are increasing. The workman has not the same
employment from the manufacturer and merchant; though he pays the same price for
every thing in the market. The farmer cannot dispose of his corn and cattle;
though he must pay the same rent to his landlord. The poverty and beggary and
sloth, which must ensue, are easily foreseen.

II. The second observation I proposed to make with regard to money, may be
explained after the following manner. There are some kingdoms, and many
provinces in Europe, (and all of them were once in the same condition) where
money is so scarce, that the landlord can get none at all from his tenants; but
is obliged to take his rent in kind, and either to consume it himself, or
transport it to places, where he may find a market. In those countries, the
prince can levy few or no taxes, but in the same manner: And as he will receive
very small benefit from impositions so paid, it is evident, that such a kingdom
has very little force even at home; and cannot maintain fleets and armies to
the same extent, as if every part of it abounded in gold and silver. There is
surely a greater disproportion betwixt the force of Germany at present and what
it was three centuries ago, THE Italians gave to the emperor Maximilian, the
nickname of Pocchi-danari. None of the enterprises of that prince ever
succeeded, for want of money.
than there is in its industry, people and manfactures. The Austrian dominions
in the empire are in general well peopled and well cultivated, and are of great
extent, but have not a proportionable weight in the balance of Europe;
proceeding, as is commonly supposed, from their scarcity of money. How do all
these facts agree with that principle of reason, that the quantity of gold and
silver is in itself altogether indifferent? According to that principle,
wherever a sovereign has numbers of subjects, and these have plenty of
commodities, he should, of course, be great and powerful, and they rich and
happy, independent of the greater or lesser abundance of the precious metals.
These admit of divisions and sub-divisions to a great extent; and where they
would become so small as to be in danger of being lost, it is easy to mix them
with a baser metal, as is practiced in some countries of Europe; and by that
means raise them to a bulk more sensible and convenient. They still serve the
same purposes of exchange, whatever their number may be, or whatever color
they may be supposed to have.

To these difficulties I answer, that the effect, here supposed to flow from
scarcity of money, really arises from the manners and customs of the
inhabitants, and that we mistake, as is usual, a collateral effect for a cause.
The contradiction is only apparent; but it requires some thought and reflection
to discover the principles, by which we can reconcile reason to experience.

It seems a maxim almost self-evident, that the prices of every thing depend on
the proportion betwixt commodities and money, and that any considerable
alteration on either of these has the same effect either of heightening or
diminishing the price. Increase the commodities, they become cheaper: Increase
the money, they rise in their value. As on the other hand, a diminution of the
former, and that of the latter have contrary tendencies.

IT IS also evident, that the prices do not so much depend on the absolute
quantity of commodities and of money, which are in a nation; as on that of the
commodities, which come or may come to market, and of the money, which
circulates. If the coin be locked up in chests, it is the same thing with regard
to prices, as if it were annihilated: If the commodities be hoarded in
granaries, a like effect follows. As the money and commodities, in these cases,
never meet, they cannot affect each other. Were we, at any time, to form
conjectures concerning the prices of provisions, the corn, which the farmer
must reserve for the maintenance of himself and family, ought never to enter
into the estimation. It Is only the overplus, compared to the demand, that
determines the value.

To apply these principles, we must consider, that in the first and more
uncultivated ages of any state, e're fancy has confounded her wants with those
of nature, men, contented with the productions of their own fields, or with
those rude preparations, which they themselves can work upon them, have little
occasion for exchange, or at least for money, which, by agreement, is the
common measure of exchange. The wool of the farmer's own flock, spun in his own
family, and wrought by a neighboring weaver, who receives his payment in corn
or wool, suffices for furniture and clothing. The carpenter, the smith, the
mason, the tailor are retained by wages of a like nature; and the landlord
himself, dwelling in the neighborhood, is contented to receive his rent in the
commodities raised by the farmer. The greatest part of these he consumes at
home, in rustic hospitality: The rest, perhaps, he disposes of for money to the
neighboring town, whence he draws the materials of his expense and luxury.

BUT after men begin to refine on all these enjoyments, and live not always at
home, nor are contented with what can be raised in their neighborhood, there
is more exchange and commerce of all kinds, and more money enters into that
exchange. The tradesmen will not be paid in corn; because they want something
more than barely to eat. The farmer goes beyond his own parish for the
commodities he purchases, and cannot always carry his commodities to the
merchant, who supplies him. The landlord lives in the capital or in a foreign
country; and demands his rent in gold and silver, which can easily be
transported to him. Great undertakers and manufacturers and merchants arise in
every commodity; and these can conveniently deal in nothing but in specie. And
consequently, in this situation of society, the coin enters into many more
contracts, and by that means is much more employed than in the former.

THE necessary effect is, that provided the money does not increase in the
nation, every thing must become much cheaper in times of industry and
refinement, than in rude, uncultivated ages. It Is the proportion betwixt the
money, that circulates, and the commodities in the market, that determines the
prices. Goods, that are consumed at home, or exchanged with other goods in the
neighborhood, never come to market; they affect not, in the least, the current
specie; with regard to it they are as if totally annihilated; and consequently
this method of using them sinks the proportion on the side of the commodities,
and increases the prices. But after money enters into all contracts and sales,
and is every where the measure of exchange, the same national cash has a much
greater task to perform; all commodities are then in the market; the sphere of
circulation is enlarged; it is the same case as if that individual sum were to
serve a larger kingdom; and therefore, the proportion being here diminished on
the side of the money, every thing must become cheaper, and the prices
gradually fall.

BY the most exact computations, that have been formed all over Europe, after
making allowance for the change in the numerary value or the denomination, it is
found, that the prices of all things have only risen three, or at most four
times since the discovery of the West Indies. But will any one assert, that
there is no more than four times the coin in Europe, that was in the fifteenth
century and the centuries preceding it? The Spaniards and Portuguese from their
mines, the English, French and Dutch, by their African trade, and by their
interlopers in the West Indies, bring home about seven millions a year, of
which not above a tenth part goes to the East Indies. This sum alone in five
years would probably double the ancient stock of money in Europe. And no other
satisfactory reason can be given, why all prices have not risen to a much more
exorbitant height, except that derived from a change of customs and manners.
Besides, that more commodities are produced by additional industry, the same
commodities come more to market, after men depart from their ancient simplicity
of manners. And though this increase has not been equal to that of money, it has,
however, been considerable, and has preserved the proportion betwixt coin and
commodities nearer the ancient standard.

WERE the question proposed, which of these methods of living in the people,
the simple or the refined, is the most advantageous to the state or public, I
should, without much scruple, prefer the latter, in a view to politics at
least; and should produce this as an additional reason for the encouragement of
trade and manufactures.

WHEN men live in the ancient simple manner, and supply all their necessities
from their domestic industry or from the neighborhood, the sovereign can levy
no taxes in money from a considerable part of his subjects; and if he will
impose on them any burdens, he must take his payment in commodities, with
which alone they abound; a method attended with such great and obvious
inconveniences, that they need not here be insisted on. All the money he can
pretend to raise must be from his principal cities, where alone it circulates;
and these, it is evident, cannot afford him so much as the whole state could,
did gold and silver circulate through the whole. But besides this obvious
diminution of the revenue, there is also another cause of the poverty of the
public in such a situation. Not only the sovereign receives less money, but the
same money goes not so far as in times of industry and general commerce. Every
thing is dearer, where the gold and silver are supposed equal; and that because
fewer commodities come to market, and the whole coin bears a higher proportion
to what is to be purchased by it; whence alone the prices of every thing are
fixed and determined.

HERE then we may learn the fallacy of the remark, often to be met with in
historians, and even in common conversation, that any particular state is weak,
though fertile, populous, and well cultivated, merely because it wants money. It
appears, that the want of money can never injure any state within itself: For
men and commodities are the real strength of any community. It Is the simple
manner of living which here hurts the public, by confining the gold and silver
to few hands, and preventing its universal diffusion and circulation. On the
contrary, industry and refinements of all kinds incorporate it with the whole
state, however small its quantity may be: They digest it into every vein, so to
speak; and make it enter into every transaction and contract. No hand is
entirely empty of it; and as the prices of every thing fall by that means, the
sovereign has a double advantage: He may draw money by his taxes from every
part of the state, and what he receives goes farther in every purchase and
payment.

WE may infer, from a comparison of prices, that money is not more plentiful in
China, than it was in Europe three centuries ago: But what immense power is
that empire possessed of, if we may judge by the civil and military list,
maintained by it? Polybius Lib. 2. cap. 15.
tells us, that provisions were so cheap in Italy during his time, that in some
places the stated club in the inns was a semis a head, little more than a
farthing: Yet the Roman power had even then subdued the whole known world.
About a century before that period, the Carthaginian ambassadors said, by way
of raillery, that no people lived more sociably amongst themselves than the
Romans; for that in every entertainment, which, as foreign ministers, they
received, they still observed the same plate at every table. Plin. lib. 33.
cap. 11.
The absolute quantity of the precious metals is a matter of great
indifference. There are only two circumstances of any importance, viz. their
gradual increase, and their thorough concoction and circulation through the
state; and the influence of both these circumstances has been here explained.

IN the following discourse we shall see an instance of a like fallacy, as that
above mentioned; where a collateral effect is taken for a cause, and where a
consequence is ascribed to the plenty of money; though it be really owing to a
change in the manners and customs of the people.

DISCOURSE IV. Of Interest.
NOTHING is esteemed a more certain sign of the flourishing condition of any
nation than the lowness of interest: And with reason; though I believe the cause
is somewhat different from what is commonly apprehended. The lowness of
interest is generally ascribed to the plenty of money. But money, however
plentiful, has no other effect, if fixed, than to raise the price of labor.
Silver is more common than gold; and therefore you receive a greater quantity
of it for the same commodities: But do you pay less interest for it? Interest
in Batavia and Jamaica is at 10 per cent. in Portugal at 6; though these places,
as we may learn from the prices of every thing, abound much more in gold and
silver than either London or Amsterdam.

WERE all the gold in England annihilated at once, and one and twenty shillings
substituted in the place of every guinea, would money be more plentiful or
interest lower? No surely: We should only use silver instead of gold. Were gold
rendered as common as silver, and silver as common as copper; would money be
more plentiful or interest lower? We may assuredly give the same answer. Our
shillings would then be yellow, and our halfpence white; and we should have no
guineas. No other difference would ever be observed. No alteration on commerce,
manufactures, navigation, or interest; unless we imagine, that the color of
the metal is of any consequence.

NOW what is so visible in these greater variations of scarcity or abundance of
the precious metals, must hold in all inferior changes. If the multiplying gold
and silver fifteen times makes no difference, much less can the doubling or
tripling them. All augmentation has no other effect than to heighten the price
of labor and commodities; and even this variation is little more than that of
a name. In the progress toward these changes, the augmentation may have some
influence, by exciting industry; but after the prices are settled, suitable to
the new abundance of gold and silver, it has no manner of influence.

AN effect always holds proportion with its cause. Prices have risen about four
times, since the discovery of the Indies; and it is probable gold and silver
have multiplied much more: But interest has not fallen much above half. The
rate of interest, therefore, is not derived from the quantity of the precious
metals.

MONEY having merely a fictitious value, arising from the agreement and
convention of men, the greater or less plenty of it is of no consequence, if we
consider a nation within itself; and when once fixed, though in never so great
abundance, it has no other effect, than to oblige every one to tell out a
greater number of those shining bits of metal, for clothes, furniture, or
equipage, without increasing any one convenience of life. If a man borrows
money to build a house, he then carries home a greater load; because the stone,
timber, lead, glass, etc. with the labor of the masons and carpenters, are
represented by a greater quantity of gold and silver. But as these metals are
considered merely as representations, there can no alteration arise, from their
bulk or quantity, their weight or color, either upon their real value or their
interest. The same interest, in all cases, bears the same proportion to the
sum. And if you lent me so much labor and so many commodities; by receiving
five per cent. you receive always proportional labor and commodities, however
represented, whether by yellow or white coin, whether by a pound or an ounce.
It Is in vain, therefore, to look for the cause of the fall or rise of interest
in the greater or less quantity of gold and silver, which is fixed in any nation.

HIGH interest arises from three circumstances: A great demand for borrowing;
little riches to supply that demand; and great profits arising from commerce:
And these circumstances are a clear proof of the small advance of commerce and
industry, not of the scarcity of gold and silver. Low interest, on the other
hand, proceeds from the three opposite circumstances: A small demand for
borrowing; great riches to supply that demand; and small profits arising from
commerce: And these circumstances are all connected together, and proceed from
the increase of industry and commerce, not of gold and silver. We shall
endeavor to prove these points as fully and distinctly as possible, and shall
begin with the causes and the effects of a great or small demand for borrowing.

WHEN a people have emerg'd ever so little from a state of barbarity, and their
numbers have increased beyond the original multitude, there must immediately
arise an inequality of property; and while some possess large tracts of land,
others are confined within narrow limits, and some are entirely without any
landed property. Those, who possess more land than they can labor, employ
those who possess none, and agree to receive a determinate part of the product.
Thus the landed interest is immediately established; nor is there any settled
government, however rude, wherein affairs are not on this footing. Of these
proprietors of land, some must presently discover themselves to be of different
tempers from others; and while one would willingly store up the product of his
land for futurity, another desires to consume at present what should suffice
for many years. But as the spending a settled revenue is a way of life entirely
without occupation; men have so much need of somewhat to fix and engage them,
that pleasures, such as they are, will be the pursuit of the greatest part of
the landholders, and the prodigals amongst them will always be more numerous
than the misers. In a state, therefore, where there is nothing but a landed
interest, as there is little frugality, the borrowers must be very numerous,
and the rate of interest must hold proportion to it. The difference depends not
on the quantity of money, but on the habits and manners which prevail. By this
alone the demand for borrowing is increased or diminished. Were money so
plentiful as to make an egg be sold for sixpence; as long as there are only
landed gentry and peasants in the state, the borrowers must be numerous, and
interest high. The rent for the same farm would be heavier and more bulky: But
the same idleness of the landlord, with the higher prices of commodities, would
dissipate it in the same time, and produce the same necessity and demand for
borrowing. I HAVE been informed by a very eminent lawyer and a man of great
knowledge and observation, that it appears from ancient papers and records,
that, about four centuries ago, money, in Scotland, and probably in other parts
of Europe, was only at five per cent. and afterward rose to ten before the
discovery of the West Indies. This fact is curious; but might easily be
reconciled to the foregoing reasoning. Men, in that age, lived so much at home,
and in so very simple and frugal a manner, that they had no occasion for money;
and though the lenders were then few, the borrowers were still fewer. The high
rate of interest among the early Romans is accounted for by historians from the
frequent losses sustained by the inroads of the enemy.


NOR is the case different with regard to the second circumstance we proposed
to consider, viz. the great or little riches to supply this demand. This effect
also depends on the habits and ways of living of the people, not on the
quantity of gold and silver. In order to have, in any state, a great number of
lenders, it is not sufficient nor requisite, that there be great abundance of
the precious metals. It Is only requisite, that the property or command of that
quantity, which is in the state, whether great or small, should be collected in
particular hands, so as to form considerable sums, or compose a great moneyed
interest. This begets a number of lenders, and sinks the rate of usury; and
this, I shall venture to affirm, depends not on the quantity of specie, but on
particular manners and customs, which make the specie gather into separate sums
or masses of considerable value.

FOR suppose, that, by miracle, every man in Britain should have five pounds
slipped into his pocket in one night; this would much more than double the whole
money that is at present in the kingdom, and yet there would not next day, nor
for some time, be any more lenders, nor any variation on the interest. And were
there nothing but landlords and peasants in the state, this money, however
abundant, could never gather into sums, and would only serve to increase the
prices of every thing, without any farther consequence. The prodigal landlord
dissipates it, as fast as he receives it; and the beggarly peasant has no means
nor view nor ambition of obtaining above a bare livelihood. The overplus of
borrowers above that of lenders continuing still the same, there will follow no
reduction of interest. That depends upon another principle, and must proceed
from an increase of industry and frugality, of arts and commerce.

EVERY thing, useful to the life of man, arises from the ground; but few things
arise in that condition, which is requisite to render them useful. There must,
therefore, beside the peasants and the proprietors of land, be another rank of
men, who, receiving from the former the rude materials, work them into their
proper form, and retain part for their own use and subsistence. In the infancy
of society, these contracts betwixt the artizans and the peasants, and betwixt
one species of artizan and another, are commonly entered into immediately, by
the persons themselves, who, being neighbors, are readily acquainted with each
other's necessities, and can lend their mutual assistance to supply them. But
when men's industry increases, and their views enlarge; it is found, that the
most remote parts of the state can assist each other as well as the more
contiguous, and that this intercourse of good offices may be carried on to the
greatest extent and intricacy. Hence the origin of merchants, the most useful
race of men in the whole society, who serve as agents betwixt those parts of
the state, that are wholly unacquainted, and are ignorant of each other's
necessities. Here are in a city fifty workmen in silk and linen and a thousand
customers; and these two ranks of men, so necessary to each other, can never
rightly meet, 'till one man erects a shop, to which all the workmen, and all
the customers repair. In this province, grass rises in abundance: The
inhabitants abound in cheese and butter and cattle; but want bread and corn,
which, in a neighboring province, are in too great abundance for the uses of
the inhabitants. One man discovers this. He brings corn from the one province,
and returns with cattle; and supplying the wants of both, he is, so far, a
common benefactor. As the people increase in numbers and industry, the
difficulty of their mutual intercourse increases: The business of the agency or
merchandise becomes more intricate; and divides, sub-divides, compounds, and
mixes to a greater variety. In all these transactions, it is necessary and
reasonable, that a considerable part of the commodities and labor should
belong to the merchant, to whom, in a great measure, they are owing. And these
commodities he will sometimes preserve in kind, or more commonly convert into
money, which is their common representation. If gold and silver have increased
in the state along with industry, it will require a great quantity of these
metals to represent a great quantity of commodities and labor. If industry
alone has increased, the prices of every thing must sink, and a very small
quantity of specie will serve as a representation.

THERE is no craving or demand of the human mind more constant and insatiable
than that for exercise and employment; and this desire seems the foundation of
most of our passions and pursuits. Deprive a man of all business and serious
occupation, he runs restless from one amusement to another; and the weight and
oppression, which he feels from idleness, is so great, that he forgets the
ruin, which must follow from his immoderate expenses. Give him a more harmless
way of employing his mind or body, he is satisfied, and feels no longer that
insatiable thirst after pleasure. But if the employment you give him be
profitable, especially if the profit be attached to every particular exertion
of industry, he has gain so often in his eye, that he acquires, by degrees, a
passion for it, and knows no such pleasure as that of seeing the daily increase
of his fortune. And this is the reason why trade increases frugality, and why,
among merchants, there is the same overplus of misers above prodigals, as,
among the possessors of land, there is the contrary.

COMMERCE increases industry, by conveying it readily from one member of the
state to another, and allowing none of it to perish or become useless. It
increases frugality, by giving occupation to men, and employing them in the
arts of gain, which soon engage their affection, and remove them from all
relish of pleasure and expense. It Is an infallible consequence of all
industrious professions to beget frugality, and make the love of gain prevail
over the love of pleasure. Among lawyers and physicians, who have any practice,
there are many more, who live within their income, than who exceed it, or even
live up to it. But lawyers and physicians beget no industry; and it is even at
the expense of others they acquire their riches; so that they are sure to
diminish the possessions of some of their fellow citizens as fast as they
increase their own. Merchants, on the contrary, beget industry, by serving as
canals to convey it through every corner of the state; and, at the same time, by
their frugality, they acquire great power over that industry, and collect a
large property in the labor and commodities, which they are the chief
instruments in producing. There is no other profession, therefore, except
merchandise, which can make the moneyed interest considerable, or in other
words, can increase industry, and by also increasing frugality, give a great
command of that industry to particular members of the society. Without
commerce, the state must consist chiefly of landed gentry, whose prodigality
and expense make a continual demand for borrowing; and of peasants, who have no
sums to supply that demand. The money never gathers into large stocks or sums,
that can be lent at interest. It is dispersed into numberless hands, who either
squander it in idle show and magnificence, or employ it in the purchase of the
common necessaries of life. Commerce alone assembles it into considerable sums;
and this effect it has merely from the industry, which it begets, and the
frugality, which it inspires, independent of the quantity of precious metal,
which may circulate in the state.

THUS an increase of commerce, by a necessary and infallible consequence,
raises a great number of lenders, and by that means produces a lowness of
interest. We must now consider how far this increase of commerce diminishes the
profits arising from that profession, and gives rise to the third circumstance
requisite to produce a lowness of interest.

IT may be proper to observe on this head, that low interest and low profits of
merchandise are two events, that mutually forward each other, and are both
originally derived from that extensive commerce, which produces opulent
merchants, and renders the moneyed interest considerable. Where merchants
possess great stocks, whether represented by few or many pieces of metal, it
must frequently happen, that, when they either become tired of business, or
have heirs unwilling or unfit to engage in commerce, a great deal of these
riches naturally seeks an annual and secure revenue. The plenty diminishes
their price, and makes the lenders accept of a low interest. This consideration
obliges many to keep their stocks in trade, and rather be content with low
profit than dispose of their money at an under-value. On the other hand, when
commerce has become very extensive, and employs very large stocks, there must
arise rivalships among the merchants, which diminish the profits of trade; at
the same time, that they increase the trade itself. The low profits of
merchandise induce the merchants to accept more willingly of a low interest,
when they leave off business, and begin to indulge themselves in ease and
indolence. It is needless, therefore, to enquire, which of these circumstances,
viz. low interest or low profits, is the cause, and which the effect. They both
arise from an extensive commerce, and mutually forward each other. No man will
accept of low profits, where he can have high interest; and no man will accept
of low interest, where he can have high profits. An extensive commerce, by
producing large stocks, diminishes both interest and profit, and is always
assisted, in its diminution of the one, by the proportional sinking of the
other. I may add, that as low profits arise from the increase of commerce and
industry; they serve in their turn to the farther increase of commerce, by
rendering the commodities cheaper, increasing the consumption, and heightening
the industry. And thus, if we consider the whole connection of causes and
effects, interest is the true barometer of the state, and its lowness is a sign
almost infallible of the flourishing of a people. It proves the increase of
industry, and its prompt circulation through the whole state, little inferior to
a demonstration. And though, perhaps, it may not be impossible but a sudden and a
great check to commerce may have a momentary effect of the same kind, by
throwing so many stocks out of trade; it must be attended with such misery and
want of employment in the poor, that, besides its short duration, it will not
be possible to mistake the one case for the other.

THOSE, who have asserted, that the plenty of money was the cause of low
interest, seem to have taken a collateral effect for a cause; since the same
industry, which sinks the interest, does commonly acquire great abundance of
the precious metals. A variety of fine manufactures, along with vigilant,
enterprising merchants, will soon draw money to a state, if it be any where to
be found in the world. The same cause, by multiplying the conveniences of life,
and increasing industry, collects great riches into the hands of persons, who
are not proprietors of land, and produces by that means a lowness of interest.
But though these effects, plenty of money and low interest, do both naturally
arise from commerce and industry, they are altogether independent of each
other. For, suppose a nation removed into the Pacific ocean, without any
foreign commerce or any knowledge of navigation: Suppose, that this nation
possesses always the same stock of coin, but is continually increasing in its
numbers and industry: It Is evident, that the price of every commodity must
gradually diminish in that kingdom; since it is the proportion betwixt money and
any species of goods, which fixes their mutual value; and upon the present
supposition, the conveniences of life become every day more abundant, without
any alteration on the current specie. A less quantity of money, therefore,
amongst this people, will make a rich man, during the times of industry, than
would serve to that purpose, in ignorant and slothful ages. Less money will
build a house, portion a daughter, buy an estate, support a manufactory, or
maintain a family and equipage. These are the uses, for which men borrow money;
and therefore, the greater or less quantity of it in a state has no influence
on the interest. But it is evident, that the greater or less stock of labor and
commodities must have a great influence; since we really and in effect borrow
these, when we take money upon interest. It Is true, when commerce is extended
all over the globe, the most industrious nations always abound most with the
precious metals: So that low interest and plenty of money are in fact almost
inseparable. But still it is of consequence to know the principle, whence any
phenomenon arises, and to distinguish betwixt a cause and a concomitant effect.
Besides, that the speculation is curious, it may frequently be of use in the
conduct of public affairs. At least, it must be owned, that nothing can be of
more use than to improve, by practice, the method of reasoning on these
subjects, which, of all others, are the most important; though they are commonly
treated in the loosest and most careless manner.

ANOTHER reason of this popular mistake with regard to the cause of low
interest seems to be the instance of some nations; where, after a sudden
acquisition of riches or of the precious metals, by means of foreign conquest,
the interest has fallen, not only amongst them, but in all the neighboring
states, as soon as that money was dispersed, and had insinuated itself into
every corner. Thus, interest in Spain fell near a half immediately after the
discovery of the West Indies, as we are informed by Garcilasso de la Vega: And
it has been ever since gradually sinking in every kingdom of Europe. Interest
in Rome, after the conquest of Egypt, fell from 6 to 4 per cent. as we learn
from Dion. Lib. 51.


THE causes of the sinking of interest upon such an event seem different in the
conquering country and in the neighboring states; but in neither of them can
we justly ascribe that effect merely to the increase of gold and silver.

IN the conquering country, it is natural to imagine, that this new acquisition
of money will fall into a few hands, and be gathered into large sums, which
seek a secure revenue, either by the purchase of land or by interest; and
consequently the same effect follows, for a little time, as if there had been a
great occasion of industry and commerce. The increase of lenders above the
borrowers sinks the interest; and so much the faster, if those, who have
acquired those large sums, find no industry or commerce in the state, and no
method of employing their money but by lending it at interest. But after this
new mass of gold and silver has been digested and has circulated, through the
whole state, affairs will soon return to their former situation: While the
landlords and new money-holders, living idly, squander above their income; and
the former daily contract debt, and the latter encroach on their stock 'till
its final extinction. The whole money may still be in the state, and make
itself felt by the increase of prices: But not being now collected into any
large masses or stocks, the disproportion betwixt the borrowers and lenders is
the same as formerly, and consequently the high interest returns.

ACCORDINGLY we find, in Rome, that so early as Tiberius's time, interest had
again mounted to 6 per cent. Columella, lib. 3. cap. 3.
though no accident had happened to drain the empire of money. In Trajan's time,
money, lent on mortgages in Italy, bore 6 per cent. Plinii epist. lib. 7. ep.
18.
on common securities in Bithynia, 12. Ibid. lib. 10. ep. 62.
And if interest in Spain has not risen to its old pitch; this can be ascribed
to nothing but the continuance of the same cause, that sunk it, viz. the large
fortunes continually made in the Indies, which come over to Spain, from time to
time, and supply the demand of the borrowers. But this accidental and
extraneous cause, more money is to be lent in Spain; that is, more money is
collected into large sums, than would otherways be found in a state, where
there are so little commerce and industry.

As to the reduction of interest, which has followed in England, France, and
other kingdoms of Europe, that have no mines, it has been gradual, and has not
proceeded from the increase of money, considered merely in itself, but from the
increase of industry, which is the natural effect of the former increase, in
that interval, before it raises the price of labor and provisions. For to
return to the foregoing supposition; if the industry of England had risen as
much from other causes (and that rise might easily have happened, though the
stock of money had remained the same) must not all the same consequences have
followed, which we observe at present? The same people would, in that case, be
found in the kingdom, the same commodities, the same industry, manufactures and
commerce, and consequently the same merchants, with the same stocks, that is,
with the same command over labor and commodities, only represented by a
smaller number of white or yellow pieces: Which being a circumstance of no
moment, would only affect the waggoner, porter, and trunk-maker. Luxury,
therefore, manufactures, arts, industry, frugality, flourishing equally as at
present, it is evident that interest must also have been as low; since that is
the necessary result of all these circumstances; so far as they determine the
profits of commerce, and the proportion betwixt the borrowers and lenders in
any state.

DISCOURSE V. Of the Balance of Trade.
IT IS very usual, amongst nations ignorant of the nature of commerce, to
prohibit the exportation of commodities, and to preserve amongst themselves,
whatever they think valuable and useful. They consider not, that, in this
prohibition, they act directly contrary to their intentions, and that the more
is exported of any commodity, the more will be raised at home, of which they
themselves will always have the first offer.

IT IS well known to the learned, that the ancient laws of Athens rendered the
exportation of figs criminal; that being supposed a species of fruit so
excellent in Attica, that the Athenians esteemed it too delicious for the
palate of any foreigner. And in this ridiculous prohibition they were so much
in earnest, that informers were thence called sycophants among them, from two
Greek words, which signify figs and discoverer. Plut. de curiositate.
I have been told, that many old acts of parliament show the same ignorance in
the nature of commerce. And to this day, in a neighboring kingdom, the
exportation of corn is almost always prohibited; in order, as they say, to
prevent famines; though it is evident, that nothing contributes more to the
frequent famines, which so much distress that fertile country.

THE same jealous fear with regard to money has also prevailed amongst several
nations; and it required both reason and experience to convince any people,
that these prohibitions serve to no other purpose than to raise the exchange
against them, and produce a still greater exportation.

THESE errors, one may say, are gross and palpable: But there still prevails,
even amongst nations well acquainted with commerce, a strong jealousy with
regard to the balance of trade, and a fear, that all their gold and silver may
be leaving them. This seems to me, almost in every case, a very groundless
apprehension; and I should as soon dread, that all our springs and rivers would
be exhausted, as that money should abandon a kingdom, where there are people
and industry. Let us carefully preserve these latter advantages; and we need
never be apprehensive of losing the former.

IT IS easy to observe, that all calculations concerning the balance of trade
are founded on very uncertain facts and suppositions. The customhouse books are
owned to be an insufficient ground of reasoning; nor is the rate of exchange
much better, unless we consider it with all nations, and know also the
proportions of the several sums remitted; which one may safely pronounce
impossible. Every man, who has ever reasoned on this subject, has always proved
his theory, whatever it was, by facts and calculations, and by an enumeration
of all the commodities sent to all foreign kingdoms.

THE writings of Mr. Gee struck the nation with an universal pannic, when they
saw it plainly demonstrated, by a detail of particulars, that the balance was
against them for so considerable a sum as must leave them without a single
shilling in five or six years. But, luckily, twenty years have since elapsed,
along with an expensive foreign war; and yet it is commonly supposed, that money
is still more plentiful amongst us than in any former period.

NOTHING can be more entertaining on this head than Dr. Swift; an author, who
has more humor than knowledge, more taste than judgment, and more spleen,
prejudice, and passion than any of these qualities. He says, in his short view
of the state of Ireland, that the whole cash of that kingdom amounted but to
500,000 l. that out of this they remitted every year a neat million to England,
and had scarce any other source to compensate themselves from, and little other
foreign trade but the importation of French wines, for which they paid ready
money. The consequence of this situation, which must be owned disadvantageous,
was, that in a course of three years, the current money of Ireland, from
500,000 l. was reduced to less than two. And at present, I suppose, in a course
of near 30 years, it is absolutely nothing. Yet I know not how, that opinion of
the advance of riches in Ireland, which gave the doctor so much indignation,
seems still to continue, and gain ground amongst every body.

IN short, this apprehension of the wrong balance of trade, appears of such a
nature, that it discovers itself, wherever one is out of humor with the
ministry, or is in low spirits; and as it can never be refuted by a particular
detail of all the exports, which counterbalance the imports, it may here be
proper to form a general argument, which may prove the impossibility of that
event, as long as we preserve our people and our industry.

SUPPOSE four parts of all the money in Britain to be annihilated in one night,
and the nation reduced to the same condition, in this particular, as in the
reigns of the Harrys and Edwards; what would be the consequence? Must not the
price of all labor and commodities sink in proportion, and every thing be sold
as cheap as they were in those ages? What nation could then dispute with us in
any foreign market, or pretend to navigate or to sell manufactures at the same
price, which to us would afford sufficient profit? In how little time,
therefore, must this bring back the money, which we had lost, and raise us to
the level of all the neighboring nations? Where, after we have arrived, we
immediately lose the advantage of the cheapness of labor and commodities; and
the farther flowing in of money is stopped by our fullness and repletion.

AGAIN; suppose, that all the money in Britain were multiplied fourfold in a
night, must not the contrary effect follow? Must not all labor and commodities
rise to such an exorbitant height, that no neighboring nations could afford to
buy from us; while their commodities, on the other hand, became so cheap in
comparison, that, in spite of all the laws, which could be formed, they would
be run in upon us, and our money would flow out; 'till we fall to a level with
foreigners, and lose that great superiority of riches, which had laid us under
such disadvantages?

Now it is evident, that the same causes, which would correct these exorbitant
inequalities, were they to happen miraculously, must prevent their happening in
the common course of nature, and must for ever, in all neighboring nations,
preserve money nearly proportioned to the art and industry of each nation. All
water, wherever it communicates, remains always at a level: Ask naturalists the
reason; they tell you, that were it to be raised in any one place, the superior
gravity of that part, not being balanced, must depress it, 'till it meets a
counterpoize; and that the same cause, which redresses the inequality, when it
happens, must for ever prevent it, without some violent, external operation.
THERE is another cause, though more limited in its operation, which checks the
wrong balance of trade, to every particular nation, to which the kingdom
trades. When we import more goods than we export, the exchange turns against
us, and this becomes a new encouragement to export; as much as the charge of
carriage and insurance of the money due would amount to. For the exchange can
never rise higher than that sum.


CAN one imagine, that it had ever been possible, by any laws, or even by any
art, or industry, to have preserved all the money in Spain, which the galleons
have brought from the Indies? Or that all commodities could be sold in France
for a tenth of the price they would yield on the other side of the Pyrenees,
without finding their way thither, and draining from that immense treasure?
What other reason, indeed, is there, why all nations, at present, gain in their
trade with Spain and Portugal; but because it is impossible to heap up money,
more than any fluid, beyond its proper level? The sovereigns of these countries
have shown, that they wanted not inclination to keep their gold and silver to
themselves, had it been in any degree practicable.

BUT as any body of water may be raised above the level of the surrounding
element, if the former has no communication with the latter; so in money, if
the communication be cut off, by any material or physical impediment (for all
laws alone are ineffectual) there may, in such a case, be a very great
inequality of money. Thus the immense distance of China, along with the
monopolies of our India companies, obstructing the communication, preserve in
Europe the gold and silver, especially the latter, in much greater plenty than
they are found in that kingdom. But notwithstanding this great obstruction, the
force of the causes above mentioned is still evident. The skill and ingenuity
of Europe in general much surpasses that of China, with regard to manual arts
and manufactures; yet are we never able to trade thither without great
disadvantage: And were it not for the continual recruits we receive from
America, money would very soon sink in Europe, and rise in China, 'till it came
nearly to a level in both places. Nor can any reasonable man doubt, but that
industrious nation, were they as near us as Poland or Barbary, would drain us
of the overplus of our specie, and draw to themselves a larger share of the
West Indian treasures. We need have no recourse to a physical attraction, to
explain the necessity of this operation. There is a moral attraction, arising
from the interests and passions of men, which is full as potent and infallible.

HOW is the balance kept in the provinces of every kingdom among themselves,
but by the force of this principle, which makes it impossible for money to lose
its level, and either to rise or sink, beyond the proportion of the labor and
commodities, that is in each province? Did not long experience make people easy
on this head, what a fund of gloomy reflections might calculations afford a
melancholy Yorkshire man; while he computed and magnified the sums drawn to
London by taxes, absentees, commodities; and found on comparison the opposite
articles so much inferior? And no doubt, had the Heptarchy subsisted in
England, the legislature of each state had been continually alarmed by the fear
of a wrong balance; and as it is probable, that the mutual hatred of these
states would have been extremely violent, on account of their close
neighborhood, they would have loaded and oppressed all commerce, by a jealous
and superfluous caution. Since the union has removed the barriers betwixt
Scotland and England; which of these nations gains from the other by this free
commerce? Or if the former kingdom has received any increase of riches, can it
be reasonable accounted for by any thing, but the increase of its art and
industry? 'Twas a common apprehension in England, before the union, as we learn
from L'Abbe du Bos, Les interets d'Angleterre mal-entendus.
that Scotland would soon drain them of their treasure, were an open trade
allowed; and on the other side the Tweed a contrary apprehension prevailed: With
what justice in both, time has shown.

WHAT happens in small portions of mankind must take place in greater. The
provinces of the Roman empire, no doubt, kept their balance with each other,
and with Italy, independent of the legislature; as much as the several counties
of Britain, or the several parishes of each county. And any man, who travels
over Europe, at this day, may see, by the prices of commodities, that money, in
spite of the absurd jealousy of princes and states, has brought itself nearly
to a level, and that the difference betwixt one kingdom and another is not
greater in this respect, than it is often betwixt different provinces of the
same kingdom. Men naturally flock to capital cities, seaports, and navigable
rivers. There we find more men, more industry, more labor, and consequently
more money; but still the latter difference holds proportion with the former,
and the level is preserved. IT must carefully be remarked, that, throughout
this discourse, wherever I speak of the level of money, I mean always its
proportional level to the commodities, labor, industry, and skill, which is in
the several states. And I assert, that, where these advantages are double,
triple, quadruple, to what they are in the neighboring states, the money
infallibly will also be double, triple, quadruple. The only circumstance, that
can obstrust the exactness of these proportions, is the expense of transporting
the commodities from one place to another; and this expense is sometimes
unequal. Thus the corn, cattle, cheese, butter of Derbyshire cannot draw the
money of London, so much as the manufactures of London draw the money of
Derbyshire. But this objection is only a seeming one: For so far as the
transport of commodities is expensive, so far is the communication betwixt the
places obstructed and imperfect.


OUR jealousy and our hatred of France are without bounds; and the former
sentiment, at least, must be acknowledged very reasonable and well grounded.
These passions have occasioned innumerable barriers and obstructions upon
commerce, where we are accused of being commonly the aggressors. But what have
we gained by the bargain? We lost the French market for our woolen
manufactures, and transferred the commerce of wine to Spain and Portugal, where
we buy much worse liquor at a higher price. There are few Englishmen, that
would not think their country absolutely ruined, were French wines sold in
England so cheap and in such abundance as to supplant, in some measure, all ale
and home-brewn liquors: But would we lay aside prejudice, it would not be
difficult to prove, that nothing could be more innocent, perhaps advantageous.
Each new acre of vineyard planted in France, in order to supply England with
wine, would make it requisite for the French to take the product of an English
acre, sown in wheat or barley, in order to subsist themselves; and it is
evident, we have thereby got command of the better commodity.

THERE are many edicts of the French king, prohibiting the planting of new
vineyards, and ordering all those lately planted to be grubb'd up: So sensible
are they, in that country, of the superior value of corn, above every other
product.

MARSHALL Vauban complains often, and with reason, of the absurd duties, which
load the entry of wines of Languedoc, Guienne and those other southern
provinces, that are imported into Britany and Normandy. He entertained no
doubt, but these latter provinces could preserve their balance, notwithstanding
the open commerce, which he recommends. And it is evident, that a few leagues
more navigation to England would make no difference: Or if it did, that it must
operate alike on the commodities of both kingdoms.

THERE is indeed one expedient, by which it is possible to sink, and another by
which we may raise, money beyond its natural level in any kingdom; but these
cases, when examined, will be found to resolve into our general theory, and to
bring additional authority to it.

I SCARCE know any method of sinking money below its level; but those
institutions of banks, funds, and paper credit, with which we are in this
kingdom so much infatuated. These render paper equivalent to money, circulate
it through the whole state, make it supply the place of gold and silver, raise
proportionably the price of labor and commodities, and by that means either
banish a great part of those precious metals, or prevent their farther
increase. What can be more short-sighted than our reasonings on this head? We
fancy, because an individual would be much richer, were his stock of money
doubled, that the same good effect would follow were the money of every one
increased; not considering, that this would raise as much the price of every
commodity, and reduce every man, in time, to the same condition as before. It Is
only in our public negotiations and transactions with foreigners, that a
greater stock of money is advantageous; and as our paper is there absolutely
insignificant, we feel, by its means, all the ill effects, arising from a great
abundance of money, without reaping any of the advantages.

SUPPOSE there are 12 millions of paper, that circulate in the kingdom as money
(for we are not to imagine, that all our enormous funds are employed in that
shape) and suppose, that the real cash of the kingdom is 18 millions: Here is a
state, which is found by experience able to hold a stock of 30 millions. I say,
if it be able to hold it, it must of necessity have acquired it in gold and
silver, had we not obstructed the entrance of these metals by this new
invention of paper. Whence would it have acquired that sum? From all the
kingdoms of the world. But why? Because, if you remove these 12 millions, money
in this state is below its level, compared with our neighbors; and we must
immediately draw from all of them, till we be full and saturate, so to speak,
and can hold no more. By our wise politics, we are as careful to stuff the
nation with this fine commodity of bankbills and chequer-notes, as if we were
afraid of being overburthen'd with the precious metals.

IT IS not to be doubted, but the great plenty of bullion in France, is, in a
great measure, owing to the want of paper credit. The French have no banks:
Merchants bills do not there circulate as with us: Usury or lending on interest
is not directly permitted; so that many have large sums in their coffers: Great
quantities of plate are used in private houses; and all the churches are full
of it. By this means, provisions and labor still remain much cheaper amongst
them than in nations that are not half so rich in gold and silver. The
advantage of this situation in point of trade, as well as in great public
emergencies, is too evident to be disputed.

THE same fashion, a few years ago, prevailed in Genoa, which still has place
in England and Holland, of using services of China ware instead of plate; but
the senate, wisely foreseeing the consequences, prohibited the use of that
brittle commodity beyond a certain extent; while the use of silver plate was
left unlimited. And I suppose, in their late distresses, they felt the good
effect of this ordonnance. OUR tax on plate is, perhaps, in this view,
impolitic.


BEFORE the introduction of paper money into our colonies, they had gold and
silver sufficient for their circulation. Since the introduction of that
commodity, the least of the inconveniences that has followed, is the total
banishment of the precious metals. And after the abolition of paper, can it be
doubted but money will return, while these colonies possess manufactures and
commodities, the only things valuable in commerce, and for whose sake alone all
men desire money.

WHAT pity Lycurgus did not think of paper credit, when he wanted to banish
gold and silver from Sparta! It would have served his purpose better than the
lumps of iron he made use of as money; and would also have prevented more
effectually all commerce with strangers, as being of so much less real and
intrinsic value.

BUT as our darling projects of paper credit are pernicious, being almost the
only expedient, by which we can sink money below its level; so in my opinion
the only expedient, by which we can raise money above its level, is a practice
we would all exclaim against as destructive, viz. the gathering large sums into
a public treasure, locking them up, and absolutely preventing their
circulation. The fluid, not communicating with the neighboring element, may,
by such an artifice, be raised to what height we please. To prove this, we need
only return to our first supposition, of the annihilating the half or any part
of our cash; where we found, that the immediate consequence of such an event
would be, the attraction of an equal sum from all the neighboring kingdoms.
Nor does there seem to be any necessary bounds set, by the nature of things, to
this practice of hoarding. A small city, like Geneva, continuing this policy
for ages, might engross nine tenths of the money of Europe. There seems,
indeed, in the nature of man, an invincible obstacle to that immense growth of
riches. A weak state, with an enormous treasure, would soon become a prey to
some of its poorer but more powerful neighbors. A great state would dissipate
its wealth on dangerous and illconcerted projects; and probably destroy, along
with it, what is much more valuable, the industry, morals, and numbers of its
people. The fluid, in this case, raised to too great a height, bursts and
destroys the vessel, that contains it; and mixing itself with the surrounding
element, soon falls to its proper level.

So little are we commonly acquainted with this principle, that, though all
historians agree in relating uniformly so recent an event, as the immense
treasure amassed by Harry the VII. (which they make amount to 1,700,000 pounds)
we rather reject their concurring testimony, than admit of a fact, which agrees
so ill with our inveterate prejudices. It Is indeed probable, that that sum
might be three fourths of all the money in England. But where is the difficulty
that such a sum might be amassed in twenty years, by a cunning, rapacious,
frugal, and almost arbitrary monarch? Nor is it probable, that the diminution
of circulating money was ever sensibly felt by the people, or ever did them any
prejudice. The sinking of the prices of all commodities would immediately
replace it, by giving England the advantage in its commerce with all the
neighboring kingdoms.

HAVE we not an instance in the small republic of Athens with its allies, who
in about fifty years, betwixt the Median and Peloponesian wars, amassed a sum
greater than that of Harry the VII? There were about eight ounces of silver in
a pound Sterling in Harry the VII,'s time.
For all the Greek historians Thucydidis lib. 2. and Diod. Sic. lib. 12.
and orators Vid. Aeschinis and Demosthenis epist.
agree, that the Athenians collected in the citadel more than 10,000 talents,
which they afterward dissipated to their own ruin, in rash and imprudent
enterprises. But when this money was set a running, and began to communicate
with the surrounding fluid; what was the consequence? Did it remain in the
state? No. For we find by the memorable census, mentioned by Demosthenes (...).
and Polybius, Lib. 2. cap. 62.
that in about fifty years afterward, the whole value of the republic,
comprehending lands, houses, commodities, slaves, and money, was less than 6000
talents.

WHAT an ambitious high spirited people was this, to collect and keep in their
treasury, with a view to conquests, a sum, which it was every day in the power
of the citizens, by a single vote, to distribute among themselves, and which
would go near to triple the riches of every individual! For we must observe,
that the numbers and private riches of the Athenians are said by ancient
writers to have been no greater at the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, than
at the beginning of the Macedonian.

MONEY was little more plentiful in Greece during the age of Philip and Perseus
than in England during that of Harry the VII: Yet these two monarchs in 30
years, Titi Livii lib. 45. cap. 40.
collected, from the small kingdom of Macedon, a much larger treasure than that
of the English monarch. Paulus Aemilius brought to Rome about 1,700,000 pounds
Sterling. Vel. Patcrc. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Pliny says 2,400,000. Lib. 33 cap. 3.
And that was but a part of the Macedonian treasure. The rest was dissipated by
the resistance and flight of Perseus. Titi Livii, ibid.


WE may learn from Stanyan, that the canton of Berne had 300,000 pounds lent at
interest, and had above six times as much in their treasury. Here then is a sum
hoarded of 1,800,000 pounds Sterling, which is at least quadruple of what
should naturally circulate in such a petty state; and yet no one, who travels
into the Pais de Vaux or any part of that canton, observes any want of money
more than could be supposed in a country of that extent, soil, and situation.
On the contrary, there are scarce any inland provinces in the continent of
France or Germany, where the inhabitants are at this time so opulent; though that
canton has vastly increased its treasure since 1714, the time when Stanyan
wrote his judicious account of Switzerland. The poverty, which Stanyan speaks
of, is only to be seen in the most mountainous cantons, where there is no
commodity to bring money: And even there the people are not poorer than in the
diocese of Saltzburg on the one hand, or Savoy on the other; if they be so poor.


THE account given by Appian Proem.
of the treasure of the Ptolemies, is so prodigious, that one cannot admit of
it; and so much the more, that the historian says the other successors of
Alexander were also frugal, and had many of them treasures not much inferior.
For this saving humor of the neighboring princes must necessarily have
checked the frugality of the Egyptian monarchs, according to the foregoing
theory. The sum he mentions is 740,000 talents or 191,166,666 pounds 13
shillings and 4 pence, according to Dr. Arbuthnot's computation. And yet Appian
says, that he extracted his account from the public records; and he was himself
a native of Alexandria.

FROM these principles we may learn what judgment we ought to form of those
numberless bars, obstructions, and imposts, which all nations of Europe, and
none more than England, have put upon trade; from an exorbitant desire of
amassing money, which never will heap up beyond its level, while it circulates;
or from an ill grounded apprehension of losing their specie, which never will
sink below it. Could any thing scatter our riches, 'twou'd be such impolitic
contrivances. But this general ill effect, however, results from them, that
they deprive neighboring nations of that free communication and exchange,
which the author of the world has intended, by giving them soils, climates, and
geniuses, so different from each other.

OUR modern politics embrace the only method of banishing money, the using
paper credit; they reject the only method of amassing it, the practice of
hoarding; and they adopt a hundred contrivances, which serve to no purpose but
to check industry, and rob ourselves and our neighbors of the common benefits
of art and nature.

ALL taxes, however, upon foreign commodities, are not to be regarded as
prejudicial or useless, but those only which are founded on the jealousy above
mentioned. A tax on German linen encourages home manufactures, and thereby
multiplies our people and industry. A tax on brandy increases the sale of rum,
and supports our southern colonies. And as it is necessary imposts should be
levied for the support of government, it may be thought more convenient to lay
them on foreign commodities, which can easily be intercepted at the port, and
subjected to the impost. We ought, however, always to remember the maxim of Dr.
Swift, that, in the arithmetic of the customs, two and two make not four, but
often make only one. It can scarcely be doubted, but if the duties on wine were
lowered to a third, they would yield much more to the government than at
present: Our people might thereby afford to drink commonly a better and more
wholesome liquor: And no prejudice would ensue to the balance of trade, of which
we are so jealous. The manufacture of ale, beyond the agriculture, is but
inconsiderable, and gives employment to few hands. The transport of wine and
corn would not be much inferior.

BUT are there not frequent instances, you will say, of states and kingdoms,
that were formerly rich and opulent, and are now poor and beggarly? Has not the
money left them, with which they formerly abounded? I answer, If they lose
their trade, industry, and people, they cannot expect to keep their gold and
silver: For these precious metals hold proportion to the former advantages.
When Lisbon and Amsterdam got the East India trade from Venice and Genoa, they
also got the profits and money, that arose from it. Where the seat of
government is transferred, where expensive armies are maintained at a distance,
where great funds are possessed by foreigners; there naturally follows from these
causes a diminution of the specie. But these, we may observe, are violent and
forcible methods of carrying away money, and are in time commonly attended with
the transport of people and industry. But where these remain, and the drain is
not continued, the money always finds its way back again, by a hundred canals,
of which we have no notion nor suspicion. What immense treasures have been
spent, by so many nations, in Flanders, since the revolution, in the course of
three long wars? More money perhaps, than the half of what is at present in all
Europe. But what has now become of it? Is it in the narrow compass of the
Austrian provinces? No surely: It has most of it returned to the several
countries, whence it came, and has followed that art and industry, by which, at
first, it was acquired.

IN short, a government has great reason to preserve with care its people and
its manufactures. Its money, it may safely trust to the course of human
affairs, without fear or jealousy. Or if it ever give attention to that latter
circumstance, it ought only to be so far as it affects the former.

DISCOURSE VI. Of the Balance of Power.
IT is a question, whether the idea of the balance of power be owing entirely
to modern policy, or whether the phrase only has been invented in these latter
ages. It Is certain, that Lib. I.
Xenophon, in his institution of Cyrus, represents the combination of the
Asiatic powers to have arisen from a jealousy of the increasing force of the
Medes and Persians; and though that elegant composition should be supposed
altogether a romance, this sentiment, ascribed by the author to the Eastern
princes, is at least a proof of the prevailing notions of ancient times.

IN the whole politics of Greece, the anxiety, with regard to the balance, is
most apparent, and is expressly pointed out to us, even by the ancient
historians. Thucydides Lib. I.
represents the league, which was formed against Athens, and which produced the
Peloponnesian war, as entirely owing to this principle. And after the decline
of Athens, when the Thebans and Lacedaemonians disputed for sovereignity, we
find, that the Athenians (as well as many other republics) threw themselves
always into the lighter scale, and endeavored to preserve the balance. They
supported Thebes against Sparta, till the great victory, gained by Epaminondas
at Leuctra; after which they immediately went over to the conquered, from
generosity, as they pretended, but, in reality, from their jealousy of the
conquerors. Xenoph. hist, Graec, lib. 6. and 7.


WHOEVER will read Demosthenes's oration for the Megalopolitans, may see the
utmost refinements on this principle, that ever entered into the head of a
Venetian or English speculatist. And upon the first rise of the Macedonian
power, this orator immediately discovered the danger, sounded the alarm through
all Greece, and at last assembled that confederacy under the banners of Athens,
which fought the great and decisive battle of Chaeronea.

IT IS true, the Grecian wars are regarded by historians as wars of emulation
rather than of politics; and each state seems to have had more in view the
honor of leading the rest than any wellgrounded hopes of authority and
dominion. If we consider, indeed, the small number of inhabitants in any one
republic, compared to the whole, the great difficulty of forming sieges in
those times, and the extraordinary bravery and discipline of every freeman
amongst that noble people; we shall conclude, that the balance of power was of
itself sufficiently secured in Greece, and needed not to be guarded with that
caution, which may be requisite in other ages. But whether we ascribe the
shifting sides in all the Grecian republics to jealous emulation or cautious
politics, the effects were alike, and every prevailing power was sure to meet
with a confederacy against it, and that often composed of its former friends
and allies.

THE same principle, call it envy or prudence, which produced the Ostracism of
Athens and Petalism of Syracuse, and expelled every citizen, whose fame or
power overtop'd the rest; the same principle, I say, naturally discovered
itself in foreign politics, and soon raised enemies to the leading state,
however moderate in the exercise of its authority.

THE Persian monarch was really, in his force, a petty prince, compared to the
Grecian republics; and therefore it behooved him, from views of safety more than
from emulation, to interest himself in their quarrels, and to support the
weaker side in every contest. This was the advice given by Alcibiades to
Tissaphernes, Thuc. lib. 8.
and it prolonged near a century the date of the Persian empire; till the
neglect of it for a moment, after the first appearance of the aspiring genius
of Philip, brought that lofty and frail edifice to the ground, with a rapidity,
of which there are few instances in the history of mankind.

THE successors of Alexander showed an infinite jealousy of the balance of
power; a jealousy, founded on true politics and prudence, and which preserved
distinct for several ages the partitions made after the death of that famous
conqueror. The fortune and ambition of Antigonus Diod, Sic. lib. 20.
threatened them anew with an universal monarchy; but their combination and
their victory at Ipsus saved them. And in after times, we find, that, as the
Eastern princes considered the Greeks and Macedonians as the only real military
force, with whom they had any intercourse, they kept always a watchful eye over
that part of the world. The Ptolemies, in particular, supported first Aratus
and the Achaeans, and then Cleomenes King of Sparta, from no other view than as
a counterbalance to the Macedonian monarchs. For this is the account, which
Polybius gives of the Egyptian politics. Lib. 2. cap. 51.


THE reason, why it is supposed, that the ancients were entirely ignorant of the
balance of power, seems to be drawn from the Roman history more than the Greek;
and as the transactions of the former are generally the most familiar to us, we
have thence formed all our conclusions. It must be owned, that the Romans never
met with any such general combination or confederacy against them, as might
naturally be expected from their rapid conquests and declared ambition; but
were allowed peaceably to subdue their neighbors, one after another, till they
extended their dominion over the whole known world. Not to mention the fabulous
history of their Italic wars THERE have strong suspicions, of late, arisen
amongst crities, and, in my opinion, not without reason, concerning the first
ages of the Roman history; as if they were almost entirely fabulous, 'till
after the sacking of the city by the Gauls; and were even doubtful for some
time afterward, 'till the Greeks began to give attention to Roman affairs, and
commit them to writing. This skepticism, however, seems to me scarcely
defensible in its full extent, with regard to the domestic history of Rome,
which has some air of truth and probability, and could scarce be the invention
of an historian, who had so little morals or judgment as to indulge himself in
fiction and romance. The revolutions seem so well proportioned to their causes:
The progress of the factions is so conformable to political experience: The
manners and maxims of the age are so uniform and natural, that scarce any real
history affords more just reflection and improvement. Is not Machiavel's
comment on Livy (a work surely of great judgment and genius) founded entirely
on this period, which is represented as fabulous. I would willingly, therefore,
in my private sentiments, divide the matter with these critics; and allow, that
the battles and victories and triumphs of those ages had been extremely
falsify'd by family memoirs, as Cicero says they were: But as in the accounts
of domestic factions, there were two opposite relations transmitted to
posterity, this both served as a check upon fiction, and enabled latter
historians to gather some truth from comparison and reasoning. Half of the
slaughter, which Livy commits on the Aequi and the Volsci, would depopulate
France and Germany; and that historian, though perhaps he may justly be charged
as superficial, is at last shocked himself with the incredibility of his
narration. The same love of exaggeration seems to have magnified the numbers of
the Romans in their armies, and census.
; there was, upon Hannibal's invasion of the Roman state, a very remarkable
crisis, which ought to have called up the attention of all civilized nations.
It appeared afterward (nor was it difficult to be observed at the time IT was
observed by some, as appears by the speech of Agelaus of Naupactum in a general
congress of Greece. See Polyb. lib. 5. cap. 104.
) that this was a contest for universal empire; and yet no prince or state
seems to have been in the least alarmed about the event or issue of the
quarrel. Philip of Macedon remained neuter, 'till he saw the victories of
Hannibal; and then most imprudently formed an alliance with the conqueror, upon
terms still more imprudent. He stipulated, that he was to assist the
Carthaginian state in their conquest of Italy; after which they engaged to send
over forces into Greece, to assist him in subduing the Grecian commonwealths
Titi Livii lib. 23. cap. 33.
.

THE Rhodian and Achaean republics are much celebrated by ancient historians
for their wisdom and sound policy; yet both of them assisted the Romans in
their wars against Philip and Antiochus. And what may be esteemed still a
stronger proof, that this maxim was not familiarly known in those ages; no
ancient author has ever remarked the imprudence of those measures, nor has even
blamed that absurd treaty above mentioned, made by Philip with the
Carthaginians. Princes and statesmen may, in all ages, be blinded in their
reasonings with regard to events, before hand: But it is somewhat extraordinary,
that historians, afterward, should not form a sounder judgment of them.

Massinissa, Attalus, Prusias, in satisfying their private passions, were, all
of them, the instruments of the Roman greatness, and never seem to have
suspected, that they were forging their own chains, while they advanced the
conquests of their ally. A simple treaty and agreement betwixt Massinissa and
the Carthaginians, so much required by mutual interest, barred the Romans from
all entrance into Africa, and preserved liberty to mankind.

THE only prince we meet with in the Roman history, who seems to have
understood the balance of power, is Hiero king of Syracuse. Though ally of Rome,
he sent assistance to the Carthaginians, during the war of the auxiliaries.
Esteeming it requisite, (says Polybius Lib. 1. cap. 83.
) both in order to retain his dominions in Sicily, and to preserve the Roman
friendship, that Carthage should be safe: Lest by its fall the remaining power
should be able, without contraste or opposition, to execute every purpose and
undertaking. And here he acted with great wisdom and prudence. For that is
never, on any account, to be overlookt; nor ought such a force ever to be
thrown into one hand, as to incapacitate the neighboring states from defending
their rights against it. Here is the aim of modern politics pointed out in
express terms.

IN short, the maxim of preserving the balance of power is founded so much on
common sense and obvious reasoning, that it is impossible it could altogether
have escaped antiquity, where we find, in other particulars, so many marks of
deep penetration and discernment. If it was not so generally known, and
acknowledged as at present, it had, at least, an influence on all the wiser and
more experienced princes and politicians. And indeed, even at present, however
generally known and acknowledged, amongst speculative reasoners, it has not, in
practice, an authority much more extensive, amongst those who govern the world.

AFTER the fall of the Roman empire, the form of government established by the
northern conquerors, incapacitated them, in a great measure, from farther
conquests, and long maintained each state in its proper boundaries. But when
vassalage and the feudal militia were abolished, mankind were anew alarmed by
the danger of universal monarchy, from the union of so many kingdoms and
principalities in the person of the emperor, Charles. But the power of the
house of Austria, founded on extensive but divided dominions, and their riches,
derived chiefly from mines of gold and silver, were more likely to decay, of
themselves, from internal defects, than to overthrow all the bulwarks raised
against them. In less than a century, the force of that violent and haughty
race was shattered, their opulence dissipated, their splendour eclipsed. A new
power succeeded, more formidable to the liberties of Europe, possessing all the
advantages of the former, and laboring under none of its defects; except a
share of that spirit of bigotry and persecution, with which the house of
Austria were so long and still are so much infatuated.

Europe has now, for above a century, remained on the defensive against the
greatest force, that ever, perhaps, was formed by the civil or political
combination of mankind. And such is the influence of the maxim here treated of,
that though that ambitious nation, in the five last general wars, have been
victorious in four THOSE concluded by the peace of the Pyrences, Nimeguen,
Ryswick and Aix-la-Chapelle.
, and unsuccessful only in one THAT concluded by the peace of Utrecht.
, they have not much enlarged their dominions, nor acquired a total ascendant
over Europe. On the contrary, there remain still some hopes of maintaining the
resistance so long, that the natural revolutions of human affairs, together
with unforeseen events and accidents, may guard us against universal monarchy,
and preserve the world from so great an evil.

IN the three last of these general wars, Britain has stood foremost in the
glorious struggle; and she still maintains her station, as guardian of the
general liberties of Europe, and patron of mankind. Beside her advantages of
riches and situation; her people are animated with such a national spirit, and
are so fully sensible of the inestimable blessings of their government, that we
may hope their vigor never will languish in so necessary and so just a cause.
On the contrary, if we may judge by the past, their passionate ardour seems
rather to require some moderation; and they have oftener erred from a laudable
excess than from a blamable deficiency.

IN the first place, we seem to have been more possessed with the ancient Greek
spirit of jealous emulation, than actuated with the prudent views of modern
politics. Our wars with France have been begun with justice, and even, perhaps,
from necessity; but have always been too far pushed, from obstinacy and
passion. The same peace, which was afterward made at Ryswick in 1697, was
offered so early as the ninety two; that concluded at Utrecht in 1712 might
have been finished on as good conditions at Gertruytenberg in the eight; and we
might have given at Frankfort, in 1743, the same terms, which we were glad to
accept of at Aix-la-Chapelle in the forty eight. Here then we see, that above
half of our wars with France, and all our public debts are owing more to our
own imprudent vehemence, than to the ambition of our neighbors.

IN the second place, we are so declared in our opposition to French power, and
so alert in defense of our allies, that they always reckon upon our force as
upon their own; and expecting to carry on war at our expense, refuse all
reasonable terms of accommodation. Habent subjectos, tanquam suos; viles, ut
alienos. All the world knows, that the factious vote of the house of commons,
in the beginning of the last parliament, along with the professed humor of the
nation, made the queen of Hungary inflexible in her terms, and prevented that
agreement with Prussia, which would immediately have restored the general
tranquillity of Europe.

IN the third place, we are such true combatants, that, when once engaged, we
lose all concern for ourselves and our posterity, and consider only how we may
best annoy the enemy. To mortgage our revenues at so deep a rate, in wars,
where we were only accessaries, was surely the most fatal delusion, that a
nation, who had any pretension to politics and prudence, has ever yet been
guilty of. That remedy of funding, if it be a remedy, and not rather a poison,
ought, in all reason, to be reserved to the last extremity; and no evil, but
the greatest and most urgent, should ever induce us to embrace so dangerous an
expedient.

THESE excesses, to which we have been carried, are prejudicial; and may,
perhaps, in time, become still more prejudicial another way, by begeting, as is
usual, the opposite extreme, and rendering us totally careless and supine with
regard to the fate of Europe. The Athenians, from the most bustling,
intriguing, warlike people of Greece, finding their error in thrusting
themselves into every quarrel, abandoned all attention to foreign affairs; and
in no contest ever took party on either side, except by their flatteries and
complaisance to the victor.

ENORMOUS monarchies, such as Europe, at present, is in danger of falling into,
are, probably, destructive to human nature; in their progress, in their
continuance, IF the Roman empire was of advantage, it could only proceed from
this, that mankind were generally in a very disorderly, unciviliz'd condition,
before its establishment.
and even in their downfall, which never can be very distant from their
establishment. The military genius, which aggrandiz'd the monarchy, soon leaves
the court, the capital, and the center of such a government; while the wars are
carried on at a great distance, and interest so small a part of the state. The
ancient nobility, whose affections attach them to their sovereign, live all at
court, and never will accept of military employments, which would carry them to
remote and barbarous frontiers, where they are distant both from their pleasure
and their fortune. The arms of the state must, therefore, be trusted to
mercenary strangers, without zeal, without attachment, without honor; ready on
every occasion to turn them against the prince, and join each desperate
malecontent, who offers pay and plunder. This is the necessary progress of
human affairs: Thus human nature checks itself in its airy elevations: Thus
ambition blindly labors for the destruction of the conqueror, of his family,
and of every thing near and dear to him. The Bourbons, trusting to the support
of their brave, faithful, and affectionate nobility, would push their
advantage, without reserve or limitation. These, while fired with glory and
emulation, can bear the fatigues and dangers of war: But never would submit to
languish in the garrisons of Hungary or Lithuania, forgot at court, and
sacrisic'd to the intrigues of every minion or mistress, that approaches the
prince. The troops are filled with Cravates and Tartars, Hussars and Cossacs;
intermingled, perhaps, with a few soldiers of fortune from the better
provinces: And the melancholy fate of the Roman emperors, from the same causes,
is renewed, over and over again, 'till the final dissolution of the monarchy.

DISCOURSE VII. Of Taxes.
THERE is a maxim, that prevails amongst those, whom, in this country, we call
ways and means men, and who are denominated Financiers and Maltotiers in
France; that every new tax creates a new ability in the subjects to bear it,
and that each increase of public burdens increases proportionably the
industry of the people. This maxim is of such a nature as is most likely to be
extremely abused, and is so much the more dangerous, that its truth cannot be
altogether denied; but it must be owned; when kept within certain bounds, to
have some foundation in reason and experience.

WHEN a tax is laid upon commodities, that are consumed by the common people,
the necessary consequence may seem to be, that either the poor must retrench
something from their way of living, or raise their wages, so as to make the
burden of the tax fall entirely upon the rich. But there is a third
consequence, which very often follows upon taxes, viz. that the poor increase
their industry, perform more work, and live as well as before, without
demanding more for their labor. Where taxes are moderate, are laid on
gradually, and affect not the necessaries of life, this consequence naturally
follows; and it is certain, that such difficulties often serve to excite the
industry of a people, and render them more opulent and laborious than others,
who enjoy the greatest advantages. For we may observe, as a parallel instance,
that the most trading nations have not always possessed the greatest extent of
fertile land; but on the contrary, that they have labored under many natural
disadvantages. Tire, Athens, Carthage, Rhodes, Genoa, Venice, Holland are
strong examples to this purpose. And in all history, we find only three
instances of large and fertile countries, that have possessed much trade, the
Netherlands, England, and France. The two former seem to have been allured by
the advantages of their maritime situation, and the necessity they lay under of
frequenting foreign ports, in order to procure what their own climate refused
them. And as to France, trade has come very late into that kingdom, and seems
to have been the effect of reflection and observation in an ingenious and
enterprising people, who remarked the immense riches acquired by such of the
neighboring nations as cultivated navigation and commerce.

THE places mentioned by Cicero, Epist. ad At. lib. 9. ep. 11.
as possessed of the greatest commerce in his time are Alexandria, Colchos, Tire,
Sidon, Andros, Cyprus, Pamphilia, Lycia, Rhodes, Chios, Byzantium, Lesbos,
Smyrna, Miletum, Coos. All these, except Alexandria, were either small islands
or narrow territories. And that city owed its trade entirely to the happiness
of its situation.

SINCE therefore some natural necessities or disadvantages may be thought
favorable to industry, why may not artificial burdens have the same effect?
Sir William Temple, ACCOUNT of the Netherlands, chap. 6.
I am sure, ascribes the industry of the Dutch entirely to necessity,
proceeding from their natural disadvantages; and illustrates his doctrine by a
very striking comparison with Ireland; where, (says he,) by the largeness and
plenty of the soil, and scarcity of people, all things necessary to life are so
cheap, that an industrious man, by two days labor, may gain enough to feed him
the rest of the week: Which I take to be a very plain ground of the laziness,
attributed to the people. For men naturally prefer ease before labor, and will
not take pains, if they can live idle; though when, by necessity, they have
been enured to it, they cannot leave it, being grown a custom necessary to
their health and to their very entertainment: Nor perhaps is the change harder,
from constant ease to labor, than from constant labor to ease. After which
the author proceeds to confirm his doctrine, by enumerating, as above, the
places, where trade has most flourished, in ancient and modern times; and which
are commonly observed to be such narrow confined territories, as beget a
necessity for industry.

IT IS always observed, in years of scarcity, if it be not extreme, that the
poor labor more, and really live better, than in years of great plenty, when
they indulge themselves in idleness and riot. I have been told, by a
considerable manufacturer, that in the year 1740, when bread and provisions of
all kinds were very dear, his workmen not only made a shift to live, but paid
debts, which they had contracted in former years, that were much more
favorable and abundant. To this purpose, see also discourse I. at the end.


THIS doctrine, therefore, with regard to taxes, may be admitted in some
degree: But beware of the abuse. Taxes, like necessity, when carried too far,
destroy industry, by engendring despair; and even before they reach this pitch,
they raise the wages of the labourer and manufacturer, and heighten the price
of all commodities. An attentive, disinterested legislature will observe the
point, when the emolument ceases, and the prejudice begins: But as the contrary
character is much more common, it is to be feared, that taxes, all over Europe,
are multiplying to such a degree, as will entirely crush all art and industry;
though, perhaps, their first increase, along with other circumstances, might
contribute to the growth of these advantages.

THE best taxes are those which are levied upon consumptions, especially those
of luxury; because such taxes are less felt by the people. They seem to be, in
some measure, voluntary, since a man may choose how far he will use the
commodity, which is taxed: They are paid gradually and insensibly: And being
confounded with the natural price of the commodity, they are scarcely perceived
by the consumers. Their only disadvantage is, that they are expensive in the
levying.

TAXES upon possessions are levied without expense; but have every other
disadvantage. Most states, however, are obliged to have recourse to them, in
order to supply the deficiencies of the other.

BUT the most pernicious of all taxes are those which are arbitrary. They are
commonly converted, by their management, into punishments on industry; and
also, by their unavoidable inequality, are more grievous than by the real
burden, which they impose. It Is surprising, therefore, to see them have place
amongst any civilized people.

IN general, all poll-taxes, even when not arbitrary, which they commonly are,
may be esteemed dangerous: Because it is so easy for the sovereign to add a
little more, and a little more, to the sum demanded, that these taxes are apt
to become altogether oppressive and intolerable. On the other hand, a duty upon
commodities checks itself; and a prince will soon find, that an increase of the
impost is no increase of his revenue. It is not easy, therefore, for a people
to be altogether ruined by such taxes.

HISTORIANS inform us, that one of the chief causes of the destruction of the
Roman state was the alteration, which Constantine introduced into the finances,
by substituting an universal poll-tax, in lieu of almost all the tithes,
customs, and excises, which formerly composed the revenue of the empire. The
people, in all the provinces, were so grinded and oppressed by the publicans,
that they were glad to take refuge under the conquering arms of the barbarians;
whose dominion, as they had fewer necessities and less art, was found
preferable to the refined tyranny of the Romans.

THERE is a prevailing opinion, that all taxes, however levied, fall upon the
land at last. Such an opinion may be useful in Britain, by checking the landed
gentlemen, in whose hands our legislature is lodged, and making them preserve
great regard for trade and industry. But I must confess, that this principle,
though first advanced by a celebrated writer, has so little appearance of reason,
that, were it not for his authority, it had never been received by any body.
Every man, to be sure, is desirous of pushing off from himself the burden of
any tax, that is imposed, and laying it upon others: But as every man has the
same inclination, and is upon the defensive; no set of men can be supposed to
prevail altogether in this contest. And why the landed gentleman should be the
victim of the whole, and should not be able to defend himself, as well as
others are, I cannot readily imagine. All tradesmen, indeed, would willingly
prey upon him, and divide him among them, if they could: But this inclination
they always have, though no taxes were levied; and the same methods, by which he
guards against the imposition of tradesmen before taxes, will serve him
afterward, and make them share the burden with him.

I SHALL conclude this subject with observing, that we have, with regard to
taxes, an instance of what frequently happens in political institutions, that
the consequences of things are diametrically opposite to what we should expect
on the first appearance. It Is regarded as a fundamental maxim of the Turkish
government, that the Grand signior, though absolute master of the lives and
fortunes of each individual, has no authority to impose a new tax; and every
Ottoman prince, who has made such an attempt, either has been obliged to
retract, or has found the fatal effects of his perseverance. One would imagine,
that this prejudice or established opinion were the firmest barrier in the
world against oppression; yet'tis certain, that its effect is quite contrary.
The emperor, having no regular method of increasing his revenue, must allow all
the bashas and governors to oppress and abuse the subjects: And these he
squeezes after their return from their government. Whereas, if he could impose
a new tax, like our European princes, his interest would so far be united with
that of his people, that he would immediately feel the bad effects of these
disorderly levies of money, and would find, that a pound, raised by a general
imposition, would have less pernicious effects, than a shilling taken in so
unequal and arbitrary a manner.

DISCOURSE VIII. Of Public Credit.
IT appears to have been the common practice of antiquity, to make provision,
in time of peace, for the necessities of war, and to hoard up treasures, before
hand, as the instruments either of conquest or defense; without trusting to
extraordinary imposts, much less to borrowing, in times of disorder and
confusion. Besides the immense sums abovementioned, DISCOURSE V.
which were amassed by Athens, and by the Ptolemies, and other successors of
Alexander; we learn from Plato, Alcib. 1.
that the frugal Lacedaemonians had also collected a great treasure; and Arrian
LIB. 3.
and Plutarch Plut. in vita Alex. He makes these treasures amount to 20,000
talents, or about 15 millions Sterling. Quintus Curtius (lib. 5. cap. 2.) says
that Alexander found in Susa above 50,000 talents.
specify the riches, which Alexander got possession of on the conquest of Susa
and Ecbatana, and which were reserved, some of them, from the time of Cyrus. If
I remember right, the scripture also mentions the treasure of Hezekiah and the
Jewish princes; as profane history does that of Philip and Perseus kings of
Macedon. The ancient republics in Gaul had commonly large sums in reserve.
Strabo, lib 4.
Every one knows the treasure seized in Rome by Julius Caesar, during the civil
wars; and we find afterward, that the wiser emperors, Augustus, Tiberius,
Vespasian, Severus, etc. always discovered the prudent foresight, of saving
great sums against any public exigency.

ON the contrary, our modern expedient, which has become very general, is to
mortgage the public revenues, and to trust, that posterity, during peace, will
pay off the encumbrances, contracted during the preceding war: And they, having
before their eyes, so good an example of their wise fathers, have the same
prudent reliance on their posterity; who, at last, from necessity, more than
choice, are obliged to place the same confidence in a new posterity. But not to
waste time in declaiming against a practice, which appears ruinous, beyond the
evidence of a hundred demonstrations; it seems pretty apparent, that the
ancient maxims are, in this respect, much more prudent than the modern; even
though the latter had been confined within some reasonable bounds, and had ever,
in any instance, been attended with such frugality, in time of peace, as to
discharge the debts incurred by an expensive war. For why should the case be so
very different betwixt the public and an individual, as to make us establish
such different maxims of conduct for each? If the funds of the former be
greater, its necessary expenses are proportionably larger; if its resources be
more numerous, they are not infinite; and as its frame should be calculated for
a much longer duration, than the date of a single life, or even of a family, it
should embrace maxims, large, durable, and generous, suitable to the supposed
extent of its existence. To trust to chances and temporary expedients is,
indeed, what the necessity of human affairs frequently reduces us to; but
whoever voluntarily depend on such resources have not necessity, but their own
folly, to accuse for their misfortunes, when any such befall them.

IF the abuses of treasures be dangerous, either by engaging the state in rash
enterprises, or making them neglect military discipline, in confidence of their
riches; the abuses of mortgaging are more certain and inevitable; poverty,
impotence, and subjection to foreign powers.

ACCORDING to modern policy, war is attended with every destructive
circumstance; loss of men, increase of taxes, decay of commerce, dissipation of
money, plunder by sea and land. According to ancient maxims, the opening of the
public treasure, as it produced an uncommon affluence of gold and silver,
served as a temporary encouragement to industry, and atoned, in some degree,
for the inevitable calamities of war.

WHAT then shall we say to the new paradox, that public encumbrances are, of
themselves, advantageous, independent of the necessity of contracting them; and
that any state, even though it were not pressed by a foreign enemy, could not
possibly have embraced a wiser expedient for promoting commerce and riches,
than to create funds and debts and taxes, without limitation? Discourses, such
as these, might naturally have past for trials of wit among rhetoricians, like
the panegyrics on folly and a fever, on Busiris and Nero; had we not seen such
absurd maxims patronized, by great ministers, and by a whole party among us.
And these puzzling arguments, (for they deserve not the name of specious) though
they could not be the foundation of lord Oxford's conduct; for he had more
sense; served at least to keep his partisans in countenance, and perplex the
understanding of the nation.

LET us examine the consequences of public debts, both in our domestic
management, by their influence on commerce and industry, and in our foreign
transactions, by their effects on wars and negotiations.

THERE is a word, which is here in the mouth of every body, and which, I find,
has also got abroad, and is much employed by foreign writers, Melon, Du Tot,
Law, in the pamphlets, published in France.
in imitation of the English; and that is CIRCULATION. This word serves as an
account of every thing; and though I confess, that I have sought for its meaning
in the present subject, ever since I was a schoolboy, I have never yet been
able to discover it. What possible advantage is there which the nation can reap
by the easy transference of stock from hand to hand? Or is there any parallel to
be drawn from the circulation of other commodities, to that of chequer notes
and India bonds? Where a manufacturer has a quick sale of his goods to the
merchant, the merchant to the shopkeeper, the shopkeeper to his customers;
this enlivens industry, and gives new encouragement to the first dealer or the
manufacturer and all his tradesmen, and makes them produce more and better
commodities of the same species. A stagnation is here pernicious, wherever it
happens; because it operates backwards, and stops or benumbs the industrious
hand in its production of what is useful to human life. But what production we
owe to Change-alley, or even what consumption, except that of coffee, and pen,
ink and paper, I have not yet learned; nor can one foresee the loss or decay of
any one beneficial commerce or commodity, though that place and all its
inhabitants were for ever buried in the ocean.

BUT though this term, circulation, has never been explained by those, who insist
so much on the advantages that result from it, there seems, however, to be some
benefit of a similar kind, arising from our encumbrances: As indeed, what human
evil is there, which is not attended with some advantage? This we shall
endeavor to explain, that we may estimate the weight we ought to allow it.

PUBLIC securities are with us become a kind of money, and pass as readily at
the current price as gold or silver. Wherever any profitable undertaking offers
itself, however expensive, there are never wanting hands enough to embrace it;
nor need a trader, who has sums in the public stocks, fear to launch out into
the most extensive trade; since he is possessed of funds, which will answer the
most sudden demand that can be made upon him. No merchant thinks it necessary
to keep by him any considerable cash. Bank stock, or India bonds, especially
the latter, serve to all the same purposes; because he can dispose of them, or
pledge them to a banker, in a quarter of an hour; and at the same time, they
are not idle, even when in his scritoire, but bring him in a constant revenue.
In short, our national debts furnish merchants with a species of money, that is
continually multiplying in their hands, and produces sure gain, beside the
profits of their commerce. This must enable them to trade upon less profit. The
small profit of the merchant renders the commodity cheaper; causes a greater
consumption; quickens the labor of the common people; and helps to spread arts
and industry through the whole society.

THERE are also, we may observe, in England, and in all states, that have both
commerce and public debts, a set of men, who are half merchants, half
stock-holders, and may be supposed willing to trade for small profits; because
commerce is not their principal or sole support, and their revenues in the
funds are a sure resource for themselves and their families. Were there no
funds, great merchants would have no expedient for realizing or securing any
part of their profit, but by making purchases of land; and land has many
disadvantages in comparison of funds. Requiring more care and inspection, it
divides the time and attention of the merchant; upon any tempting offer or
extraordinary accident in trade, it is not so easily converted into money; and
as it attracts too much, both by the many natural pleasures it affords, and the
authority it gives, it soon converts the citizen into the country gentleman.
More men, therefore, with large stocks and incomes may naturally be supposed to
continue in trade, where there are public debts: And this, it must be owned, is
of some advantage to commerce, by diminishing its profits, promoting
circulation, and encouraging industry. ON this head, I shall observe, without
interrupting the thread of the argument, that the multiplicity of our public
debts serves rather to sink the interest, and that the more the government
borrows, the cheaper may they expect to borrow; contrary to first appearance,
and contrary to common opinion. The profits of trade have an influence on
interest. See discourse IV.


BUT in opposition to these two favorable circumstances, perhaps of no very
great importance, weigh the many disadvantages, that attend our public debts,
in the whole interior economy of the state: You will find no comparison
betwixt the ill and the good, that result from them.

First, IT IS certain, that national debts cause a mighty confluence of people
and riches to the capital, by the great sums, which are levied in the provinces
to pay the interest of those debts; and perhaps too, by the advantages in trade
above mentioned, which they give the merchants in the capital above the rest of
the kingdom. The question is, whether, in our case, it be for the public
interest, that so many privileges should be conferred on London, which has
already arrived at such an enormous size, and seems still increasing. Some men
are apprehensive of the consequences. For my part, I cannot forbear thinking,
that though the head is undoubtedly too big for the body, yet that great city is
so happily situated, that its excessive bulk causes less inconvenience, than
even a smaller capital to a greater kingdom. There is more difference betwixt
the prices of all provisions in Paris and Languedoc than betwixt those in
London and Yorkshire.

Secondly, PUBLIC stocks, being a kind of papercredit, have all the
disadvantages attending that species of money. They banish gold and silver from
the most considerable commerce of the state, reduce them to common circulation,
and by that means render all provisions and labor dearer than otherwise they
would be.

Thirdly, THE taxes, which are levied to pay the interest of these debts, are a
check upon industry, heighten the price of labor, and are an oppression on the
poorer sort.

Fourthly, As foreigners possess a share of our national funds, they render the
public, in a manner, tributary to them, and may in time occasion the transport
of our people and our industry.

Fifthly, THE greatest part of public stock being always in the hands of idle
people, who live on their revenue, our funds give great encouragement to an
useless and inactive life.

BUT though the injury, that arises to commerce and industry from our public
funds, will appear, upon balancing the whole, very considerable, it is trivial
in comparison of the prejudice, that results to the state, considered as a body
politic, which must support itself in the society of nations, and have various
transactions with other states, in wars and negotiations. The ill, there, is
pure and unmixt, without any favorable circumstance to atone for it: And it is
an ill too, of a nature the highest and most important.

WE have indeed been told, that the public is no weaker upon account of its
debts; since they are mostly due amongst ourselves, and bring as much property
to one as they take from another. It Is like transferring money from the right
hand to the left; which leaves the person neither richer nor poorer than
before. Such loose reasonings and specious comparisons will always pass, where
we judge not upon principles. I ask, Is it possible, in the nature of things,
to overburthen a nation with taxes, even where the sovereign resides amongst
them? The very doubt seems extravagant; since it is requisite, in every
commonwealth, that there be a certain proportion observed betwixt the laborious
and the idle part of it. But if all our present taxes be mortgaged, must we not
invent new ones? And may not this matter be carried to a length, that is
ruinous and destructive?

IN every nation, there are always some methods of levying money more easy than
others, suitable to the way of living of the people, and the commodities they
make use of. In Britain, the excises upon malt and beer afford a very large
revenue; because the operations of malting and brewing are very tedious and are
impossible to be concealed; and at the same time, these commodities are not so
absolutely necessary to life, as that the raising their price would very much
affect the poorer sort. These taxes being all mortgaged, what difficulty to
find new ones! What vexation and ruin of the poor!

DUTIES upon consumptions are more equal and easy than those upon possessions.
What a loss to the public, that the former are all exhausted, and that we must
have recourse to the more grievous method of levying taxes!

WERE all the proprietors of land only stewards to the public; must not
necessity force them to practice all the arts of oppression, used by stewards,
where the absence and negligence of the proprietor render them secure against
enquiry?

'TWILL scarce be asserted, that no bounds ought ever to be set to national
debts, and that the public would be no weaker, were 12 or 15 shillings in the
pound, land tax, mortgaged, along with all the present customs and excises.
There is something, therefore, in the case, beside the mere transferring of
property from one hand to another. In 500 years, the posterity of those, now in
the coaches, and of those upon the boxes, will probably have changed places,
without affecting the public by these revolutions.

I MUST confess, that there is a strange supineness, from long custom, crept
into all ranks of men, with regard to public debts; not unlike what divines so
vehemently complain of with regard to their religious doctrines. We all own,
that the most sanguine imagination cannot hope, either that this or any future
ministry will be possessed of such rigid and steady frugality, as to make any
considerable progress in the payment of our debts, or that the situation of
foreign affairs will, for any long time, allow them leisure and tranquillity,
sufficient for such an undertaking. IN times of peace and security, when alone
it is possible to pay debt, the moneyed interest are averse to receive partial
payments, which they know not how to dispose of to advantage; and the landed
interest are averse to continue the taxes requisite for that purpose. Why
therefore should a minister persevere in a measure so disagreeable to all
parties? For the sake, I suppose, of a posterity, which be will never see, or
of a few reasonable, reflecting people, whose united interest, perhaps, will
not be able to secure him the smallest borough in England. It Is not likely we
shall ever find any minister so bad a politician. With regard to these narrow,
destructive maxims of politics, all ministers are expert enough.
What then is to become of us? Were we ever so good Christians, and ever so
resigned to providence; this, methinks, were a curious question, even
considered as a speculative one, and what it might not be altogether impossible
to form some conjectural solution of. The events here will depend little upon
the contingencies of battles, negotiations, intrigues, and factions. There
seems to be a natural progress of things, which may guide our reasoning. As it
would have required but a moderate share of prudence, when we first began this
practice of mortgaging, to have foretold, from the nature of men and of
ministers, that things would necessarily be carried to the length we see; so
now that they have at last happily reached it, it may not be difficult to guess
at the consequence. It must, indeed, be one of these two events; either the
nation must destroy public credit, or public credit will destroy the nation.
It Is impossible they can both subsist, after the manner they have been hitherto
managed, in this, as well as in some other nations.

THERE was, indeed, a scheme for the payment of our debts, which was proposed
by an excellent citizen, Mr. Hutchinson, above 30 years ago, and which was much
approved of by some men of sense, but never was likely to take effect. He
asserted, that there was a fallacy in imagining, that the public owed this
debt; for that really every individual owed a proportional share of it, and
paid, in his taxes, a proportional share of the interest, beside the expenses
of levying these taxes. Had we not better, then, says he, make a proportional
distribution of the debt amongst us, and each of us contribute a sum suitable
to his property, and by that means, discharge at once all our funds and public
mortgages? He seems not to have considered, that the laborious poor pay a
considerable part of the taxes by their annual consumptions, though they could
not advance, at once, a proportional part of the sum required. Not to mention,
that property in money and stock in trade might easily be concealed or
disguised; and that visible property in lands and houses would really at last
answer for the whole: An inequality and oppression, which never would be
submitted to. But though this project is never likely to take place; it is not
altogether improbable, that, when the nation become heartily sick of their
debts, and are cruelly oppressed by them, some daring projector may arise, with
visionary schemes for their discharge. And as public credit will begin, by that
time, to be a little frail, the least touch will destroy it, as happened in
France; and in this manner, it will dye of the doctor. SOME neighboring states
practice an easy expedient, by which they lighten their public debts. The
French have a custom (as the Romans formerly had) of augmenting their money;
and this the nation has been so much familiariz'd to, that it hurts not public
credit, though it be really cutting off at once, by an edict, so much of their
debts. The Dutch diminish the interest without the consent of their creditors;
or which is the same thing, they arbitrarily tax the funds as well as other
property. Could we practice either of these methods, we need never be oppressed
by the national debt; and it is not impossible but one of these, or some other
method may, at all adventures, be tried, on the augmentation of our
encumbrances and difficulties. But people in this country are so good reasoners
upon whatever regards their interest, that such a practice will deceive no
body; and public credit will probably tumble at once by so dangerous a trial.


BUT it is more probable, that the breach of national faith will be the
necessary effect of wars, defeats, misfortunes, and public calamities, or even
perhaps of victories and conquests. I must confess, when I see princes and
states fighting and quarreling, amidst their debts, funds, and public
mortgages, it always brings to my mind a match of cudgelplaying fought in a
China shop. How can it be expected, that sovereigns will spare a species of
property, which is pernicious to themselves and to the public, when they have
so little compassion on lives and properties, which are useful to both? Let the
time come (and surely it will come) when the new funds, created for the
exigencies of the year, are not subscribed to, and raise not the money
projected. Suppose, either that the cash of the nation is exhausted; or that
our faith, which has been hitherto so ample, begins to fail us. Suppose, that,
in this distress, the nation is threatened with an invasion, a rebellion is
suspected or broke out at home, a squadron cannot be equipt for want of pay,
victuals, or repairs; or even a foreign subsidy cannot be advanced. What must a
prince or minister do in such an emergence? The right of self-preservation is
unalienable in every individual, much more in every community. And the folly of
our statesmen must then be greater than the folly of those who first contracted
debt, or what is more, than that of those who trusted, or continue to trust
this security, if these statesmen have the means of safety in their hands, and
do not employ it. The funds, created and mortgaged, will, by that time, bring
in a large yearly revenue, sufficient for the defense and security of the
nation: Money is perhaps lying in the exchequer, ready for the discharge of the
quarterly interest: Necessity calls, fear urges, reason exhorts, compassion
alone exclaims: The money will immediately be seized for the current service,
under the most solemn protestations, perhaps, of being immediately replac'd.
But no more is requisite. The whole fabric, already tottering, falls to the
ground, and buries thousands in its ruins. And this, I think, may be called the
natural death of public credit: For to this period it tends as naturally as an
animal body to its dissolution and destruction. So great dupes are the
generality of mankind, that, notwithstanding such a violent shock to public
credit, as a voluntary bankruptcy in England would occasion, it would not
probably be long, e're credit would again revive in as flourishing a condition
as before. The present king of France, during the late war, borrowed money at
lower interest than ever his grandfather did; and as low as the British
parliament, comparing the natural rate of interest in both kingdoms. And though
men are commonly more governed by what they have seen, than by what they
foresee, with whatever certainty; yet promises, protestations, fair
appearances, with the allurements of present interest, have such powerful
influence as few are able to resist. Mankind are, in all ages, caught by the
same baits: The same tricks, played over and over again, still trepan them. The
heights of popularity and patriotism are still the beaten road to power and
tyranny; flattery to treachery; standing armies to arbitrary government; and
the glory of God to the temporal interest of the clergy. The fear of an
everlasting destruction of credit, allowing it to be an evil, is a needless
bugbear. A prudent man, in reality, would rather lend to the public immediately
after they had taken a sponge to their debts than at present; as much as an
opulent knave, even though one could not force him to pay, is a preferable debtor
to an honest bankrupt: For the former, in order to carry on business, may find
it his interest to discharge his debts, where they are not exorbitant: The
latter has it not in his power. The reasoning of Tacitus, hist. lib 3. as it is
eternally true, is very applicable to our present case. Sed vulgus ad
magnitudinem beneficiorum aderat: Stultissimus quisque pecuniis mercabatur:
Apud sapientes cassa habebantur, quae neque dari neque accepi, salva republica,
poterant. The public is a debtor, whom no man can oblige to pay. The only
check, which the creditors have on it, is the interest of preserving credit; an
interest, which may easily be overbalanc'd by a very great debt; and by a
difficult and extraordinary emergence, even supposing that credit
irrecoverable. Not to mention, that a present necessity often forces states
into measures, which are, strictly speaking, against their interest.


THESE two events, supposed above, are calamitous, but not the most calamitous.
Thousands are thereby sacrificed to the safety of millions. But we are not
without danger, that the contrary event may take place, and that millions may
be sacrificed, for ever, to the temporary safety of thousands. I HAVE heard it
has been computed, that the whole creditors of the public, natives and
foreigners, amount only to 17000. These make a figure at present on their
income; but in case of a public bankruptcy, would, in an instant, become the
lowest, as well as the most wretched of the people. The dignity and authority
of the landed gentry and nobility is much better rooted; and would render the
contention very unequal, if ever we come to that extremity. One would incline
to assign to this event a very near period, such as half a century, had not our
fathers prophesies of this kind been already found fallacious, by the duration
of our public credit, so much beyond all reasonable expectation. When the
astrologers in France were every year foretelling the death of Harry the IV.
These fellows, says he, must be right at last. We shall, therefore, be more
cautious than to assign any precise date; and shall content ourselves with
pointing out the event in general.
Our popular government, perhaps, will render it difficult or dangerous for a
minister to venture on so desperate an expedient, as that of a voluntary
bankruptcy. And though the house of lords be altogether composed of the
proprietors of lands, and the house of commons chiefly; and consequently
neither of them can be supposed to have great property in the funds; yet the
connexions of the members may be so great with the proprietors, as to render
them more tenacious of public faith, than prudence, policy, or even justice,
strictly speaking, requires. And perhaps too, our foreign enemies, or rather
enemy (for we have but one to dread) may be so politic as to discover, that our
safety lies in despair, and may not, therefore, show the danger, open and
barefaced, 'till it be inevitable. The balance of power in Europe, our
grandfathers, our fathers, and we, have all justly esteemed too unequal to be
preserved without our attention and assistance. But our children, weary with
the struggle, and fettered with encumbrances, may sit down secure, and see
their neighbors oppressed and conquered; till at last, they themselves and their
creditors lie both at the mercy of the conqueror. And this may properly enough
be denominated the violent death of our public credit.

THESE seem to be the events, which are not very remote, and which reason
foresees as clearly almost as she can do any thing, that lies in the womb of
time. And though the ancients maintained, that, in order to reach the gift of
prophesy, a certain divine fury or madness was requisite; one may safely
affirm, that, in order to deliver such prophesies as these, no more is
necessary, than merely to be in one's senses, free from the influence of
popular madness and delusion.

DISCOURSE IX. Of some remarkable customs.
I SHALL observe three remarkable customs in three celebrated governments; and
shall conclude from the whole, that all general maxims in politics ought to be
established with great reserve, and that irregular and extraordinary
appearances are frequently discovered, in the moral, as well as in the physical
world. The former, perhaps, we can better account for, after they happen, from
springs and principles, of which every one has, within himself, or from obvious
observation, the strongest assurance and conviction: But it is often fully as
impossible for human prudence, before hand, to foresee and foretell them.

I. ONE would think it essential to every supreme council or assembly, which
debates, that entire liberty of speech should be granted to every member, and
that all motions or reasonings should be received, which can any way tend to
illustrate the point under deliberation. One would conclude, with still greater
assurance, that, after a motion was made, which was voted and approved by that
assembly, in which the legislature is lodged, the member, who made the motion,
must, for ever, be exempted from farther trial and enquiry. But no political
maxim can, at first sight, appear more undisputable, than that he must, at
least, be secured from all inferior jurisdiction; and that nothing less, than
the same supreme legislative assembly, in their subsequent meetings, could
render him accountable for those motions and harangues, which they had before
approved of. But these axioms, however irrefragable they may appear, have all
failed in the Athenian government, from causes and principles too, which appear
almost inevitable.

BY the (...) or indictment of illegality, (though it has not been remarked by
antiquaries or commentators) any man was tried and punished, in a common court
of judicature, for any law, which had passed upon his motion, in the assembly
of the people, if that law appeared to the court unjust or prejudicial to the
public. Thus Demosthenes, finding that ship money was levied irregularly, and
that the poor bore the same burden as the rich, in equipping the galleys,
corrected this inequality by a very useful law, which proportioned the expense
to the revenue and income of each individual. He moved for this law in the
assembly; he proved its advantages; His harangue for it is still extant; (...).
he convinced the people, the only legislature in Athens; the law passed; and
was carried into execution: And yet he was tried in a criminal court for that
law, upon the complaint of the rich, who resented the alteration he had
introduced into the finances. Pro Ctesiphonte.
He was, indeed, acquitted, upon proving anew the usefulness of his law.

Ctesiphon moved in the assembly of the people, that particular honors should
be conferred on Demosthenes, as on a citizen affectionate and useful to the
commonwealth: The people, convinced of this truth, voted those honors: Yet was
Ctesiphon tried by the (...). It was asserted, amongst other topics, that
Demosthenes was not a good citizen, nor affectionate to the commonwealth: And
the orator was called upon to defend his friend, and consequently himself;
which he executed by that sublime piece of eloquence, that has ever since been
the admiration of mankind.

AFTER the fatal battle of Chaeronea, a law was past, upon the motion of
Hyperides, giving liberty to slaves, and enrolling them in the troops. Plutarch
in vita december oratorum. Demosthenes gives a different account of this law
contra Aristogiton, orat. II. He says, that its purport was, to render the
(...), or to restore the privilege of bearing offices to those who had been
declared incapable. Perhaps, these were both clauses of the same law.
On account of this law, the orator was afterward tried by the indictment
above mentioned; and defended himself, amongst other topics, by that stroke
celebrated by Plutarch and Longinus. It was not I, said he, that moved for this
law: It was the necessities of war; it was the battle of Chaeronea. The
orations of Demosthenes abound with many instances of trials of this nature,
and prove clearly, that nothing was more commonly practiced.

THE Athenian democracy was such a mobbish government, as we can scarce form a
notion of in the present age of the world. The whole collective body of the
people voted in every law, without any limitation of property, without any
distinction of rank, without control from any magistracy or senate; THE senate
of the Bean was only a less numerous mob, chosen by lot from among the people;
and their authority was not great.
and consequently with little regard to order, justice, or prudence. The
Athenians soon became sensible of the mischiefs attending this constitution:
But being averse to the checking themselves by any rule or restriction, they
resolved, at least, to check their demagogues or counselors, by the fear of
future punishment and enquiry. They accordingly instituted this remarkable law;
a law esteemed so essential to their government, that Aeschines insists on it,
as a known truth, that were it abolished or neglected, it were impossible for
the democracy to subsist. In Ctesiphontem. It Is remarkable, that the first
step, after the dissolution of the democracy by Critias and the Thirty, was to
annul the (...); as we learn from Demosthenes (...). The orator in this oration
gives us the words of the law, establishing the (...). Page 297 ex edit. Aldi.
And he accounts for it, from the same principles, that we here reason upon.


THE people feared not any ill consequences to liberty from the authority of
the criminal courts; because these were nothing but very numerous juries,
chosen by lot from amongst the people. And they considered themselves justly as
in a state of pupillage, where they had an authority, after they came to the
use of reason, not only to retract and control whatever had been determined,
but to punish any guardian for measures, which they had embraced by his
persuasion. The same law had place in Thebes; Plut. in vita Pelop.
and for the same reason.

IT appears to have been an usual practice in Athens, on the establishment of
any law, esteemed very useful or popular, to prohibit for ever its abrogation
and repeal. Thus the demagogue, who diverted all the public revenues to the
support of shows and spectacles, made it criminal so much as to move for a
reversement of this law. Demost. Olynth. 1. 2.
Thus Leptines moved for a law, not only to recall all the immunities formerly
granted, but to deprive the people for the future of the power of granting any
more. Demost. contra Lept.
Thus all bills of attainder Demost. contra Aristocratem.
were forbid, or laws that affect one Athenian, without extending to the whole
commonwealth. These absurd clauses, by which the legislature vainly attempted
to bind itself for ever, proceeded from an universal sense of the levity and
inconstancy of the people.

II. A WHEEL within a wheel, such as we observe in the German empire, is
considered by lord Shaftsbury, ESSAY on the freedom of wit and humor. Part 3.
sect. 2.
as an absurdity in politics: But what must we say to two equal wheels, which
govern the same political machine, without any mutual check, control, or
subordination; and yet preserve the greatest harmony and concord? To establish
two distinct legislatures, each of which possesses full and absolute authority
within itself, and stands in no need of the other's assistance, in order to
give validity to its acts; this may appear, before hand, altogether
impracticable, as long as men are actuated by the passions of ambition,
emulation, and avarice, which have been hitherto their chief governing
principles. And should I assert, that the state I have in my eye was divided by
two distinct factions, each of which predominated in a distinct legislature,
and yet produced no clashing of these independent powers; the supposition may
appear almost incredible. And if, to augment the paradox, I should affirm, that
this disjointed, irregular government was the most active, triumphant, and
illustrious commonwealth, that ever yet appeared on the stage of the world; I
should certainly be told, that such a political chimera was as absurd as any
vision of the poets. But there is no need for searching long, in order to prove
the reality of the foregoing suppositions: For this was actually the case with
the Roman republic.

THE legislative power was there lodged both in the comitia centuriata and
comitia tributa. In the former, it is well known, the people voted accordingly
to their census; so that when the first class was unanimous, (as commonly
happened) though it contained not, perhaps, the hundredth part of the
commonwealth, it determined the whole; and with the authority of the senate,
established a law. In the latter, every vote was alike; and as the authority of
the senate was not there requisite, the lower people entirely prevailed, and
gave law to the whole state. In all party divisions, at first betwixt the
Patricians and Plebeians, afterward betwixt the nobles and the people, the
interest of the Aristocracy was predominant in the first legislature; that of
the Democracy in the second: The one could always destroy what the other had
established: Nay, the one, by a sudden and unforeseen motion, might take the
start of the other; and totally annihilate its rival, by a vote, which, from
the nature of the constitution, had the full authority of a law. But no such
contest or struggle is observed in the history of Rome: No instance of a
quarrel betwixt these two legislatures; though many betwixt the parties, that
governed in each. Whence arose this concord, which may seem so extraordinary?

THE legislature established at Rome, by the authority of Servius Tullius, was
the comitia centuriata, which, after the expulsion of the kings, rendered the
government, for some time, altogether aristocratical. But the people, having
numbers and force on their side, and being elated with frequent conquests and
victories in their foreign wars, always prevailed when pushed to extremities,
and first extorted from the senate the magistracy of the tribunes, and then the
legislative power of the comitia tributa. It then behooved the nobles to be more
careful than ever not to provoke the people. For beside the force, which the
latter were always possessed of, they had now got possession of legal authority,
and could instantly break in pieces any order or institution, which directly
opposed them. By intrigue, by influence, by money, by combination, and by the
respect paid their character; the nobles might often prevail, and direct the
whole machine of government: But had they openly set their comitia centuriata
in oposition to the tributa, they had soon lost the advantage of that
institution, along with their consuls, praetors, ediles, and all the
magistrates elected by it. But the comitia tributa, not having the same reason
for respecting the centuriata, frequently repealed laws favorable to the
aristocracy: They limited the authority of the nobles; protected the people
from oppression; and controlled the actions of the senate and magistracy. The
centuriata found it convenient always to submit; and though equal in authority,
yet being inferior in power, durst never directly give any shock to the other
legislature, either by repealing its laws, or establishing laws, which, it
foresaw, would soon be repealed by it.

NO instance is found of any opposition or struggle betwixt these comitia;
except one slight attempt of this kind, mentioned by Appian in the 3d book of
his civil wars. Mark Anthony resolving to deprive Decimus Brutus of the
government of Cisalpine Gaul, railed in the Forum, and called one of the
comitia, in order to prevent the meeting of the other, which had been ordered
by the senate. But affairs were then fallen into such confusion, and the Roman
constitution was so near its last extremity, that no inserence can be drawn
from such an expedient. This contest, besides, was founded more on form than
party. 'Twas the senate, who ordered the comitia tributa, that they might
obstruct the meeting of the centuriata, which, by the constitution, or at least
forms of the government, could alone dispose of provinces.

Cicero was recalled by the comitia centuriata; though banished by the tributa,
that is, by a plebiscitum: But his banishment, we may observe, never was
considered as a legal deed, arising from the free choice and inclination of the
people. It was always ascribed to the violence alone of Clodius, and the
disorders introduced by him into the government.

III. THE third custom we proposed to observe regards England; and though it be
not so important as those, which we have pointed out in Athens and Rome, it is
no less singular and remarkable. It Is a maxim in politics, which we readily
admit as undisputed and universal, that a power, however great, when granted by
law to an eminent magistrate, is not so dangerous to liberty, as an authority,
however inconsiderable, which he acquires from violence and usurpation. For
besides that the law always limits every power, which it bestows; the very
receiving it as a concession establishes the authority whence it is derived,
and preserves the harmony of the constitution. By the same right that one
prerogative is assumed without law, another may also be claimed, and another,
with still greater facility: While the first usurpations both serve as
precedents to the following, and give force to maintain them. Hence the heroism
of Hampden, who sustained the whole violence of royal prosecution rather than
pay a tax of 20 shillings, not imposed by parliament: Hence the care of all
English patriots to guard against the first encroachments of the crown: And
hence alone the existence, at this day, of English liberty.

THERE is, however, one occasion, wherein the parliament has departed from this
maxim; and that is, in the pressing of seamen. The exercise of an illegal power
is here tacitly permitted in the crown; and though it has frequently been
deliberated on, how that power might be rendered legal, and under what
restrictions it might be granted to the sovereign, no safe expedient could ever
be proposed for that purpose, and the danger to liberty always appeared greater
from law than from usurpation. While this power is exercised to no other end
than to man the navy, men willingly submit to it, from a sense of its use and
necessity; and the sailors, who are alone affected by it, find no body to
support them, in claiming the rights and privileges, which the law grants,
without distinction, to all English subjects. But were this power, on any
occasion, made an instrument of faction or ministerial tyranny, the opposite
faction, and indeed all lovers of their country, would immediately take the
alarm, and support the injured party: The liberty of Englishmen would be
asserted: Juries would be implacable; and the tools of tyranny, acting both
against law and equity, would meet with the severest vengeance. On the other
hand, were the parliament to grant such an authority, they would probably fall
into one of these two inconveniences: They would either bestow it under so
many restrictions as would make it lose its effects, by cramping the authority
of the crown; or they would render it so large and comprehensive, as might give
occasion to great abuses, for which we could, in that case, have no remedy. The
very illegality of the power, at present, prevents its abuses, by affording so
easy a remedy against them.

I PRETEND not, by this reasoning, to exclude all possibility of contriving a
register for seamen, which might mann the navy, without being dangerous to
liberty. I only observe, that no satisfactory scheme of that nature has yet
been proposed. Rather than adopt any project hitherto invented, we continue a
practice seemingly the most absurd and unaccountable. Authority, in times of
full internal peace and concord, is armed against law: A continued and open
usurpation in the crown is permitted, amidst the greatest jealousy and
watchfulness in the people; nay proceeding from those very principles: Liberty,
in a country of the highest liberty, is left entirely to its own defense,
without any countenance or protection: The wild state of nature is renewed, in
one of the most civilized societies of mankind: And great violences and
disorders, amongst the people, the most humane and the best natured, are
committed with impunity; while the one party pleads obedience to the supreme
magistrate, the other the permission of fundamental laws.

DISCOURSE X. Of the Populousness of ancient Nations. AN eminent clergyman in
Edinburgh, having wrote, some years ago, a discourse on the same question with
this, of the populousness of ancient nations, was pleased lately to communicate
it to the author. It maintained the opposite side of the argument, to what is
here insisted on, and contained much erudition and good reasoning. The author
acknowledges to have borrowed, with some variations, from that discourse, two
computations, that with regard to the number of inhabitants in Belgium, and
that with regard to those in Epirus. If this learned gentleman be prevailed on
to publish his differtation, it will serve to give great light into the present
question, the most curious and important of all questions of erudition.

THERE is very little ground, either from reason or experience, to conclude the
universe eternal or incorruptible. The continual and rapid motion of matter,
the violent revolutions with which every part is agitated, the changes remarked
in the heavens, the plain traces, as well as tradition, of an universal deluge
or general convulsion of the elements; all these prove strongly the mortality
of this fabric of the world, and its passage, by corruption or dissolution,
from one state or order to another. It must, therefore, have its infancy,
youth, manhood, and old age, as well as each individual form, which it
contains, and it is probable, that, in all these variations, man, equally with
every animal and vegetable, will partake. In the flourishing age of the world,
it may be expected, that the human species should possess greater vigor both
of mind and body, more prosperous health, higher spirits, longer life, and a
stronger inclination and power of generation. But if the general system of
things, and human society of course, have any such gradual revolutions, they
are too slow to be discernible in that short period, which is comprehended by
history and tradition. Stature and force of body, length of life, even courage
and extent of genius, seem hitherto to have been naturally, in all ages, pretty
much the same. The arts and sciences, indeed, have flourished in one period,
and have decayed in another: But we may observe, that at the time when they
rose to greatest perfection amongst one people, they were perhaps totally
unknown to all the neighboring nations; and though they universally decayed in
one age, yet in a succeeding generation they again revived, and diffused
themselves over the world. As far, therefore, as observation reaches, there is
no universal difference discernible in the human species; and though it were
allowed, that the universe, like an animal body, had a natural progress from
infancy to old age, yet as it must still be uncertain, whether, at present, it
be advancing to its point of perfection, or declining from it, we cannot thence
presuppose any decay in human nature. Collumela says, lib. 3. cap. 8. that in
Egypt and Africa the bearing of twins was frequent and even customary, gemini
parties familiares, ac paene solennes sunt. If this was true, there is a
physical difference both in countries and ages. For travelers make no such
remark of those countries at present. On the contrary, we are apt to suppose
the northern nations more fertile. As those two countries were provinces of the
Roman empire, it is difficult, though not altogether absurd, to suppose, that
such a man as Columella might be mistaken with regard to them.
To prove, therefore, or account for the greater populousness of antiquity, by
the imaginary youth or vigor of the world, will scarce be admitted by any just
reasoner. These general physical causes ought entirely to be excluded from that
question.

THERE are indeed some more particular physical causes of great importance.
Diseases are mentioned in antiquity, which are almost unknown to modern
medicine; and new diseases have arisen and propagated themselves, of which
there are no traces in ancient history. And in this particular, we may observe,
upon comparison, that the disadvantage is very much on the side of the moderns.
Not to mention some others of less importance, the small pox commits such
ravages, as would almost alone account for the great superiority supposed in
ancient times. The tenth or the twelfth part of mankind, destroyed every
generation, should make a vast difference, it may be thought, in the numbers of
the people; and when joined to venereal distempers, a new plague diffused every
where, this disease is perhaps equivalent, by its constant operation, to the
three great scourges of mankind, war, pestilence, and famine. Were it certain,
therefore, that ancient times were more populous than the present, and could no
moral causes be assigned for so great a change; these physical causes alone, in
the opinion of many, would be sufficient to give us satisfaction on that head.

BUT is it certain, that antiquity was so much more populous, as is pretended?
The extravagancies of Vossius, with regard to this subject, are well known: But
an author of much greater genius and discernment has ventured to affirm, that,
according to the best computations, which these subjects will admit of, there
are not now the fiftieth part of mankind on the face of the earth, which
existed in the time of Julius Caesar. Lettres Persanes. See also L'Esprit des
Loix live. 23. chap. 17, 18, 19.
It may easily be observed, that the comparisons, in this case, must be very
imperfect; even though we confine ourselves to the scene of ancient history,
Europe and the nations about the Mediterranean. We know not exactly the numbers
of any European kingdom, or even city, at present: How can we pretend to
calculate those of ancient cities and states, where historians have left us
such imperfect traces? For my part, the matter appears to me so uncertain,
that, as I intend to throw together some reflections on that head, I shall
intermingle the enquiry concerning causes with that concerning facts; which
ought never to be admitted, where the facts can be ascertained with any
tolerable assurance. We shall first consider, whether it be probable, from what
we know of the situation of society in both periods, that antiquity must have
been more populous. Secondly, Whether in reality it was so. If I can make
appear, that the conclusion is not so certain, as is pretended, in favor of
antiquity, it is all I aspire to.

IN general, we may observe, that the question with regard to the comparative
populousness of ages or kingdoms implies very important consequences, and
commonly determines concerning the preference of their whole police, manners,
and constitution of government. For as there is in all men, both male and
female, a desire and power of generation more active than is ever universally
exerted, the restraints, which it lies under, must proceed from some
difficulties in men's situation, which it belongs to a wise legislature
carefully to observe and remove. Almost every man, who thinks he can maintain a
family, will have one; and the human species, at this rate of propagation,
would more than double every generation, were every one coupled as soon as he
comes to the age of puberty. How fast do mankind multiply in every colony or
new settlement; where it is an easy matter to provide for a family; and where
men are no way straightened or confined, as in long established governments?
History tells us frequently of plagues, that have swept away the third or
fourth part of a people: Yet in a generation or two, the destruction was not
perceived; and the society had again acquired their former number. The lands,
that were cultivated, the houses built, the commodities raised, the riches
acquired, enabled the people, who escaped, immediately to marry, and to rear
families, which supplied the place of those who had perished. THIS too is a
good reason, why the small pox does not depopulate countries so much as may at
first sight be imagined. Where there is room for more people, they will always
arise, even without the assistance of naturalization bills. It Is remarkt by Don
Geronimo de Ustariz, that the provinces of Spain, which send most people to the
Indies, are most populous; which proceeds from their superior riches.
And for a like reason, every wise, just, and mild government, by rendering the
condition of its subjects easy and secure, will always abound most in people,
as well as in commodities and riches. A country, indeed, whose climate and soil
are fitted for vines, will naturally be more populous than one, which produces
only corn, and that more populous than one, which is only fitted for pasturage.
But if every thing else be equal, it seems natural to expect, that wherever
there are most happiness and virtue and the wisest institutions, there will
also be most people.

THE question, therefore, concerning the populousness of ancient and modern
times being allowed of great importance, 'twill be requisite, if we would bring
it to some determination, to compare both the domestic and political situation
of these two periods, in order to judge of the facts by their moral causes;
which is the first view, in which we proposed to consider them.

THE chief difference betwixt the domestic economy of the ancients and that of
the moderns consists in the practice of slavery, which prevailed amongst the
former, and which has been abolished for some centuries throughout the greatest
part of Europe. Some passionate admirers of the ancients and zealous partisans
of civil liberty (for these sentiments, as they are both of them, in the main,
extremely just, are also found to be almost inseparable) cannot forbear
regreting the loss of this institution; and whilst they brand all submission to
the government of a single person, with the harsh denomination of slavery, they
would gladly subject the greatest part of mankind to real slavery and
subjection. But to one, who considers cooly of the subject, it will appear,
that human nature, in general, really enjoys more liberty at present, in the
most arbitrary government of Europe, than it ever did during the most
flourishing period of ancient times. As much as submission to a petty prince,
whose dominions extend not beyond a single city, is more grievous than
obedience to a great monarch; so much is domestic slavery more cruel and
oppressive than any civil subjection whatsoever. The more the master is removed
from us in place and rank, the greater liberty do we enjoy; the less are our
actions inspected and controlled; and the fainter that cruel comparison becomes
betwixt our own subjection, and the freedom and even dominion of another. The
remains, that are left of domestic slavery, in our colonies, and amongst some
European nations, would never surely create a desire os rendering it more
universal. The little humanity commonly observed in persons, accustomed, from
their infancy, to exercise so great authority over their fellow creatures, and
to trample upon human nature, were sufficient alone to disgust us with that
authority. Nor can a more probable reason be given for the severe, I might say,
barbarous, manners of ancient times, than the practice of domestic slavery; by
which every man of rank was rendered a petty tyrant, and educated amidst the
flattery, submission, and low debasement of his slaves.

ACCORDING to the ancient practice, all checks were on the inferior, to
restrain him to the duty of submission; none on the superior, to engage him to
the reciprocal duties of gentleness and humanity. In modern times, a bad
servant finds not easily a good master, nor a bad master a good servant; and
the checks are mutual, suitable to the inviolate and eternal laws of reason and
equity.

THE custom of exposing old, useless, or sick slaves in an island of the Tyber,
there to starve, seems to have been pretty common in Rome; and whoever
recovered, after having been so exposed, had his liberty given him, by an edict
of the emperor Claudius; where it was likeways forbid to kill any slave, merely
for old age or sickness. Suetonius in vita Claudii.
But supposing, that this edict was strictly obeyed, would it better the
domestic treatment of slaves, or render their lives much more comfortable? We
may imagine what others would practice, when it was the professed maxim of the
elder Cato to sell his superannuated slaves for any price, rather than maintain
what he esteemed an useless burden. Plut. in vita Catonis.


THE ergastula or dungeons, where slaves in chains were beat to work, were very
common all over Italy. Columella Lib. 1. cap. 6.
advises, that they be always built under ground; and recommends Id. lib. 11.
cap. 1.
it as the duty of a careful overseer to call over every day the names of these
slaves, like the mustering of a regiment or ship's company, in order to know
presently when any of them had deserted. A proof of the frequency of these
ergastula, and of the great number of slaves confined in them. Partem Italiae
ergastula a solitudine vindicant, says Livy.

ACHAIN'D slave for a porter was usual in Rome, as appears from Ovid, Amor.
lib. 1. eleg. 6.
and other authors. Sueton. de claris rhetor. So also the ancient poet
Janitoris tintinnire impedimenta audio.
Had not these people shaken off all sense of compassion toward that unhappy
part of their species, would they have presented all their friends, at the
first entrance, with such an image of the severity of the master, and misery of
the slave?

NOTHING so common in all trials, even of civil causes, as to call for the
evidence of slaves; which was always extorted by the most exquisite torments.
Demosthenes says, In Oneterem. orat. 1.
that where it was possible to produce, for the same fact, either freemen or
slaves as witnesses, the judges always preferred the torturing of slaves, as a
more certain and infallible evidence. THE same practice was common in Rome; but
Cicero seems not to think this evidence so certain as the testimony of free
citizens. Pro Caelio.


Seneca draws a picture of that disorderly luxury, which changes day into night
and night into day, and inverts every stated hour of every office in life.
Amongst other circumstances, such as displacing the meals and time of bathing,
he mentions, that, regularly, about the third hour of the night, the neighbors
of one, who indulges this false refinement, hear the noise of whips and lashes;
and upon enquiry, find he is then taking an account of the conduct of his
servants, and giving them due correction and discipline. This is not remarked
as an instance of cruelty, but only of disorder, which, even in actions the
most usual and methodical, changes the fixed hours, that an established custom
had assigned them. Epist. 122. THE inhuman sports, exhibited at Rome, may
justly be considered too as an effect of the people's contempt for slaves, and
was also a great cause of the general inhumanity of their princes and rulers.
Who can read the accounts of the amphitheatrical entertainments without horror?
Or who is surprised, that the emperors should treat that people in the same way
the people treated their inferiors? One's humanity, on that occasion, is apt to
renew the barbarous wish of Caligula, that the people had but one neck. A man
could almost be pleased, by a single blow, to put an end to such a race of
monsters. You may thank God, says the author above cited (epist. 7.) addressing
himself to the Romans people, that you have a master, (viz. the mild and
merciful Nero) who is incapable of learning cruelty from your example. This was
spoke in the beginning of his reign: But he fitted them very well afterward;
and no doubt, was considerably improved by the sight of the barbarous objects,
to which he had, from his infancy, been accustomed.


BUT our present business is only to consider the influence of slavery on the
populousness of a state. It Is pretended, that, in this particular, the ancient
practice has infinitely the advantage, and was the the chief cause of that
extreme populousness, which is supposed in those times. At present, all masters
discourage the marrying of their male servants, and admit not by any means the
marriage of the female, who are then supposed altogether incapacitated for
their service. But where the property of the servants is lodged in the master,
their marriage and sertility form his riches, and bring him a succession of
slaves that supply the place of those, whom age and infirmity have disabled. He
encourages, therefore, their propagation, as much as that of his cattle; rears
the young with the same care; and educates them to some art or calling, which
may render them more useful or valuable to him. The opulent are, by this
policy, interested in the being at least, though not the well-being of the poor;
and enrich themselves by increasing the number and industry of those, who are
subjected to them. Each man, being a sovereign in his own family, has the same
interest with regard to it, as the prince with regard to the state; and has
not, like the prince, any opposite motives of ambition or vainglory, which may
lead him to depopulate his little sovereignty. All of it is, at all times,
under his eye; and he has leisure to inspect the most minute detail of the
marriage and education of his subjects. WE may here observe, that if domestic
slavery really increased populousness, it would be an exception to the general
rule, that the happiness of any society and its populousness are necessary
attendants. A master, from humor or interest, may make his slaves very
unhappy, and yet be careful, from interest, to increase their number. Their
marriage is not a matter of choice with them, no more than any other action of
their life.


SUCH are the consequences of domestic slavery, according to the first aspect
and appearance of things: But if we enter deeper into the subject, we shall
perhaps find reason to retract our hasty determinations. The comparison is
shocking betwixt the management of human creatures and that of cattle; but
being extremely just, when applied to the present subject, it may be proper to
trace the consequences of it. At the capital, near all great cities, in all
populous, rich, industrious provinces, few cattle are bred. Provisions,
lodging, attendance, labor are there dear; and men find better their account
in buying the cattle, after they come to a certain age, from the remoter and
cheaper countries. These are consequently the only breeding countries for
cattle; and by a parity of reason, for men too, when the latter are put on the
same footing with the former. To rear a child in London, till he could be
serviceable, would cost much dearer, than to buy one of the same age from
Scotland or Ireland; where he had been raised in a cottage, covered with rags,
and fed on oatmeal or potatoes. Those who had slaves, therefore, in all the
richer and more populous countries, would discourage the pregnancy of the
females, and either prevent or destroy the birth. The human species would
perish in those places, where it ought to increase the fastest; and a perpetual
recruit be needed from all the poorer and more desert provinces. Such a
continued drain would tend mightily to depopulate the state, and render great
cities ten times more destructive than with us; where every man is master of
himself, and provides for his children from the powerful instinct of nature,
not the calculations of sordid interest. If London, at present, without much
increasing, needs a yearly recruit from the country of 5000 people, as is
commonly computed: What must it require, if the greatest part of the tradesmen
and common people were slaves, and were hindered from breeding, by their
avaricious masters?

ALL ancient authors tell us, that there was a perpetual flux of slaves to
Italy from the remoter provinces, particularly Syria, Cilicia, TEN thousand
slaves in a day have been often sold for the use of the Romans, at Delus in
Cilicia. Strabo, lib. 14.
Cappadocia, the lesser Asia, Thrace and Egypt: Yet the number of people
increased not in Italy; and writers complain of the continual decay of industry
and agriculture. Columella, lib. 1. Proem. et cap. 2. et 7. Varro, lib. 3. cap.
1. Horace, lib. 2. od. 15. Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. cap. 54. Sueton. in vita Aug.
cap. 42. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 13.
Where then is that extreme fertility of the Roman slaves, which is commonly
supposed? So far from multiplying, they could not, it seems, so much as keep up
the stock, without immense recruits. And though great numbers were continually
manumitted, and converted into Roman citizens, the numbers even of these did
not increase; Minore indies plebe ingenua, says Tacitus, ann. lib. 4. cap 27.
till the freedom of the city was communicated to foreign provinces.

THE term for a slave, born and bred in the family, was verna; As servus was
the name of the genus, and verna of the species, without any correlative, this
forms a strong presumption, that the latter were, by far, the least numerous.
It Is an universal observation, which we may form upon language, that where two
related parts of a whole bear any proportion to each other, in numbers, rank,
or consideration, there are always correlative terms invented, which answer to
both the parts, and express their mutual relation. If they bear no proportion
to each other, the term is only invented for the less, and marks its
distinction from the whole. Thus, man and woman, master and servant, father and
son, prince and subject, stranger and citizen are correlative terms. But the
words, seaman, carpenter, smith, tailor, etc. have no correspondent terms,
which express those who are no seaman, no carpenter, etc. Languages differ very
much with regard to the particular words, where this distinction obtains; and
may thence afford very strong inferences, concerning the manners and customs of
different nations. The military government of the Roman emperors had exalted
the soldiery so high, that they balanced all the other orders of the state:
Hence miles and paganus became relative terms, a thing, till then, unknown to
ancient and still so to modern languages. Modern superstition exalted the
clergy so high, that they overbalanced the whole state: Hence clergy and laity
are terms opposed in all modern languages; and in these alone. And from the
same principles I infer, that, if the number of slaves, bought by the Romans
from foreign countries, had not extremely exceeded those bred at home, verna
would have had a correlative, which would have expressed the former species of
slaves. But these, it would seem, composed the main body of the ancient slaves,
and the latter were but a few exceptions.
and these slaves seem to have been entitled by custom to privileges and
indulgences beyond others; a sufficient reason, why the masters would not be
fond of rearing many of that kind. Verna is used by Roman writers as a word
equivalent to scurra, on account of the petulance and impudence of those
slaves. Mart. lib. 1. cp. 42. Horace also mentions the vernae procaces, and
Petronius, cap. 24. vernula urbanitas. Seneca de provid. cap. 1. vernularum
licentia.
Whoever is acquainted with the maxims of our planters will acknowledge the
justness of this observation. IT IS computed in the West Indies, that a stock of
slaves grow worse five per cent. every year, unless new slaves be bought to
recruit them. They are not able to keep up their own number, even in those warm
countries, where clothes and provisions are so easily got. How much more must
this happen in European countries, and in or near great cities?


Atticus is much praised by his historian for the care which he took in
recruiting his family from the slaves born in it: Corn. Nepes in vita Attici,
May we not thence infer, that that practice was not then very common?

THE names of slaves in the Greek comedies, Syrus, Mysus, Geta, Thrax, Davus,
Lydus, Phryx, etc. afford a presumption, that at Athens, at least, most of the
slaves were imported from foreign nations. The Athenians, says Strabo, LIB. 7.
gave to their slaves, either the names of the nations, whence they were
bought, as Lydus, Syrus, or the names that were most common amongst those
nations, as Manes or Midas to a Phrygian, Tibias to a Paphlagonian.

Demosthenes, after having mentioned a law, which forbid any man to strike the
slave of another, praises the humanity of this law; and adds, that if the
barbarians, from whom slaves were bought, had information that their countrymen
met with such gentle treatment, they would entertain a great esteem for the
Athenians. In Midiam, p. 221. ex edit. Aldi.
Isocrates Panegyr.
also says, that all the Greek slaves were barbarians.

IT IS well known, that Demosthenes, in his nonage, had been defrauded of a
large fortune by his tutors, and that afterward he recovered, by a prosecution
at law, the value of his patrimony. His orations, on that occasion, still
remain, and contain a very exact detail of the whole substance left by his
father, In Aphobum orat. 1.
in money, merchandise, houses, and slaves, along with the value of each
particular. Amongst the rest were 52 slaves, handicraftsmen, viz. 32
sword-cutlers, and 20 cabinet-makers; (...), makers of those beds, which the
ancients lay upon at meals.
all males, not a word of any wives, children, or family, which they certainly
would have had, had it been a common custom at Athens to breed from the slaves:
And the value of the whole must have depended very much on that circumstance.
No female slaves are even so much as mentioned, except some chamber-maids, that
belonged to his mother. This argument has great force, if it be not altogether
decisive.

CONSIDER this passage of Plutarch, In vita Catenit.
speaking of the elder Cato. He had a great number of slaves, which he took
care to buy at the sales of prisoners of war; and he chose them young, that
they might easily be accustomed to any diet or manner of life, and be
instructed in any business or labor, as men teach any thing to young dogs or
horses. -- And esteeming love the chief source of all disorders, he allowed the
male slaves to have a commerce with the female in his family, upon paying a
certain sum for this privilege: But he strictly forbid all intrigues out of his
family. Are there any symptoms in this narration of that care, which is
supposed in the ancients, of the marriage and propagation of their slaves? If
that was a common practice, founded on general interest, it would surely have
been embraced by Cato, who was a great occonomist, and lived in times, when the
ancient frugality and simplicity of manners were still in credit and reputation.

IT is expressly remarked by the writers of the Roman law, that scarce any ever
purchase slaves with a view of breeding from them. Non temere ancillae ejus rei
causa comparantur ut pariant. Digest. lib. 5. tit. 3. de haered. petit. lex 27.
The following texts are to the same purpose. Spadonem morbosum non esse, neque
vitiosum, verius mihi videtur; sed sanum esse, sicuti illum qui unum testiculum
habet, qui etiam generare potest. Digest. lib. 2. tit. 1. de aedilicio edicto
lex 6. sect. 2. Sin autem quis ita spado sit, ut tam necessariae pars corporis
penitus absit, morbosus est. Id. lex. 7. His impotence, it seems, was only
regarded so far as his health or life might be affected by it. In other
respects, he was full as valuable. The same reasoning is employed with regard
to female slaves. Quaeritur de ea muliere, quae semper mortuos parit, an
morbosa sit; et ait Sabinus, si vulvae vitio hoc contingit, morbosam esse. Id.
lex 14. It has even been doubted, whether a woman pregnant was morbid or
vitiated; and it is determined, that she is sound, not on account of the value
of her offspring, but because it is the natural part or office of women to bear
children. Si mulier praegnans venerit, inter omnes convenit sanam eam esse.
Maximum enim ac praecipuum munus faeminarum accipere ac tueri conceptum.
Puerperam quoque sanam esse: Si modo nihil extrinsecus accedit, quod corpus
ejus in aliquam valitudinem immitteret. De sterili Celius distinguere Trebatium
dicit, ut si natura sterilis sit, sana sit. Si vitio corporis, centra. Id.


OUR lackeys and chamber-maids, I own, do not serve much to multiply the
species: But the ancients, beside those who attended on their person, had all
their labor performed by slaves, who lived, many of them, in their family; and
some great men possessed to the number of 10,000. If there be any suspicion,
therefore, that this institution was unfavourable to propagation, (and the same
reason, at least in part, holds with regard to ancient slaves as well as modern
servants) how destructive must slavery have proved?

HISTORY mentions a Roman nobleman, who had 400 slaves under the same roof with
him; and having been assassinated at home by the furious revenge of one of
them, the law was executed with rigor, and all without exception were put to
death. Tacit. ann. lib. 14. cap. 43.
Many other Roman noblemen had families equally, or more numerous; and I
believe every one will allow, that this would scarce be practicable were we to
suppose all the slaves married, and the females to be breeders. THE slaves, in
the great houses, had little rooms assigned them, called cellae. Whence the
name of cell was transferred to the monks room in a convent. See farther on this
head, Just. Lipsius, Saturn. 1. cap. 14. These form strong presumptions against
the marriage and propagation of the family slaves.


So early as the poet Hesiod, Opera and Dies, lib. 2. 1. 24. also 1. 220.
married slaves, whether male or female, were esteemed very inconvenient. How
much more, where families had increased to such an enormous size, as in Rome,
and the ancient simplicity of manners was banished from all ranks of people?

Xenophon in his oeconomics, where he gives directions for the management of a
farm, recommends a strict care and attention of laying the male and female
slaves at a distance from each other. He seems not to suppose they are ever
married. The only slaves amongst the Greeks, that appear to have continued
their own breed, were the Helotes, who had houses apart, and were more the
slaves of the public than of individuals. Strabo, lib. 8.


THE ancients talk so frequently of a fixed, stated portion of provisions
assigned to each slave, SEE Cato de re rustica, cap. 56. Donatus in Phormion.
1. 1. 9. Seneca epist. 80.
that we are naturally led to conclude, that slaves lived almost all single,
and received that portion as a kind of board wages.

THE practice, indeed, of marrying the slaves seems not to have been very
common, even amongst the country laborers, where it is more naturally to be
expected. Cato, De re rust, cap. 10, 11.
enumerating the slaves, requisite to labor a vineyard of a hundred acres,
makes them amount to 15; the overseer and his wife, villicus and villica, and
13 male slaves. For an olive plantation of 240 acres, the overseer and his wife
and II male slaves: And so in proportion to a greater or less plantation or
vineyard.

Varro, LIB. 1. cap. 18.
citing this passage of Cato, allows his computation to be just in every other
respect, except the last. For as it is requisite, says he, to have an overseer
and his wife, whether the vineyard or plantation be great or small, this must
alter the exactness of the proportion. Had Cato's computation been erroneous in
any other respect, it had certainly been corrected by Varro, who seems fond of
discovering so trivial an error.

THE same author, LIB. 1. cap. 17.
as well as Columella, LIB. 1. cap. 18.
recommends it as requisite to give a wife to the overseer, in order to attach
him the more strongly to his master's service. This was, therefore, a peculiar
indulgence granted to a slave, in whom so great a confidence was reposed.

IN the same place, Varro mentions it as an useful precaution not to buy too
many slaves from the same nation; lest they beget factions and seditions in the
family: A presumption, that in Italy the greatest part, even of the country
laboring slaves (for he speaks of no other) were bought from the remoter
provinces. All the world knows, that the family slaves in Rome, who were
instruments of show and luxury, were commonly imported from the East. Hoc
profecere, says Pliny, speaking of the jealous care of masters, mancipiorum
legiones, et in domo turba externa, ac servorum quoque causa nomenclator
adhibendus. LIB. 33. cap. 1.


IT is indeed recommended by Varro, LIB. 2. cap. 10.
to propagate young shepherds in the family from the old ones. For as grasing
farms were commonly in remote and cheap places, and each shepherd lived in a
cottage apart, his marriage and increase were not liable to the same
inconveniences as in dearer places, and where many servants lived in a family;
which was universally the case in such of the Roman farms as produced wine or
corn. If we consider this exception with regard to shepherds, and weigh the
reason of it, it will serve for a strong confirmation of all our foregoing
suspicions. Pastoris duri est hic filius, ills bubulet. Juven. Sat. XI. 151.


Columella, LIB. 1. cap. 8.
I own, advises the master to give a reward, and even liberty to a female
slave, that had reared him above three children: A proof, that sometimes the
ancients propagated from their slaves, which, indeed, cannot be denied. Were it
otherwise, the practice of slavery, being so common in antiquity, must have
been destructive to a degree, which no expedient could repair. All I pretend by
these reasonings is, that slavery is in general disadvantageous both to the
happiness and populousness of mankind, and that its place is much better
supplied by the practice of hired servants.

THE laws, or, as some writers call them, the seditions of the Gracchi, were
occasioned by their observing the increase of slaves all over Italy, and the
diminution of free-citizens. Appian De bell. civ. lib. 1.
ascribes this increase to the propagation of the slaves: Plutarch In vita Tib.
andC. Grach.
to the purchase of barbarians, who were chained and imprisoned, (...) To the
same purpose is that passage of the elder Seneca, ex controversia 5. lib. 5.
Arata quondam populis rura, singulorum ergastulorum sunt; latiusque nunc
villici, quam olim reges, imperant. At nunc eadem, says Pliny, vincti pedes,
damnatae manus, inscripti vultus exercent. lib. 18. cap. 3. So also Martial:

Et sonet innumera compede Thuscus ager. lib. 9. ep. 23.
And Lucan: Tum longos jungere fines
Agrorum, et quondam duro sulcata Camilli,
Vomere et antiquas Curiorum passa ligones,
Longa sub ignotis extendere rura colonis. lib. 1.
Vincto fossore coluntur

Hesperiae segetes. lib 7.


. It Is to be presumed, that both causes concurred.

Sicily, says Florus, LIB. 3. cap. 19.
was full of ergastula, and was cultivated by laborers in chains. Eunus and
Athenio excited the servile war, by breaking up these monstrous prisons, and
giving liberty to 60,000 slaves. The younger Pompey augmented his army in Spain
by the same expedient Id. lib. 4 cap. 8.
. If the country laborers throughout the Roman empire were so generally in
this situation, and if it was difficult or impossible to find separate lodgings
for the families of the city servants; how unfavourable to propagation, as well
as humanity, must the institution of domestic slavery be esteemed?

Constantinople, at present, requires the same recruits of slaves from all the
provinces, which Rome did of old; and these provinces are of consequence far
from being populous.

Egypt, according to Mons. Maillet, sends continual colonies of black slaves
to the other parts of the Turkish empire, and receives annually an equal return
of white: The one brought from the inland parts of Africa, the other from
Mingrelia, Circassia, and Tartary.

OUR modern convents are, no doubt, very bad institutions: But there is reason
to suspect, that anciently every great family in Italy, and probably in other
parts of the world, was a species of convent. And though we have reason to detest
all these popish institutions, as nurseries of the most abject superstition,
burdensome to the public, and oppressive to the poor prisoners, male, as well
as female; yet may it be questioned, whether they be so destructive to the
populousness of a state as is commonly imagined. Were the land, which belongs
to a convent, bestowed on a nobleman, he would spend its revenue on dogs,
horses, grooms, footmen, cooks, and chamber-maids; and his family would not
furnish many more citizens than the convent.

THE common reason why parents thrust their daughters into nunneries, is, that
they may not be overburthen'd with too numerous a family; but the ancients had
a method almost as innocent and more effectual to that purpose, viz. the
exposing their children in the earliest infancy. This practice was very common;
and is not mentioned by any author of those times with the horror it deserves,
or scarce Tacitus blames it. De morib. Germ.
even with disapprobation. Plutarch, the humane, good natured Plutarch, De
fraterno amore. Seneca also approves of the exposing of sickly, infirm
children. De ira, lib. 1. cap. 15.
recommends it as a virtue in Attalus, king of Pergamus, that he murdered, or,
if you will, exposed all his own children, in order to leave his crown to the
son of his brother, Eumenes: Signalizing in this manner his gratitude and
affection to Eumenes, who had left him his heir preferably to that son. 'Twas
Solon, the most celebrated of the sages of Greece, who gave parents permission
by law to kill their children. Sext. Emp. lib 3. cap. 24.


SHALL we then allow these two circumstances to compensate each other, viz.
monastic vows and the exposing of children, and to be unfavourable, in equal
degrees, to the propagation of mankind? I doubt the advantage is here on the
side of antiquity. Perhaps, by an odd conexion of causes, the barbarous
practice of the ancients might rather render those times more populous. By
removing the terrors of too numerous a family, it would engage many people in
marriage; and such is the force of natural affection, that very few, in
comparison, would have resolution enough, when it came to the push, to carry
into execution their former intentions.

China the only country, where this barbarous practice of exposing children
prevails at present, is the most populous country we know; and every man is
married before he is twenty. Such early marriages could scarce be general, had
not men the prospect of so easy a method of getting rid of their children. I
own, that Plutarch De amore prolis.
speaks of it as a very universal maxim of the poor to expose their children;
and as the rich were then averse to marriage, on account of the courtship they
met with from those who expected legacies from them, the public must have been
in a bad situation betwixt them. THE practice of leaving great sums of money to
friends, though one had near relations, was common to Greece as well as Rome; as
we may gather from Lucian. This practice prevails very little in modern times;
and Ben Johnson's volpone is therefore almost entirely extracted from ancient
authors, and suits better the manners of those times.


OF all sciences there is none, where first appearances are more deceitful than
politics. Hospitals for foundlings seem favorable to the increase of numbers;
and perhaps, may be so, when kept under proper restrictions. But when they open
the door to every one, without distinction, they have probably a contrary
effect, and are pernicious to the state. It Is computed, that every ninth child,
born at Paris, is sent to the hospital; though it seems certain, according to the
common course of human affairs, that it is not a hundredth part, whose parents
are altogether incapacitated to rear and educate them. The infinite difference,
for health, industry, and morals, betwixt an education in an hospital and that
in a private family, should induce us not to make the entrance into an hospital
too easy and engaging. To kill one's own child is shocking to nature, and must
therefore be pretty unusual; but to turn over the care of him upon others is
very tempting to the natural indolence of mankind.

HAVING considered the domestic life and manners of the ancients, compared to
those of the moderns; It may justly be thought, that the liberty of divorces in
Rome was another discouragement to marriage. Such a practice prevents not
quarrels from humor, or rather increases them, and occasions also those from
interest, which are much more dangerous and destructive. See farther on this
head, Essays moral and political, essay XXI. Perhaps too the unnatural lusts of
the ancients ought to be taken into consideration, as of some moment.
where, in the main, we seem rather superior, so far as the present question is
concerned; we shall now examine the political customs and institutions of both
ages, and weigh their influence in retarding or forwarding the propagation of
mankind.

BEFORE the increase of the Roman power, or rather, till its full
establishment, almost all the nations, which are the scene of ancient history,
were divided into small territories or petty commonwealths, where of course a
great equality of fortune prevailed, and the center of government was always
very near its frontiers. This was the situation of affairs, not only in Greece
and Italy, but also in Spain, Gaul, Germany, Afric, and a great part of the
lesser Asia: And it must be owned, that no institution could be more favorable
to the propagation of mankind. For though a man of an overgrown fortune, not
being able to consume more than another, must share it with those who serve and
attend him: Yet their possession being precarious, they have not the same
encouragement to marriage, as if each had a small fortune, secure and
independent. Enormous cities are besides destructive to society, beget vice and
disorder of all kinds, starve the remoter provinces, and even starve
themselves, by the high prices, to which they raise all provisions. Where each
man had his little house and field to himself, and each county had its capital,
free and independent: What a happy situation of mankind! How favorable to
industry and agriculture; to marriage and propagation! The prolific virtue of
men, were it to act in its full extent, without that restraint, which poverty
and necessity imposes on it, would double the numbers every generation: And
nothing surely can give it more liberty, than such small commonwealths, and
such an equality of fortune amongst the citizens. All small states naturally
produce equality of fortune, because they afford no opportunities of great
increase; but small commonwealths much more, by that division of power and
authority, which is essential to them.

WHEN Xenophon De exp. Cyr. lib. 7.
returned after the famous expedition with Cyrus, he hired himself and 6000 of
the Greeks into the service of Seuthes, a prince of Thrace; and the articles of
his agreement were, that each soldier should receive a daric a month, each
captain two darics, and he himself as general four: A regulation of pay, which
would not a little surprise our modern officers.

WHEN Demosthenes and Aeschines, with eight more, were sent ambassadors to
Philip of Macedon, their appointments for above four months were a thousand
drachmas, which is less than a dram a day for each ambassador. Demost. de
falsa leg. He calls it a considerable sum.
But a dram a day, nay sometimes two, Thucyd. lib. 3.
was the pay of a common foot soldier.

A CENTURION amongst the Romans had only double pay to a common soldier, in
Polybius's LIB. 6. cap. 37.
time; and we accordingly find their gratuities after a triumph regulated by
that proportion. Tit. Live. lib 41. cap 7, 13. and alibi, passim.
But Mark Anthony and the triumvirate gave the centurions five times the reward
of the other. Appian de bell. civ. lib. 4.
So much had the increase of the commonwealth increased the inequality amongst
the citizens. Caesar gave the centurions ten times the gratuity of the common
soldiers. De bell. Gallico, lib. 8. In the Rhodian cartel, mentioned
afterward, no distinction in the price of ransom was made on account of ranks
in the army.


IT must be owned, that the situation of affairs in modern times, with regard
to civil liberty, as well as equality of fortune, is not near so favorable,
either to the propagation or happiness of mankind. Europe is shared out mostly
into great monarchies; and such parts of it as are divided into small
territories, are commonly governed by absolute princes, who ruin their people
by a ridiculous mimickry of the greater monarchs, in the splendour of their
court and number of their forces. Swisserland alone and Holland resemble the
ancient republics; and though the former is far from possessing any advantage
either of soil, climate, or commerce, yet the numbers of people, with which it
abounds, notwithstanding their enlisting themselves into every service in
Europe, prove sufficiently the advantages of their political institutions.

THE ancient republics derived their chief or only security from the numbers of
their citizens. The Trachinians having lost great numbers of their people, the
remainder, instead of enriching themselves by the inheritance of their fellow
citizens, applied to Sparta, their metropolis, for a new stock of inhabitants.
The Spartans immediately collected ten thousand men, amongst whom the old
citizens divided the lands, of which the former proprietors had perished. Diod.
Sic. lib. 12. Thucyd. lib. 3.


AFTER Timoleon had banished Dionysius from Syracuse, and had settled the
affairs of Sicily, finding the cities of Syracuse and Sellinuntium extremely
depopulated by tyranny, war, and faction, he invited over from Greece some new
inhabitants to repeople them. Diod. Sic. lib. 16.
Immediately forty thousand men (Plutarch In vita Timol.
says sixty thousand) offered themselves; and he distributed so many lots of
land amongst them, to the great satisfaction of the ancient inhabitants: A
proof at once of the maxims of ancient policy, which affected populousness more
than riches; and of the good effects of these maxims, in the extreme
populousness of that small country, Greece, which could at once supply so large
a colony. The case was not much different with the Romans in early times. He is
a pernicious citizen, said M. Curious, who cannot be contented with seven acres.
Plin. lib. 18. cap. 3. The same author in cap. 6. says, Verumque fatentibus
latifundia perdidere Italiam: Jam vero et provincias. Sex domi femissem Africae
possidebant, cum interfecit cos Nero princeps. In this view, the barbarous
butchery committed by the first Roman emperors was not perhaps so destructive
to the public as we may imagine. These never ceased till they had extinguished
all the illustrious families, which had enjoyed the plunder of the world,
during the latter ages of the republic. The new nobles, who rose in their
place, were less splendid, as we learn from Tacit. Ann. lib. 3. cap. 55.
Such ideas of equality could not fail to produce populousness.

WE must now consider what disadvantages the ancients lay under with regard to
populousness, and what checks they received from their political maxims and
institutions. There are commonly compensations in every human condition; and
though these compensations be not always perfectly equivalent, yet they serve, at
least, to restrain the prevailing principle. To compare them and estimate their
influence is indeed very difficult, even where they take place in the same age
and in neighboring countries: But where several ages have intervened, and only
scattered lights are afforded us by ancient authors; what can we do but amuse
ourselves by talking, pro and con, on an interesting subject, and thereby
correcting all hasty and violent determinations?

First, WE may observe, that the ancient republics were almost in perpetual
war; a natural effect of their martial spirit, their love of liberty, their
mutual emulation, and that hatred, which generally prevails amongst nations,
that live in a close neighborhood. Now war in a small state is much more
destructive than in a great one; both because all the inhabitants, in the
former case, must fill the armies, and because the state is all frontier, and
all exposed to the inroads of the enemy.

THE maxims of ancient war were much more destructive than those of modern;
chiefly by the distribution of plunder, in which the soldiers were indulged.
Our common soldiers are such a low rascally set of people, that we find any
abundance, beyond their simple pay, breeds confusion and disorder, and a total
dissolution of discipline. The very wretchedness and meanness of those, who
fill the modern armies, render them less destructive to the countries, which
they invade: One instance, amongst many, of the deceitfulness of first
appearances in all political reasonings. THE ancient soldiers, being free
citizens, above the lowest rank, were all married. Our modern soldiers are
either forc'dto live unmarry'd, or their marriages turn to small account
toward the increase of mankind. A circumstance which ought, perhaps, to be
taken into consideration, as of some consequence in favor of the ancients.


ANCIENT battles were much more bloody by the very nature of the weapons
employed in them. The ancients drew up their men 16 or 20, sometimes 50 men
deep, which made a narrow front; and 'twas not difficult to find a field, in
which both armies might be marshalled, and might engage with each other. Even
where any body of the troops was kept off by hedges, hillocks, woods, or hollow
ways, the battle was not so soon decided betwixt the contending parties, but
that the others had time to overcome the difficulties, that opposed them, and
take part in the engagement. And as the whole armies were thus engaged, and
each man closely buckl'd to his antagonist, the battles were commonly very
bloody, and great slaughter made on both sides, but especially on the
vanquished. The long, thin lines, required by fire arms, and the quick decision
of the fray, render our modern engagements but partial rencounters, and enable
the general, who is foiled in the beginning of the day, to draw off the
greatest part of his army, sound and entire. Could Folard's project of the
column take place (which seems impracticable WHAT is the advantage of the
column after it has broke the enemy's line? Only, that it then takes them in
the flank, and dissipates whatever stands near it by a fire from all sides. But
till it has broke them, does it not present a flank to the enemy, and that
exposed to their musquetry, and what is much worse, to their cannon?
) it would render modern battles as destructive as the ancient.

THE battles of antiquity, both by their duration and their resemblance of
single combats, were wrought up to a degree of fury, quite unknown to latter
ages. Nothing could then engage the combatants to give quarter but the hopes of
profit, by making slaves of their prisoners. In civil wars, as we learn from
Tacitus, HIST. lib. 2. cap. 44.
the battles were the most bloody, because the prisoners were not slaves.

WHAT a stout resistance must be made, where the vanquished expected so hard a
fate! How inveterate the rage, where the maxims of war were, in every respect,
so bloody and severe!

INSTANCES are very frequent, in ancient history, of cities besieged, whose
inhabitants, rather than open their gates, murdered their wives and children,
and rushed themselves on a voluntary death, sweetened perhaps with a little
prospect of revenge upon the enemy. Greeks, As Abydus mentioned by Livy, lib.
31. cap. 17, 18. and Polyb. lib. 16. As also the Xanthians, Appian de bell.
civil. lib. 4.
as well as Barbarians, have been often wrought up to this degree of fury. And
the same determinate spirit and cruelty must, in many other instances, less
remarkable, have been extremely destructive to human society, in those petty
commonwealths, that lived in a close neighborhood, and were engaged in
perpetual wars and contentions.

SOMETIMES the wars in Greece, says Plutarch, In vita Arati.
were carried on entirely by inroads, and robberies, and pyracies. Such a
method of war must be more destructive, in small states, than the bloodiest
battles and sieges.

BY the laws of the 12 tables, possession for two years formed a prescription
for land; one year for movables: INST. lib. 2. cap. 6. It Is true, the same law
seems to have been continued, till the time of Justinian. But abuses,
introduced by barbarism, are not always corrected by civility.
An indication, that there was not in Italy, during that period, much more
order, tranquillity, and settled police than there is at present amongst the
Tartars.

THE only cartel, I remember in ancient history, is that betwixt Demetrius
Poliorcetes and the Rhodians; when it was agreed, that a free citizen should be
restored for 1000 drachamas, a slave bearing arms for 500. Diod. Sicul. lib. 20.


BUT secondly, it appears, that ancient manners were more unfavourable than the
modern, not only in time of war but also in time of peace, and that too, in
every respect, except the love of civil liberty and equality, which is, I own,
of considerable importance. To exclude faction from a free government is very
difficult, if not altogether impracticable; but such inveterate rage betwixt
the factions, and such bloody maxims, are found, in modern times, amongst
religious parties alone, where bigoted priests are the accusers, judges, and
executioners. In ancient history, we may always observe, where one party
prevailed, whether the nobles or people, (for I can observe no difference in
this respect Lysias, who was himself of the popular faction, and very narrowly
escaped from the 30 Tyrants, says that the Democracy was as violent a
government as the Oligarchy. Orat. 24. de statu popul.
) that they immediately butchered all of the opposite party they laid their
hands on, and banished such as had been so fortunate as to escape their fury.
No form of process, no law, no trial, no pardon. A fourth, a third, perhaps
near a half of the city were slaughtered, or expelled, every revolution; and
the exiles always joined foreign enemies, and did all the mischief possible to
their fellow citizens; till fortune put it in their power to take full revenge
by a new revolution. And as these were very frequent in such violent
governments, the disorder, diffidence, jealousy, enmity, which must prevail,
are not easy for us to imagine in this age of the world.

THERE are only two revolutions I can recollect in all ancient history, which
past without great severity and great effusion of blood in massacres and
assassinations, viz. the restoration of the Athenian democracy by Thrasybulus,
and the subduing the Roman republic by Caesar. We learn from ancient history,
that Thrasybulus past a general amnesty for all past offenses; and first
introduced that word, as well as practice into Greece. Cicero Philip. 1.
It appears, however, from many orations of Lysias, As orat. 11. contra
Eratost. orat. 12. contra Agorat. orat 15. pro Mantith.
that the chief, and even some of the subaltern offenders, in the preceding
tyranny, were tried, and capitally punished. This is a difficulty not cleared
up, and even not observed, by antiquarians and historians. And as to Caesar's
clemency, though much celebrated, it would not gain great applause in the present
age. He butchered, for instance, all Cato's senate, when he became master of
Utica; Appian de bell. civ. lib. 2.
and these, we may readily believe, were not the most worthless of the party.
All those, who had born arms against that usurper, were forfeited; and, by
Hirtius's law, declared incapable of all public offices.

THESE people were extremely fond of liberty; but seem not to have understood
it very well. When the thirty tyrants first established their dominion at
Athens, they began with seizing all the sycophants and informers, that had been
so troublesome during the democracy, and putting them to death, by an arbitrary
sentence and execution. Every man, says Sallust SEE Caesar's speech de bell.
Catil.
and Lysias, ORAT. 24. And in orat 29. he mentions the faction only as the
cause why these illegal punishments should displease.
was rejoiced at these punishments; not considering, that liberty was from that
moment annihilated.

THE utmost energy of Thucydides's nervous style, and the great copiousness and
expression of the Greek language seem to sink under that historian, when he
attempts to describe the disorders, that arose from faction, throughout all the
Greek commonwealths. You would imagine, that he still labors with a thought
greater than he can find words to communicate. And he concludes his pathetic
description with an observation, which is at once very refined and very solid.
In these contests, (says he,) those who were dullest and most stupid and had
the least foresight, commonly prevailed. For being conscious of this weakness,
and dreading to be over-reached by those of greater penetration, they went to
work hastily, without premeditation, by the sword and poniard, and thereby
prevented their antagonists, who were forming fine schemes and projects for
their destruction. LIB. 3. The country in Europe, wherein I have observed the
factions to be most violent and party hatred the strongest, is Ireland. This
goes so far as to cut off even the most common intercourse of civilities
betwixt the protestants and catholics. Their cruel insurrections, and the
severe revenges which they have taken of each other, are the causes of this
mutual ill will, which is the chief source of disorder, poverty, and
depopulation in that country. The Greek factions, I imagine, to have been
inflamed still to a higher degree of rage: The revolutions being commonly more
frequent, and the maxims of assassination much more avowed and acknowledged.


NOT to mention Dionysius Plut. de virt. et fort. Alex.
the elder, who is computed to have butchered in cold blood above 10,000 of his
fellow citizens; nor Agathocles, Diod. Sic. lib. 18, 19.
Nabis, Tit. Live. lib. 31, 33, 34.
and others, still more bloody than he; the transactions, even in free
governments, were extremely violent and destructive. At Athens, the thirty
tyrants and the nobles, in a twelvemonth, murdered, without trial, about 1200
of the people, and banished above the half of the citizens that remained. Diod.
Sic. lib. 14. Isocrates says there were only 5000 banished. He makes the number
of those killed amount to 1500. Arcop. Aeschines, contra Ctesi. assigns
precisely the same number. Seneca (de tranq. anim. cap. 5.) says 1300.
In Argos, near the same time, the people killed 1200 of the nobles; and
afterward their own demagogues, because they had refused to carry their
prosecutions farther. Diod. Sic. lib. 15.
The people also in Corcyra killed 1500 of the nobles and banished a thousand.
Diod Sic. lib. 13.
These numbers will appear the more surprising, if we consider the extreme
smallness of these states: But all ancient history is full of such instances.
WE shall mention from Diod. Siculus alone a few, which past in the course of
sixty years during the most shining age of Greece. There were banished from
Sybaris 500 of the nobles and their partisans, lib. 12. p. 77. ex edit.
Rhodomanni. Of Chians 600 citizens banished, lib. 13. p. 189. At Ephesus, 340
killed, 1000 banished, lib. 13. p. 223. Of Cyrenians, 500 nobles killed; all
the rest banished, lib. 14. p. 263. The Corinthians killed 120, banished 500,
lib. 14. p. 304. Phaebidas the Spartan banished 300 Baeotians, lib. 15. p. 342.
Upon the fall of the Lacedaemonians, Democracies were restored in many cities,
and severe vengeance taken of the nobles, after the Greek manner. But matters
did not end there. For the banished nobles, returning in many places, butchered
their adversaries at Phialae, in Corinth, in Megara, in Phliasia. In this last
place, they killed 300 of the people; but these again revolting, killed above
600 of the nobles and banished the rest, lib. 15. p. 357. In Arcadia 1400
banished, besides many killed. The banished retired to Sparta and to
Pallantium: The latter delivered up to their countrymen, and all killed, lib.
15. p. 373. Of the banished from Argos and Thebes, there were 500 in the
Spartan army, id. p. 374. Here is a detail of the most remarkable of
Agathocles' cruelties from the same author. The people before his usurpation
had banished 600 nobles, lib. 19. p. 655. Afterward, that tyrant, in
concurrence with the people, killed 4000 nobles and banished 6000, id. p. 657.
He killed 4000 people at Gela, id. p. 741. By Agathocles' brother 8000 banished
from Syracuse, lib. 20. p. 757. The inhabitants of Aegesta, to the number of
40,000 were killed, man, woman, and child, and with tortures, for the sake of
their money, id. p. 802. All the relations, viz. father, brother, children,
grandfather of his Libyan army killed, id. p. 803. He killed 7000 exiles after
capitulation, id. p. 816. It Is to be remarkt that Agathocles was a man of great
sense and courage.


WHEN Alexander ordered all the exiles to be restored, through all the cities; it
was found that the whole amounted to 20,000 men; Diod. Sic. lib. 18.
the remains probably of still greater slaughters and massacres. What an
astonishing multitude in so narrow a country as ancient Greece! And what
domestic confusion, jealousy, partiality, revenge, heart-burnings, must tear
those cities, where factions were wrought up to such a degree of fury and
despair?

'TWOU'D be easier, says Isocrates to Philip, to raise an army in Greece at
present from the vagabonds than from the cities.

EVEN where affairs came not to such extremities (which they failed not to do
almost in every city twice or thrice every century) property was rendered very
precarious by the maxims of ancient government. Xenophon, in the banquet of
Socrates, gives us a very natural, unaffected description of the tyranny of the
Athenian people. In my poverty, (says Charmides,) I am much more happy than
ever I was during my riches; as much as it is happier to be in security than in
terrors, free than a slave, to receive than to pay court, to be trusted than
suspected. Formerly I was obliged to caress every informer: Some imposition was
continually laid upon me; and it was never allowed me to travel or be absent
from the city. At present, when I am poor, I look big and threaten others. The
rich are afraid of me, and show me every kind of civility and respect; and I am
become a kind of tyrant in the city. PAGE 885. exedit. Le^n^l.


IN one of the pleadings of Lysias, ORAT. 29. in Nicom.
the orator very coolly speaks of it, by the bye, as a maxim of the Athenian
people, that, whenever they wanted money, they put to death some of the rich
citizens as well as strangers, for the sake of the forfeiture. In mentioning
this, he seems to have no intention of blaming them; still less, of provoking
them, who were his audience and judges.

WHETHER a man was a citizen or a stranger amongst that people, it seems indeed
requisite, either that he should impoverish himself, or the people would
impoverish him, and perhaps kill him into the bargain. The orator last
mentioned gives a pleasant account of an estate laid out in the public service;
IN order to recommend his client to the favor of the people, he enumerates all
the sams he had expended. When (...) 30 minas: Upon a chorus of men 20 minas;
(...) 8 minas; (...) 50 minas; (...) 3 minas: Seven times trierarch, where he
spent 6 talents: Taxes, once 30 minas; another time 40; (...), 12 minas; (...)
15 minas; (...) 18 minas; (...) 7 minas; (...) 15 minas; (...) 30 minas. In the
whole 10 talents 38 minas: An immense sum for an Athenian fortune, and what
alone would be esteemed great riches. Orat. 20. It Is true, he says, the law did
not oblige absolutely to be at so much expense, not above a fourth. But without
the favor of the people, no body was so much as safe; and this was the only
way to gain it. See, farther orat. 24. de pop. statu. In another place, he
introduces a speaker, who says that he had spent his whole fortune, and an
immense one, eighty talents, for the people. Orat. 25. de prob. Evandri. The
(...) or strangers find, says he, if they do not contribute largely enough to
the people's fancy, that they have reason to repent. Orat. 30. contra Phil. You
may see with what care Demosthenes displays his expenses of this nature, when
he pleads for himself de corona. And how he exaggerates Midias stinginess in
this particular, in his accusation of that criminal. All this, by the bye, is a
mark of a very iniquitous judicature: And yet the Athenians valued themselves
on having the most legal and regular administration of any people in Greece.
that is, above the third of it, in rareeshows and figured dances.

INEED not insist on the Greek tyrannies, which were altogether horrible. Even
the mixed monarchies, by which most of the ancient states of Greece were
governed, before the introduction of republics, were very unsettled. Scarce any
city, but Athens, says Isocrates, could show a succession of kings, for four or
five generations Panath.
.

BESIDES many other obvious reasons for the instability of ancient monarchies,
the equal division of property amongst the brothers in private families, by a
necessary consequence, must contribute to unsettle and disturb the state. The
universal preference given to the elder in modern governments, though it
increases the inequality of fortunes, has, however, this good effect, that it
accustoms men to the same idea of public succession, and cuts off all claim and
pretension of the younger.

THE new settled colony of Heraclea, falling immediately into factions, applied
to Sparta, who sent Heripidas with full authority to quiet their dissensions.
This man, not provoked by any opposition, not inflamed by party rage, knew no
better expedient than immediately putting to death about 500 of the citizens
Diod. Sic. lib. 14.
. A strong proof how deeply rooted these violent maxims of government were
throughout all Greece.

IF such was the disposition of men's minds amongst that refined people, what
may be expected in the commonwealths of Italy, Afric, Spain, and Gaul, which
were denominated barbarous? Why otherways did the Greeks so much value
themselves on their humanity, gentleness and moderation above all other
nations? This reasoning seems very natural: But unluckily the history of the
Roman commonwealth, in its earlier times, if we give credit to the received
accounts, stands against us. No blood was ever shed in any sedition at Rome,
'till the murder of the Gracchi. Dionysius Halicarnassoeus LIB. 1.
, observing the singular humanity of the Roman people in this respect, makes
use of it as an argument that they were originally of Grecian extraction:
Whence we may conclude, that the factions and revolutions in the barbarous
republics were more violent than even those of Greece above mentioned.

IF the Romans were so late in coming to blows, they made ample compensation
after they had once entered upon the bloody scene; and Appian's history of
their civil wars contains the most frightful picture of massacres,
proscriptions and forfeitures, that ever was presented to the world. What
pleases most in that historian is, that he seems to feel a proper resentment of
these barbarous proceedings; and talks not with that provoking coolness and
indifference, which custom had produced in many of the Greek historians. THE
authorities cited above are all historians, orators, and philosophers, whose
testimony is unquestioned. It Is dangerous to rely upon writers, who deal in
ridicule and satire. What will posterity, for instance, infer from this passage
of Dr. Swift? I told him, that in the kingdom of Tribnia (Britain) by the
Natives called Langdon, (London) where I had sojourned some time in my travels,
the bulk of the people consist, in a manner, wholly of discoverers, witnesses,
informers, accusers, prosecutors, evidences, swearers, together with their
several subservient and subaltern instruments, all under the colors, the
conduct, and pay of ministers of state and their deputies. The plots in that
kingdom are usually the workmanship of those persons, etc. Gulliver's travels.
Such a representation might suit the government of Athens; but not that of
England, which is a prodigy, even in modern times, for humanity, justice and
liberty. Yet the doctor's satire, though carried to extremes, as is usual with
him, even beyond other satirical writers, did not altogether want an object.
The bishop of Rochester, who was his friend and of the same party, had been
banished a little before by a bill of attainder, with great justice, but
without such a proof as was legal, or according to the strict forms of common
law.


THE maxims of ancient politics contain, in general, so little humanity and
moderation, that it seems superfluous to give any particular reason for the
violences committed at any particular period. Yet I cannot forbear observing,
that the laws, in the latter ages of the Roman commonwealth, were so absurdly
contrived, that they obliged the heads of parties to have recourse to these
extremities. All capital punishments were abolished: However criminal, or what
is more, however dangerous any citizen might be, he could not regularly be
punished otherways than by banishment: And it became necessary, in the
revolutions of party, to draw the sword of private vengeance; nor was it easy,
when laws were once violated, to set bounds to these sanguinary proceedings.
Had Brutus himself prevailed over the triumvirate, could he, in common
prudence, have allowed Octavius and Anthony to live, and have contented himself
with banishing them to Rhodes or Marseilles, where they might still have
plotted new commotions and rebellions? His executing C. Antonius, brother to
the triumvir, shows evidently his sense of the matter. Did not Cicero, with the
approbation of all the wise and virtuous of Rome, arbitrarily put to death
Catiline's associates, contrary to law, and without any trial or form of
process? And if he moderated his executions, did it not proceed, either from
the clemency of his temper or the conjunctures of the times? A wretched
security in a government, which pretends to laws and liberty.

THUS, one extreme produces another. In the same manner as excessive severity
in the laws is apt to beget great relaxation in their execution; so their
excessive lenity naturally engenders cruelty and barbarity. It Is dangerous to
force us, in any case, to use freedom with their sacred regulations and
prescriptions.

ONE general cause of the disorders, so frequent in all ancient governments,
seems to have consisted in the great difficulty of establishing any aristocracy
in those ages, and the perpetual discontents and seditions of the people,
whenever even the meanest and most beggarly were excluded from the legislature
and from public offices. The very quality of freeman gave such a rank, being
opposed to that of slave, that it seemed to entitle the possessor to every
power and privilege of the commonwealth. Salon's Plutarch. in vita Salon.
laws excluded no freeman from votes or elections, but confined some
magistracies to a particular census; yet were the people never satisfied 'till
those laws were repealed. By the treaty with Antipater Diod. Sic. lib. 18
, no Athenian had a vote, whose census was less than 2000 drachmas (about 60 l.
Sterling.) And though such a government would to us appear sufficiently
democratical, it was so disagreeable to that people, that above two thirds
immediately deserted their country Id. ibid.
Cassander reduced that census to the half Id, ibid.
; yet still the government was considered as an oligarchical tyranny, and the
effect of foreign violence.

Servius Tullius's Tit. Live. lib. 1. cap. 43.
laws seem very equal and reasonable, by fixing the power in proportion to the
property: Yet the Roman people could never be brought quietly to submit to them.

IN those days, there was no medium betwixt a severe, jealous aristocracy, over
discontented subjects; and a turbulent, factious, tyrannical democracy.

BUT thirdly, there are many other circumstances, in which ancient nations seem
inferior to the modern, both for the happiness and increase of mankind. Trade,
manufactures, industry were no where, in former ages, so flourishing as they
are at present, in Europe. The only garb of the ancients, both for males and
females, seems to have been a kind of flannel, which they wore commonly white
or gray, and which they scoured, as often as it grew dirty. Tire, which carried
on, after Carthage, the greatest commerce of any city in the Mediterranean,
before it was destroyed by Alexander, was no mighty city, if we credit Arrian's
account of its inhabitants LIB. 2. There were 8000 killed during the siege; and
the whole captives amounted to 30,000: Diodorus Siculus lib. 17. says only
13,000: But he accounts for this small number by saying that the Tyrians had
sent away beforehand part of their wives and children to Carthage.
. Athens is commonly supposed to have been a trading city; but it was as
populous before the Median war, as at any time after it, according to Herodotus
LIB. 5. he makes the number of the citizens amount to 30,000.
; and yet its commerce, at that time, was so inconsiderable, that, as the same
historian observes ib. 5.
, even the neighboring coasts of Asia were as little frequented by the Greeks
as the pillars of Hercules: For beyond these, he conceived nothing.

GREAT interest of money and great profits of trade are an infallible
indication, that industry and commerce are but in their infancy. We read in
Lysias Orat. 33. advers. Diagit.
of 100 per cent. profit made on a cargo of two talents, sent to no greater
distance than from Athens to the Adriatic: Nor is this mentioned as an instance
of exorbitant profit. Antidorus, says Demosthenes Contra Aphob. p. 25. ex edit
Aldi.
, paid three talents and a half for a house, which he let at a talent a year:
And the orator blames his own tutors for not employing his money to like
advantage. My fortune, says he, in eleven years minority, ought to have been
tripled. The value of 20 of the slaves, left by his father, he computes at 40
minas; and the yearly profit of their labor at twelve Id. ibid. p. 19.
. The most moderate interest at Athens (for there was higher Id. ibid.
often paid) was 12 per cent. Id. ibid. and Aeschines contra Ciesiph.
; and that paid monthly. Not to insist upon the exorbitant interest of 34 per
cent. to which the vast sums distributed in elections had raised money Epist.
ad Attic. lib. 5. epist. 21.
at Rome, we find, that Verres, before that factious period, stated 24 per
cent. for money, which he left in the publicans hands. And though Cicero exclaims
against this article, it is not on account of the extravagant usury; but
because it had never been customary to state any interest on such occasions
Contra Verr. orat. 3.
. Interest, indeed, sunk at Rome, after the settlement of the empire: But it
never remained any considerable time, so low as in the commercial states of
modern ages SEE discourse IV.
.

AMONGST the other inconveniences, which the Athenians felt from the
fortifying Decelia by the Lacedaemonians, it is represented by Thucydides LIB. 7.
as one of the most considerable, that they could not bring over their corn
from Euboea by land, passing by Oropus, but were obliged to embark it, and to
sail about the promontory of Sunium. A surprising instance of the imperfection
of ancient navigation: For the water carriage is not here above double the land.

I DO not remember any passage in any ancient author, wherein the growth of any
city is ascribed to the establishment of a manufacture. The commerce, which is
said to flourish, is chiefly the exchange of those commodities, for which
different soils and climates were suited. The sale of wine and oil into Africa,
according to Diodorus Siculus LIB 13.
, was the foundation of the riches of Agrigentum. The situation of the city of
Sybaris, according to the same author LIB. 12.
, was the cause of its immense populousness; being built near the two rivers,
Crathys and Sybaris. But these two rivers, we may observe, are not navigable;
and could only produce some fertile valleys for agriculture and husbandry; an
advantage so inconsiderable, that a modern writer would scarcely have taken
notice of it.

THE barbarity of the ancient tyrants, along with the extreme love of liberty,
which animated those ages, must have banished every merchant and manufacturer,
and have quite depopulated the state, had it subsisted upon industry and
commerce. While the cruel and suspicious Dionysius was carrying on his
butcheries, who, that was not detained by his landed property, and could have
carried along with him any art or skill to procure a subsistence in other
countries, would have remained exposed to such implacable barbarity? The
persecutions of Philip the II. and Lewis the XIV. filled all Europe with the
manufacturers of Flanders and of France.

I GRANT, that agriculture is the species of industry, which is chiefly
requisite to the subsistence of multitudes of people; and it is possible, that
this industry may flourish, even where manufactures and other arts are unknown
or neglected. Swisserland is at present a very remarkable instance; where we
find, at once, the most skilful husbandmen and the most bungling tradesmen,
that are to be met with in all Europe. That agriculture flourished mightily in
Greece and Italy, at least in some parts of them, and at some periods, we have
reason to presume: And whether the mechanical arts had reached the same degree
of perfection may not be esteemed so material; especially, if we consider the
great equality in the ancient republics, where each family was obliged to
cultivate, with the greatest care and industry, its own little field, in order
to its subsistence.

BUT is it just reasoning, because agriculture may, in some instances, flourish
without trade or manufactures, to conclude that, in any great extent of
country, and for any great tract of time, it would subsist alone? The most
natural way, surely, of encouraging husbandry, is first to excite other kinds
of industry, and thereby afford the labourer a ready market for his
commodities, and a return of such goods as may contribute to his pleasure and
enjoyment. This method is infallible and universal; and as it prevails more in
modern governments than in the ancient, it affords a presumption of the
superior populousness of the former.

EVERY man, says Xenophon, Oecon.
may be a farmer: No art or skill is requisite: All consists in the industry
and attention to the execution. A strong proof, as Columella hints, that
agriculture was but little known in the age of Xenophon.

ALL our latter improvements and refinements; have they operated nothing
toward the easy subsistence of men, and consequently toward their propagation
and increase? Our superior skill in mechanics, the discovery of new worlds, by
which commerce has been so much enlarged, the establishment of posts, and the
use of bills of exchange; these seem all extremely useful to the encouragement
of art, industry, and populousness. Were we to strike off these, what a check
would we give to every kind of business and labor, and what multitudes of
families would immediately perish from want and hunger? And it seems not
probable, that we could supply the place of these new inventions by any other
regulation or institution.

HAVE we reason to think, that the police of ancient states was any way
comparable to that of modern, or that men had then equal security, either at
home, or in their journeys by land or water? I question not, but every
impartial examiner would give us the preference in this particular. SEE essays
moral and political, essay XV.


THUS upon comparing the whole, it seems impossible to assign any just reason,
why the world should have been more populous in ancient than in modern times.
The equality of property, amongst the ancients, liberty, and the small
divisions of their states, were indeed favorable to the propagation of
mankind: But their wars were more bloody and destructive; their governments
more factious and unsettl'd; commerce and manufactures more feeble and
languishing; and the general police more loose and irregular. These latter
disadvantages seem to form a sufficient counter-balance to the former
advantages; and rather favor the opposite opinion to that which commonly
prevails with regard to this subject.

BUT there is no reasoning, it may be said, against matter of fact. If it
appear, that the world was then more populous than at present, we may be
assured, that our conjectures are false, and that we have overlooked some
material circumstance in the comparison. This I readily own: All our preceding
reasonings, I acknowledge to be mere trifling, or, at least, small skirmishes
and frivolous rencounters, that decide nothing. But unluckily the main combat,
where we compare facts, cannot be rendered much more decisive. The facts
delivered by ancient authors are either so uncertain or so imperfect as to
afford us nothing decisive in this matter. How indeed could it be otherwise?
The very facts, which we must oppose to them, in computing the greatness of
modern states, are far from being either certain or complete. Many grounds of
calculation, proceeded on by celebrated writers, are little better than those
of the emperor Heliogabalus, who formed an estimate of the immense greatness of
Rome, from ten thousand pound weight of cobwebs, which had been found in that
city. Aelii Lamprid, in vita Heliog. cap. 26.


IT IS to be remarked, that all kinds of numbers are uncertain in ancient
manuscripts, and have been subject to much greater corruptions than any other
part of the text; and that for a very obvious reason. Any alteration in other
places, commonly affects the sense or grammar, and is more readily perceived by
the reader and transcriber.

FEW enumerations of inhabitants have been made of any tract of country by any
ancient author of good authority; so as to afford us a large enough view for
comparison.

IT IS probable, that there was formerly a good foundation for the numbers of
citizens assigned to any free city; because they entered for a share of the
government, and there were exact registers kept of them. But as the number of
slaves is seldom mentioned, this leaves us in as great uncertainty as ever,
with regard to the populousness even of single cities.

The first page of Thucydides is, in my opinion, the commencement of real
history. All preceding narrations are so intermixed with fable, that
philosophers ought to abandon them, in a great measure, to the embellishment of
poets and orators. IN general, there is more candor and sincerity in ancient
historians, but less exactness and care, than in the moderns. Our speculative
factions, especially those of religion, throw such an illusion over our minds,
that men seem to regard impartiality to their adversaries and to heretics, as a
vice or weakness: But the commonness of books, by means of printing, has
obliged modern historians to be more careful in avoiding contradictions and
incongruities. Diodorus Siculus is a good writer; but it is with pain I see his
narration contradict, in so many particulars, the two most authentic pieces of
all Greek history, viz. Xenophon's expedition, and Demosthenes' orations.
Plutarch and Appian seem scarce ever to have read Cicero's epistles.


WITH regard to remote times, the numbers of people assigned are often
ridiculous, and lose all credit and authority. The free citizens of Sybaris,
able to bear arms, and actually drawn out in battle, were 300,000. They
encountered at Siagra with 100,000 citizens of Crotona, another Greek city
contiguous to them; and were defeated. This is Diodorus Siculus's LIB. 12.
account; and is very seriously insisted on by that historian. Strabo LIB. 6.
also mentions the same number of Sybarites.

Diodorus Siculus LIB. 13.
, enumerating the inhabitants of Agrigentum, when it was destroyed by the
Carthaginians, says, that they amounted to 20,000 citizens, 200,000 strangers,
besides slaves, who, in so opulent a city, as he represents it, would probably
be, at least, as numerous. We must remark, that the women and the children are
not included; and that therefore, upon the whole, the city must contain near
two millions of inhabitants Diagenes Laertius (in vita Empedoclis) says, that
Agrigentum contained only 800,000 inhabitants.
And what was the reason of so immense an increase? They were very industrious
in cultivating the neighboring fields, not exceeding a small English county;
and they traded with their wine and oil to Africa, which, at that time, had
none of these commodities.

Ptolemy, says Theocritus IDYLL. 17.
, commands 33,339 cities. I suppose the singularity of the number was the
reason of assigning it. Diodorus Siculus LIB. 1.
gives three millions of inhabitants to Egypt, a very small number: But then
he makes the number of their cities amount to 18,000: An evident contradiction.

He says ID. ibid.
, the people were formerly seven millions. Thus remote times are always most
envied and admired.

THAT Xerxes's army was extremely numerous, I can readily believe; both from
the great extent of his empire, and from the foolish practice of the Eastern
nations, of encumbering their camp with a superfluous multitude: But will any
reasonable man cite Herodotus's wonderful narrations as an authority? There is
something very rational, I own, in Lysias's Orat. funebris.
argument upon this subject. Had not Xerxes's army been incredibly numerous,
says he, he had never made a bridge over the Hellespont: It had been much
easier to have transported his men over so short a passage, with the numerous
shipping he was master of.

Polybius LIB. 2.
says, that the Romans, betwixt the first and second Punic wars, being
threatened with an invasion from the Gauls, mustered all their own forces, and
those of their allies, and found them amount to seven hundred thousand men able
to bear arms. A great number surely, and which, when joined to the slaves, is
probably more than that extent of country affords at present The country, that
supplied this number, was not above a third of Italy, viz. the pope's
dominions, Tuscany, and a part of the kingdom of Naples.
The enumeration too seems to have been made with some exactness; and Polybius
gives us the detail of the particulars. But might not the number be magnified,
in order to encourage the people?

Diodorus Siculus LIB. 2.
makes the same enumeration amount to near a million: These variations are
suspicious. He plainly too supposes, that Italy in his time was not so
populous: Another very suspicious circumstance. For who can believe, that the
inhabitants of that country diminished from the time of the first Punic war to
that of the triumvirates?

Julius Caesar, according to Appian Celtica.
, encountered four millions of Gauls, killed one million, and took another
prisoner Plutarch (in vita Caes.) makes the number that Caesar fought with
amount only to 3 millions. Julian (in Caesarihus) to 2.
. Supposing the numbers of the enemy's army and of the killed could be exactly
assigned, which never is possible; how could it be known how often the same man
returned into the armies, or how distinguish the new from the old levied
soldiers? No attention ought ever to be given to such loose, exaggerated
calculations; especially where the author tells us not the mediums, upon which
the calculations were formed.

Paterculus LIB. 2. cap. 47.
makes the number killed by Caesar amount only to 400,000: A much more probable
account, and more easily reconciled to the history of these wars, given by that
conqueror himself in his commentaries.

ONE would imagine, that every circumstance of the life and actions of
Dionysius the elder might be regarded as authentic, and free from all fabulous
exaggerations; both because he lived at a time when letters flourished most in
Greece, and because his chief historian was Philistus, a man allowed to be of
great genius, and who was a courtier and minister of that prince. But can we
admit, that he had a standing army of 100,000 foot, 10,000 horse, and a fleet
of 400 galleys? Diod, Sic. lib, 2.
These, we may observe, were mercenary forces, and subsisted upon their pay,
like our armies in Europe. For the citizens were all disarmed; and when Dion
afterward invaded Sicily, and called on his countrymen to vindicate their
liberty, he was obliged to bring arms along with him, which he distributed
among those who joined him. Plutarch, in vita Dionis.
In a state, where agriculture alone flourishes, there may be many inhabitants;
and if these be all armed and disciplined, a great force may be called out upon
occasion: But great numbers of mercenary troops can never be maintained,
without either trade and manufactures, or very extensive dominions. The United
Provinces never were masters of such a force by sea and land, as that which is
said to belong to Dionysius; yet they possess as large a territory, perfectly
well cultivated, and have infinitely more resources from their commerce and
industry. Diodorus Siculus allows, that, even in his time, the army of
Dionysius appeared incredible; that is, as I interpret it, it was entirely a
fiction, and the opinion arose from the exaggerated flattery of the courtiers,
and perhaps from the vanity and policy of the tyrant himself.

THE critical art may very justly be suspected of temerity, when it pretends to
correct or dispute the plain testimony of ancient historians by any probable or
analogical reasonings: Yet the license of authors upon all subjects,
particularly with regard to numbers, is so great, that we ought still to retain
a kind of doubt or reserve, whenever the facts advanced depart, in the least,
from the common bounds of nature and experience. I shall give an instance with
regard to modern history. Sir William Temple tells us, in his memoirs, that,
having a free conversation with Charles the II, he took the opportunity of
representing to that monarch the impossibility of introducing into this island
the religion and government of France, chiefly on account of the great force,
requisite to subdue the spirit and liberty of so brave a people. The Romans,
says he, were forced to keep up 12 legions for that purpose'' (a great
absurdity Strabo, lib. 4. says that one legion would be sufficient, with a few
cavalry; but the Romans commonly kept up somewhat a greater force in this
island; which they never took pains entirely to subdue.
) and Cromwell left an army of near eighty thousand men. Must not this last
fact be regarded as unquestioned by future critics, when they find it asserted
by a wise and learned minister of state, contemporary to the fact, and who
addressed his discourse, upon an ungrateful subject, to a great monarch, who was
also contemporary, and who himself broke those very forces about fourteen years
before. Yet by the most undoubted authority, we may insist, that Cromwell's
army, when he died, did not amount to half the number here mentioned.

IT IS a very usual fallacy to consider all the ages of antiquity as one period,
and to compute the numbers contained in the great cities mentioned by ancient
authors, as if these cities had been all contemporary. The Greek colonies
flourished extremely in Sicily, during the age of Alexander: But in Augustus's
time they were so decayed, that almost all the product of that fertile island
was consumed in Italy. Strabo. lib. 6.


LET us now examine the numbers of inhabitants assigned to particular cities in
antiquity; and omitting the numbers of Nineveh, Babylon, and the Egyptian
Thebes, let us confine ourselves to the sphere of real history, to the Grecian
and Roman empires. I must own, the more I consider this subject, the more am I
inclined to skepticism, with regard to the great populousness ascribed to
ancient times.

Athens is said by Apolog. Socr.
Plato to be a very great city; and it was surely the greatest of all the Greek
Argos seems also to have been a great city: For Lysias contents himself with
saying that it did not exceed Athens. Orat. 34.
cities, excepting Syracuse, which was nearly about the same size in
Thucydides's LIB. 6. see also Plutarch. in vita Niciae.
time, and afterward increased beyond it. For Cicero Orat. contra Verrem, lib.
4. cap. 52. Strabo, lib. 6. says it was 22 miles in compass. But then we are to
consider, that it contained two harbors within it; one of which was a very
large one; and might be regarded as a kind of bay.
mentions it as the greatest of all the Greek cities in his time; not
comprehending, I suppose, either Antioch or Alexandria under that denomination.
Athenaeus LIB. 6. cap. 20.
says, that by the enumeration of Demetrius Phalereus there were in Athens
21,000 citizens, 10,000 strangers, and 400,000 slaves. This number is very much
insisted on, by those whose opinion I call in question, and is esteemed a
fundamental fact to their purpose: But in my opinion there is no point of
criticism more certain, than that Athenaeus, and Ctesicles, whom he cites, are
here mistaken, and that the number of slaves is augmented by a whole cipher,
and ought not to be regarded as more than 40,000.

First. WHEN the number of citizens is said to be 21,000 by Athenaeus,
Demosthenes assigns 20,000. contra Aristog.
men of full age are only understood. For (1) Herodotus LIB. 5.
says, that Aristagoras, ambassador from the Ionians, found it harder to
deceive one Spartan than 30,000 Athenians; meaning, in a loose way, the whole
state, supposed in one popular assembly, excluding the women and children. (2)
Thucydides LIB. 8.
says, that making allowances for all the absentees in the fleet, army,
garrisons, and for people employed in their private affairs, the Athenian
assembly never rose to five thousand. (3) The forces enumerated by the same
historian LIB. 2. Diodorus Siculus's account perfectly agrees, lib. 12.
, being all citizens, and amounting to 13,000 heavy armed infantry, prove the
same method of calculation; as also the whole tenor of the Greek historians,
who always understand men of full age, when they assign the number of citizens
in any republic. Now these being but the fourth of the inhabitants, the free
Athenians were by this account 84,000; the strangers 40,000; and the slaves,
calculating by the smaller number, and allowing that they married and
propagated at the same rate with freemen, were 160,000: And the whole
inhabitants 284,000: A large enough number surely. The other number 1,720,000
makes Athens larger than London and Paris united.

Secondly. THERE were but 10,000 houses in Athens. Xenopbon. mem. lib. 2.


Thirdly. THOUGH the extent of the walls, as given us by Thucydides be great,
LIB. 2.
(viz. 18 miles, beside the seacoast) yet Xenophon De ratione red.
says, there was much waste ground within the walls. They seem indeed to have
joined four distinct and separate cities We are to observe, that when Dionysius
Halycarnassaeus says, that if we regard the ancient walls of Rome, the extent
of the city will not appear greater than that of Athens; he must mean the
Acropolis or high town only. No ancient author ever speaks of the Piraeum,
Phalerus, and Micnychia as the same with Athens. Much less can it be supposed,
that Dionysius would consider the matter in that light, after the walls of
Cimon and Pericles were destroyed, and Athens was entirely separated from these
other towns. This observation destroys all Vossius's reasonings, and introduces
common sense into these calculations.
.

Fourthly. NO insurrection of the slaves, or suspicion of insurrection ever
mentioned by historians; except one commotion of the miners. Athen. lib. 6.


Fifthly. THE Athenians treatment of their slaves is said by Xenophon De rep.
Athen.
and Demosthenes Philip. 3.
and Plautus Sticho.
to have been extremely gentle and indulgent: Which could never have been the
case, had the disproportion been twenty to one. The disproportion is not so
great in any of our colonies; and yet we are obliged to exercise a very
rigorous, military government over the Negroes.

Sixthly. NO man is ever esteemed rich for possessing what may be reckoned an
equal distribution of property in any country, or even triple or quadruple that
wealth. Thus every person in England is computed by some to spend six pence a
day: Yet is he esteemed but poor that has five times that sum. Now Timarchus is
said by Aeschines Contra Timarch.
to have been left in easy circumstances; but he was master only of 10 slaves
employed in manufactures. Lysias and his brother, two strangers, were
proscribed by the thirty for their great riches; though they had but 60 a piece.
Orat. 11.
Demosthenes was left very rich by his father; yet he had no more than 52
slaves. Contra Aphob.
His workhouse, of 20 cabinet makers, is said to be a very considerable
manufactory. Ibid.


Seventhly. DURING the Decelian war, as the Greek historians call it, 20,000
slaves deserted, and brought brought the Athenians to great distress, as we
learn from Thucydides. LIB. 7.
This could not have happened, had they been only the twentieth part. The best
slaves would not desert.

Eighthly. Xenophon De rat. red.
proposes a scheme for entertaining by the public 10,000 slaves: And that so
great a number may possibly be supported, any one will be convinced, says he,
who considers the numbers we had before the Decelian war. A way of speaking
altogether incompatible with the larger number of Athenaeus.

Ninthly. THE whole census of the state of Athens was less than 6000 talents.
And though numbers in ancient manuscripts be often suspected by critics, yet this
is unexceptionable; both because Demosthenes, De classibus.
who gives it, gives also the detail, which checks him, and because Polybius
LIB. 2. cap. 62.
assigns the same number, and reasons upon it. Now the most vulgar slave could
yield by his labor an obolus a day, over and above his maintenance; as we
learn from Xenophon, De rat. red.
who says that Nicias's overfeer paid his master so much for slaves, whom he
employed in digging of mines; and also kept up the number of slaves. If you
will take the pains to estimate an obolus a day, and the slaves at 400,000,
computing only at 4 years purchase, you will find the sum above 12,000 talents;
even though allowance be made for the great number of holy days in Athens.
Besides, many of the slaves would have a much greater value from their art. The
lowest that Demosthenes Contra Aphobum.
estimates any of his father's slaves is two minas ahead. And upon this
supposition, it is a little difficult, I confess, to reconcile even the number
of 40,000 slaves with the census of 6000 talents.

Tenthly. Chios is said by Thucydides LIB. 8.
to contain more slaves, than any Greek city except Sparta. Sparta, then, had
more than Athens, in proportion to the number of citizens. The Spartans were
9000 in the town; 30,000 in the country. Plutarch. in vita Lycurg.
The male slaves, then, of full age, must have been more than 780,000: The
whole more than 3,120,000. A number impossible to be maintained in a narrow,
barren country, such as Laconia, which had no trade. Had the Helotes been so
very numerous, the murder of 2000 mentioned by Thucydides, LIB. 4.
would have irritated them, without weakening them.

BESIDES, we are to consider, that the number, assigned by Athenaeus, THE same
author affirms that Corinth had once 460,000 slaves, Aegina 470,000. But the
foregoing arguments hold strongagainst these facts. It Is however remarkable,
that Athenaeus cites so great an authority as Aristotle for this last fact: And
the scholiast on Pindar mentions the same number of slaves in Aegina.
whatever it is, comprehends all the inhabitants of Attica, as well as those of
Athens. The Athenians affected much a couner try life, as we learn from
Thucydides; LIB. 2.
and when they were all chased into town, by the invasion of their territory
during the Peloponnesian war, the city was not able to contain them, and they
were obliged to lie in the porticos, temples, and even streets, for want of
lodging. Id. ibid.


THE same remark is to be extended to all the other Greek cities; and when the
number of the citizens is assigned, we must always understand it of the
inhabitants of the neighboring country, as well as of the city. Yet even with
this allowance, it must be confessed, that Greece was a populous country, and
much exceeded what we could imagine of so narrow a territory, naturally not
very fertile, and which drew no supplies of corn from other places. For
excepting Athens, which traded to Pontus for that commodity, the other cities
seem to have subsisted chiefly from their neighboring territory. Demost.
contra Lept. The Athenians brought yearly from Pontus 400,000 medimni or
bushels of corn, as appeared from the custom-house books. And at that time they
imported little corn from any other place. This by the bye is a strong proof,
that there is some great mistake in the foregoing passage of Athenaeus. For
Attica itself was so barren in corn, that it produced not enough even to
maintain the peasants. Tit. Livii lib. 43. cap. 6. Lucian, in his navigium sive
vota, says, that a ship, which, by the dimensions he gives, seems to have been
about the size of our third rates, carried as much corn as would maintain all
Attica for a twelvemonth. But perhaps Athens was decayed at that time; and
besides, it is not safe to trust such loose rhetorical calculations.


Rhodes is well known to have been a city of extensive commerce, and of great
fame and splendour; yet it contained only 6000 citizens able to bear arms, when
it was besieged by Demetrius. Diod. Sic. lib. 20.


Thebes was always one of the capital cities of Greece: Isoc. paneg.
But the number of its citizens exceeded not those of Rhodes. Diod Sic. lib. 15
and 17.
Phliasia is said to be a small city by Xenophon; Hist. Graec. lib. 7.
yet we find, that it contained 6000 citizens. Id. lib. 7.
I pretend not to reconcile these two facts.

Mantinaea was equal to any city in Arcadia: Polyb. lib. 2.
Consequently it was equal to Megalopolis, which was 50 stadia, or 6 miles and
a quarter in circumference. Polyb. lib. 9. cap. 20.
But Mantinaea had only 3000 citizens. Lysias, orat. 34.
The Greek cities, therefore, contained often fields and gardens, along with
the houses; and we cannot judge of them by the extent of their walls. Athens
contained no more than 10,000 houses; yet its walls, with the sea coast, were
above 20 miles in extent. Syracuse was 22 miles in circumference; yet was
scarce ever spoke of by the ancients as more populous than Athens. Babylon was
a square of 15 miles or 60 miles in circuit; but it contained large cultivated
fields and enclosures, as we learn from Pliny. Though Aurelian's wall was 50
miles in circumference; Vopiscus in vita Aurel.
the circuit of all the 13 divisions of Rome, taken apart, according to
Publius Victor, was only about 43 miles. When an enemy invaded the country, the
whole inhabitants retired within the walls of the ancient cities, along with
their cattle, and furniture, and instruments of husbandry. And the great
height, to which the walls were raised, enabled a small number to defend them
with facility.

Sparta, says Xenophon, De rep. Laced. This passage is not easily reconciled
with that of Plutarch above, who says, that Sparta had 9000 citizens.
is one of the cities of Greece, that has the fewest inhabitants. Yet Polybius
Polyb. lib. 9. cap. 20.
says it was 48 stadia in circumference, and was round.

ALL the Aetolians able to bear arms in Antipater's time were but ten thousand
men. Diod. Sic. lib. 18.


Polybius Legate.
tells us, that the Achaean league might, without any inconvenience, march 30
or 40,000 men; and this account seems very probable. For that league
comprehended the greatest part of Peloponnesus. Yet Pausanias, In Achaicis.
speaking of the same period, says, that all the Achaeans able to bear arms,
even when several manumitted slaves were joined to them, did not amount to
fifteen thousand.

THE Thessalians, till their final conquest by the Romans, were, in all ages,
turbulent, factious, seditious, disorderly. Tit. Live. lib. 34. cap. 51. Plato
in Critone.
It Is not therefore natural to suppose, that that part of Greece abounded much
in people.

THE whole inhabitants of Epirus, of all ages, sexes and conditions, who were
sold by Paulus Aemilius, amounted only to 150,000. Tit. Live. lib. 45. cap. 34.
Yet Epirus might be double the extent of Yorkshire. A LATE Trench writer, in
his observations on the Greeks, has remarked, that Philip of Macedon, being
declared captain general of the Greeks, would have been backed by the force of
230,000 of that nation in his intended expedition against Persia. This number
comprehends, I suppose, all the free citizens, throughout all the cities; but
the authority, on which that computation is founded, has, I own, escaped either
my memory or reading; and that writer, though otherwise very ingenious, has given
into a bad practice, of delivering a great deal of erudition, without one
citation. But supposing, that that enumeration could be justified by good
authority from antiquity, we may establish the following computation. The free
Greeks of all ages and sexes were 920,000: The slaves, computing them by the
number of Athenian slaves as above, who seldom married or had families, were
double the male citizens of full age, viz. 460,000. And the whole inhabitants
of ancient Greece about one million, three hundred and eighty thousand. No
mighty number, nor much exceeding what may be found at present in Scotland, a
country of nearly the same extent, and which is very indifferently peopled.


WE may now consider the numbers of people in Rome, and Italy, and collect all
the lights afforded us by scattered passages in ancient authors. We shall find,
upon the whole, a great difficulty in fixing any opinion on that head; and no
reason to support those exaggerated calculations, so much insisted on by modern
writers.

Dionysius Halycarnasseus LIB. 4.
says, that the ancient walls of Rome were nearly of the same compass with
those of Athens, but that the suburbs ran out to a great extent; and it was
difficult to tell, where the town ended or the country begun. In some places of
Rome, it appears from the same author, LIB. 10.
from Juvenal, SATYR. 3. l. 269, 270.
and from other ancient writers, Strabo lib. 5. says, that the emperor Augustus
prohibited the raising houses higher than 70 foot. In another passage, lib. 16.
he speaks of the houses of Rome as remarkably high. See also to the same
purpose Vitruvius lib. 2. cap. 8. Aristides the sophist, in his oration (...),
says that Rome consisted of cities on the the top of cities, and that if one
were to spread it out and unfold it, it would cover the whole surface of Italy.
Where an author indulges himself in such extravagant declamations, and gives so
much into the hyperbolical style, one knows not how far he must be reduced. But
this reasoning seems natural: If Rome was built in so scattered a manner as
Dionysius says, and ran so much into the country, there must have been very few
streets, where the houses were raised so high. It Is onlyf or want of ground,
that any body builds in that inconvenient manner.
that the houses were high, and families lived in separate stories, one above
another: But it is probable, these were only the poorer citizens, and only in
some few streets. If we may judge from the younger Pliny's LIB. 2. epist. 16.
lib. 5. epist. 6. It Is true, Pliny there describes a country house: But since
that was the idea the ancients formed of a magnificent and convenient building,
the great men would certainly build the same way in town. In laxitatem ruris
excurrunt, says Seneca of the rich and voluptuous. Epist. 114. Valerius
Maximus, lib. 4. cap. 4. speaking of Cincinnatus's field of 4 acres, says,
Anguste se habitare nunc putat, cujus domus tantum patet quantum Cincinnati
rura patuerant. To the same purpose, see lib. 36. cap. 15. also lib. 18. cap. 2.
account of his house, and from Bartoli's plans of ancient buildings, the men
of quality had very spacious palaces; and their buildings were like the Chinese
houses at this day, where each apartment is separate from the rest, and rises
no higher than a single story. To which, if we add, that the Roman nobility
much affected very extensive porticos and even woods VITRUV. lib. 5. cap. 11.
Tacit. annal. lib. 11. cap. 3. Sucton. in vita Octav. cap. 72. etc.
in town; we may perhaps allow Vossius (though there is no manner of reason for
it) to read the famous passage of the elder Pliny Moenia ejus (Romae) collegere
ambitu imperatoribus, censoribusque Vespasianis, A. U. C. 828. pass. xiii. MCC.
complexa montes septem, ipsa dividitur in regiones quatuordecim, compita earum
265. Ejusdem spatii mensura, currente a milliario in capite Romans Fori statuto,
ad singulas portas, quae sunt body numero 37, ita ut duodecim portae semel
numerentur, praetereanturque ex veteribus septem, quae esse desierunt, efficit
passuum per directum 30775. Ad extrema vero tectorum cum castris praetoriis ab
eodem milliario, per vicos omnium viarum, mensura collegit paulo amplius
septuaginta millia passuum. Quo si quis altitudinem tectorum addat, dignam
profecto aestimationem concipiat, fateaturque nullius urbis magnitudinem in
toto orb potuisse ei comparari. Plin. lib. 3. cap. 5.

ALL the best manuscripts of Pliny read the passage as here cited, and fix the
compass of the walls of Rome to be 13 miles. The only question is, what Pliny
means by 30775 paces, and how that number was formed. The manner, in which I
conceive it, is this. Rome was a semicircular area of 13 miles circumference.
The Forum and consequently the Milliarium, we know, was situated on the Banks
of the Tyber, and near the center of the circle or upon the diameter of the
semicircular area. Though there were 37 gates to Rome, yet only twelve of them
had straight streets, leading from them to the Milliarium. Pliny, therefore,
having assigned the circumference of Rome, and knowing that that alone was not
sufficient to give in a just notion of its surface, uses this farther method.
He supposes all the streets, leading from the Milliarium to the 12 gates, to be
laid together into one straight line, and supposes we run along that line, so
as to count each gate once: In which case, he says, that the whole line is
30775 paces: Or in other words, that each street or radius of the semicircular
area is upon an average two miles and a half; and the whole length of Rome is 5
miles, and its breadth about half as much, beside the scattered suburbs.

Pere Hardouin understands this passage in the same manner; with regard to the
laying together the several streets of Rome into one line, in order to compose
30775 paces: But then he supposes that streets led from the Milliarium to every
gate, and that no street exceeded 800 paces in length. But (1) a semicircular
area, whose radius was only 800 paces, could never have a circumference near 13
miles, the compass of Rome as assigned by Pliny. A radius of two miles and a
half forms very nearly that circumference. (2) There is an absurdity in
supposing a city so built as to have streets running to its center from every
gate in its circumference. These streets must interfere as they approach. (3)
This diminishes too much from the greatness of ancient Rome, and reduces that
city below even Bristol or Rotterdam.

The sense which Vossius in his observationes variae puts on this passage of
Pliny, errs widely in the other extreme. One manuscript, of no authority,
instead of 13 miles, has assigned 30 miles for the compass of the walls of
Rome. And Vossius understands this only of the curvilinear part of the
circumference; supposing, that, as the Tyber formed the diameter, there were no
walls built on that side. But (1) this reading is allowed contrary to almost
all the manuscripts. (2) Why should Pliny, a concise writer, repeat the compass
of the walls of Rome in two successive sentences? (3) Why repeat it with so
sensible a variation? (4) What is the meaning of Pliny's mentioning twice the
Milliarium, if a line was measured, that had no dependence on the Milliarium?
(5) Aurelian's wall is said by Vopiscus to have been drawn laxiore ambitu, and
to have comprehended all the buildings and suburbs on the north-side of the
Tyber; yet its compass was only 50 miles, and even here critics suspect some
mistake or corruption in the text. It is not probable that Rome would diminish
from Augustus to Aurelian. It remained still the capital of the same empire;
and none of the civil wars, in that long period, except the tumults on the
death of Maximus and Balbinus, ever affected the city. Caracalla is said by
Aurelius Victor to have increased Rome. (6) There are no remains of ancient
buildings, which mark any such greatness of Rome. Vossius's reply to this
objection seems absurd, that the rubbish would sink 60 or 70 foot below ground.
It appears from Spartian (in vita Severi) that the five mile stone in via
Lavicana was out of the city. (7) Olympiodorus and Publius Victor fix the
number of houses in Rome to be betwixt forty and fifty thousand. (8) The very
extravagance of the consequences, drawn by this critic, as well as Lipsius, if
they be necessary, destroys the foundation on which they are grounded: That
Rome contained 14 millions of inhabitants; while the whole kingdom of France
contains only five, according to his computation, etc.

THE only objection to the sense, which we have affixed above to the passage of
Pliny, seems to lie in this, that Pliny, after mentioning the 37 gates of Rome,
assigns only a reason for suppressing the seven old ones, and says nothing of
the 18 gates, the streets leading from which, terminated, according to my
opinion, before they reached the Forum. But as Pliny was writing to the Romans,
who perfectly knew the disposition of the streets, it is not strange he should
take a circumstance for granted, which was so familiar to every body. Perhaps
too, many of these gates led to wharfs upon the river.


his own way, without admitting own way, without admitting the extravagant
consequences he draws from it.

THE number of citizens, who received corn by the public distribution in
Augustus's time, Ex monument. Ancyr.
were 200,000. This one would esteem a pretty certain ground of calculation:
Yet is it attended with such circumstances as throw us back into doubt and
uncertainty.

Did the poorer citizens only receive the distribution? It was calculated, to
be sure, chiefly for their benefit. But it appears from a passage of Cicero,
Tusc. quaest. lib. 3. cap. 48.
that the rich might also take their portion, and that it was esteemed no
reproach in them to apply for it.

TO whom was the corn given; whether only to heads of families, or to every
man, woman and child? The portion every month was five modii to each Licinius
apud Sallust. hist. frag. lib. 3.
(about of a bushel.) This was too little for a family, and too much for an
individual. A very accurate antiquarian, Nicolaus Hortensius de re frumentaria
Roman.
therefore, infers, that it was given to every man of full years: But he allows
the matter to be uncertain.

WAS it strictly inquired, whether the claimant lived within the precincts of
Rome, or was it sufficient, that he presented himself at the monthly
distribution? This last seems more probable. Not to take the people too much
from their business, Augustus ordained the distribution of corn to be made only
thrice a year: But the people finding the monthly distributions more convenient
(as preserving, I suppose, a more regular economy in their family) desired to
have them restored. Sucton. August. cap. 40. Had not some of the people come
from some distance for their corn, Augustus's precaution seems superfluous.


WERE there no false claimants? We are told, Sueton. in Jul. cap. 41.
that Caesar struck off at once 170,000, who had crept in without a just title;
and it is very little probable, that he remedied all abuses.

BUT lastly, what proportion of slaves must we assign to these citizens? This
is the most material question; and the most uncertain. It Is very doubtful,
whether Athens can be established as a rule for Rome. Perhaps the Athenians had
more slaves, because they employed them in manufactures, for which a capital
city, like Rome, seems not so proper. Perhaps, on the other hand, the Romans
had more slaves, on account of their superior luxury and riches.

THERE were exact bills of mortality kept in Rome; but no ancient author has
given us the number of burials, except Suetonius, In vita Neronis.
who tells us, that in one season, there were 30,000 names carried to the
temple of Libitina: But this was during a plague; which can afford no certain
foundation for any inference.

THE public corn, though distributed only to 200,000 citizens, affected very
considerably the whole agriculture of Italy: LIB. 4. cap. 5.
A fact no way reconcilable to some modern exaggerations with regard to the
inhabitants of that country.

THE best ground of conjecture I can find, concerning the greatness of ancient
Rome is this: We are told by Herodian, Sueton. Aug. cap. 42.
that Antioch and Alexandria were very little inferior to Rome. It appears from
Diodorus Siculus, LIB. 17.
that one straight street of Alexandria, reaching from port to port, was five
miles long; and as Alexandria was much more extended in length than breadth, it
seems to have been a city nearly of the bulk of Paris; Quintus Curtius says its
walls were only ten miles in circumference, when founded by Alexander, lib. 4.
cap. 8. Strabo, who had traveled to Alexandria as well as Diodorus Siculus,
says it was scarce four miles long, and in most places about a mile broad, lib.
17. Pliny says it resembled a Macedonian cassock stretching out in the corners,
lib. 5. cap. 10. Notwithstanding this bulk of Alexandria, which seems but
moderate, Diodorus Siculus speaking of its circuit as drawn by Alexander (which
it never exceeded, as we learn from Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 22. cap. 16.)
says it was (...), extremely great, ibid. The reason, which he assigns for its
surpassing all cities of the world (for he excepts not Rome) is, that it
contained 300,000 free inhabitants. He also mentions the revenues of the kings,
viz. 6000, as another circumstance to the same purpose: No such mighty sum in
our eyes, even though we make allowances for the different value of money. What
Strabo says of the neighboring country means only that it was well peopled
(...). Might not one affirm, without any great hyperbole, that the whole banks
of the river from Gravesend to Windsor are one city? This is more than Strabo
says of the banks of the lake Mareotis and of the canal to Canopus. It Is a
vulgar saying in Italy, that the king of Sardinia has but one town in Piedmont:
For it is all a town. Agrippa in Josephus, de bello Judaic. lib. 2. cap. 16. to
make his audience comprehend the excessive greatness of Alexandria, which he
endeavors to magnify, describes only the compass of the city as drawn by
Alexander: A clear proof that the bulk of the inhabitants were lodged there,
and that the neighboring country was no more than what might be expected about
all great towns, very well cultivated and well peopled.
and Rome might be about the size of London.

THERE lived in Alexandria in Diodorus Siculus's time, LIB. 17.
300,000 free people, comprehending, I suppose, women and children. He says
(...) not (...), which must have been understood of citizens alone, and grown
men.
But what number of slaves? Had we any just ground to fix these at an equal
number with the free inhabitants, it would favor the foregoing calculation.

THERE is a passage in Herodian, which is a little surprising. He says,
positively and plainly, that the palace of the emperor was as large as all the
rest of the city. LIE. 4. cap. I. (...), Politian interprets it aedibus
majoribus etiam reliqua urbe.
This was Nero's golden house, which is indeed represented by Suetonius He says
(in Nerone, cap. 30.) that a portico or piazza of it was 3000 feet long; tanta
laxitas ut porticus triplices milliarias haberet. He cannot mean three miles.
For the whole extent of the house from the Palatine to the Esquiline was not
near so great. So when Vopisc. in Aureliano mentions a portico in Sallust's
gardens, which he calls porticus milliarensis, it must be understood of a
thousand feet. So also Horace; Nulla decempedis
Metata privatis opacam
Porticus excipiebat Arcton. Lib. 2. ode 15.
So also in lib. 1. satyr 8.

Mill pedes in front, trecentos cippus in agrum Hic dabat.


and Pliny LIE. 36. cap. 15. Bis vidimus urbem totam cingi domibus principum,
Caii ac Neronis.
as of an enormous extent; but no power of imagination can make us conceive it
to bear any proportion to such a city as London.

WE may observe, had the historian been relating Nero's extravagance, and had
he made use of such an expression, it would have had much less weight; these
rhetorical exaggerations being so apt to creep into an author's style, even
when the most chaste and correct. But it is mentioned by Herodian only by the
bye, in relating the quarrels betwixt Geta and Caracalla.

IT appears from the same historian, LIB. 2. cap. 15.
that there was, then, much land uncultivated, and put to no manner of use; and
he ascribes it as a great praise to Pertinax, that he allowed every one to take
such land, either in Italy or elsewhere, and cultivate it as he pleased,
without paying any taxes. Lands uncultivated and put to no manner of use! This
is not heard of in any part of Christendom; except perhaps, in some remote
parts of Hungary, as I have been informed. And it surely corresponds very ill
with that idea of the extreme populousness of antiquity, so much insisted on.

We learn from Vopiscus, In Aurelian. cap. 48.
that there was in Etruria much fertile land uncultivated; which the emperor,
Aurelian, intended to convert into vineyards, in order to furnish the Roman
people with a gratuitous distribution of wine: A very proper expedient to
dispeople still farther that capital and all the neighboring territories.

IT may not be amiss to take notice of the account, which Polybius LIB. 12.
cap. 2.
gives of the great herds of swine to be met with in Tuscany and Lombardy, as
well as in Greece, and of the method of feeding them which was then practiced.
There are great herds of swine, (says he) throughout all Italy, particularly,
in former times, through Etruria and Cisalpine Gaul. And a herd frequently
contains a thousand or more swine. When one of these herds in feeding meets
with another, they mix together; and the swine-herds have no other expedients
to separate them than to go to different quarters, where they sound their horn;
and these animals, being accustomed to that signal, run immediately each to the
horn of his own keeper. Whereas in Greece, if the herds of swine happen to mix
in the forests, he, who has the greatest flock, takes cunningly the opportunity
of driving all away. And thieves are very apt to purloin the straggling hogs,
which have wandered to a great distance from their keeper, in search of food.

MAY we not infer from this account, that the North of Italy was then much less
peopled, and worse cultivated than at present? How could these vast herds be
fed in a country, so thick of enclosures, so improved by agriculture, so
divided by farms, so planted with vines and corn intermingled together? I must
confess, that Polybius's relation has more the air of that economy, which is
to be met with in our American colonies, than the management of an European
country.

WE meet with a reflection in Aristotle's LIE. 9. cap. 10. His expression is
(...) not (...) inhabitant not citizen.
ethics, which seems to me unaccountable on any supposition, and by proving too
much in favor of our present reasoning may be thought really to prove nothing.
That philosopher, treating of friendship, and observing, that that relation
ought neither to be contracted to a very few, nor extended over a great
multitude, illustrates his opinion by the following argument. In like manner,
(says he,) as a city cannot subsist, if it either have so few inhabitants as
ten, or so many as a hundred thousand; so is there a mediocrity required in the
number of friends; and you destroy the essence of friendship by running into
either extreme. What! Impossible, that a city can contain a hundred thousand
inhabitants! Had Aristotle never seen, nor heard of a city that was near so
populous? This, I must own, passes my comprehension.

Pliny LIE. 6. cap. 28.
tells us, that Seleucia, the seat of the Greek empire in the East, was
reported to contain 600,000 people. Carthage is said by Strabo LIE. 17.
to have contained 700,000. The inhabitants of Pekin are not much more
numerous. London, Paris, and Constantinople may admit of nearly the same
computation; at least, the two latter cities do not exceed it. Rome,
Alexandria, Antioch we have already spoke of. From the experience of past and
present ages, one might conjecture, that there is a kind of impossibility in
the nature of things, that any city could ever rise much beyond this
proportion. Whether the grandeur of a city be founded on commerce or on empire,
there seem to be invincible obstacles, which prevent its farther progress. The
seats of vast monarchies, by introducing extravagant luxury, irregular expense,
idleness, dependence, and false ideas of rank and superiority, are improper for
commerce. Extensive commerce checks itself, by raising the price of all labor
and commodities. When a great court engages the attendance of a numerous
nobility, possessed of overgrown fortunes, the middling gentry remain in their
provincial towns, where they can make a figure on a moderate income. And if the
dominions of a state arrive at an enormous size, there necessarily arise many
capitals, in the remoter provinces; whither all the inhabitants, except a few
courtiers, repair, for education, fortune, and amusement. Such were Alexandria,
Anticob, Carthage, Ephesus, Lions, etc. in the Roman empire. Such are even
Bourdeaux, Toulouse, Dijon, Rennes, Rouen, Aix, etc. in France, Dublin,
Edinburgh, York in the British dominions.
London, by uniting extensive commerce and middling empire, has, perhaps,
arrived at a greatness, which no city will ever be able to exceed.

CHOOSE Dover or Calais for a center: Draw a circle of two hundred miles radius:
You comprehend London, Paris, the Netherlands, the United Provinces, and some
of the best cultivated counties of France and England. It may safely, I think,
be affirmed, that no spot of ground can be found, in antiquity, of equal
extent, which contained near so many great and populous cities, and was so
stockt with riches and inhabitants. To balance, in both periods, the states,
which possessed most art, knowledge, civility and the best police, seems the
truest method of comparison.

IT IS an observation of L'Abbe du Bos, VOL. 2. sect. 16.
that Italy is warmer at present than it was in ancient times. The annals of
Rome tell us, (says he) that in the year 480. ab U. C. the winter was so severe
that it destroyed the trees. The Tyber froze in Rome, and the ground was
covered with snow for forty days. When Juvenal SAT. 6.
describes a superstitious woman, he represents her as breaking the ice of the
Tyber, that she may perform her ablutions.

Hybernum fracta glacie descendet in amnem,
Ter matutino Tyberi mergetur.
He speaks of that river's freezing as a common event. Many passages of Horace
suppose the streets of Rome full of snow and ice. We should have more certainty
with regard to this point, had the ancients known the use of thermometers: But
their writers, without intending it, give us information, sufficient to
convince us, that the winters are now much more temperate at Rome than
formerly. At present, the Tyber no more freezes at Rome than the Nile at Cairo.
The Romans esteem the winter very rigorous, if the snow lies two days, and if
one sees for eight and forty hours a few small icicles hang from a fountain
that has a North exposition.

THE observation of this ingenious critic may be extended to other European
climates. Who could discover the mild climate of France in Diodorus Siculus's
LIB. 4.
description of Gaul? As it is a Northern climate, (says he) it is infested
with cold to an extreme degree. In cloudy weather, instead of rain, there fall
great snows; and in clear weather it there freezes so excessive hard, that the
rivers acquire bridges of their own substance, over which, not only single
travelers may pass, but large armies, accompanied with all their baggage and
loaded wagons. And there being many rivers in Gaul, the Rhone, the Rhine, etc.
almost all of them are froze over; and it is usual, in order to prevent falling,
to cover the ice with chaff and straw, at the places where the road passes.

NORTH of the Cevennes, says Strabo, LIB. 4.
Gaul produces not figs and olives: And the vines, that have been planted, bear
not grapes, that will ripen.

Ovid positively maintains, with all the serious affirmation of prose, that the
Euxine sea froze every winter in his time; and he appeals to Roman governors,
whom he names, for the truth of his assertion. Trist. lib. 3. eleg. 9. De
ponto, lib. 4. eleg. 7, 9, 10.
This never happens at present in the latitude of Tomi, whither Ovid was
banished. All the complaints of the same poet seem to mark a rigor of the
seasons, which is scarce experienced at present in Petersburg or Stockholm.

Tournefort, a Provencal, who had traveled into the same countries, observes
that there is not a finer climate in the world: And he asserts that nothing but
Ovid's melancholy could have given him such dismal ideas of it. But the facts,
mentioned by that poet, are too circumstantiate to bear any such interpretation.

Polybius LIB. 4. cap. 21.
says, that the climate in Arcadia was very cold, and the air moist.

Italy, LIB. 1. cap. 2.
(says Varro,) is the most temperate climate in Europe. The inland parts (Gaul,
Germany, and Pannonio, no doubt) have almost perpetual winter.

THE Northern parts of Spain, according to Strabo, LIB. 3.
are but ill inhabited, because of the great cold.

ALLOWING, therefore, this remark to be just, that Europe is become warmer than
formerly; how can we account for it? Plainly, by no other method, but by
supposing, that the land is at present much better cultivated, and that the
woods are cleared, which formerly threw a shade upon the earth, and kept the
rays of the sun from penetrating to it. Our Northern colonies in America become
more temperate, in proportion as the woods are felled; THE warm Southern also
become more healthful: And it is remarkable, that in the Spanish histories of
the first discovery and conquest of these countries they appear to have been
very healthful; being then well peopled and cultivated. No account of the
sickness or decay of Cortes's or Pizzarro's small armies.
but in general, every one may remark, that cold still makes itself much more
severely felt, both in North and South America, than in places under the same
latitude in Europe.

Saserna, cited by Columella, LIB. 1. cap. 1.
affirmed, that the disposition of the heavens was altered before his time, 2nd
that the air had become much milder and warmer; as appears hence, says he, that
many places now abound with vineyards and olive plantations, which formerly, by
reason of the rigor of the climate, could raise none of these productions.
Such a change, if real, will be allowed an evident sign of the better
cultivation and peopling of countries before the age of Saserna; HE seems to
have lived about the time of the younger Africanus, id. ib.
and if it be continued to the present times, is a proof, that these advantages
have been continually increasing throughout this part of the world.

LET us now cast our eye over all the countries, that were the scene of ancient
and modern history, and compare their past and present situation. We shall not,
perhaps, find such foundation for the complaint of the present emptiness and
desolation of the world. Egypt is represented by Maillet, to whom we owe the
best account of it, as extremely populous; though he esteems the number of its
inhabitants to be diminished. Syria and the lesser Asia, as well as the coast
of Barbary, I can readily own, to be very desert in comparison of their ancient
condition. The depopulation of Greece is also very obvious; but whether the
country now called Turkey in Europe may not, in general, contain as many
inhabitants as during the flourishing period of Greece may be a little
doubtful. The Thracians seem, then, to have lived like the Tartars at present,
by pasturage and plunder: Xenoph. exp. lib. 7. Polyb. lib. 4. cap. 45.
The Getes were still more unciviliz'd: Ovid. passim, etc. Strabo, lib. 7.
And the Illyrians were no better. Polyb. lib. 2. cap. 12.
These occupy nine tenths of that country: And though the police and government
of the Turks be not very favorable to industry and propagation; yet it
preserves, at least, peace and order amongst the inhabitants; and is preferable
to that barbarous, unsettled condition, in which they anciently lived.

Poland and Muscovy in Europe are not very populous; but are certainly much
more so than the ancient Sarmatia and Scythia; where no husbandry or
agriculture was ever heard of, and pasturage was the sole art, by which the
people were maintained. The like observation may be extended to Denmark and
Sweden. No one ought to esteem the immense swarms of people, that formerly came
from the North, and overran all Europe, to be any objection to this opinion.
Where a whole nation, or even half of it, remove their seat; it is easy to
imagine what a prodigious multitude they must form; with what desperate courage
they must make their attacks; and how the terror they strike into the invaded
nations, will make these magnify, in their imagination, both the courage and
multitude of the invaders. Scotland is neither extensive nor populous; but were
the half of its inhabitants to seek a new habitation, they would form a colony
as large as the Teutons and Cimbri, and would shake all Europe; supposing it in
no better a condition for defense than formerly.

Germany has surely at present twenty times more inhabitants than in ancient
times, when they cultivated no ground, and each tribe valued itself on the
extensive desolation which it spread around, as we learn from Caesar Debello
Gallico, lib. 6.
and Tacitus De moribus Germ.
and Strabo. LIB. 7.
A proof that the division into small republics will not alone render a nation
populous, unless attended with the spirit of peace, order, and industry.

THE barbarous condition of Britain in former times is well known, and the
thinness of its inhabitants may easily be conjectured, both from their
barbarity, and from a circumstance mentioned by Herodian, LIB 3. cap. 47.
that all Britain was marshy, even in Severus's time, after the Romans had been
fully settled in it above a whole century.

IT IS not easily imagined, that the Gauls were anciently much more advanced in
the arts of life than their Northern neighbors; since they traveled to this
island for their education in the mysteries of the religion and philosophy of
the Druids. Caesar de bello Gallico, lib. 6. Strabo, lib. 7. says the Gauls
were not much more improved than the Germans.
I cannot, therefore, think, that Gaul was then near so populous as France is
at present.

WERE we to believe, indeed, and join together the testimony of Appian and that
of Diodorus Siculus, we must admit an incredible populousness in Gaul. The
former historian Celt. pars 1.
says, that there were 400 nations in that country; the latter affirms LIB. 5.
that the largest of the Gallic nations consisted of 200,000 men, besides women
and children, and the least of 50,000. Calculating, therefore, at a medium, we
must admit of near 200 millions of people, in a country, which we esteem
populous at present, though supposed to contain little more than 20. ANCIENT Gaul
was more extensive than modern France.
Such calculations, therefore, by their extravagance lose all manner of
authority. We may observe, that that equality of property, to which the
populousness of antiquity may be ascribed, had no place amongst the Gauls.
Caesar de bello Gallico, lib. 6.
Their intestine wars also, before Caesar's time, were almost perpetual. Id.
ibid.
And Strabo LIB. 4.
observes, that though all Gaul was cultivated, yet it was not cultivated with
any skill or care; the genius of the inhabitants leading them less to arts than
arms, till their slavery to Rome produced peace among themselves.

Caesar De bello Gallico, lib. 2.
enumerates very particularly the great forces, which were levied in Belgium,
to oppose his conquests; and makes them amount to 208,000. These were not the
whole people able to bear arms in Belgium: For the same historian tells us,
that the Bellovaci could have brought a hundred thousand men into the field,
though they engaged only for sixty. Taking the whole, therefore, in this
proportion of ten to six, the sum of fighting men in all the states of Belgium
was above half a million; the whole inhabitants two millions. And Belgium being
about the fourth of Gaul, that country might contain eight millions, which is
not above the third of its present inhabitants. IT appears from Caesar's
account, that the Gauls had no domestic slaves. The whole common people were
indeed a kind of slaves to the nobility, as the people of Poland are at this
day: And a nobleman of Gaul had sometimes ten thousand clients or dependants of
this kind; nor can we doubt, that the armies were composed of the people as
well as of the nobility: An army of 100,000 noblemen from a very small state is
incredible. The fighting men amongst the Helvetii were the fourth part of the
whole inhabitants; a clear proof, that all the males of military age bore arms.
See Caesar de bello Gall. lib. 1.

We may remark, that the numbers in Caesar's commentaries can be more depended
on than those of any other ancient author; because of the Greek translation,
which still remains, and which checks the original.




THE ancient Helvetia was 240 miles in length, and 180 in breadth, according to
Caesar; De bello Gallico, lib. 1.
yet contained only 360,000 inhabitants. The canton of Berne alone, has, at
present, as many people.

AFTER this computation of Appian and Diodorus Siculus, I know not if I dare
say, that the modern Dutch are more numerous than the ancient Batavi.

Spain is decayed from what it was three centuries ago; but if we step backward
two thousand years, and consider the restless, turbulent, unsettl'd condition
of its inhabitants, we may probably be inclined to think, that it is now much
more populous. Many Spaniards killed themselves when deprived of their arms by
the Romans. Titi Livii lib. 34. cap. 17.
It appears from Plutarch In vita Marii.
that robbery and plunder were esteemed honorable amongst the Spaniards.
Hirtius De bello Hisp.
represents in the same light the situation of that country in Caesar's time;
and he says, that every man was obliged to live in castles and walled towns for
his security. 'Twas not till their final conquest under Augustus, that these
disorders were represt. Vell. Pater. lib. 2. sect. 90.
The account, which Strabo LIB. 3.
and Justin LIB. 44.
give of Spain, corresponds exactly with those above mentioned. How much,
therefore, must it diminish from our idea of the populousness of antiquity,
when we find, that Cicero, comparing Italy, Afric, Gaul, Greece, and Spain,
mentions the great number of inhabitants, as the peculiar circumstance which
rendered that latter country formidable. Nec numero Hispanos, nec robore
Galls, nec calliditate Paenos, nec artibus Graeces, nec denique hoc ipso hujus
gentis, ac terrae domestico nativoque sensu, Italos ipsos ac Latins -- --
superavimus. De harusp. resp. cap. 9. The disorders of Spain seem to have been
almost proverbial. Nec impacatos a te^go horrebis Iberos. Virg. Georg. lib. 3.
The Iberi are here plainly taken, by a poetical figure, for robbers in general.


Italy, it is probable, however, has decayed: But how many great cities does it
still contain; Venice, Genoa, Pavia, Turin, Milan, Naples, Florence, Leghorn,
which either subsisted not in ancient times, or were then very inconsiderable?
If we reflect on this, we shall not be apt to carry matters to so great an
extreme as usual, with regard to this subject.

WHEN the Roman authors complain, that Italy, which formerly exported corn,
became dependent on all the provinces for its daily bread, they never ascribe
this alteration to the increase of its inhabitants, but to the neglect of
tillage and agriculture. Varro de re rustica. lib. 2. praef. Columella praef.
Suston. August. cap. 42.
A natural effect of that pernicious practice of importing corn, in order to
distribute it gratis among the Roman citizens, and a very bad means of
multiplying the inhabitants of any country. THOUGH the observation of L'Abbe du
Bos should be admitted, that Italy is now warmer than in former times, the
consequence may not be necessary, that it is more populous or better
cultivated. If the other countries of Europe were more savage and woody, the
cold winds, that blowed from them, might affect the climate of Italy.
The sportula, so much talked of by Martial and Juvenal, being presents
regularly made by the great lords to their smaller clients, must have had a
like tendency to produce idleness, debauchery, and a continual decay amongst
the people.

WERE I to assign a period, when I imagine this part of the world might
possibly contain more inhabitants than at present, I should pitch upon the age
of Trajan and the Antonines; the great extent of the Roman empire being then
civilized and cultivated, settled almost in a profound peace both foreign and
domestic, and living under the same regular police and government. THE
inhabitants of Marseilles lost not their great superiority ever the Gauls in
commerce and the mechanic arts, till the Roman dominion turned the latter from
arms to agriculture and civil life. See Strabo, lib. 4. That author, in several
places, repeats the observation concerning the improvement, arising from the
Roman arts and civility: And he lived at the time, when the change was new, and
would be more sensible. So also Pliny, Quis exim non, communicato orb
terrarum, majestate Romani imperii, profecisse vitam putet, commercio rerum ac
societate festae pacis, omniaque exam, quae acculta antea fuerant, in
promiscuousu facta. lib. 14. proem, Numine deum electa (speaking of Italy) quae
caelum ipsum clarius faceret, sparsa congregaret imperia, ritusque moiliret, ct
tot populorum discordes, ferasque linguas sermonis commercio contraberet ad
colloquia, et humanitatem homini daret; breviterque, una cunctarum gentium in
toto orb patria fieret, lib. 2. cap. 5. Nothing can be stronger to this
purpose than the following passage from Tertullian, who lived about the age of
Severus. Cer^e quidem ipse orbis in promptu est, culticr de die et instructior
pristino. Omnia jam pervia, omnia nota, omnia negotiosa. Solitudines famosas
retro fandi amaenissimi obliteraverunt, silvas arva domuerunt, feras pecora
fugaverant, arenae seruntur, saxa panguntur, paludes cliquantur, tantae urbes,
quantae non casae quendam. Jam nec insulae horrent, nec scopuli terrent; ubique
domus, ubique populus, ubique respublica, ubique vita. Summum testimonium
frequentiae humanae, onerosi sumus mundo, vix nobis elementa sufficient; et
necessitates arctiores, et querelae apud omnes, dum jane nos natura non
sustinet. De anima, cap. 30. The air of rhetoric and declamation, which appears
in this passage, diminishes somewhat from its authority, but does not entirely
destory it. A man of violent imagination, such as Tertullian, augments every
thing equally; and for that reason his comparative judgments are the most to be
depended on. The same remark may be extended to the following passage of
Aristides the sophist, who lived in the age of Adrian. The whole world, says
he, addressing himself to the Romans, seems to keep one holiday; and mankind,
laying aside the swords they formerly wore, now betake themselves to feasting
and to joy. The cities, forgetting their ancient contentions, preserve only one
emulation, which shall embellish itself most by every art and ornament.
Theaters every where arise, amphitheatres, porticos, aqueducts, temples,
schools, academies; and one may safely pronounce, that the sinking world has
been again raised by your auspicious empire. Nor have cities alone received an
increase of ornament and beauty; but the whole earth, like a garden or
paradise, is cultivated and adorned. Insomuch that such of mankind as are
placed out of the limits of your empire (who are but few) seem to merit our
simpathy and compassion.

It Is remarkable, that though Diodorus Siculus makes the whole inhabitants of
Egypt, when conquered by the Romans, amount only to three millions; yet
Josephus, de bello Jud. lib. 2. cap. 16. says, that its inhabitants, excluding
those of Alexandria, were seven millions and a half, in the reign of Nero: And
he expressly says, that he drew this account from the books of the Roman
publicans, who levied the poll tax. Strabo, lib. 17. praises the superior
police of the Romans with regard to the finances of Egypt, above that of its
former monarchs: And no part of administration is more essential to the
happiness of a people. Yet we read in Athenaeus, (lib. 1. cap. 25.) who
flourished during the reign of the Antonines, that the town Mareia, near
Alexandria, which was formerly a large city, had dwindled into a village. This
is not, properly speaking, a contradiction. Suidas (August.) says that the
emperor Augustus, having numbered the whole Roman empire, found it contained
only 4,101,017 men ((...)) There is here surely some great mistake, either in
the author or transcriber. But this authority, feeble as it is, may be
sufficient to counterbalance the exaggerated accounts of Herodotus and Diodorus
Siculus with regard to more early times.


But we are not told, that all extensive governments, especially absolute
monarchies, are destructive to population, and contain a secret vice and
poison, which destroy the effect of all these promising appearances. L'Esprit
des loix, livre 23. chap. 19.
To confirm this, there is a passage, cited from Plutarch, De orac. defectu.
which being somewhat singular, we shall here examine it.

THAT author, endeavoring to account for the silence of many of the oracles,
says, that it may be ascribed to the present desolation of the world,
proceeding from former wars and factions; which common calamity, he adds, has
fallen heavier upon Greece than on any other country; insomuch, that the whole
could scarce at present furnish out three thousand warriors, which, in the time
of the Median war, were supplied by the single city of Megara. The gods,
therefore, who affect works of dignity and importance, have suppressed many of
their oracles, and deign not to use so many interpreters of their will to so
diminutive a people.

I MUST confess, that this passage contains so many difficulties, that I know
not what to make of it. You may observe, that Plutarch assigns for a cause of
the decay of mankind, not the extensive dominion of the Romans, but the former
wars and factions of the several nations; all which were quieted by the Roman
arms. Plutarch's reasoning, therefore, is directly contrary to the inference,
which is drawn from the fact he advances.

Polybius supposes, that Greece had become more prosperous and flourishing
after the establishment of the Roman yoke; LIB. 2. cap. 62. It may perhaps be
imagined, that Polybius, being dependent on Rome, would naturally extol the
Roman dominion. But in the first place, Polybius, though one sees sometimes
instances of his caution, discovers no symptoms of flattery. Secondly, This
opinion is only delivered in a single stroke, by the bye, while he is intent
upon another subject; and it is allowed, if there be any suspicion of an
author's insincerity, that these oblique propositions discover his real opinion
better than his more formal and direct assertions.
and though that historian wrote before these conquerors had degenerated, from
being the patrons, to be the plunderers of mankind; yet as we find from Tacitus
Annal. lib. 1. cap. 2.
that the severity of the emperors afterward corrected the license of the
governors, we have no reason to think that extensive monarchy so destructive,
as it is often represented.

WE learn from Strabo, LIB. 8, and 9.
that the Romans, from their regard to the Greeks, maintained, to his time,
most of the privileges and liberties of that celebrated nation; and Nero
afterward rather increased them. Plutarch. De his qui sero a Numine puniuntur.
How therefore can we imagine, that the Roman yoke was so burdensome over that
part of the world? The oppression of the proconsuls was checked; and the
magistracies in Greece being all bestowed in the several cities, by the free
votes of the people, there was no great necessity for the competitors to attend
the emperor's court. If great numbers went to seek their fortunes in Rome, and
advance themselves by learning or eloquence, the commodities of their native
country, many of them would return with the fortunes they had made, and thereby
enrich the Grecian commonwealths.

BUT Plutarch says, that the general depopulation had been more sensibly felt
in Greece than in any other country. How is this reconcilable to its superior
privileges and advantages?

BESIDES, this passage, by proving too much, really proves nothing. Only three
thousand men able to bear arms in all Greece! Who can admit so strange a
proposition; especially, if we consider the great numbers of Greek cities,
whose names still remain in history, and which are mentioned by writers long
after the age of Plutarch? There are there surely ten times more people at
present, when there scarce remains a city in all the bounds of ancient Greece.
That country is still tolerably cultivated, and furnishes a sure supply of
corn, in case of any scarcity in Spain, Italy or the South of France.

WE must observe, that the ancient frugality of the Greeks, and their equality
of property, still subsisted during the age of Plutarch; as appears from
Lucian. De mercede conductis.
Nor is there any ground to imagine, that that country was possessed by a few
masters, and a great number of slaves.

IT IS probable, indeed, that military discipline, being entirely useless, was
extremely neglected in Greece after the establishment of the Roman empire; and
if these commonwealths, formerly so warlike and ambitious, maintained each of
them a small city guard, to prevent mobbish disorders, it is all they had
occasion for: And these, perhaps, did not amount to three thousand men,
throughout all Greece. I own, that if Plutarch had this fact in his eye, he is
here guilty of a very gross paralogism, and assigns causes no way proportioned
to the effects. But is it so great a prodigy, that an author should fall into a
mistake of this nature? I must confess, that that discourse of Plutarch
concerning the silence of the oracles is in general of so odd a texture, and so
unlike his other productions, that one is at a loss what judgment to form of
it. It Is wrote in dialogue, which is a method of composition, that Plutarch
commonly little affects. The personages he introduces advance very wild,
absurd, and contradictory opinions, more like the visionary systems of Plato
than the solid sense of Plutarch. There runs also through the whole an air of
superstition and credulity, which resembles very little the spirit, that
appears in the other philosophical compositions of that author. For it is
remarkable, that though Plutarch be an historian as superstitious as Herodotus or
Livy, yet there is scarcely, in all antiquity, a philosopher less
superstitious, excepting Cicero and Lucian. I must, therefore, confess, that a
passage of Plutarch, cited from this discourse, has much less authority with
me, than if it had been found in most of his other compositions.

THERE is only one other discourse of Plutarch liable to like objections, viz.
that concerning those whose punishment is delayed by the Deity. It is also
wrote in dialogue, contains like superstitious, wild visions, and seems to have
been chiefly composed in rivalship to Plato, particularly his last book, de
republica.

AND here I cannot but observe, that Mons. Fontenelle, a writer eminent for
candor, seems to have departed a little from his usual character, when he
endeavors to throw a ridicule upon Plutarch on account of passages to be met
with in this dialogue concerning oracles. The absurdities here put into the
mouths of the several personages are not to be ascribed to Plutarch. He makes
them resute each other; and in general, he seems to intend the ridiculing of
those very opinions, which Fontenelle would ridicule him for maintaining. See
Histoire des Oracles.




BUT whatever force may remain in this passage of Plutarch, we shall endeavor
to counter-balance it by as remarkable a passage in Diodorus Siculus, where the
historian, after mentioning Ninus's army of 1,700,000 foot and 200,000 horse,
endeavors to support the credibility of this account, by some posterior facts;
and adds, that we must not form a notion of the ancient populousness of mankind
from the present emptiness and depopulation, which is spread over the world.
LIB. 2.
Thus an author, who lived at that very period of antiquity, which is
represented as most populous, HE was contemporary with Caesar and Augustus.
complains of the desolation, which then prevailed, gives the preference to
former times, and has recourse to ancient fables as a foundation for his
opinion. The humor of blaming the present, and admiring the past, is strongly
rooted in human nature, and has an influence, even on persons, endu'd with the
profoundest judgment and most extensive learning.

DISCOURSE XI. Of the Protestant Succession.
I SUPPOSE, that a member of parliament, in the reign of king William or queen
Anne, while the establishment of the protestant succession was yet uncertain,
were deliberating concerning the party he would choose in that important
question, and weighing, with impartiality, the advantages and disadvantages on
each side. I believe the following particulars would have entered into his
consideration.

HE would easily perceive the great advantages, resulting from the restoration
of the Stuart family; by which we should preserve the succession clear and
undisputed, free from a pretender, with such a specious title as that of blood,
which, with the multitude, is always the claim, the strongest, and most easily
comprehended. It Is in vain to say, as many have done, that the question with
regard to governors, independent of government, is frivolous, and little worth
disputing, much less fighting about. The generality of mankind never will enter
into these sentiments; and it is much happier, I believe, for society, that they
do not, but continue in their natural prejudices and prepossessions. How could
stability be preserved in any monarchical government (which, though, perhaps, not
the best, is, and always has been the most common of any) unless men had so
passionate a regard for the true heir of their royal family; and even though weak
in understanding, or infirm in years, gave him so great a preference above
persons, the most accomplished in shining talents, or celebrated for great
achievements? Would not every popular leader put in his claim at every
vacancy, or even without any vacancy; and the kingdom become the theater of
perpetual wars and convulsions? The condition of the Roman empire, surely, was
not, in this respect, much to be envied; nor is that of the Eastern nations,
who pay little regard to the title of their sovereigns, but sacrifice them,
every day, to the caprice or momentary humor of the populace or soldiery. It Is
but a foolish wisdom, which is so carefully displayed, in undervaluing princes,
and placing them on a level with the meanest of mankind. To be sure, an
anatomist finds no more in the greatest monarch than in the lowest peasant or
day-labourer; and a moralist may, perhaps, frequently find less. But what do
all these reflections tend to? We, all of us, still retain these prejudices in
favor of birth and family; and neither in our serious occupations, nor most
careless amusements, can we ever get entirely rid of them. A tragedy, that
would represent the adventures of common sailors, or porters, or even of
private gentlemen, would presently disgust us; but one, that introduces kings
and princes, acquires in our eyes an air of importance and dignity. Or should a
man be able, by his superior wisdom, to get entirely above such prepossessions,
he would soon, by means of the same wisdom, again bring himself down to them;
for the sake of society, whose welfare he would perceive to be intimately
connected with them. Far from endeavoring to undeceive the people in this
particular, he would cherish and foster such sentiments of reverence to their
princes; as requisite to preserve a due subordination in society. And though the
lives of twenty thousand men be often sacrificed to maintain a king in
possession of his throne, or preserve the right of succession undisturbed, he
entertains no indignation at the loss; on pretense that every individual of
these was, perhaps, in himself, as valuable as the prince he served. He
considers the consequences of violating the hereditary right of kings:
Consequences, which may be felt for many centuries; while the loss of several
thousand men brings so little prejudice to a large kingdom, that it may not be
perceived a few years afterward.

THE advantages of the Hanover succession are of an opposite nature, and arise
from this very circumstance, that it violates hereditary right, and places on
the throne a prince, to whom birth gave no title to that dignity. It Is evident
to any one, who considers the history of this island, that the privileges of
the people have, during the two last centuries, been continually upon the
increase, by the division of the church lands, by the alienations of the barons
estates, by the progress of trade, and above all, by the happiness of our
situation, which, for a long time, gave us sufficient security, without any
standing army or military establishment. On the contrary, public liberty has,
almost in every other nation of Europe, been, during the same period, extremely
upon the decline; while the people were disgusted at the hardships of the old
Gothic militia, and chose rather to entrust their prince with mercenary armies,
which he easily turned against themselves. 'Twas nothing extraordinary,
therefore, that some of our British sovereigns mistook the nature of the
constitution, and genius of the people; and as they embraced all the favorable
precedents left them by their ancestors, they overlooked all those, which were
contrary, and which supposed a limitation in our government. They were
encouraged in this mistake, by the example of all the neighboring princes,
who, bearing the same title or appellation, and being adorned with the same
ensigns of authority, naturally led them to claim the same powers and
prerogatives. IT appears from the speeches, and proclamations, and whole train
of king James the I. 's actions, as well as his son's, that they considered the
English government as a simple monarchy, and never imagined that any
considerable part of their subjects entertained a contrary idea. This made them
discover their pretensions, without preparing any force to support them; and
even without reserve or disguise, which are always employed by those, who enter
upon any new project, or endeavor to innovate in any government. King James
told his parliament plainly, when they meddled in state affairs, Ne suitor ultra
crepidam. He used also, at his table, in promiscuous companies, to advance his
notions, in a manner still more undisguis'd: As we may learn from a story told
in the life of Mr. Waller, and which that poet used frequently to repeat. When
Mr. Waller was young, he had the curiosity to go to court; and he stood in the
circle, and saw king James dine, where, amongst other company, there sat at
table two bishops. The king, openly and aloud, proposed this question, Whether
he might not take his subjects money, when he had occasion for it, without all
this formality of parliament. The one bishop readily replied, God forbid you
should not: For you are the breath of our nostrils. The other bishop declined
answering, and said he was not skilled in parliamentary cases: But upon the
king's urging him, and saying he would admit of no evasion, his lordship
replied very pleasantly, Why then, I think your majesty may lawfully take my
brother's money: For he offers it. In Sir Walter Raleigh's preface to the
history of the world, there is this remarkable passage. Philip the II. by
strong hand and main force, attempted to make himself, not only an absolute
monarch over the Netherlands, like unto the kings and sovereigns of England and
France; but Turk-like to tread under his feet all their natural and fundamental
laws, privileges and ancient rights. Spenser, speaking of some grants of the
English kings to the Irish corporations, says, All which, though, at the time of
their first grant, they were tolerable, and perhaps reasonable, yet now are
most unreasonable and inconvenient. But all these will easily be cut off with
the superior power of her majesty's prerogative, against which her own grants
are not to be pleaded or enforced. State of Ireland, page 1537, Edit. 1706.

As these were very common, though not, perhaps, the universal notions of the
times, the two first princes of the house of Stuart were the more excusable for
their mistake. And Rapin, the most judicious of historians, seems sometimes to
treat them with too much severity upon account of it.


The flattery of courtiers farther blinded them; and above all, that of the
clergy, who from several passages of their scripture, and these wrested too,
had erected a regular and avowed system of tyranny and despotic power. The only
method of destroying, at once, all these exorbitant claims and pretensions was
to depart from the true hereditary line, and choose a prince, who, being plainly
a creature of the public, and receiving the crown on conditions, expressed and
avowed, found his authority established on the same bottom with the privileges
of the people. By electing him in the royal line, we cut off all hopes of
ambitious subjects, who might, in future emergencies, disturb the government by
their cabals and pretensions: By rendering the crown hereditary in his family,
we avoided all the inconveniences of elective monarchy: And by excluding the
lineal heir, we secured all our constitutional limitations, and rendered our
government uniform and of a piece. The people cherish monarchy, because
protected by it: The monarch favors liberty, because created by it. And thus
every advantage is obtained by the new establishment, as far as human skill and
wisdom can extend itself.

THESE are the separate advantages of fixing the succession, either in the
house of Stuart, or in that of Hanover. There are also disadvantages in each
establishment, which an impartial patriot would ponder and examine, in order to
form a just judgment upon the whole.

THE disadvantages of the protestant succession consist in the foreign
dominions, which are possessed by the princes of the Hanover line, and which, it
might be supposed, would engage us in the intrigues and wars of the continent,
and lose us, in some measure, the inestimable advantage we possess, of being
surrounded and guarded by the sea, which we command. The disadvantages of
recalling the abdicated family consist chiefly in their religion, which is more
prejudicial to society than that established amongst us, is contrary to it, and
affords no toleration or peace or security to any other religion.

IT appears to me, that all these advantages and disadvantages are allowed on
both sides; at least, by every one, who is at all susceptible of argument or
reasoning. No subject, however loyal, pretends to deny, that the disputed title
and foreign dominions of the present royal family are a loss; nor is there any
partizan of the Stuart family, but will confess, that the claim of hereditary,
indefeasible right, and the Roman catholic religion are also disadvantages in
that family. It belongs, therefore, to a philosopher alone, who is of neither
party, to put all these circumstances in the scale, and assign to each of them
its proper poize and influence. Such an one will readily, at first,
acknowledge, that all political questions are infinitely complicated; and that
there scarce ever occurs, in any deliberation, a choice, which is either purely
good, or purely ill. Consequences, mixed and varied, may be foreseen to flow
from every measure: And many consequences, unforeseen, do always, in fact,
result from it. Hesitation, and reserve, and suspense are, therefore, the only
sentiments he brings to this essay or trial. Or if he indulges any passion,
it is that of derision and ridicule against the ignorant multitude, who are
always clamorous and dogmatical, even in the nicest questions, of which, from
want of temper, perhaps still more than of understanding, they are altogether
unfit judges.

BUT to say something more determinate on this head; the following reflections
will, I hope, show the temper, if not the understanding of a philosopher.

WERE we to judge merely by first appearance, and by past experience, we must
allow, that the advantages of a parliamentary title in the house of Hanover are
much greater than those of an undisputed hereditary title in the house of
Stuart; and that our fathers acted wisely in preferring the former to the
latter. So long as the house of Stuart reigned in Britain, which, with some
interruptions, was above 80 years, the government was kept in a continual
fever, by the contentions betwixt the privileges of the people and the
prerogatives of the crown. If arms were dropped, the noise of disputes continued:
Or if these were silenced, jealousy still corroded the heart, and threw the
nation into an unnatural ferment and disorder. And while we were thus occupy'd
in domestic contentions, a foreign power, dangerous, if not fatal, to public
liberty, erected itself in Europe, without any opposition from us, and even
sometimes with our assistance.

BUT within these last sixty years, when a parliamentary establishment has
taken place; whatever factions may have prevailed either amongst the people or
in public assemblies; the whole force of our constitution has always fallen to
one side, and an uninterrupted harmony has been preserved betwixt our princes
and our parliaments. Public liberty, with internal peace and order, has
flourished, almost without interruption: Trade and manufactures and agriculture
have increased: The arts and sciences and philosophy have been cultivated: Even
religious parties have been necessitated to lay aside their mutual rancour: And
the glory of the nation has spread itself all over Europe; while we stand the
bulwark against oppression, and the great antagonist of that power, which
threatens every people with conquest and subjection. So long and so glorious a
period no nation almost can boast of; nor is there another instance, in the
whole history of mankind, that so many millions of people have, during such a
space of time, been held together, in a manner so free, so rational, and so
suitable to the dignity of human nature.

BUT though this recent instance seems clearly to decide in favor of the present
establishment, there are some circumstances to be thrown into the other scale;
and it is dangerous to regulate our judgment by one event or example.

WE have had two rebellions during the flourishing period above mentioned;
besides plots and conspiracies without number. And if none of these have
produced any very fatal event, we may ascribe our escape chiefly to the narrow
genius of those princes, who disputed our establishment; and may esteem
ourselves so far fortunate. But the claims of the banished family, I fear, are
not yet antiquated; and who can foretell, that their future attempts will
produce no greater disorder?

THE disputes betwixt privilege and prerogative may easily be composed by laws,
and votes, and conferences, and concessions; where there is tolerable temper or
prudence on both sides, or on either side. Amongst contending titles, the
question can only be determined by the sword, and by devastation, and by civil
war.

A PRINCE, who fills the throne with a disputed title dares not arm his
subjects; the only method of securing a people fully, both against domestic
oppression and foreign conquest.

NOTWITHSTANDING all our riches and renown, what a critical escape did we
lately make, from dangers, which were owing not so much to bad conduct and ill
success in war, as to the pernicious practice of mortgaging our finances, and
the still more pernicious maxim of never paying off our encumbrances. Such
fatal measures could never have been embraced, had it not been to secure a
precarious establishment. THOSE who consider how universal this pernicious
practice of funding has become all over Europe may perhaps dispute this last
opinion. But we lay under less necessity than other states.


BUT to convince us, that an hereditary title is to be embraced rather than a
parliamentary one, which is not supported by any other views or motives; a man
needs only transport himself back to the era of the restoration, and suppose,
that he had had a seat in that parliament, which recalled the royal family, and
put a period to the greatest disorders that ever arose from the opposite
pretensions of prince and people. What would have been thought of one, that had
proposed, at that time, to set aside Charles the second, and settle the crown
on the duke of York or Gloucester; merely, in order to exclude the high claims
of their father and grandfather? Would not such an one have been regarded as a
very extravagant projector, who loved dangerous remedies, and could tamper and
play with a government and national constitution, like a quack with a sickly
patient?

THE advantages, which result from a parliamentary title, preferably to an
hereditary one, though they are great, are too refined ever to enter into the
conception of the vulgar. The bulk of mankind would never allow them to be
sufficient for committing what would be regarded as an injustice to the prince.
They must be supported by some gross, popular, and familiar topics; and wise
men, though convinced of their force, would reject them, in compliance with the
weakness and prejudices of the people. An encroaching tyrant or deluded bigot
alone, by his misconduct, is able to enrage the nation, and render practicable
what was always, perhaps, desirable.

IN reality, the reason asiign'd by the nation for excluding the race of
Stuart, and so many other branches of the royal family, is not on account of
their hereditary title (which however just in itself, would, to vulgar
apprehensions, have appeared altogether absurd) but on account of their
religion: Which leads us to compare the disadvantages above mentioned of each
establishment.

I CONFESS, that, considering the matter in general, it were rather to be
wished, that our prince had no foreign dominions, and could confine all his
attention to the government of this island. For not to mention some real
inconveniences, that may result from territories on the continent; they afford
such a handle for calumny and defamation, as is greedily seized by the people,
who are always disposed to think ill of their superiors. It must, however, be
acknowledged, that Hanover is, perhaps, the spot of ground in Europe the least
inconvenient for a king of Britain. It lies in the heart of Germany, at a
distance from the great powers, which are our natural rivals: It is protected
by the laws of the empire, as well as by the arms of its own sovereign: And it
serves only to connect us more closely with the house of Austria, which is our
natural ally.

IN the last war, it has been of service to us, by furnishing us with a
considerable body of auxiliary troops, the bravest and most faithful in the
world. The elector of Hanover is the only considerable prince in the empire,
who has drove no separate end, and has raised up no stale pretensions, during
the late commotions of Europe; but has acted, all along, with the dignity of a
king of Britain. And ever since the accession of that family, 'twou'd be
difficult to show any harm we have ever received from the electoral dominions,
except that short disgust in 1718, with Charles the twelfth, who, regulating
himself by maxims very different from those of other princes, made a personal
quarrel of every public injury.

THE religious persuasion of the house of Stuart is an inconvenience of a much
deeper dye, and would threaten us with much more dismal consequences. The Roman
catholic religion, with its huge train of priests and friars, is vastly more
expensive than ours: Even though unaccompany'd with its natural attendants of
inquisitors and stakes and gibbets, it is less tolerating: And not contented
with dividing the sacerdotal from the regal office, (which must be prejudicial
to any state) it bestows the former on a foreigner, who has always a separate,
and may often have an opposite interest to that of the public.

BUT were this religion ever so advantageous to society, it is contrary to that
which is established among us, and which is likely to keep possession, for a
long time, of the minds of the people. And though it is much to be hoped, that
the progress of reason and philosophy will, by degrees, abate the virulent
acrimony of opposite religious all over Europe; yet the spirit of moderation
has, as yet, made too slow advances to be entirely trusted. The conduct of the
Saxon family, where the same person can be a catholic king and a protestant
elector, is, perhaps, the first instance, in modern times, of so reasonable and
prudent a behavior. And the gradual progress of the catholic superstition
does, even there, prognosticate a speedy alteration: After which, it is justly
to be apprehended, that persecutions will put a speedy period to the protestant
religion in the place of its nativity.

THUS, upon the whole, the advantages of the settlement in the family of
Stuart, which frees us from a disputed title, seem to bear some proportion with
those of the settlement in the family of Hanover, which frees us from the
claims of prerogative: But at the same time, its disadvantages, by placing on
the throne a Roman catholic, are much greater than those of the other
establishment, in settling the crown on a foreign prince. What party an
impartial patriot, in the reign of king William or queen Anne, would have
chosen amidst these opposite views, may, perhaps, to some appear hard to
determine. For my part, I esteem liberty so invaluable a blessing in society,
that whatever favors its progress and security, can scarce be too fondly
cherished by every one, who is a lover of human kind.

BUT, the settlement in the house of Hanover has actually taken place. The
princes of that family, without intrigue, without cabal, without solicitation
on their part, have been called to mount our throne, by the united voice of the
whole legislative body. They have, since their accession, displayed, in all
their actions, the utmost mildness, equity, and regard to the laws and
constitution. Our own ministers, our own parliaments, ourselves have governed
us; and if aught ill has befallen us, we can only blame fortune or ourselves.
What a reproach must we become amongst nations, if, disgusted with a settlement
so deliberately made, and whose conditions have been so religiously observed,
we should throw every thing again into confusion; and by our levity and
rebellious disposition, prove ourselves totally unfit for any state but that of
absolute slavery and subjection?

THE greatest inconvenience attending a disputed title is, that it brings us in
danger of civil wars and rebellions. What wise man, to avoid this
inconvenience, would run directly upon a civil war and rebellion? Not to
mention, that so long possession, secured by so many laws, must, e're this
time, in the apprehension of a great part of the nation, have begot a title in
the house of Hanover, independent of their present possession: So that now we
should not even, by a revolution, obtain the end, of avoiding a disputed title.

No revolution, made by national forces, will ever be able, without some other
great necessity, to abolish our debts and encumbrances, in which the interest
of so many persons is concerned. And a revolution, made by foreign forces, is a
conquest: A calamity, with which the precarious balance of power very nearly
threatens us, and which our civil dissensions are likely, above all other
circumces, to bring suddenly upon us.

DISCOURSE XII. Idea of a perfect Commonwealth.
OF all mankind, there are none so pernicious as political projectors, if they
have power; nor so ridiculous, if they want it: As on the other hand, a wise
politician is the most beneficial character in nature, if accompanied with
authority, and the most innocent, and not altogether useless, even if deprived
of it. It Is not with forms of government, as with other artificial
contrivances; where an old engine may be rejected, if we can discover another
more accurate and commodious, or where trials may safely be made, even though the
success be doubtful. An established government has an infinite advantage, by
that very circumstance of its being established; the bulk of mankind being
governed by authority, not reason, and never attributing authority to any
thing, that has not the recommendation of antiquity. To tamper, therefore, in
this affair, or try projects, merely upon the credit of supposed argument and
philosophy, can never be the part of a wise magistrate, who will bear a
reverence to what carries the marks of age; and though he may attempt some
improvement for the public good, yet will he adjust his innovations, as much as
possible, to the ancient fabric, and preserve entire the chief pillars and
supports of the constitution.

THE mathematicians in Europe have been much divided concerning that figure of
a ship, which is the most commodious for sailing; and Huygens, who at last fixed
this controversy, is justly thought to have obliged the learned, as well as
commercial world; though Columbus had sailed to America, and Sir Francis Drake
made the tour of the world, without any such discovery. As one form of
government must be allowed more perfect than another, independent of the
manners and humors of particular men; Why may we not enquire what is the most
perfect of all, though the common botcht and inaccurate governments seem to serve
the purposes of society, and though it be not so easy to establish a new
government as to build a vessel upon a new plan? The subject is surely the most
worthy curiosity, of any the wit of man can possibly devise. And who knows, if
this controversy were fixed by the universal consent of the learned, but in some
future age an opportunity might be afforded of reducing the theory to practice,
either by a dissolution of the old governments, or the combination of men to
form a new one, in some distant part of the world? In all cases, it must be
advantageous to know what is most perfect in the kind, that we may be able to
bring any real constitution or form of government as near it as possible, by
such gentle alterations and innovations, as may not give too great disturbance
to society.

ALL I'pretend to in the present essay is to revive this subject of
speculation; and therefore I shall deliver my sentiments in as few words as
possible. A long dissertation on that head would not, I apprehend, be very
acceptable to the public, who will be apt to regard such disquisitions, both as
useless and chimerical.

ALL plans of government, which suppose great reformation in the manners of
mankind, are plainly imaginary. Of this nature, are the republic of Plato, and
the Utopia of Sir Thomas More. The Oceana is the only valuable model of a
commonwealth, that has yet been offered to the public.

THE chief defects of the Oceana seem to be these. First, Its rotation is
inconvenient, by throwing men, of whatever ability, by intervals, out of public
employments. Secondly, Its Agrarian is impracticable. Men will soon learn the
art, which was practiced in ancient Rome, of concealing their possessions under
other peoples names; till at last, the abuse will become so common, that they
will throw off, even the appearance of restraint. Thirdly, The Oceana provides
not a sufficient security for liberty or the redress of grievances. The senate
must propose, and the people consent; by which means, the senate have not only
a negative upon the people, but what is of infinitely greater consequence,
their negative goes before the votes of the people. Were the king's negative of
the same nature in the English constitution, and could he prevent any bill from
coming into parliament, he would be an absolute monarch. As his negative
follows the votes of the houses, it is of little consequence: Such a difference
is there in the manner of placing the same thing. When a popular bill has been
debated in the two houses, is brought to maturity, all its conveniences and
inconveniences weighed and balanced; if afterward it be presented for the
royal assent, few princes will venture to reject the unanimous desire of the
people. But could the king crush a disagreeable bill in embryo (as was the
case, for some time in the Scotch parliament, by means of the lords of the
articles) the British government would have no balance, nor would grievances
ever be redrest: And it is certain, that exorbitant power proceeds not, in any
government, from new laws, so much as from neglecting to remedy the abuses,
which frequently rise upon the old ones. A government, says Machiavel, must
often be brought back to its original principles. It appears, then, that in the
Oceana the whole legislature may be said to rest in the senate; which
Harrington would own to be an inconvenient form of government; especially after
the Agrarian is abolished.

HERE is a form of government, to which I cannot, in theory, discover any
considerable objection. Let Great Britain and Ireland, or any territory of
equal extent, be divided into 100 counties, and each county into 100 parishes,
making in all 10,000. If the country, purposed to be erected into a
commonwealth, be of more narrow extent, we may diminish the number of counties,
but never bring them below thirty. If it be of greater extent, 'twere better to
enlarge the parishes, or throw more parishes into a county, than increase the
number of counties.

LET all the freeholders in the country parishes, and those who pay scot and
lot in the town parishes, meet annually in the parish church, and choose by
ballot some freeholder of the county for their member, whom we shall call the
county representative.

LET the 100 county representatives, two days after their election, meet in the
county town, and choose by ballot, from their own body, ten county magistrates,
and one senator. There are, therefore, in the whole commonwealth, 100 senators,
1100 county magistrates, and 10,000 county representatives. For we shall bestow
on all senators the authority of county magistrates, and on all county
magistrates the authority of county representatives.

LET the senators meet in the capital, and be endowed with the whole executive
power of the commonwealth, the power of peace and war, of giving orders to
generals, admirals, and ambassadors; and in short, all the prerogatives of a
British king, except his negative.

LET the county representatives meet in their particular counties, and possess
the whole legislative power of the commonwealth; the greatest number of
counties deciding the question, and where these are equal, let the senate have
the casting vote.

EVERY new law must first be debated in the senate; and though rejected by it, if
ten senators insist and protest, it must be sent down to the counties. The
senate may join to the copy of the law, their reasons for receiving or
rejecting it.

BECAUSE it would be troublesome to assemble the whole county representatives
for every trivial law, that may be requisite, the senate have their choice of
sending down the law either to the county magistrates or county representatives.

THE magistrates, though the law be referred to them, may, if they please, call
the representatives, and submit the affair to their determination.

WHETHER the law be referred by the senate to the county magistrates or
representatives, a copy of it, and of the senate's reasons must be sent to
every representative eight days before the day appointed for the assembling in
order to deliberate concerning it. And though the determination be, by the
senate, referred to the magistrates, if five representatives of the county
order the magistrates to assemble the whole court of representatives, and
submit the affair to their determination, they must obey.

EITHER the county magistrates or representatives may give, to the senator of
the county, the copy of a law to be proposed to the senate; and if five
counties concur in the same order, the law, though refused by the senate, must
come either to the county magistrates or representatives, as is contained in
the order of the five counties.

ANY twenty counties, by a vote either of their magistrates or representatives,
may throw any man out of all public offices for a year. Thirty counties for
three years.

THE senate has a power of throwing out any member or number of members of its
own body, not to be re-elected for that year. The senate cannot throw out twice
in a year the senator of the same county.

THE power of the old senate continues for three weeks after the annual
election of the county representatives. Then all the new senators are shut up
in a conclave, like the cardinals; and by an intricate ballot, such as that of
Venice or Malta, they choose the following magistrates; a protector, who
represents the dignity of the commonwealth, and presides in the senate; two
secretaries of state; these six councils, a council of state, a council of
religion and learning, a council of trade, a council of laws, a council of war,
a council of the admiralty; each council consisting of five persons: Along with
six commissioners of the treasury and a chief commissioner. All these must be
senators. The senate also names all the ambassadors to foreign courts, who may
either be senators or not.

THE senate may continue any or all of these, but must re-elect them every year.

THE protector and two secretaries have session and suffrage in the council of
state. The business of that council is all foreign politics. The council of
state has session and suffrage in all the other councils.

THE council of religion and learning inspects the universities and clergy.
That of trade inspects every thing that may affect commerce. That of laws
inspects all the abuses of laws by the inferior magistrates, and examines what
improvements may be made of the municipal law. That of war inspects the militia
and its discipline, magazines, stores, etc. and when the republic is in war,
examines into the proper orders for generals. The council of admiralty has the
same power with regard to the navy, along with the nomination of the captains
and all inferior officers.

NONE of these councils can give orders themselves, except where they receive
such powers from the senate. In other cases, they must communicate every thing
to the senate.

WHEN the senate is under adjournment, any of the councils may assemble it
before the day appointed for its meeting.

BESIDES these councils or courts, there is another called the court of
competitors, which is thus constituted. If any candidates for the office of
senator have more votes than a third of the representatives, that candidate,
which has most votes, next to the senator elected, becomes incapable for one
year of all public offices, even of being a magistrate or representative: But
he takes his seat in the court of competitors. Here then is a court, which may
sometimes consist of a hundred members; sometimes have no members at all; and
by that means, be for a year abolished.

THE court of competitors has no power in the commonwealth. It has only the
inspection of public accounts, and the accusing any man before the senate. If
the senate acquit him, the court of competitors may, if they please, appeal to
the people, either magistrates or representatives. Upon that appeal, the
magistrates or representatives meet on the day appointed by the court of
competitors, and choose in each county three persons; from which number every
senator is excluded. These to the number of 300 meet in the capital, and bring
the person accused to a new trial.

The court of competitors may propose any law to the senate; and if refused may
appeal to the people, that is to the magistrates or representatives, who
examine it in their counties. Every senator, who is thrown out of the senate by
a vote of the court, takes his seat in the court of competitors.

THE senate possesses all the judicative authority of the house of lords, that
is, all the appeals from the inferior courts. It likewise nominates the lord
chancellor, and all the officers of the law.

EVERY county is a kind of republic within itself, and the representatives may
make county laws; which have no authority 'till three months after they are
voted. A copy of the law is sent to the senate, and to every other county. The
senate or any single county may, at any time, annul any law of another county.

THE representatives have all the authority of the British justices of the
peace in trials, commitments, etc.

THE magistrates have the nomination of all the officers of the revenue in each
county. All causes with regard to the revenue are appealed ultimately to the
magistrates. They pass the accounts of all the officers; but must have all
their own accounts examined and past at the end of the year by the
representatives.

THE magistrates name rectors or ministers to all the parishes.

THE presbyterian government is established; and the highest ecclesiastical
court is an assembly or synod of all the presbyters of the county. The
magistrates may take any cause from this court, and determine it themselves.

THE magistrates may try, and depose or suspend any presbyter.

THE militia is established in imitation of that in Swisserland, which being
well known, we shall not insist upon it. 'Twill only be proper to make this
addition, that an army of 20,000 be annually drawn out by rotation, paid and
encamped during six weeks in summer; that the duty of a camp may not be
altogether unknown.

THE magistrates nominate all the colonels and downwards. The senate all
upwards. During war, the general nominates the colonel and downwards, and his
commission is good for a twelvemonth. But after that it must be confirmed by
the magistrates of the county, to which the regiment belongs. The magistrates
may break any officer in the county regiment. And the senate may do the same to
any officer in the service. If the magistrates do not think proper to confirm
the general's choice, they may nominate another officer in the place of him
they reject.

ALL crimes are tried within the county by the magistrates and a jury. But the
senate can stop any trial, and bring it before themselves.

ANY county may indict any man before the senate, for any crime.

THE protector, the two secretaries, the council of state, with any five more
that the senate appoints, on extraordinary emergencies, are possessed of
dictatorial power for six months.

THE protector may pardon any person condemned by the inferior courts.

IN time of war, no officer of the army, that is in the field, can have any
civil office in the commonwealth.

THE capital, which we shall call London, may be allowed four members in the
senate. It may therefore be divided into four counties. The representatives of
each of these choose one senator, and ten magistrates. There are therefore in
the city four senators, forty four magistrates, and four hundred
representatives. The magistrates have the same authority as in the counties.
The representatives also have the same authority; but they never meet in one
general court: They give their votes in their particular county or division of
hundreds.

WHEN they enact any city law, the greatest number of counties or divisions
determines the matter. And where these are equal, the magistrates have the
casting vote.

THE magistrates choose the mayor, sheriff, recorder and other officers of the
city.

IN the commonwealth, no representative, magistrate, or senator, as such, has
any salary. The protector, secretaries, councils, and ambassadors have salaries.

THE first year in every century is set apart to correct all inequalities,
which time may have produced in the representation. This must be done by the
legislature.

THE following political aphorisms may explain the reason of these orders.

THE lower sort of people and small proprietors are good enough judges of one
not very distant from them in rank or habitation; and therefore, in their
parochial meetings, will probably choose the best or nearly the best
representative: But they are wholly unfit for county meetings, and for electing
into the higher offices of the republic. Their ignorance gives the grandees an
opportunity of deceiving them.

TEN thousand, even though they were not annually elected, are a large enough
basis for any free government. It Is true, the nobles in Poland are more than
10,000, and yet these oppress the people. But as power continues there always
in the same persons and families, this makes them, in a manner, a different
nation from the people. Besides, the nobles are there united under a few heads
of families.

ALL free governments must consist of two councils, a less and a greater, or in
other words, of a senate and people. The people, as Harrington observes, would
want wisdom, without the senate: The senate, without the people, would want
honesty.

A LARGE assembly of 1000, for instance, to represent the people, if allowed to
debate, would fall into disorder. If not allowed to debate, the senate has a
negative upon them, and the worst kind of negative, that before resolution.

HERE therefore is an inconvenience which no government has yet fully remedied,
but which is the easiest to be remedied in the world. If the people debate, all
is confusion: If they do not debate, they can only resolve; and then the senate
carves for them. Divide the people into many separate bodies; and then they may
debate with safety, and every inconvenience seems to be prevented.

CARDINAL de Retz says, that all numerous assemblies, however composed, are
mere mob, and swayed in their debates by the least motive. This we find
confirmed by daily experience. When an absurdity strikes a member, he conveys
it to his neighbor, and so on, till the whole be infected. Separate this great
body; and tho every member be only of middling sense, it is not probable, that
any thing but reason can prevail over the whole. Influence and example being
removed, good sense will always get the better of bad among a number of people,
Good sense is one thing: But follies are numberless; and every man has a
different one. The only way of making a people wise is to keep them from
uniting into large assemblies.

THERE are two things to be guarded against in every senate: Its combination
and its division. Its combination is most dangerous; and against this
inconvenience we have provided the following remedies. 1, The great dependence
of the senators on the people by annual elections; and that not by an
undistinguishing rabble, like the English electors, but by men of fortune and
education. 2, The small power they are allowed. They have few offices to
dispose of. Almost all are given by the magistrates in the counties. 3, The
court of competitors, which being composed of men that are their rivals, next
to them in interest, and uneasy in their present situation, will be sure to
take all advantages against them.

THE division of the senate is prevented, 1, By the smallness of their number.
2, As faction supposes a combination to a separate interest, it is prevented by
their dependence on the people. 3, They have a power of expelling any factious
member. It Is true, when another member of the same spirit comes from the
county, they have no power of expelling him: Nor is it fit they should; for
that shows the humor to be in the people, and probably arises from some ill
conduct in public affairs. 4, Almost any man, in a senate so regularly chosen
by the people, may be supposed fit for any civil office. 'Twou'd be proper,
therefore, for the senate to form some general resolutions with regard to the
disposing of offices among the members: Which resolutions would not confine
them in critical times, when extraordinary parts on the one hand, or
extraordinary stupidity on the other, appears in any senator; but yet they
would be sufficient to prevent brigue and faction, by making the disposal of
the offices a thing of course. For instance; let it be a resolution, that no
man shall enjoy any office, till he has sat four years in the senate: That,
except ambassadors, no man shall be in office two years following: That no man
shall attain the higher offices but through the lower; That no man shall be
protector twice, etc. The senate of Venice govern themselves by such
resolutions.

IN foreign politics the interest of the senate can scarc eever be divided from
that of the people; and therefore it is fit to make the senate absolute with
regard to them; otherwise there could be no se crecy nor refined policy.
Besides, without money, no alliance can be executed; and the senate is still
sufficiently dependent. Not to mention, that the legislative power being always
superior to the executive, the magistrates or representatives may interpose,
whenever they think proper.

THE chief support of the British government is the opposition of interests;
but that, though in the main serviceable, breeds endless factions. In the
foregoing plan, it does all the good without any of the harm. The competitors
have no power of controlling the senate: They have only the power of accusing,
and appealing to the people.

IT IS necessary, likewise, to prevent both combination and division in the
thousand magistrates. This is done sufficiently by the separation of places and
interests.

BUT lest that should not be enough, their dependence on the 10,000 for their
elections, serves to the same purpose.

NOR is that all: For the 10,000 may resume the power, whenever they please;
and not only when they all please, but when any five of a hundred please, which
will happen upon the very first suspicion of a separate interest.

THE 10,000 are too large a body either to unite or divide, except when they
meet in one place, and fall under the guidance of ambitious leaders. Not to
mention their annual election, by almost the whole body of the people.

A SMALL commonwealth is the happiest government in the world, within itself;
because every thing lies under the eye of the rulers: But it may be subdued by
great force from without. This scheme seems to have all the advantages both of
a great and a little commonwealth.

EVERY county law may be anull'd either by the senate or another county;
because that shows an opposition of interests: In which case, no part ought to
decide for itself. The matter must be referred to the whole, which will best
determine what agrees with general interest.

AS to the clergy and militia, the reasons of these orders are obvious. Without
the dependence of the clergy on the civil magistrate, and without a militia,
it is folly to think any free government will ever have security or stability.

IN many governments, the inferior magistrates have no rewards but what arise
from their ambition, vanity, or public spirit. The salaries of the French
judges amount not to the interest of the sums they pay for their offices. The
Dutch burgo-masters have little more immediate profit than the English justices
of peace, or the members of the house of commons formerly. But lest any should
suspect that this would beget negligence in the administration, (which is
little to be feared considering the natural ambition of mankind) let the
magistrates have competent salaries. The senators have access to so many
honorable and lucrative offices, that their attendance needs not be bought.
There is little attendance required of the representatives.

THAT the foregoing plan of government is practicable, no one can doubt, who
considers the resemblance it bears to the commonwealth of the United provinces,
formerly one of the wisest and most renowned governments, that ever was in the
world. The alterations in the present scheme are all evidently to the better.
1, The representation is more equal. 2, The unlimited power of the
burgo-masters in the towns, which forms a perfect aristocracy in the Dutch
commonwealth, is corrected by a well tempered democracy, in giving to the
people the annual election of the county representatives. 3, The negative,
which every province and town has upon the whole body of the Dutch republic,
with regard to alliances, peace and war, and the imposition of taxes, is here
removed. 4, The counties, in the present plan, are not so independent of each
other, nor do they form separate bodies so much as the seven provinces; where
the jealousy and envy of the smaller provinces and towns against the greater,
particularly Holland and Amsterdam, have frequently disturbed the government.
5, Larger powers, though of the safest kind, are entrusted to the senate than the
States General possess; by which means, the former may become more expeditious,
and secret in their resolutions, than it is possible for the latter.

THE chief alterations, that could be made on the British government, in order
to bring it to the most perfect model of limited monarchy, seem to be the
following. First, The plan of the republican parliament ought to be restored,
by making the representation equal, and by allowing none to vote in the county
elections who possess not a hundred a year. Secondly, As such a house of
commons would be too weighty for a frail house of lords, like the present, the
bishops and Scotch peers ought to be removed, whose behavior, in former
parliaments, destroyed entirely the authority of that house: The number of the
upper house ought to be raised to three or four hundred: Their seats not
hereditary, but during life: They ought to have the election of their own
members; and no commoner should be allowed to refuse a seat, that was offered
him. By this means, the house of lords would consist entirely of the men of
chief credit, ability, and interest of the nation; and every turbulent leader
in the house of commons might be taken off, and connected in interest with the
house of peers. Such an aristocracy would be an excellent barrier both to the
monarchy and against it. At present, the balance of our government depends, in
some measure, on the ability and behavior of the sovereign; which are variable
and uncertain circumstances.

I ALLOW, that this plan of limited monarchy, however corrected, is still
liable to three great inconveniences. First, It removes not entirely, tho it
may soften, the parties of court and country. Secondly, The king's personal
character must still have a great influence on the government. Thirdly, The
sword is in the hands of a single person, who will always neglect to discipline
the militia, in order to have a pretext for keeping up a standing army. It Is
evident, that this is a mortal distemper in the British government, of which it
must at last inevitably perish. I must, however, confess, that Sweden seems, in
some measure, to have remedied this inconvenience, and to have a militia, along
with its limited monarchy, as well as a standing army, which is less dangerous
than the British.

WE shall conclude this subject with observing the falsehood of the common
opinion, that no large state, such as France or Britain, could ever be modeled
into a commonwealth, but that such a form of government can only take place in
a city or small territory. The contrary seems evident. Though it is more difficult
to form a republican government in an extensive country than in a city; there
is more facility, when once it is formed, of preserving it steady and uniform,
without tumult and faction, in the former than in the latter. It Is not easy,
for the distant parts of a large state to combine in any plan of free
government; but they easily conspire in the esteem and reverence for a single
person, who, by means of this popular favor, may seize the power, and forcing
the more obstinate to submit, may establish a monarchical government. On the
other hand, a city readily concurs in the same notions of government, the
natural equality of property favors liberty, and the nearness of habitation
enables the citizens mutually to assist each other. Even under absolute
princes, the subordinate government of cities is commonly republican; while
that of counties and provinces is monarchical. But these same circumstances,
which facilitate the erection of commonwealths in cities, render their
constitution more frail and uncertain. Democracies are turbulent. For however
the people may be separated or divided into small parties, either in their
votes or elections; their near habitation in a city will always make the force
of popular tides and currents very sensible. Aristocracies are better adapted
for peace and order, and accordingly were most admired by ancient writers; but
they are jealous and oppressive. In a large government, which is modeled with
masterly skill, there is compass and room enough to refine the democracy, from
the lower people, who may be admitted into the first elections or first
concoction of the commonwealth, to the higher magistrates, who direct all the
motions. At the same time, the parts are so distant and remote, that it is very
difficult, either by intrigue, prejudice, or passion, to hurry them into any
measures against the public interest.

IT IS needless to enquire whether such a government would be immortal. I allow
the justness of the poet's exclamation on the endless projects of human race,
Man and for ever! The world itself probably is not immortal. Such consuming
plagues may arise as would leave even a perfect government a weak prey to its
neighbors. We know not, how far enthusiasm, or other extraordinary motions of
the human mind, may transport men, to the neglect of all order and public good.
Where difference of interest is removed, whimsical and unaccountable factions
often arise, from personal favor or enmity. Perhaps, rust may grow to the
springs of the most accurate political machine, and disorder its motions.
Lastly, extensive conquests when pursued, must be the ruin of every free
government, and of the more perfect governments sooner than of the imperfect;
because of the very advantages, which the former possess above the latter. And
though such a state ought to establish a fundamental law against conquests: Yet
republics have ambition as well as individuals, and present interest makes men
forgetful of their posterity. It Is a sufficient incitement to human endeavors,
that such a government would flourish for many ages; without pretending to
bestow on any work of man, that immortality, which the Almighty seems to have
refused to his own productions.

FINIS.

