A LETTER TO Mr. SECRETARY DUNDAS.

IN ANSWER TO HIS SPEECH ON THE LATE PROCLAMATION.

BY THOMAS PAIN.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. PARSONS, No. 21, PATERNOSTER ROW.

1792.

PRICE SIXPENCE.

TO Mr. SECRETARY DUNDAS.
SIR, London, June 6, 1792.
AS you opened the debate in the House of Commons, May 25th, on the
Proclamation for suppressing Publications, which that Proclamation (without
naming any) calls wicked and seditious, and as you applied those opprobious
epithets to the works entitled "RIGHTS OF MAN," I think it unnecessary to offer
any other reason for addressing this Letter to you.

I begin, then, at once, by declaring that I do not believe there are to be
found in the writings of any author, ancient or modern, on the subject of
Government, a spirit of greater benignity, and a stronger inculcation of moral
principles than in those which I have published. They come, Sir, from a man,
who, by having lived in different countries, and under different systems of
Government, and who, being intimate in the construction of them, is a better
judge of the subject than it is possible that you, from the want of those
opportunities, can be: -- And, besides this, they come from an heart that knows
not how to beguile.

I will further say, that when that moment arrives in which the best
consolation that shall be left will be that of looking back on some past
actions, more virtuous, more meritorious, than the rest, I shall then with
happiness remember, among other things, I have written the RIGHTS OF MAN. -- As
to what Proclamations, or Prosecutions, or Place-men, or place-expectants --
those who possess, or those who are gaping for office, may say or them, it will
not alter their character, either with the world or with me.

Having, Sir, made this declaration, I shall proceed to remark, not
particularly upon your own Speech on that occasion, but on any other Speech to
which your Motion on that day gave rise; and I shall begin with that of Mr.
ADAM.

This Gentleman accuses me of not having done the very thing that I have done,
and which, he says, if I had done, he should not have accused me.

Mr. ADAM, in his Speech, (see the Morning Chronicle of May 26,) says, That he
had well considered the subject of Constitutional Publications, and was by no
means ready to say (but the contrary) that books of science upon Government,
though recommending a doctrine or system different from the form of our
Constitution, (meaning that of England) were fit objects of prosecution; that
if he did, he must condemn (which he meant not to do) HARRINGTON for his
Oceana, SIR THOMAS MORE for his Eutopia, and HUME for his idea of a perfect
Commonwealth. But, (continued Mr. Adam,) the Publication of Mr. PAIN was very
different; for it reviled what was most sacred in the Constitution, destroyed
every principle of subordination, and established nothing in their room.

I readily perceive that Mr. ADAM had not read the Second Part of the Rights of
Man, and I am put under the necessity, either of submitting to an erroneous
charge, or of justifying myself against it; and I certainly shall prefer the
latter. -- If, then, I shall prove to Mr. ADAM, that, in my reasoning upon
Systems of Government in the Second Part of Rights of Man, I have shown as
clearly, I think, as words can convey ideas, a certain system of Government;
and that not existing in theory only, but already in full and established
practice, and systematically and practically free from all the vices and
defects of the English Government, and capable of producing more happiness to
the People, and that also with an eightieth part of the Taxes, which the
present System of English Government consumes; I hope he will do me the justice
when he next goes to the House, to get up and confess he had been mistaken in
saying, that I had established nothing, and that I had destroyed every
principle of subordination. Having thus opened the case, I now come to the
point.

In the Second Part of RIGHTS OF MAN, I have distinguished Government into two
classes or systems; the one the hereditary system; the other the representative
system.

In the First Part of Rights of Man, I have endeavored to show, and I
challenge any man to refute it, that there does not exist a right to establish
Hereditary Government; or, in other words, Hereditary Governors; because
Hereditary Government always means a Government yet to come, and the case
always is, that the People who are to live afterward, have always the same
right to choose a Government for themselves, as the peohad who lived before them.

In the Second Part of Rights of Man, I have not repeated those arguments,
because they are irrefutable; but have confined myself to show the defects of
what is called Hereditary Government, or Hereditary Succession; that it must,
from the nature of it, throw Government into the hands of men totally unworthy
of it, from want of principle, or unfitted for it from want of capacity. --
James the IId is recorded as an instance of the first of these cases; and
instances are to be found almost all over Europe to prove the truth of the
latter.

To show the absurdity of the Hereditary System still more strongly, I will now
put the following case: -- Take any fifty men promiscuously, and it will be
very extraordinary, if out of that number, one man should be found, whose
principles and talents taken together, (for some might have principles, and
others have talents) would render him a person truly fitted to fill any very
extraordinary office of National Trust. If, then, such a fitness of character
could not be expected to be found in more than one person out of fifty, it
would happen but once in a thousand years to the eldest son of any one family,
admitting each, on an average, to hold the office twenty years. Mr. Adam talks
of something in the Constitution which he calls most sacred; but I hope he does
not mean hereditary succession, a thing which appears to me a violation of
every order of nature, and of common sense.

When I look into History and see the multitudes of men, otherwise virtuous,
who have died, and their families been ruined, in defense of knaves and fools,
and which they would not have done, had they reasoned at all upon the system; I
do not know a greater good that an individual can render to mankind, than to
endeavor to break the chains of political superstition. Those chains are now
dissolving fast, and proclamations and prosecutions will serve but to hasten
that dissolution.

Having thus spoken of the Hereditary System as a bad system, and subject to
every possible defect; I now come to the Representative System; and this Mr.
ADAM will find stated in the Second Part of Rights of Man, not only as the
best, but as the only Theory of Government under which the liberties of a
people can be permanently secure.

But it is needless now to talk of mere Theory, since there is already a
Government in full practice, established upon that Theory, or in other words,
upon the Rights of Man, and has been so for almost twenty years. Mr. Pit, in a
speech of his some short time since, said, That there never did, and never
could exist a Government established upon those Rights, and that if it began at
noon, it would end at night. Mr. Pit is not yet arrived to the degree of a
schoolboy in this species of knowledge. His practice has been confined to the
means of extorting revenue, and his boast has been -- how much? Whereas the
boast of the System of Government that I am speaking of, is not how much, but
how little.

The System of Government purely representative, unmixed with any thing of
hereditary nonsense, began in America. I will now compare the effects of that
system of Government with the system of Government in England, both during, and
since the close of the war.

So powerful is the Representative System; first, by combining and
consolidating all the parts of a country together, however great the extent;
and secondly, by admitting of none but men properly qualified into the
Government, or dismissing them if they prove to be otherwise, that America was
enabled thereby totally to defeat and overthrow all the schemes and projects of
the Hereditary Government of England against her. As the establishment of the
Revolution and Independence of America is a proof of this fact, it is needless
to enlarge upon it.

I now come to the comparative effect of the two Systems since the close of the
war, and I request Mr. Adam to attend to it.

America had internally sustained the ravage of upwards of seven years of war,
which England had not. England sustained only the expense of the war; whereas
America sustained, not only the expense, but the destruction of property
committed by both armies. Not a house was built during that period, and many
thousands were destroyed. The farms and plantations along the coast of the
Country, for more than a thousand miles, were laid waste. Her commerce was
annihilated. Her ships were either taken or had rotted within her own harbor.
The credit of her funds had fallen upwards of ninety per cent. that is, an
original hundred pounds would not sell for ten pounds. In fine, she was
apparently put back an hundred years when the war closed; which was not the
case with England.

But such was the event, that the same Representative System of Government,
though since better organized, which enabled her to conquer, enabled her also
to recover; and she now presents a more flourishing condition, and a more happy
and harmonized society under that system of Government, than any country in the
world can boast under any other. Her towns are rebuilt, much better than
before; her farms and plantations are in higher improvement than ever; her
commerce is spread over the world, and her funds have risen from less than ten
pounds the hundred to upwards of one hundred and twenty. Mr. Pit, and his
colleagues, talk of the things that have happened in his boyish Administration,
without knowing what greater things have happened elsewhere, and under other
systems of Government.

I next come to state the expense of the two systems, as they now stand in each
of the countries; but it may first be proper to observe, that Government in
America is what it ought to be, a matter of honor and trust, and not made a
trade of for the purpose of lucre.

The whole amount of the nett taxes in England (exclusive of the expense of
collection, of drawbacks, of seizures and condemnations, of fines and
penalties, of fees of office, of litigations and informers, which are some of
the blessed means of enforcing them) is, seventeen millions. Of this sum, about
nine millions go for the payment of the interest of the National Debt, and the
remainder, being about eight millions, is for the current annual expenses. Thus
much for one side of the case. I now come to the other.

The expense of all the several departments of the general Representative
Government of the United States of America, extending over a space of country
nearly ten times larger than England, is two hundred and ninety-four thousand,
five hundred and fifty-eight dollars, which, at 4s. 6d. per dollar, is 66,275l.
11s. sterling, and is thus apportioned.

Expense of the Executive Department. l. s. The Office of the Presidency, at
which the President receives nothing for himself 5,625 0 Vice President 1,125 0
Chief Justice 900 0 Five associate Justices 3,937 10 Nineteen Judges of
Districts and Attorney General 6,873 15 Legislative Department. Members of
Congress at six dollars (1l. 7s.) per day their Secretaries, Clerks, Chaplains,
Messengers, Door-keepers, etc. 25,515 0 Treasury Department. Secretary,
Assistant, Comptroller, Auditor, Treasurer, Register, and Loan-Office-Keeper,
in each State, together with all necessary Clerks, Office-Keepers, etc. 12,825
0 Department of State, including Foreign Affairs. Secretary, Clerks, etc. etc.
1,406 5 Department of War. Secretary, Clerks, Paymasters, Commissioner, etc.
1,462 10 Commissioners for settling Old Accounts. The whole Board, Clerks, etc.
2,598 15 Incidental and Contingent Expenses. For Firewood, Stationary,
Printing, etc. 4,006 16 Total 66,275 11

On account of the incursions of the Indians on the back settlements, Congress
is, at this time, obliged to keep six thousand militia in pay, in addition to a
regiment of foot, and a battalion of artillery, which it always keeps; and this
increases the expense of the War Department to 390,000 dollars, which is
87,795l. sterling, but when Peace shall be concluded with the Indians, the
greatest part of this expense will cease, and the total amount of the expense
of Government, including that of the army, will not amount to one hundred
thousand pounds sterling, which, as has been already stated, is but an
eightieth part of the expenses of the English Government.

I request Mr. Adam and Mr. Dundas, and all those who are talking of
Constitutions, and blessings, and Kings, and Lords, and the Lord knows what, to
look at this statement. Here is a form and system of Government, that is better
organized and better administered than any Government in the world, and that
for less than one hundred thousand pounds per annum, and yet every Member of
Congress receives, as a compensation for his time and attendance on public
business, one pound seven shillings per day, which is at the rate of nearly
five hundred pounds a year.

This is a Government that has nothing to fear. It needs no proclamations to
deter people from writing and reading. It needs no political superstition to
support it. It was by encouraging discussion, and rendering the press free upon
all subjects of Government, that the principles of Government became understood
in America, and the people are now enjoying the present blessings under it. You
hear of no riots, tumults, and disorders in that country; because there exists
no cause to produce them. Those things are never the effect of Freedom, but of
restraint, oppression, and excessive taxation.

In America there is not that class of poor and wretched people that are so
numerously dispersed all over England, and who are to be told by a
Proclamation, that they are happy; and this is in a great measure to be
accounted for, not by the difference of Proclamations, but by the difference of
Governments and the difference of Taxes between that country and this. What the
laboring people of that country earn they apply to their own use, and to the
education of their children, and do not pay it away in Taxes as fast as they
earn it, to support Court extravagance, and a long enormous list of Place-men
and Pensioners; and besides this, they have learned the manly doctrine of
reverencing themselves, and consequently of respecting each other; and they
laugh at those imaginary beings called Kings and Lords, and all the fraudulent
trumpery of Courts.

When Place-men and Pensioners, or those who expect to be such, are lavish in
praise of a Government, it is not a sign of its being a good one. The pension
list alone, in England, (see Sir John Sinclair's History of the Revenue, page 6
of the Appendix,) is One Hundred and Seven Thousand Four Hundred and Four
Pounds, which is more than the expenses of the whole Government of America
amount to. And I am now more convinced than before, that the offer that was
made to me of a Thousand Pounds, for the copy-right of the Second Part of the
Rights of Man, together with the remaining copy-right of the First Part, was to
have effected, by a quick suppression, what is now attempted to be done by a
Prosecution. The connection which the person who made that offer has with the
King's Printing Office, may furnish part of the means of enquiring into this
affair, when the Ministry should please to bring their Prosecution to issue.
But to return to my subject --

I have said, in the Second Part of Rights of Man, and I repeat it here, that
the service of any man, whether called King, President, Senator, Legislator, or
any thing else, cannot be worth more to any country, in the regular routine of
office, than Ten Thousand Pounds per annum. We have a better man in America,
and more of a Gentleman than any King I ever knew of, who does not occasion
even half that expense; for, though the salary is fixed at Five Thousand Six
hundred and Twenty-Five Pounds, he does not accept it, and it is only the
incidental expenses that are paid out of it. The name by which a man is called
is, of itself, but an empty thing. It is worth and character alone which can
render him valuable, for without these, Kings, and Lords, and Presidents, are
but jingling names.

But without troubling myself about Constitutions of Government, I have shown,
in the Second Part of Rights of Man, that an alliance may be formed between
England, France, and America, and that the expenses of Government in England
may be put back to one million and an half, viz. Civil expense of Government,
L. 500,000 Army, 500,000 Navy, 500,000 1,500,000 And even this sum is fifteen
times greater than the expenses of Government are in America; and it is also
greater than the whole peace establishment of England amounted to about an
hundred years ago. So much has the weight and oppression of Taxes increased
since the Revolution, and especially since the year 1714.

To show that the sum of 500,000l. is sufficient to defray all the civil
expenses of Government, I have, in that work, annexed the following estimate
for any country of the same extent as England:

In the first place, three hundred Representatives, fairly elected, are
sufficient for all the purposes to which Legislation can apply, and preferable
to a larger number.

If then an allowance, at the rate of five hundred pounds per ann. be made for
every Representative, deducting for non-attendance the expense, if the whole
number attended six months each year, would be -- 75,000

The Official Departments could not possibly exceed the following number with
the salaries annexed, viz.

Three Offices, at 10,000l. each, 30,000 Ten ditto, at 5,000l. each, 50,000
Twenty ditto, at 2,000l. each, 40,000 Forty ditto, at 1,000l. each, 40,000 Two
hundred ditto, at 500l. each, 100,000 Three hundred ditto, at 200l. each,
60,000 Five hundred ditto, at 100l. each, 50,000 Seven hundred ditto, at 75l.
each, 52,500 L. 497,500

If a Nation chose, it might deduct four per cent from all the offices, and
make one of twenty thousand pounds per annum, and style the person who should
fill it, King, or Majesty, or Madjesty, or give him any other title.

Taking, however, this sum of one million and an half, as an abundant supply
for all the expenses of Government under any form whatever, there will remain a
surplus of nearly six million and a half out of the present Taxes, after paying
the interest of the National Debt; and I have shown in the Second Part of
Rights of Man, what appears to me, the best mode of applying the surplus money;
for I am now speaking of expenses and savings, and not of systems of Government.

I have in the first place, estimated the poor-rates at two millions annually,
and shown that the first effectual step would be to abolish the poor-rates
entirely, (which would be a saving of two millions to the housekeepers,) and
to remit four millions out of the surplus taxes to the poor to be paid to them
in money in proportion to the number of children in each family, and the number
of aged persons.

I have estimated the number of persons of both sexes in England of fifty years
of age and upwards at 420,000, and have taken one-third of this number, viz.
140,000, to be poor people.

To save long calculations, I have taken 70,000 of them to be upwards of fifty
years of age and under sixty, and the other to be sixty years and upwards; and
to allow six pounds per ann. to the former class, and ten pounds per ann. to
the latter. The expense of which will be, Seventy thousand persons at 6l. per
ann. 420,000 Seventy thousand persons at 10l. per ann. 700,000 L. 1,120,000
There will then remain of the four millions 2,880,000l. I have stated two
different methods of appropriating this money. The one is to pay it in
proportion to the number of children in each family, at the rate of three or
four pounds per ann. for each child; the other is, to apportion it according to
the expense of living in different counties; but in either of these cases it
would, together with the allowance to be made to the aged, completely take off
taxes from one-third of all the families in England, besides relieving all the
other families from the burden of poor-rates.

The whole number of families in England, lotting five souls to each family, is
one million four hundred thousand, of which I take one third, viz. 466,666 to
be poor families who now pay four million of taxes, and that the poorest pays
at least four guineas a year; and that the other thirteen millions are paid by
the other two-thirds. The plan, therefore, as stated in the work is, first, to
remit or repay, as is already stated, this sum of four millions to the poor,
because it is impossible to separate them from the others in the present mode
of collecting taxes on articles of consumption; and, secondly, to abolish the
poor-rates, the house and window light tax, and to change the Commutation Tax
into a progressive Tax on large estates, the particulars of all which are set
forth in the work, and to which I desire Mr. ADAM to refer for particulars. I
shall here content myself with saying, that to a town of the population of
Manchester, it will make a difference in its favor, compared with the present
state of things, of upwards of fifty thousand pounds annually, and so in
proportion to all other places throughout the nation. This certainly is of more
consequence, than that the same sums should be collected to be afterward spent
by riotous and profligate courtiers, and in nightly revels at the Star and
Garter Tavern, Pall Mall.

I will conclude this part of my letter with an extract from the Second Part of
Rights of Man, which Mr. Dundas (a man rolling in luxury at the expense of the
nation) has branded with the epithet of "wicked."

By the operation of this plan, the poor laws, those instruments of civil
torture, will be superseded, and the wasteful expense of litigation prevented.
The hearts of the humane will not be shocked by ragged and hungry children, and
persons of seventy and eighty years of age begging for bread. The dying poor
will not be dragged from place to place, to breathe their last, as a reprisal
of parish upon parish. Widows will have a maintenance for their children, and
not be carted away, on the death of their husbands, like culprits and
criminals, and children will no longer be considered as increasing the
distresses of their parents. The haunts of the wretched will be known, because
it will be to their advantage, and the number of petty crimes, the offspring of
poverty and distress, will be lessened. The poor, as well as the rich, will
then be interested in the support of Government, and the cause and apprehension
of riots and tumults will cease. -- Ye who sit in ease, and solace yourselves
in plenty, and such there are in Turkey and Russia as well as in England, and
who say to yourselves, are we not well off? have ye thought of these things?
When ye do, ye will cease to speak and feel for yourselves alone. -- Rights of
Man, Part II. page 136.

After this remission of four millions be made, and the poor Rates and House
and Window-light Tax be abolished, and the Commutation Tax changed, there will
still remain nearly one million and an half of surplus Taxes; and as by an
alliance between England, France, and America, armies and navies will, in a
great measure, be rendered unnecessary; and as men who have either been brought
up in, or long habited to, those lines of life, are still citizens of a nation
in common with the rest, and have a right to participate in all plans of
National benefit, it is stated in that work (Rights of Man, part II.) to apply
annually 507,000l. out of the surplus taxes to this purpose in the following
manner: To fifteen thousand disbanded soldiers, 3s. per week each (clear of
deductions) during life 117,000 Additional pay to the remaining soldiers, per
ann. 19,500 To the officers of the disbanded corpse, during life, the same sum
of 117,000 To fifteen thousand disbanded sailors, 3s. per week, during life
117,000 Additional pay to the remaining sailors 19,500 To the officers of the
disbanded part of the Navy, during life 117,000 L. 507,000

The limits to which it is proper to confine this Letter, will not admit of my
entering into further particulars. I address it to Mr. Dundas because he took
the lead in the debate, and he wishes, I suppose, to appear conspicuous; but
the purport of it is to justify myself from the charge which Mr. Adam has made.

This Gentleman, as has been observed in the beginning of this Letter,
considers the writings of Harrington, Moore, and Hume, as justifiable and legal
Publications, because they reasoned by comparison, though, in so doing, they
showed plans and systems of Government, not only different from, but preferable
to, that of England; and he accuses me of endeavoring to confuse, instead of
producing a system in the room of that which I have reasoned against; whereas
the fact is, that I have not only reasoned by comparison of the Representative
system against the Hereditary system, but I have gone further; for I have
produced an instance of a Government established entirely on the Representative
system, under which much greater happiness is enjoyed, much fewer Taxes
required, and much higher credit is established, than under the system of
Government in England. The funds in England have risen since the war only from
54l. to 97l. and they have been down, since the Proclamation, to 87l. whereas
the Funds in America rose in the mean time from 10l. to 120l.

His charge against me "of destroying every principle of subordination," is
equally as groundless, which even a single paragraph from the work will prove,
and which I shall here quote:

Formerly, when divisions arose respecting Governments, recourse was had to the
sword, and a civil war ensued. That savage custom is exploded by the new
system, and recourse is had to a National Convention. Discussion, and the
general will, arbitrates the question, and to this private opinion yields with
a good grace, and order is preserved uninterrupted. -- Rights of Man, Part II.
p. 173.

That two different charges should be brought at the same time, the one by a
Member of the Legislature for not doing a certain thing, and the other by the
Attorney General for doing it, is a strange jumble of contradictions. I have
now justified myself, or the work rather, against the first, by stating the
case in this letter, and the justification of the other will be undertaken in
its proper place. But in any case the work will go on.

I shall now conclude this Letter, with saying, that the only objection I found
against the plan, and principles contained in the Second Part of Rights of Man
when I had written the book, was, that they would beneficially interest at
least ninety-nine persons out of every hundred throughout the nation, and
therefore would not leave sufficient room for men to act from the direct and
disinterested principle of honor; but the prosecution now commenced has
fortunately removed that objection, and the approvers and protectors of that
work now feel the immediate impulse of honor, added to that of National
Interest.

I am, Mr. Dundas, Not your obedient humble Servant, But the contrary, THOMAS
PAIN.

Copied from the Paper entitled "THE ARGUS," June 9.

