THE DUNCIAD VARIORVM



THE DUNCIAD. With NOTES VARIORUM, AND THE PROLEGOMENA OF SCRIBLERUS.

Written in the Year, 1727.

LONDON: Printed for LAWTON GILLIVER in Fleetstreet.

PIECES contained in this BOOK.
THE PUBLISHER'S ADVERTISEMENT. A LETTER to the Publisher, occasioned by the
present Edition of the DUNCIAD. The Prolegomena of MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS. A
DISSERTATION of the POEM. TESTIMONIES of AUTHORS concerning our Poet and his
Works. The DUNCIAD, in three Books. NOTES VARIORUM: Being the Scholia of the
learned M. SCRIBLERUS and Others, with the Adversaria of JOHN DENNIS, LEWIS
THEOBALD, EDMUND CURL, the JOURNALISTS, etc. INDEX of PERSONS celebrated in
this Poem. INDEX of THINGS (including Authors) to be found in the Notes.
APPENDIX.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT will be sufficient to say of this Edition, that the reader has here a much
more correct and complete copy of the DUNCIAD, than has hitherto appeared: I
cannot answer but some mistakes may have slipped into it, but a vast number of
others will be prevented, by the Names being now not only set at length, but
justified by the authorities and reasons given. I make no doubt, the Author's
own motive to use real rather than feigned names, was his care to preserve the
Innocent from any false Applications; whereas in the former editions which had
no more than the Initial letters, he was made, by Keys printed here, to hurt
the inoffensive; and (what was worse) to abuse his friends, by an impression at
Dublin.

The Commentary which attends this Poem was sent me from several hands, and
consequently must be unequally written; yet will have one advantage over most
Commentaries, that it is not made upon Conjectures, or at a remote distance of
Time: and the reader cannot but derive one pleasure from the very Obscurity of
the persons it treats of, that it partakes of the nature of a Secret, which
most people love to be let into, though the Men or the Things be ever so
inconsiderable or trivial.

Of the Persons it was judged proper to give some account: for since it is only
in this Monument that they must expect to survive (and here survive they will,
as long as the English tongue shall remain such as it was in the reigns of
Queen ANNE and King GEORGE,) it seemed but humanity to bestow a word or two
upon each, just to tell what he was, what he writ, when he lived, and when he
died.

If a word or two more are added upon the chief Offenders; it is only as a paper
pinned upon the breast, to mark the Enormities for which they suffered; lest
the Correction only should be remembered, and the Crime forgotten.

In some Articles, it was thought sufficient barely to transcribe from Jacob,
Curl, and other writers of their own rank, who were much better acquainted with
them than any of the Authors of this Comment can pretend to be. Most of them
had drawn each other's Characters on certain occasions; but the few here
inserted are all that could be saved from the general destruction of such works.

Of the part of Scriblerus I need say nothing: his Manner is well enough known,
and approved by all but those who are too much concerned to be Judges.

The Imitations of the Ancients are added, to gratify those who either never
read, or may have forgotten them; together with some of the Parodies and
Allusions to the most excellent of the Moderns. If from the frequency of the
former any man think the Poem too much a Cento; our Poet will but appear to
have done the same thing in jest which Boileau did in earnest; and upon which
Vida, Fracastorius, and many of the most eminent Latin Poets, professedly
valued themselves.

A LETTER TO THE PUBLISHER, Occasioned by the first correct EDITION of the
DUNCIAD.
IT is with pleasure I hear that you have procured a correct Copy of the
DUNCIAD, which the many surreptitious ones have rendered so necessary; and it
is yet with more, that I am informed it will be attended with a COMMENTARY: a
Work so requisite, that I cannot think the Author himself would have omitted
it, had he approved of the first Appearance of this Poem.

Such Notes as have occurred to me I herewith send you: You will oblige me by
inserting them amongst those which are, or will be, transmitted to you by
others; since not only the Author's friends, but even strangers, appear engaged
by humanity, to some care of an orphan of so much genius and spirit, which its
parent seems to have abandoned from the very beginning, and suffered to step
into the world naked, unguarded, and unattended.

It was upon reading some of the abusive papers lately published, that my great
regard to a person, whose friendship I esteem as one of the chief honors of my
life, and a much greater respect to Truth than to him or any man living,
engaged me in Enquiries of which the enclosed Notes are the fruit.

I perceived, that most of these authors had been (doubtless very wisely) the
first Aggressors. They had tried till they were weary, what was to be got by
railing at each other: no body was either concerned, or surpised, if this or
that scribler was proved a dunce; but every one was curious to read what could
be said to prove Mr. POPE one, and was ready to pay something for such a
discovery: A stratagem which would they fairly own, might not only reconcile
them to me, but screen them from the resentment of their lawful Superiors, whom
they daily abuse, only (as I charitably hope) to get that by them, which they
cannot get from them.

I found this was not all: Ill success in that had transported them to Personal
abuse, either of himself, or (what I think he could less forgive) of his
friends. They had called men of virtue and honor Bad men, long before he had
either leisure or inclination to call them Bad Writers: and some had been such
old offenders, that he had quite forgotten their persons as well as their
slanders, till they were pleased to revive them.

Now what had Mr. POPE done before, to incense them? He had published those
works which are in the hands of every body, in which not the least mention is
made of any of them. And what has he done since? He has laughed and written the
DUNCIAD. What has that said of them? A very serious truth which the public had
said before, that they were dull: And what it had no sooner said, but they
themselves were at great pains to procure, or even purchase room in the prints,
to testify under their hands to the truth of it.

I should still have been silent, if either I had seen any inclination in my
friend to be serious with such accusers, or if they had only meddled with his
writings: since whoever publishes puts himself on his trial by his Country. But
when his moral character was attacked, and in a manner from which neither Truth
nor Virtue can secure the most innocent, in a manner which though it
annihilates the credit of the accusation with the just and impartial, yet
aggravates very much the guilt of the accuser (I mean, by Authors without
names) then I thought, since the danger was common to all, the concern ought to
be so; and that it was an act of justice to detect the Authors, not only on
this account, but as many of them are the same who for several years past, have
made free with the greatest of names in Church and State, exposed to the world
the private misfortunes of Families, abused all even to Women, and whose
prostituted papers (for one or other Party in the unhappy divisions of their
Country) have insulted the Fallen, the Friendless, the Exiled, and the Dead.

Besides this, which I take to be a public concern, I have already confessed I
had a private one. I am one of that number who have long loved and esteemed Mr.
POPE, and had often declared it was not his capacity or writings (which we ever
thought the least valuable part of his character) but the honost, open, and
beneficent man, that we most esteemed and loved in him. Now if what these
people say were believed, I must appear to all my friends either a fool or a
knave, either imposed on my self, or imposing on them: so that I am as much
interested in the confutation of these calumnies, as he is himself.

I am no Author, and consequently not to be suspected either of jealousy or
resentment against any of the men, of whom scarce one is known to me by sight;
and as for their writings, I have sought them (on this one occasion) in vain,
in the closets and libraries of all my acquaintance. I had still been in the
dark, if a Gentleman had not procured me (I suppose from some of themselves,
for they are generally much more dangerous friends than enemies) the passages I
send you. I solemnly protest I have added nothing to the malice or absurdity of
them; which it behooves me to declare, since the vouchers themselves will be so
soon and so irrecoverably lost. You may in some measure prevent it, by
preserving at least their Which we have done in a List in the Appendix.
Titles, and discovering (as far as you can depend on the truth of your
information) the names of the concealed authors.

The first objection I have heard made to the Poem is, that the persons are too
obscure for satire. The persons themselves, rather than allow the objection,
would forgive the satire; and if one could be tempted to afford it a serious
answer, were not all assassinates, popular insurrections, the insolence of the
rabble without doors, and of domestics within, most wrongfully chastised, if
the Meanness of offenders indemnified them from punishment? On the contrary,
Obscurity renders them more dangerous, as less thought of: Law can pronouce
judgment only on open facts, Morality alone can pass censure on intentions of
mischief; so that for secret calumny, or the arrow flying in the dark, there is
no public punishment left, but what a good Writer inflicts.

The next objection is, that these sort of authors are Poor. That might be
pleaded as an excuse at the Old Baily, for lesser crimes than Defamation, (for
it is the case of almost all who are tried there) but sure it can be none, for
who will pretend that the robbing another of his reputation supplies the want
of it in himself? I question not but such authors are poor, and heartily wish
the objection were removed by any honest livelihood. But Poverty is here the
accident, not the subject: he who describes malice and villainy to be pale and
meagre, expresses not the least anger against Paleness or leanness, but against
malice and villainy. The Apothecary in Romeo and Juliet is poor, but is he
therefore justified in vending poison? Not but Poverty itself becomes a just
subject of satire, when it is the consequence of vice, prodigality, or neglect
of one's lawful calling; for then it increases the public burden, fills the
streets and highways with Robbers, and the garrets with Clippers, Coiners, and
Weekly Journalists.

But admitting that two or three of these offend less in their morals, than in
their writings: must Poverty make Nonsense sacred? If so, the fame of bad
authors would be much better than that of all the good ones in the world; and
not one of a hundred had ever been called by his right name.

They mistake the whole matter: It is not charity to encourage them in the way
they follow, but to get 'em out of it: For Men are not bunglers because they
are poor, but they are poor because they are bunglers.

Is it not pleasant enough, to hear our authors crying out on the one hand, as
if their persons and Characters were too sacred for Satire; and the public
objecting on the other, that they are too mean even for Ridicule? But whether
bread or fame be their end, it must be allowed, our author by and in this Poem,
has mercifully given 'em a little of both.

There are two or three, who by their rank and fortune have no benefit from the
former objections (supposing them good) and these I was sorry to see in such
company. But if without any provocation, two or three gentlemen will fall upon
one, in an affair wherein his interest and reputation are equally embarked,
they cannot certainly, after they have been content to print themselves his
enemies, complain of being put into the Number of them?

Others, I Am told, pretend to have been once his Friends. Surely they are their
enemies who say so, since nothing can be more odious than to treat a friend as
they have done. But of this I cannot persuade my self, when I consider the
constant and eternal aversion of all bad writers to a good one.

Such as claim a merit from being his Admirers, I would gladly ask, if it lays
him under a personal obligation? at that rate he would be the most obliged
humble servant in the world. I dare swear for these in particular, he never
desired them to be his Admirers, nor promised in return to be theirs: that had
truly been a sign he was of their acquaintance; but would not the malicious
world have suspected such an approbation of some motive worse than ignorance,
in the Author of the Essay on Criticism? Be it as it will, the reasons of their
Admiration and of his Contempt are equally subsisting, for his works and theirs
are the very same that they were.

One therefore of their affertions I believe may be true, "That he has a
contempt for their writings." And there is another which would probably be
sooner allowed by himself than by any good judge beside, "That his own have
found too much success with the public." But as it cannot consist with his
modesty to claim this as a justice, it lies not on him, but entirely on the
public, to defend its own judgment.

There remains what in my opinion might seem a better plea for these people,
than any they have made use of. If Obscurity or Poverty were to exempt a man
from satire, much more should Folly or Dullness, which are still more
involuntary, nay as much so as personal Deformity. But even this will not help
them: Deformity becomes an object of Ridicule when a man sets up for being
handsome; and so must Dullness when he sets up for a Wit. They are not ridiculed
because Ridicule in itself is, or ought to be, a pleasure; but because it is
just, to undeceive and vindicate the honest and unpretending part of mankind
from Imposition, because particular interest ought to yield to general, and a
great number who are not naturally Fools ought never to be made so in
complaisance to a few who are. Accordingly we find that in all ages, all vain
pretenders, were they ever so poor or ever so dull, have been constantly the
topics of the most candid Satirists, from the Codrus of JUVENAL to the Damon
of BOILEAU.

Having mentioned BOILEAU, the greatest Poet and most judicious Critic of his
age and country, admirable for his Talents, and yet perhaps more admirable for
his Judgment in the proper application of them; I cannot help remarking the
resemblance betwixt him and our Author in Qualities, Fame, and Fortune; in the
distinctions shown to them by their Superiors, in the general esteem of their
Equals, and in their extended reputation amongst Foreigners; in the latter of
which ours has met with the better fate, as he has had for his Translators
persons of the most eminent rank and abilities in their respective nations
Essay on Criticism in French Verse by General Hamilton. The same in Verse also
by Monsieur Roboton, Counselor and Privy Secretary to King George I. after by
the Abbe Reynel, in Verse, with Notes, Paris 1730. Rape of the Lock, in French,
Paris 1728. in Italian Verse, by the Abbe Conti, a Noble Venetian: and by the
Marquess Rangoni, Envoy Extraordinary from Modena to King George II. Others of
his works by Salvini of Florence, etc. his Essays and Dissertations on Homer in
French, Paris 1728.
But the resemblance holds in nothing more, than in their being equally abused
by the ignorant Pretenders to Poetry of their times; of which not the least
memory will remain but in their own writings, and in the notes made upon them.
What BOILEAU has done in almost all his poems, our Author has only in this: I
dare answer for him he will do it in no more; and on his principle of attacking
few but who had slandered him, he could not have done it at all, had he been
confined from censuring obscure and worthless persons, for scarce any other
were his enemies. However, as the parity is so remarkable, I hope it will
continue to the last; and if ever he shall give us an edition of this Poem
himself, I may see some of 'em treated as gently (on their repentance or better
merit) as Perault and Quinault were at last by BOILEAU.

In one point I must be allowed to think the character of our English Poet the
more amiable. He has not been a follower of Fortune or Success; he has lived
with the Great without flattery, been a friend to Men in power without
pensions, from whom as he asked, so he received no favor, but what was done
Him in his friends. As his Satires were the more just for being delayed, so
were his Panegyricks; bestowed only on such persons as he had familiarly known,
only for such virtues as he had long observed in them, and only at such times
as others cease to praise, if not begin to calumniate them, I mean when out of
power, or out of fashion As Mr. Wycherley, at the time the Town declaimed
against his book of Poems: Mr Walsh, after his death: Sir William Trumbull,
when he had resigned the office of Secretary of State: Lord Bolingbroke at his
leaving England after the Queen's death: Lord Oxford in his last decline of
Life: Mr. Secretary Crags at the end of the South Sea Year, and after his
death: Others only in Epitaphs.
. A Satire therefore on writers so notorious for the contrary practice, became
no man so well as himself, as none (it is plain) was so little in their
friendships, or so much in that of those whom they had most abused, namely the
Greatest and Best of all Parties. Let me add a further reason, that though
engaged in their Friendships, he never espoused their Animosities; and can
almost singly challenge this honor, not to have written a line of any man,
which through Guilt, through Shame, or through Fear, through variety of Fortune, or
change of Interests, he was ever unwilling to own.

I shall conclude with remarking what a pleasure it must be to every reader of
Humanity, to see all along that our Author, in his very laughter, is not
indulging his own ill nature, but only punishing that of others. To his Poem
those alone are capable of doing justice, who, to use the words of a great
Writer, know how hard it is (with regard both to his subject and his manner)
VETUSTIS DARE NOVITATEM, OBSOLETIS NITOREM, OBSCURIS LUCEM, FASTIDITIS GRATIAM.
I am

Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM CLELAND.
St. James's, Dec. 22. 1728
DENNIS, Rem. on Pr. Arth. I cannot but think it the most reasonable thing in
the world, to distinguish good writers, by discouraging the bad. Nor is it an
ill-natured thing, in relation even to the very persons upon whom the
reflections are made: It is true, it may deprive them, a little the sooner, of
a short profit and a transitory Reputation; but then it may have a good effect,
and oblige them (before it be too late) to decline that for which they are so
very unfit, and to have recourse to something in which they may be more
successful.

The Persons whom Boileau has attacked in his writings, have been for the most
part Authors and most of those Authors, Poets: And the Censures be has passed
upon them have been confirmed by all Europe [Character of Mr. P. 1716.]

GILDON, Pref. to his New Rehears. It is the common cry of the Poetasters of
the town, and their fautors, that it is an Ill-natured thing to expose the
Pretenders to wit and poetry. The Judges and Magistrates may with full as good
reason be reproached with Ill Nature, for putting the laws in execution against
a Thief or Impostor. -- The same will hold in the Republic of Letters, if the
Critics and Judges will let every ignorant Pretender to Scribbling, pass on the
world.

THEOBALD. Let. to Mist, Jun. 22. 1728- ATTACKS may be levelled, either
against Failures in Genius, or against the Pretensions of wriing without one.

CONCANEN, Ded. to the Auth. of the Dunc. A Satire upon Dullness is a thing that
has been used and allowed in All Ages.

Out of thine own Mouth will I judge thee, wicked Scribler!

MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS OF THE POEM.
THIS Poem, as it celebrated the most grave and ancient of things, Chaos, Night
and Dullness, so is it of the most grave and ancient kind. Homer (says
Aristotle) was the first who gave the Form, and (says Horace) who adapted the
Measure, to heroic poesy. But even before this, may be rationally presumed from
what the ancients have left written, was a piece by Homer composed, of like
nature and matter with this of our Poet. For of Epic sort it appears to have
been, yet of matter surely not unpleasant, witness what is reported of it by
the Learned Archbishop Eustatbius, in Odyss. k. And accordingly Aristotle in
his poetic, chap. 4. does further set forth, that as the Iliad and Odyssey gave
example to Tragedy, so did this poem to Comedy its first Idaea.

From these authors also it should seem, that the Hero or chief personage of it
was no less obscure, and his understanding and sentiments no less quaint and
strange (if indeed not more so) than any of the actors in our poem. MARGITES
was the name of this personage, whom Antiquity records to have been Dunce the
first; and surely from what we hear of him, not unworthy to be the root of so
spreading a tree, and so numerous a posterity. The poem therefore celebrating
him, was properly and absolutely a Dunciad; which though now unhappily lost, yet
is its nature sufficiently known by the infallible tokens aforesaid. And thus
it does appear, that the first Dunciad was the first Epic poem, written by
Homer himself, and anterior even to the Iliad or Odyssey.

Now forasmuch as our Poet had translated those two famous works of Homer which
are yet left, he did conceive it in some sort his duty to imitate that also
which was lost: And was therefore induced to be stow on it the same Form which
Homer's is reported to have had, namely that of Epic poem, with a title also
framed after the ancient Greek manner, to wit, that of Dunciad.

Wonderful it is, that so few of the moderns have been stimulated to attempt
some Dunciad! Since in the opinion of the multitude, it might cost less pain
and oil than an imitation of the greater Epic. But possible it is also that, on
due reflection, the maker might find it easier to paint a Charlemagne, a Brute
or a Godfry, with just pomp and dignity heroic, than a Margites, a Codrus, a
Fleckno, or a Tibbald.

We shall next declare the occasion and the cause which moved our Poet to this
particular work. He lived in those days, when (after Providence had permitted
the Invention of Printing as a scourge for the sins of the learned) Paper also
became so cheap, and printers so numerous, that a deluge of Authors covered the
land: Whereby not only the peace of the honest unwriting subject was daily
molested, but unmerciful demands were made of his applause, yea of his money,
by such as would neither earn the one, or deserve the other: At the same time,
the Liberty of the Press was so unlimited, that it grew dangerous to refuse
them either; For they would forthwith publish slanders unpunished, the authors
being anonymous; nay the immediate publishers thereof lay sculking under the
wings of an Act of Parliament, assuredly intended for better purposes.

Vid. Bossu, du poem Epique, chapter 8.
. Now our author living in those times, did conceive it an endeavor well
worthy an honest Satirist, to dissuade the dull, and punish the malicious, the
only way that was left. In that public-spirited view he laid the plan of this
Poem, as the greatest service he was capable (without much hurt or being slain)
to render his dear country. First, taking things from their Original, he
considers the Causes creative of such Authors, namely Dullness and Poverty;
the one born with them, the other contracted, by neglect of their proper talent
through self-conceit of great abilities This truth he wrappeth in an Allegory,
Ibid. chapter 7.
. (as the construction of Epic poesy requires) and feigns, that one of these
Goddesses had taken up her abode with the other, and that they jointly inspired
all such writers and such works. Book 1. Verse 32, etc.
. He proceeds to show the qualities they bestow on these authors, and the
effects they produce: Ver. 45 to 52.
. Then the materials or stock with which they furnish them, Verse 57 to 75.
. and (above all) that self-opinion Verse 80.
. which causes it to seem to themselves vastly greater than it is, and is the
prime motive of their setting up* in this sad and sorry merchandise. The great
power of these Goddesses acting in alliance (whereof as the one is the mother
of Industry, so is the other of plodding) was to be exemplified in some one,
great and remarkable action. Bossu, chapter 7, 8.
. And none could be more so than that which our poet has chosen, the
Introduction of the lowest diversions of the rabble in Smithfield to be the
entertainment of the Court and town; or in other words, the Action of the
Dunciad is the Verse 1, 2.
. Removal of the Imperial Seat of Dullness from the City to the polite world, as
that of the Aeneid is the Removal of the Empire of Troy to Latium. But as Homer
singing only the Wrath of Achilles, yet includes in his poem the whole history
of the Trojan war, in like manner our author has drawn into this single action
the whole history of Dullness and her children. To this end she is represented
at the very Verse 95 to 104.
. Opening of the poem, taking a view of her Forces, which are distinguished
into these three kinds, Party-writers, dull Poets, and wild Critics.

A Person must next be fixed upon to support this Action, who (to agree with
the said design) must be such an one as is capable of being all three. This
Phantom in the poet's mind, must have a Name: k. He seeks for one who has been
concerned in the Politic Journals, written bad Plays or Poems, and published d.
Bossu, chapter 8. Vide Aristot. Poetic. c. 9.
low Criticisms: He finds his Name to be Tibbald, and he becomes of course the
Hero of the poem.

The Fable being thus according to best example one and entire, as contained in
the proposition; the Machinery is a continued chain of Allegories, setting
forth the whole power, ministry, and empire of Dullness, extended through her
subordinate instruments, in all her various operations.

This is branched into Episodes, each of which has its Moral a part, though all
conducive to the main end. The crowd assembled in the second book demonstrates
the design to be more extensive than to bad Poets only, and that we may expect
other Episodes, of the Patrons, Encouragers, or Paymasters of such authors, as
occasion shall bring them forth: And the third book, if well considered,
seems to embrace the whole world. Each of the Games relates to some or other
vile class of writers: The first concerns the Plagiary, to whom he gives the
name of More; the second the libellous Novellist, whom he styleth Eliza; the
third the flattering Dedicator, the fourth the bawling Critic or noisy Poet,
the fifth the dark and dirty Party-writer, and so of the rest; assigning to
each some proper name or other, such as he could find.

As for the Characters, the public has already acknowledged how justly they
are drawn: The manners are so depicted, and the sentiments so peculiar to those
to whom applied, that surely to transfer them to any other, or wiser,
personages, would be exceeding difficult: And certain it is, that every person
concerned being consulted apart, has readily owned the resemblance of every
portrait, his own excepted.

The Descriptions are singular; the Comparisons very quaint, the Narration
various, yet of one color* The purity and chastity of Diction is so preserved,
that in the places most suspicious, not the words but only the images have been
censured, and yet are those images no other than have been sanctified by
Ancient and Classical Authority, though (as was the manner of those good times,)
not so curiously wrapped up: yea and commented upon by most grave Doctors, and
approved Critics.

As it bears the name of Epic, it is thereby subjected to such severe
indispensable rules as are laid on all Neoterics, a strict imitation of the
Ancient; insomuch that any deviation, accompanied with whatever poetic
beauties, has always been censured by the sound Critic. How exact that
Imitation has been in this piece, appears not only by its general structure,
but by particular allusions infinite, many whereof have escaped both the
commentator and poet himself; yea diverse by his exceeding diligence are so
altered and interwoven with the rest, that several have already been and more
will be, by the ignorant abused, as altogether and originally his own.

In a word, the whole poem proves itself to be the work of our Author when his
faculties were in full vigor and perfection: at that exact time when years
have ripened the Judgment, without diminishing the Imagination; which by good
critics is held to be punctually at forty. For, at that season it was that
Virgil finished his Georgics; and Sir Richard Blackmore at the like age
composing his Arthurs, declared the same to be the very Acme and pitch of life
for Epic poesy: though since he has altered it to sixty, the year in which he
published his Alfred. a. True it is, that the talents for Criticism, namely
smartness, quick censure, vivacity of remark, certainty of asseveration, indeed
all but acerbity, seem rather the gifts of Youth than of riper age: But it is
far otherwise in Poetry; witness the works of Mr. Rymer and Mr. Dennis, who
beginning with Criticism, became afterward such Poets as no age has
paralleled. With good reason therefore did our author choose to write his Essay
on that subject at twenty, and reserve for his maturer years this great and
wonderful work of the Dunciad. u. See his Essays.


TESTIMONIES OF AUTHORS. Concerning our POET and his WORKS.
NOW before we present thee with our Exercitations on this most delectable Poem
(drawn from the many volumes of our Adversaria on modern Authors) we shall
here, according to the laudable usage of Editors, collect the various judgments
of the Learned concerning our Poet: Various indeed, not only of different
authors, but of the same author at different seasons. Nor shall we gather only
the Testimonies of such eminent Wits as would of course descend to posterity,
and consequently be read without our collection; but we shall likewise with
incredible labor seek out for diverse others, which but for this our diligence,
could never at the distance of a few months appear to the eye of the most
curious. Hereby thou may not only receive the delectation of Variety, but
also arrive at a more certain judgment, by a grave and circumspect comparison
of the Witnesses with each other, or of each with himself. Hence also thou will
be enabled to draw reflections, not only of a critical, but a moral nature, by
being let into many particulars of the Person as well as Genius, and of the
Fortune as well as Merit, of our Author: In which, if I relate some things of
little concern peradventure to thee, and some of as little even to him; I
entreat thee to consider how minutely all true Critics and commentators are
wont to insist upon such, and how material they seem to themselves if to none
other. Forgive me therefore gentle reader, if (following learned example) I
ever and anon become tedious; allow me to take the same pain to find whether my
author were good or bad, well or ill-natured, modest or arrogant; as another,
whether his author were fair or brown, short or tall, or whether he wore a coat
or a cassock?

We purposed to begin with his Life, Parentage and Education: but as to these,
even his Cotemporaries do exceedingly differ. One says, he was educated at
home; Giles Jacob's Lives of Poets, vol. 2. in his Life.
. another that he was bred abroad at St. Omer's by Jesuits; Dennis's reflect.
on the Essay on Crit.
. a third, not at St. Omer's, but at Oxford; Dunciad dissected, p. 4.
. a fourth, that he had no University education at all. Guardian, No. 40.
. Those who allow him to be bred at home, differ as much concerning his Tutor:
One says, he was kept by his father on purpose; Jacob, ib.
a second that he was an itinerant priest; Dunc. diss. ibid.
. a third, that he was a Parson; Farmer P. and his son, ibid.
. one calls him a secular Clergyman of the Church of Rome; Dunc. dissect.
. another, a Monk Characters of the Times, p. 45.
. As little agree they about his Father; whom one supposes, like the father of
Hesiod, a tradesman or merchant; Female Dunc. p. ult.
. another a husbandman; Dunc. dissect.
. another, a hatter, etc. Room, Paraphrase on the 4th of Genesis, printed 1729.
in Character of Mr. P. and his Writings, in a Letter to a Friend, printed for
S. Popping, 1716. p. 10. Curl in his Key to the Dunciad, (first edit. said to
be printed for A. Dod) in the tenth page declared Gildon to be author of that
Libel, though in the subsequent editions of his Key he left out this assertion,
and affirmed (in the Curliad, p. 4. and 8.) that it was writ by Dennis only.
. Nor has an author been wanting to give our Poet such a Father, as Apuleius
has to Plato, Iamblicus to Pythagoras, and diverse to Homer; namely, a Demon.
For thus Mr. Gildon. m. Certain it is, that his Original is not from Adam but
the Devil, and that he wants nothing but horns and tail to be the exact
resemblance of his infernal father. Finding therefore such contrariety of
opinions, and (whatever be ours of this sort of generation) not being fond to
enter into controversy; we shall defer writing the life of our Poet, till
authors can determine among themselves what parents or education he had, or
whether he had any education or parents at all?

Proceed we to what is more certain, his Works, though not less uncertain the
judgments concerning them: beginning with his ESSAY ON CRITICISM, of which hear
first the the most Ancient of Critics,

Mr. JOHN DENNIS.

"His precepts are false, or trivial, or both: his thoughts are crude, and
abortive, his expressions absurd, his numbers harsh and unmusical, without
cadence or variety, his rhymes trivial, and common -- instead of majesty, we
have something that is very mean; instead of gravity, something that is very
boyish: and instead of perspicuity, and lucid order, we have but too often
obscurity and confusion." And in another place -- "What rare Numbers are here?
would not one swear this youngster had espoused some antiquated muse, who had
sued out a divorce from some superanhuated sinner, upon account of impotence,
and who being poxt by her former spouse, has got the gout in her decrepit age,
which makes her hobble so damnably." Roflections critical and satirical, on a
Rhapsody called an Essay on Criticism. Printed for Bernard Lintot, 8vo.
No less peremptory is the censure of our hypercritical Historian.

Mr. OLDMIXON.

"I dare not say any thing of the Essay on Criticism in verse; but if any more
curious reader has discovered in it something new, which is not in Dryden's
prefaces, dedications, and his essay on dramatick poetry, not to mention the
French critics, I should be very glad to have the benefit of the discovery." He
is followed (as in fame, so in judgment) by the modest and simple-minded

Mr. LEONARD WELSTED;

Who, out of great respect to our poet not naming him, does yet glance at his
Essay, together with the Duke of Buckingham's, and the Criticisms of Dryden b
Essay on Criticism in Prose, 8vo. 1728. by the author of the Critical History
of England.
and of Horace, which he more openly taxes. Preface to his Poems, p. 18, 53.
. "As to the numerous treatises, essays, arts, etc. both in verse and prose,
that have been written by the moderns on this groundwork, they do but hackney
the same thoughts over again, making them still more trite. Most of their
pieces are nothing but a pert, insipid heap of commonplace. Horace has even in
his Art of poetry thrown out several things which plainly show, he thought an
art of poetry was of no use, even while he was writing one." To all which great
authorities, we can only oppose that of

Mr. ADDISON.

Spectator, No. 253.
. "The Art of Criticism (says he) which was published some months since, is a
masterpiece in its kind. The observations follow one another, like those in
Horace's art of poetry, without that methodical regularity which would have
been requisite in a prose-writer. They are some of them uncommon, but such as
the reader must assent to, when he sees them explained with that ease and
perspicuity in which they are delivered. As for those which are the most known
and the most received, they are placed in so beautiful a light, and illustrated
with such apt allusions, that they have in them all the graces of novelty; and
make the reader, who was before acquainted with them, still more convinced of
their truth, and solidity. And here give me leave to mention what Monsieur
Boileau has so well enlarged upon in the preface to his works: That wit and
fine writing does not confist so much in advancing things that are new, as in
giving things that are known an agreeable turn. It is impossible for us who
live in the latter ages of the world, to make observations in criticism,
morality, or any art or science, which have not been touched upon by others; we
have little else left us, but to represent the common sense of mankind in more
strong, more beautiful, or more uncommon lights. If a reader examines Horace's
art of poetry, he will find but few precepts in it, which he may not meet with
in Aristotle, and which were not commonly known by all the poets of the
Augustan age. His way of expressing, and applying them, not his invention of
them, is what we are chiefly to admire. Longinus in his reflections has given
us the same kind of Sublime, which he observes in the several passages that
occasioned them. I cannot but take notice that our English Author, has after
the same manner exemplisy'd several of the precepts in the very precepts
themselves."

He then produces some instances of a particular beauty in the Numbers, and
concludes with saying, that "there are three poems in our tongue of the same
nature, and each a masterpiece in its kind; The Essay on translated Verse; The
Essay on the Art of Poetry; and the Essay on Criticism."

Of Windsor Forest, positive is the judgment of the affirmative

Mr. JOHN DENNIS,

Letter to B. B. at the end of the remarks on Pope's Homer, 1717.
"That it is a wretched rhapsody, impudently writ in emulation of the Cooper's
Hill of Sir John Denham: The Author of it is obscure, is ambiguous, is
affected, is temerarious, is barbarous. Printed 1728, p. 12.
" But the Author of the Dispensary

Dr. GARTH,

In the preface to his poem of Claremont, differs from this opinion: "Those who
have seen those two excellent poems of Cooper's Hill, and Windsor Forest, the
one written by Sir John Denham, the other by Mr. Pope, will show a great deal
of candor if they approve of this."

Of his Epistle of Eloisa, we are told by the obscure writer of a poem called
Sawney, "That because Prior's Henry and Emma charmed the finest tastes, our
author writ his Eloise, in opposition to it; but forgot innocence and virtue:
If you take away her tender thoughts, and her fierce desires, all the rest is
of no value." In which, methinks, his judgment resembles that of a French
tailor on a Villa and gardens by the Thames: "All this is very fine, but take
away the River, and it is good for nothing." But very contrary hereunto was the
opinion of

Mr. PRIOR

himself, saying in his Alma, Alma, Cant. 2.
O Abelard! ill-fated youth,
Thy tale will justify this truth.
But well I weet thy cruel wrong
Adorns a nobler Poet's song:
Dan Pope for thy misfortune grieved,
With kind concern and skill has weaved
A silken web; and never shall fade
Its colors: gently has he laid
The mantle over thy sad distress,
And Venus shall the Texture bless, etc.


Come we now to his Translation of the ILIAD, celebrated by numerous pens, yet
shall it suffice to mention the indefatigable

Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE, Knight.

Who (though otherwise a severe censurer of our author) yet styles this a
"laudable translation. In his Essays, vol. 1. printed for E. Curl.
" That ready writer

Mr. OLDMIXON,

In his forementioned Essay, frequently commends the same. And the painful

Mr. LEWIS THEOBALD

thus extols it, Censor, vol. 2. No. 33.
"The spirit of Homer breathes all through this translation. -- I am in doubt,
whether I should most admire the justness to the original, or the force, and
beauty of the language, or the sounding variety of the numbers? But when I find
all these meet, it puts me in mind of what the poet says of one of his heroes:
That he alone raised and flung with ease, a weighty stone, that two common men
could not lift from the ground; just so, one single person has performed in
this translation, what I once despaired to have seen done by the force of
several masterly hands." Indeed the same gentleman appears to have changed his
sentiment, in his Essay on the Art of sinking in reputation, (printed in Mist's
Journal, March 30, 1728.) where he says thus: "In order to sink in reputation.
let him take it into his head to descend into Homer (let the world wonder, as
it will, how the devil he got there) and pretend to do him into English, so his
version denote his neglect of the manner how." Strange Variation! We are told in

MIST'S JOURNAL, June 8.

"That this translation of the Iliad was not in all respects conformable to the
fine taste of his friend Mr. Addison: Insomuch, that he employed a younger
muse, in an undertaking of this kind, which he supervis'd himself." Whether Mr.
Addison did find it conformable to his taste, or not, best appears from his own
testimony the year following its publication, in these words,

Mr. ADDISON, Freeholder, No. 40.

"When I consider my self as a British freeholder, I am in a particular manner
pleased with the labors of those who have improved our language, with the
translation of old Greek and Latin authors: -- We have already most of their
Historians in our own tongue, and what is more for the honor of our language,
it has been taught to express with elegance the greatest of their Poets in each
nation. The illiterate among our own countrymen may learn to judge from
Dryden's Virgil, of the most perfect Epic performance. And those parts of Homer
which have been published already by Mr. Pope, give us reason to think that the
Iliad will appear in English with as little disadvantage to that immortal
poem." As to the rest, there is a slight mistake, for this younger Muse was
elder: Nor was the gentleman (who is a friend of our author) employed by Mr.
Addison to translate it after him, since he says himself that he did it
before. Vid. Pref. to Mr. Tickel's Translation of the first book of the Iliad,
4to,
Contrariwise, that Mr. Addison engaged our author in this work, appears by
declaration thereof in the preface to the Iliad, printed some years before his
death, and by his own letters of Oct. 26, and Nov. 2, 1713, where he declares
it is his opinion that no other person was equal to it.

Next comes his Shakespeare on the stage. Let him (quoth one, whom I take to be

Mr. THEOBALD) Mist's Journal, March 30, 1728,)

"publish such an author as he has least studied, and forget to discharge even
the dull duty of an editor. In this project let him lend the bookseller his
name (for a competent sum of money though) to promote the credit of an exorbitant
subscription." Gentle reader, be pleased to cast thine eye on the Proposal
below quoted, and on what follows (some months after the former assertion) in
the same Journalist of June 8. "The bookseller proposed the book by
subscription, and raised some thousands of pounds for the same:" I believe the
gentleman did not share in the profits of this extravagant Subscription.

After the Iliad, he undertook (says

MIST'S JOURNAL, June 8, 1728.)

"the sequel of that work, the Odyssey: and having secured the success by a
numerous subscription, he employed some Underlings to perform what, according
to his proposals, should come from his own hands." To which heavy charge we can
in truth oppose nothing but the words of

Mr. POPE'S PROPOSAL for the ODYSSEY,

(printed by J. Watts, Jan. 10, 1724.) "I take this occasion to declare that
the subscription for Shakespeare belongs wholly to Mr. Tonson: And that the
benefit of This Proposal is not solely for my own use, but for that of two of
my friends, who have assisted me in this work." But these very gentlemen are
extolled above our poet himself, in another of Mist's Journals, March 30, 1728,
saying, "That he would not advise Mr. Pope to try the experiment again, of
getting a great part of a book done by assistants, lest those extraneous parts
should unhappily ascend to the sublime, and retard the declension of the
whole." Behold! these Underlings are become good writers!

If any say, that before the said proposals were printed, the subscription was
begun without declaration of such assistance; verily those who set it on foot,
or (as their term is) secured it, to wit the right honorable the Lord Vifcount
HARCOURT, were he living, would testify, and the right honorable the Lord
BATHURST now living does testify, the same is a falsehood.

Sorry I am, that persons professing to be learned, or of whatever rank of
authors, should either falsely tax, or be falsely taxed. Yet let us, who are only
reporters, be impartial in our citations, and proceed.

MIST'S JOURNAL, June 8. 1728.

"Mr. Addison raised this author from obscurity, obtained him the acquaintance
and friendship of the whole body of our Nobility, and transferred his powerful
interests with those great men to this rising bard, who frequently levied by
that means unusual contributions on the public." Which surely cannot be, if,
as the author of Dunciad diffected reports, "Mr. Wycherley had before
introduced him into a familiar acquaintance with the greatest Peers and
brightest Wits then living."

"No sooner (says the same Journalist) was his body lifeless, but this author,
reviving his resentment, libelled the memory of his departed friend, and what
was still more heinous, made the scandal public." Grievous the accusation!
unknown the accuser! the person accused no witness in his own cause, the person
in whose regard accused, dead! But if there be living any one nobleman, whose
friendship, yea any one gentleman whose subssription Mr. Addison procured to
our author; let him stand forth, that truth may appear! Amicus Plato, amicus
Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. In verity the whole story of the libel is a
lie; witness those persons of integrity, who several years before Mr. Addison's
decease, did see and approve of the said verses, in no wise a libel but a
friendly rebuke sent privately in our author's own hand to Mr Addison himself,
and never made public till after their own Journals, and Curl had printed the
same. One name alone which I am authorized here to declare, will sufciently
evince this truth, that of the right honorable the Earl of BURLINGTON.

Next is he taxed with a crime (with some authors I doubt, more heinous than
any in morality) to wit Plagiarism, from the inventive and quaint-conceited

JAMES MOORE SMITH, Gent.

Daily Journal, March 18, 1728.
""Upon reading the third volume of Pope's Miscellanies, I found five lines
which I thought excellent, and happening to praise them, a gentleman produced a
modern comedy (the Rival Modes) published last year, where were the same verses
to a tittle. These gentlemen are undoubtedly the first plagiaries that pretend
to make a reputation by stealing from a man's works in his own life time, and
out of a public print."

Let us join to this what is written by the author of the Rival Modes, the said
Mr. James Moore Smith, in a letter to our author himself (who had informed him,
a month before that play was acted, Jan. 27, 1726-7, that "these verses, which
he had before given him leave to insert in it, would be known for his, some
copies being got abroad.)" "He desires nevertheless, that since the lines had
been read in his Comedy to several, Mr. P. would not deprive it of them, etc."
Surely if we add the testimonies of the Lord BOLINGBROKE, of the Lady to whom
the said verses were originally addressed, of Hugh Bethel, Esquire and others who
knew them as our author's long before the said gentleman composed his play; it
is hoped, the ingenuous that affect not error, will rectify their opinion by
the suffrage of so honorable personages.

And yet follows another charge, insinuating no less than his Enmity both to
Church and State, which could come from no other Informer than the said

Mr. JAMES MOORE SMITH.

Daily Journal, April 3. 1728.
. "The Memoirs of a Parish clark was a very dull and unjust abuse of a person
who wrote in defense of our Religion and Constitution; and who has been dead
many years." This also seems most untrue; it being known to diverse that these
memoirs were written at the seat of the Lord Harcourt in Oxfordshire before
that excellent person (Bishop Burnet's) death, and many years before the
appearance of that History of which they are pretended to be an abuse. Most
true it is, that Mr. Moore had such a design, and was himself the man who pressed
Dr. Arbuthnot and Mr. Pope to assist him therein; and that he borrowed those
Memoirs of our author when that History came forth, with intent to turn them to
such abuse. But being able to obtain from our author but one single Hint, and
either changing his mind, or having more mind than ability, he contented
himself to keep the said Memoirs and read them as his own to all his
acquaintance. A noble person there is, into whose company Mr. Pope once chanced
to introduce him, who well remembers the conversation of Mr. Moore to have
turned upon the "contempt he had for the work of that reverend prelate, and how
full he was of a design he declared himself to have, of exposing it." This
noble person is the EARL of PETERBOROUGH.

Here in truth should we crave pardon of all the foresaid right honorable and
worthy personages, for having mentioned them in the same page with such weekly
riff-raff railers and rhymers; but that we had their ever-honour'd commands for
the same, and that they are introduced not as witnesses in the controversy, but
as witnesses that cannot be controverted; not to dispute, but to decide.

Certain it is, that dividing our writers into two classes, of such who were
acquaintance, and of such who were strangers, to our author; the former are
those who speak well, and the other those who speak evil of him. Of the first
class, the most noble

JOHN Duke of BUCKINGHAM

sums up his character in these lines, Verses to Mr. P. on his translation of
Homer.
And yet so wondrous, so sublime a thing,
As the great Iliad, scarce could make me sing,
Unless I justly could at once commend
A good companion, and as firm a friend;
One moral, or a mere well-natur'd deed,
Can all desert in sciences exceed.


So also is he decypher'd by the honorable

SIMON HARCOURT. Poem prefixed to his works.
Say, wondrous youth, what column will thou choose?
What laureled arch, for thy triumphant Muse?
Though each great Ancient court thee to his shrine,
Though every laurel through the dome be thine,
Go to the good and just, an awful train!
Thy soul's delight --


Recorded in like manner for his virtuous disposition, and gentle bearing, by
the ingenious

Mr. WALTER HEART

in this Apostrophe. In his Poems; printed for B. Lintot.
O! ever worthy, ever crowned with praise!
Blessed in thy life, and blessed in all thy lays.
Add, that the Sisters every thought refine,
And even thy life be faultless as thy line.
Yet envy still with fiercer rage pursues,
Obscures the virtue, and defames the Muse:
A soul like thine, in pain, in grief resigned,
Views with just scorn the malice of mankind.


The witty and moral Satyrist

Dr. EDWARD YOUNG,

wishing some check to the corruption and evil manners of the times, calls
out upon our poet, to undertake a task so worthy of his virtue. Universal
Passion, Satyr 1.
Why slumbers Pope, who leads the Muses' train,
Nor hears that Virtue, which he loves, complain?


Mr. THOMPSON,

In his elegant and philosophical poem of the seasons, Although not sweeter his
own Homer sings,
Yet is his Life the more endearing Song.
To the same tune also sings that learned Clerk of Suffolk

Mr. WILLIEM BROOM: In his poems, and at the end of the Odyssey.
Thus, nobly rising in fair virtue's cause,
From thy own life transcribe the unerring laws.


And diverse more, with which we will not tire the reader.

Let us rather recreate thee by turning to the other side, and showing his
Character drawn by those with whom he never conversed, and whose countenances
he could not know, though turned against him: First again commencing with the
high-voiced, and never-enoughquoted

JOHN DENNIS;

Who in his reflections on the Essay on Criticism thus describes him. A little
affected hypocrite, who has nothing in his mouth but candor, truth,
friendship, good nature, humanity, and magnanimity. He is so great a lover of
falsehood, that whenever he has a mind to calumniate his cotemporaries, he
brands them with some defect which is just contrary to some good quality, for
which all their friends and their acquaintance commend them. He seems to have a
particular pique to People of Quality, and authors of that rank -- He must
derive his religion from St. Omer's. -- But in the character of Mr. P. and his
writings (printed by S. Popping 1716) he says, "though he is a Professor of the
worst religion, yet he laughs at it;" but that, "nevertheless, he is a virulent
Papist; and yet a Pillar for the Church of England." Of both which opinions

Mr. THEOBALD

seems also to be; declaring in Mist's Journal of June 22, 1718: "That if he is
not shrewdly abused, he made it his practice to cackle to both parties in their
own sentiments." But, as to his Pique against people of quality, the same
Journalist does not agree, but says (May 8, 1728.) "he had by some means or
other the acquaintance and friendship of the whole body of our Nobility."

However contradictory this may appear, Mr. Dennis and Gildon in the Character
last cited, make it all plain, by assuring us: "That he is a creature that
reconciles all contradictions: he is a beast, and a man: a Whig and a Tory: a
writer (at one and the same time) of The names of two weekly Papers.
Guardians and Examiners, an assertor of liberty, and of the dispensing power
of kings: a jesuitical professor of truth, a base, and a foul pretender to
candor." So that, upon the whole account, we must conclude him either to have
been a great hypocrite, or a very honest man; a terrible imposer upon both
parties, or very moderate to either.

Be it, as to the judicious reader shall seem good; Sure it is, he is little
favored of certain authors whose wrath is perilous: For one declares he ought
to have a price set on his head and to be hunted down as a wild beast.
Theobald, Letter in Mist's Journal, June 22, 1728.
. Another protests that he does not know what may happen, advises him to insure
his person, says he has bitter enemies, and expressly declares it will be well
if he escape with his life. Smedley, Pref. to Gulliveriana, p. 14, 16.
. One desires he would cut his own throat or bang himself: Gulliveriana, page
332.
. But Pasquin seemed rather inclined it should be done by the Government,
representing him engaged in grievous designs with a Lord of Parliament, then
under prosecution. Anno 1723.
. Mr. Dennis himself has written to a Minister, that he is one of the most
dangerous persons in this kingdom; Anno 1729.
. and assures the public, that he is an open and mortal enemy to his Country;
a monster, that will, one day, show as daring a soul as a mad Indian who runs a
muck to kill the first Christian he meets Preface to Rem. on Rape of the Lock,
page 12, and in the last page of that Treatise.
. Another gives information of Treason discovered in his poem: Page 6, 7. of
the Preface, by Concanen, to a Book entitled, A Collection of all the Letters,
Essays, Verses, and Advertisements, occasioned by Pope and Swift's
Miscellanies, printed for A. Moore, 8vo. 1712.
. Mr. Curl boldly supplies an imperfect verse with Kings and Princesses; Key to
the Dunc. 3d edit. p. 18.
. and one Matthew Concanen yet more impudent publishes at length the Two most
SACRED NAMES in this Nation as members of the Dunciad! A List of persons, etc.
at the end of the forementioned Collection of all the Letters, Essays, etc.


This is prodigious! yet is it almost as strange, that in the midst of these
invectives his enemies have (I know not how) born testimony to some merit in
him:

M. THEOBALD,

in censuring his Shakespeare declares, "he has so great an esteem for Mr. Pope,
and so high an opinion of his genius, and excellencies; That notwithstanding he
professes a veneration almost rising to Idolatry for the writings of this
inimitable poet, he would be very loath even to do him justice, at the expense
of that other gentleman's character. Introduction to his Shakespeare restored,
in quarto, p. 3.
."

Mr. CHARLES GILDON,

after having violently attacked him in many pieces, at last came to wish from
his heart, "That Mr. Pope would be prevailed upon to give us Ovid's Epistles by
his hand: for it is certain we see the original of Sapho to Phaon with much
more life and likeness in his version, than in that of Sir Car. Scrope. And
this (he adds) is the more to be wished, because in the English tongue we have
scarce any thing truly and naturally written upon Love." Commentary on the Duke
of Buckingham's Essay, 8vo. 1721. p. 97, 98.
. He also in taxing Sir Richard Blackmore for his heterodox opinions of Homer,
challenges him to answer what Mr. Pope has said in his preface to that poet.

M. OLDMIXON

calls him a great Master of our tongue, declares "the Purity and Perfection of
the English language to be found in his Homer; and saying there are more good
Verses in Dryden's Virgil than in any other work, excepts this of our author
only." In his Prose Essay on Criticism.
. One who takes the name of

H. STANHOPE,

the maker of certain verses to Duncan Campbell, Printed under the Title of the
Progress of Dullness, 120. 1728.
. in that poem which is wholly a satire on Mr. Pope, confesses,

It Is true, if finest notes alone could show
(Tuned justly high, or regularly low)
That we should fame to these mere vocals give;
Pope, more than we can offer, should receive:
For when some gliding river is his theme,
His lines run smoother than the smoothest stream, etc.
M. THOMAS COOK,

after much blemishing our author's Homer, cries out,

But in his other works what beauties shine?
While sweetest Music dwells in every line.
These he admired, on these he stamped his praise,
And bade them live to brighten future days. Battle of Poets, fol. page 15.
.
MIST'S JOURNAL, June 8, 1728.

Although he says, "the smooth Numbers of the Dunciad are all that recommend it,
nor has it any other merit," Yet that same paper has these words: The author
is allowed to be a perfect master of an easy, and elegant versification: In all
his works, we find the most happy turns, and natural similies, wonderfully
short and thick sown." The Essay on the Dunciad also owns, page 25. it is very
full of beautiful Images.

Mr. GILDON and DENNIS

in the most furious of all their works, (the forecited Character, p. 5.) do in
In Concert.] Hear how Mr. Dennis has proved our mistake in this place. "As to
my writing in Concert with Mr. Gildon, I declare upon the honor and word of a
gentleman that I never wrote so much as one line in concert with any one man
whatsoever. And these two Letters from Mr. Gildon will plainly show, that we
are not Writers in concert with each other. Sir, --
The height of my Ambition is to please Men of the best Judgment; and finding
that I have entertained my Master agreeably, I have the Extent of the Reward of
my Labor.

Sir, I had not the opportunity of hearing your excellent Pamphlet 'till this
Day: I am infinitely satisfied and pleased with it, and hope you will meet with
that Encouragement which your admirable Performance deserves, etc.

CHAPTER GILDON.




"Now is it not plain, that any one who sends such Compliments to another, has
not been used to write in Partnership with him to whom he sends them?" [Dennis
's Remarks on the Dunciad, p 50.] Mr. Dennis is therefore welcome to take this
Piece to himself.


. Concert confess, "That some men, of good understanding, value him for his
rhymes:" And page 17. "That he has got, like Mr. Bays in the Rehearsal, (that
is, like Mr. Dryden) a notable knack of rhyming and writing smooth verse."

To the Success of all his pieces, they do unanimously give testimony: But it
is sufficient, instar omnium, to behold this last great Critic sorely lamenting
it, even from the Essay on Criticism to this Day of the Dunciad!

(...) "the treatise of the Profund is very dall, and that Mr. Pope is the
author of it:" The writer of Gulliveriana is of another opinion, and says, "the
whole or greatest part of the merit of this treatise must and can only be
ascribed to Gulliver." Gulliv. p. 336. i Burnet Homerides, page 1, of his
Translation of the Iliad.
. [Here gentle reader! cannot I but smile at the strange blindness and
positiveness of men, knowing the said treatise to appertain to none other but
to me, Martinus Scriblerus.]

Lastly we are assured, in Mist of June 8. "That his own Plays and Farces would
better have adorned the Dunciad, than those of Mr. Theobald: for he had neither
genius for Tragedy or Comedy:" Which whether true or not, is not easy to judge;
in as much as he has attempted neither.

But from all that has been said, the discerning reader will collect, that it
little availed our author to have any Candor, since when he declared he did
not write for others, it was not credited: As little to have any Modesty, since
when he declined writing in any way himself, the presumption of others was
imputed to him. If he singly enterpriz'd one great work, he was taxed of
Boldness and Madness to a prodigy: i. if he took assistants in another, it was
complained of and represented as a great injury to the public. The London and
Mist's Journals, on his Undertaking of the Odyssey.
. The loftiest Heroicks, the lowest ballads, treatises against the state or
church, satire on lords and ladies, raillery on wits and authors, squabbles
with booksellers, or even full and true accounts of monsters, poisons, and
murders: of any hereof was there nothing so good, nothing so bad, which has
not at one or other season been to him ascribed. If it bore no author's name,
then lay he concealed; if it did, he fathered it on that author to be yet
better concealed. If it resembled any of his styles, then was it evident; if it
did not, then disguised he it on set purpose. Yea, even direct oppositions in
religion, principles, and politics, have equally been supposed in him
inherent. Surely a most rare and singular Character! of which let the reader
make what he can.

Doubtless most Commentators would hence take occasion to turn all to their
Author's advantage; and from the testimony of his very enemies would affirm,
That his Capacity was boundless, as well as his Imagination; that he was a
perfect master of all Styles, and all Arguments; And that there was in those
times no other Writer, in any kind, of any degree of excellence save he
himself. But as this is not our own sentiment, we shall determine on nothing;
but leave thee, gentle reader! to steer thy judgment equally between various
opinions, and to choose whether thou will incline to the Testimonies of Authors
avowed, or of Authors concealed? of those who knew him, or of those who knew
him not?

THE DUNCIAD, IN THREE BOOKS, WITH Notes Variorum.

THE DUNCIAD.
ARGUMENT to BOOK the FIRST.
The Proposition, the Invocation, and the Inscription. Then the Original of the
great Empire of Dullness, and cause of the continuance thereof. The beloved seat
of the Goddess is described, with her chief attendants and officers, her
functions, operations, and effects. Then the poem hastes into the midst of
things, presenting her on the evening of a Lord Mayor's day, revolving the long
succession of her sons, and the glories past and to come. She fixes her eye on
Tibbald to be the instrument of that great event which is the Subject of the
poem. He is described pensive in his study, giving up the cause, and
apprehending the period of her empire from the old age of the present monarch
Settle: Wherefore debating whether to betake himself to Law or Politics, he
raises an altar of proper books, and (making first his solemn prayer and
declaration) purposes thereon to sacrifice all his unsuccessful writings. As
the pile is kindled, the Goddess beholding the slame from her seat, flies in
person and puts it out, by casting upon it the poem of Thule. She forthwith
reveals berself to him, transports him to her Temple, unfolds her arts, and
initiates him into her mysteries: then announcing the death of Settle that
night, anoints, and proclaims him Successor.

BOOKS and the Man I sing, the first who brings
The Smithfield Muses to the Ear of Kings.
Say great Patricians! (since your selves inspire
These wondrous works; so Jove and Fate require)
Say from what cause, in vain decry'd and cursed,
Still Dunce the second reigns like Dunce the first.
In eldest time, ever mortals writ or read,
E're Pallas issued from the Thund'rer's head,
Dullness over all possessed her ancient right,
Daughter of Chaos and eternal Night:
Fate in their dotage this fair idiot gave,
Gross as her sire, and as her mother grave,
Laborious, heavy, busy, bold, and blind,
She ruled in native Anarchy, the mind.
Still her old empire to confirm, she tries,
For born a Goddess, Dullness never dies.
O thou, whatever Title please thine ear,
Dean, Drapier, Bickerstaff, or Gulliver!
Whether thou choose Cervantes' serious air,
Or laugh and shake in Rab'lais easy Chair,
Or praise the Court, or magnify Mankind,
Or thy grieved Country's copper chains unbind;
From thy Baeotia though Her Power retires,
Grieve not, my SWIFT! at ought our realm acquires
Here pleased behold her mighty wings out-spread,
To hatch a new Saturnian Age of Lead.
Where wave the tattered ensigns of Rag-Fair,
A yawning ruin hangs and nods in air;
Keen, hollow winds howl through the bleak recess,
Emblem of Music caused by Emptiness.
Here in one bed two shivering Sisters lie,
The Cave of Poverty and Poetry.
This, the Great Mother dearer held than all
The clubs of Quidnunc's, or her own Guild Hall.
Here stood her Opium, here she nursed her Owls,
And destined here the imperial seat of fools
Hence springs each weekly Muse, the living boast
Of Curl's chaste press, and Lintot's rubric post,
Hence hymning Tyburn's elegiac lay,
Hence the soft sing-song on Cecilia's day,
Sepulchral Lies, our holy walls to grace,
And New-year Odes, and all the Grubstreet race.
'Twas here in clouded majesty she shone;
Four guardian Virtues, round, support her throne;
Fierce champion Fortitude, that knows no fears
Of hisses, blows, or want, or loss of ears:
Calm Temperance, whose blessings those partake
Who hunger, and who thirst, for scribbling sake:
Prudence, whose glass presents the approaching jayl:
Poetic Justice, with her lifted scale;
Where, in nice balance, truth with gold she weighs,
And solid pudding against empty praise.
Here she beholds the Chaos dark and deep,
Where nameless Somethings in their causes sleep,
Till genial Jacob, or a warm Third-day
Call forth each mass, a poem, or a play:
How hints, like spawn, scarce quick in embryo lie,
How newborn nonsense first is taught to cry,
Maggots half-form'd, in rhyme exactly meet,
And learn to crawl upon poetic feet.
Here one poor word a hundred clenches makes,
And ductile dullness new meanders takes;
There motley Images her fancy strike,
Figures ill-pair'd, and Similies unlike,
She sees a Mob of Metaphors advance,
Pleased with the madness of the mazy dance:
How Tragedy and Comedy embrace;
How Farce and Epic get a jumbled race;
How Time himself stands still at her command,
Realms shift their place, and Ocean turns to land.
Here gay Description Egypt glads with showers,
Or gives to Zembla fruits, to Barca flowers;
Glittering with ice here hoary hills are seen,
There painted valleys of eternal green,
On cold December fragrant chaplets blow,
And heavy harvests nod beneath the snow.
All these and more, the cloud-compelling Queen
Beholds through fogs, that magnify the scene:
She, tinsel'd over in robes of varying hues,
With self-applause her wild creation views,
Sees momentary monsters rise and fall,
And with her own fools-colours gild them all.
'Twas on the day, when Thorold, rich and grave,
Like Cimon triumphed both on land and wave:
(Pomps without guilt, of bloodless swords and maces,
Glad chains, warm furs, broad banners, and broad faces)
Now Night descending, the proud scene was over,
But lived, in Settle's numbers, one day more.
Now May'rs and Shrieves all hushed and satiate lay,
Yet eat, in dreams, the custard of the day;
While pensive Poets painful vigils keep,
Sleepless themselves to give their readers sleep.
Much to the mindful Queen the feast recalls
What City Swans once sung within the walls;
Much she revolves their arts, their ancient praise,
And sure succession down from Heywood's days.
She saw with joy the line immortal run,
Each sire impressed and glaring in his son;
So watchful Bruin forms with plastic care
Each growing lump, and brings it to a Bear.
She saw old Pryn in restless Daniel shine,
And Eusden eke out Blackmore's endless line;
She saw slow Philips creep like Tate's poor page,
And all the mighty Mad in Dennis rage.
In each she marks her image full expressed,
But chief, in Tibbald's monster-breeding breast;
Sees Gods with Demons in strange league engage,
And earth, and heaven, and hell her battles wage.
She eyed the Bard, where supperless he sat,
And pined, unconscious of his rising fate;
Studious he sat, with all his books around,
Sinking from thought to thought, a vast profund!
Plunged for his sense, but found no bottom there;
Then writ, and flounder'd on, in mere despair.
He rolled his eyes that witnessed huge dismay,
Where yet unpawn'd, much learned lumber lay:
Volumes, whose size the space exactly filled,
Or which fond authors were so good to gild,
Or where, by sculpture made for ever known,
The page admires new beauties, not its own.
Here swells, the shelf with Ogilby the great:
There, stamped with arms, Newcastle shines complete:
Here all his suffering brotherhood retire,
And 'scape the martyrdom of jakes and fire;
A Gothic Vatican! of Greece and Rome
Well purged, and worthy Withers, Quarles, and Blome.
But high above, more solid Learning shone,
The Classics of an Age that heard of none;
There Caxton slept, with Wynkin at his side,
One clasped in wood, and one in strong cow-hide,
There, saved by spice, like mummies, many a year,
Old Bodies of Philosophy appear:
De Lyra there a dreadful front extends,
And here, the groaning shelves Philemon bends.
Of these, twelve volumes, twelve of amplest size,
Redeemed from tapers and defrauded pyes,
Inspired he seizes: These an altar raise:
An hecatomb of pure, unsullied lays
That altar crowns: A folio Commonplace
Founds the whole pyle, of all his works the base;
Quarto's, octavo's, shape the lessening pyre;
And last, a little Ajax tips the spire.
Then he. Great Tamer of all human art!
First in my care, and nearest at my heart:
Dullness! whose good old cause I yet defend,
With whom my Muse began, with whom shall end!
O thou, of business the directing soul,
To human heads like bias to the bowl,
Which as more pond*rous makes their aim more true,
Obliquely wadling to the mark in view.
O ever gracious to perplexed mankind!
Who spread a healing mist before the mind,
And, lest we err by Wit's wild, dancing light,
Secure us kindly in our native night.
Ah! still over Britain stretch that peaceful wand,
Which lulls the Helvetian and Batavian land;
Where rebel to thy throne if Science rise,
She does but show her coward face and dies:
There, thy good Scholiasts with unwearied pains
Make Horace flat, and humble Maro's strains;
Here studious I unlucky moderns save,
Nor sleeps one error in its father's grave,
Old puns restore, lost blunders nicely seek,
And crucify poor Shakespeare once a week.
For thee I dim these eyes, and stuff this head,
With all such reading as was never read*
For thee supplying, in the worst of days,
Notes to dull books, and prologues to dull plays;
For thee explain a thing till all men doubt it,
And write about it, Goddess, and about it;
So spins the silkworm small its slender store,
And labors, 'till it clouds itself all over.
Not that my quill to Critiques was confined,
My Verse gave ampler lessons to mankind;
So gravest precepts may successless prove,
But sad examples never fail to move.
As forced from wind-guns, lead itself can fly,
And ponderous slugs cut swiftly through the sky;
As clocks to weight their nimble motion owe,
The wheels above urged by the load below;
Me, emptiness and dullness could inspire,
And were my elasticity and fire.
Had Heaven decreed such works a longer date,
Heaven had decreed to spare the Grubstreet-state.
But see great Settle to the dust descend,
And all thy cause and empire at an end!
Could Troy be saved by any single hand,
His gray-goose weapon must have made her stand.
But what can I? my Flaccus cast aside,
Take up the Attorney's (once my better) guide?
Or rob the Roman geese of all their glories,
And save the state by cackling to the Tories?
Yes, to my Country I my pen consign,
Yes, from this moment, mighty Mist! am thine,
And rival, Curtius! of thy fame and zeal,
Over head and ears plunge for the public weal.
Adieu my children! better thus expire
Unstall'd, unsold, thus glorious mount in fire
Fair without spot; than greased by grocer's hands,
Or shipped with Ward to ape and monkey lands,
Or wafting ginger, round the streets to go,
And visit alehouse where ye first did grow.
With that, he lifted thrice the sparkling brand,
And thrice he dropped it from his quivering hand:
Then lights the structure, with averted eyes;
The rolling smokes involve the sacrifice.
The opening clouds disclose each work by turns,
Now flames old Memnon, now Rodrigo burns,
In one quick flash see Proserpine expire,
And last, his own cold Aeschylus took fire.
Then gushed the tears, as from the Trojan's eyes
When the last blaze sent Ilion to the skies.
Rowz'd by the light, old Dullness heaved the head;
Then snatched a sheet of Thule from her bed,
Sudden she flies, and whelms it over the pyre:
Down sink the flames, and with a hiss expire.
Her ample presence fills up all the place;
A veil of fogs dilates her awful face:
Great in her charms! as when on Shrieves and May'rs
She looks, and breathes her self into their airs.
She bids her wait him to the sacred Dome;
Well-pleased he entered, and confessed his home:
So Spirits ending their terrestrial race,
Ascend, and recognize their native place.
Raptured, he gazes round the dear retreat,
And in sweet numbers celebrates the seat,
Here to her Chosen all her works she shows;
Prose swelled to verse, Verse loitring into prose;
How random thoughts now meaning chance to find,
Now leave all memory of sense behind:
How prologues into prefaces decay,
And these to notes are fritter'd quite away.
How index-learning turns no student pale,
Yet holds the eel of science by the tail.
How, with less reading than makes felons 'scape,
Less human genius than God gives an ape,
Small thanks to France, and none to Rome or Greece,
A past, vamp'd, future, old, revived, new piece,
'Twixt Plautus, Fletcher, Congreve, and Corneille,
Can make a Cibber, Johnson, or Ozell.
The Goddess then, over his anointed head,
With mystic words, the sacred Opium shed;
And lo! her bird (a monster of a fowl!
Something betwixt a Heideggre and owl,
Perched on his crown. All hail! and hail again,
My son! the promised land expects thy reign.
Know, Settle cloyed with custard, and with praise,
Is gathered to the dull of ancient days,
Safe, where no Critics damn, no duns molest,
Where wretched Withers, Banks, and Gildon rest,
And highborn Howard, more majestic sire,
Impatient waits, till ** grace the quire.
I see a chief, who leads my chosen sons,
All armed with points, antitheses and puns!
I see a Monarch, proud my race to own!
A Nursing-mother, born to rock the throne!
Schools, courts, and senates shall my laws obey,
Till Albion, as Hibernia, bless my sway.
She ceased: her owls responsive clap the wing,
And Grubstreet garrets roar, God save the king.
So when Jove's block descended from on high,
(As sings thy great fore-father, Ogilby,)
Loud thunder to its bottom shook the bog,
And the hoarse nation croak'd, God save King Log!
REMARKS on BOOK the FIRST.
This Poem was writ in 1726. In the next year an imperfect Edition was
published at Dublin, and reprinted at London in 120. another at Dublin, and
another at London in 8vo, and three others in 120. the same year. But there was
no perfect Edition before that of London in 4to 1728-9, which was attended with
the following Notes. We are willing to acquaint Posterity that this Poem (as it
here stands) was presented to King George the Second and his Queen, by the
hands of Sir Robert Walpole, on the 12th of March, 1728-9.

The Dunciad, Sic M. S. It may be well disputed whether this be a right
reading? Ought it not rather to be spelled Dunceiad, as the Etymology evidently
demands? Dunce with an e. therefore Dunceiad with an e. That accurate and
punctual Man of Letters, the Restorer of Shakespeare, constantly observes the
preservation of this very letter e, in spelling the name of his beloved Author,
and not like his common careless Editors, with the omission of one, nay
sometimes of two ee's [as Shak'spear] which is utterly unpardonable. Nor is the
neglect of a Single Letter so trivial as to some it may appear; the alteration
whereof in a learned language is an Achievement that brings honor to the
Critic who advances it; and Dr. B. will be remembered to posterity for his
performances of this sort, as long as the world shall have any esteem for the
Remains of Menander and Philemon. THEOBALD.

I have a just value for the letter E, and the same affection for the name of
this poem, as the forecited Critic for that of his author; yet cannot it induce
me to agree with those who would add yet another e to it, and call it the
Dunceiade; which being a French and foreign termination, is no way proper to a
word entirely English, and vernacular. One e therefore in this case is right,
and two e's wrong. Yet upon the whole I shall follow the Manuscript, and print
it without any e at all; moved thereto by Authority, at all times, with
Critics, equal if not superior to Reason. In which method of proceeding, I can
never enough praise my very good friend, the exact Mr. Tho. Hearne; who, if any
word occur which to him and all mankind is evidently wrong, yet keeps he it in
the Text with due reverence, and only remarks in the Margin, sic M. S. In like
manner we shall not amend this error in the Title itself, but only note it
obiter, to evince to the learned that it was not our fault, nor any effect of
our ignorance or inattention. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 1. Books and the Man I sing, the first who brings
The Smithfield Muses to the Ear of Kings.]
Wonderful is the stupidity of all the former Critics and Commentators on this
work! it breaks forth at the very first line. The author of the Critique
prefixed to Sawney, a Poem, p. 5. has been so dull as to explain The Man who
brings, etc. not of the Hero of the piece, but of our Poet himself, as if he
vaunted that Kings were to be his readers (an honor which though this Poem has
had, yet knows he how to receive it with more modesty.)

We remit this Ignorant to the first lines of the Aeneid; assuring him, that
Virgil there speaks not of himself, but of Aeneas. Arma virumque cano, Trojae
qui primus ab oris,
Italiam fato profugus, Lavinaque venit
Litora: multum ille and terris jactatus and alto, etc.
I cite the whole three verses, that I may by the way offer a Conjectural
Emendation, purely my own, upon each: First, oris should be read aris, it being
as we see Aen. 2. 513. from the altar of Jupiter Hercaeus that Aeneas fled as
soon as he saw Priam slain. In the second line I would read flatu for fato,
since it is most clear it was by Winds that he arrived at the shore of Italy.
jactatus in the third, is surely as improperly applied to terris, as proper to
alto: to say a man is tossed on land, is much at one with saying he walks at sea.
Risum teneatis amici? Correct it, as I doubt not it ought to be, vexatus.
SCRIBLERUS.

V. 2. The Smithfield Muses.] Smithfield is the place where Bartholomew Fair
was kept, whose shows, machines, and dramatical entertainments, formerly
agreeable only to the taste of the Rabble, were, by the Hero of this poem and
others of equal genius, brought to the Theaters of Covent Garden,
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and the Hay-Market, to be the reigning pleasures of the
Court and Town. This happened in the year 1725, and continued many years. See
Book 3. Verse 227, etc.

V. 10. Daughter of Chaos, etc.] The beauty of this whole Allegory being purely
of the poetical kind, we think it not our proper business as a Scholiast to
meddle with it, but to leave it (as we shall in general all such) to the
reader: remarking only, that Chaos (according to Hesiod's (...)) was the
Progenitor of all the Gods. SCRIBL.

V. 21. Or praise the Court, or magnify Mankind.] Ironice, alluding to
Gulliver's representations of both -- The next line relates to the papers of
the Drapier against the currency of Wood's Copper Coin in Ireland, which upon
the great discontent of the people, his Majesty was graciously pleased to recall.

V. 23. From thy Baeotia.] Baeotia of old lay under the raillery of the
neighboring Wits, as Ireland does now; though each of those nations produced one
of the greatest Wits, and greatest Generals, of their age.

V. 24. Grieve not, my Swift! at ought our realm acquires.] Ironice iterum. The
Politics of England and Ireland were at this time thought to be opposite, or
interfering with each other* Dr. Swift of course was in the interest of the
latter, our Author of the former.

V. 26. A new Saturnian Age of Lead.] The ancient golden Age is by Poets styled
Saturnian; but in the chemical language, Saturn is Lead.

V. 27. Where wave the tattered Ensigns of Rag-fair.] Rag-fair is a place near
the Tower of London, where old clothes and frippery are sold.

V. 28, 31. A yawning ruin hangs and nods in air. --
Here in one Bed two shivering Sisters lie,
The Ca^e of Poverty and Poetry.]
Hear upon this place the forecited Critic on the Dunciad. "These lines (says
he) have no construction, or are nonsense. The two shivering sisters must be
the sister-caves of Poverty and Poetry, or the bed and cave of Poverty and
Poetry must be the same, (questionless, if they lie in one bed) and the two
sisters the lord knows who?" O the construction of grammatical heads! Virgil
writes thus: Aen. 1. Front sub adversa scopulis pendentibus antrum:
Intus aquae dulces, vivoque sedilia saxo;
Nympharum domus. --
May we not say in like manner, "The nymphs must be the waters and the stones,
or the waters and the stones must be the houses of the nymphs?" Insulse! The
second line, Intus aquae, etc. is in a parenthesis (as are the two lines of our
Author, Keen hollow Winds, etc.) and it is the Antrum, and the yawning ruin, in
the line before that parenthesis, which are the Domus and the Cave.

Let me again, I beseech thee, Reader, present thee with another Conjectural
Emendation on Virgil's scopulis pendentibus: He is here describing a place,
whither the weary Mariners of Aeneas repaired to dress their dinner. -- Fessi
-- frugesque receptas Et torrere parant flammis: What has scopulis pendentibus
here to do? indeed the aquae dulces and sedilia are something; sweet waters to
drink, and seats to rest on: the other is surely an error of the Copyists.
Restore it, without the least scruple, Populis prandentibus.

SCRIBLERUS. V. 33. The Great Mother.] Magna matter, here applied to Dullness.
The Quidnunc's, a name given to the ancient members of certain political clubs,
who were constantly enquiring, quid nunc? what news?

V. 38. Curl's chaste press, and Lintot 's rubric post.] Two Booksellers, of
whom see Book 2. The former was fined by the Court of King's Bench for
publishing obscene books; the latter usually adorned his shop with titles in
red letters.

V. 39. Hence hymning Tyburn 's elegiac lay.] It is an ancient English custom
for the Malefactors to sing a Psalm at their execution at Tyburn; and no less
customary to print Elegies on their deaths, at the same time, or before.

V. 40. and 42. allude to the annual songs composed to music on St. Cecilia's
Feast, and those made by the Poet-Laureat for the time being, to be sung at
Court on every New-years-day, the words of which are happily drowned in the
voices and instruments.

V. 41. Is a just satire on the Flatteries and Falsehoods admitted to be
inscribed on the walls of Churches in Epitaphs.

I must not here omit a Reflection, which will occur perpetually through this
poem; and cannot but greatly endear the Author to every attentive observer of
it: I mean that Candor and Humanity which every where appears in him to those
unhappy objects of the ridicule of all mankind, the bad poets. He here imputes
all scandalous rhimes, scurrilous weekly papers, lying news, base flatteries,
wretched elegies, songs and verses (even from those sung at Court, to ballads
in the streets) not so much to malice or servility, as to dullness; and not so
much to dullness, as to necessity; And thus at the very commencement of his
satire, makes an apology for all that are to be satirized.

V. 48. Who hunger, and who thirst.] "This is an allusion to a Text in
scripture, which shows, in Mr. Pope, a delight in profaneness (said Curl upon
this place.") But it is very familiar with Shakespeare to allude to passages of
scripture: Out of a great number I Will select a few, in which he not only
alludes to, but quotes the very Texts from holy Writ. In All Is well that ends
well, I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, I have not much skill in grass. Ibid. They
are for the flowery way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire, Mat. 7.
13. In Much ado about nothing: All, all, and moreover God saw him when he was
hid in the garden, Genesis 3. 8. (in a very jocose scene.) In Love's labor lost,
he talks of Sampson's carrying the gates on his back; in the Merry Wives of
Windsor, of Goliath and the Weaver's beam; and in Henry 4. Falstaff's Soldiers
are compared to Lazarus and the Prodigal Son. The first part of this Note is
Mr. CURL'S, The rest is Mr. THEOBALD 's Appendix to Shakespeare restored. p.
144.

V. 61. Here one poor Word a hundred clenches makes.] It may not be amiss to
give an instance or two of these operations of Dullness out of the works of her
Sons celebrated in the poem. A great Critic formerly held these clenches in
such abhorrence, that he declared, "he that would pun, would pick a pocket."
Yet Mr. Dennis's works afford us notable examples in this kind. " Alexander
Pope has sent abroad into the world as many Bulls as his namesake Pope
Alexander.. -- Let us take the initial and final letters of his Name, viz. A. P
-- E, and they give you the idea of an Ape. -- Pope comes from the Latin word
Popa, which signifies a little Wart; or from poppysma, because he was
continually popping out squibs of wit, or rather Popysmata, or Po-pisms."
DENNIS on Hom. and Daily Journal June 11. 1728.

V. 68. How Farce and Epic -- How Time himself, etc.] allude to the
transgressions of the Unities, in the Plays of such poets. For the miracles
wrought upon Time and Place, and the mixture of Tragedy, Comedy, Farce and
Epic, see Pluto and Proserpine, Penelope, etc. if yet extant.

V. 71. Egypt glads with showers.] In the lower Egypt Rain is of no use, the
overflowing of the Nile being sufficient to impregnate the soil. -- These six
verses represent the inconsistencies in the description of poets, who heap
together all glittering and gaudy images, though incompatible in one season, or
in one scene. -- See the Guardian, No. 40. parag. 6. See also Eusden's whole
works if to be found. It would not have been unpleasant, to have given Examples
of all these species of bad writing from these Authors, but that it is already
done in our treatise of the Bathos. SCRIBL.

V. 83. 'Twas on the day, when Thorold, rich and grave.] Sir George Thorold
Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1720. The procession of a Lord Mayor is made
partly by land and partly by water. -- Cimon the famous Athenian General
obtained a victory by sea, and another by land on the same day, over the
Persians and Barbarians.

V. 86. Glad Chains.] The ignorance of these Moderns! This was altered in one
edition to Gold chains, showing more regard to the metal of which the chains of
Aldermen are made, than to the beauty of the Latinism and Grecism, nay of
figurative speech itself. -- laetas segetes, glad, for making glad, etc.
SCRIBLERUS.

V. 88. But lived, in Settle 's numbers, one day more.] A beautiful manner of
speaking, usual with poets in praise of poetry, in which kind nothing is finer
than those lines of Mr. Addison.

Sometimes misguided by the tuneful throng,
I look for streams immortalized in song,
That lost in silence and oblivion lie,
Dumb are their fountains, and their channels dry,
Yet run for ever by the Muses skill,
And in the smooth description murmur still.
V. 88. But lived in Settle 's numbers one day more.] Settle was alive at this
time, and poet to the City of London. His office was to compose yearly
panegyricks upon the Lord Mayors, and verses to be spoken in the Pageants: but
that part of the shows being frugally at length abolished, the employment of
City-Poet ceased; so that upon Settle's demise, there was no successor to that
place. This important point of time our Poet has chosen as the Crisis of the
Kingdom of Dullness, who thereupon decrees to remove her Imperial Seat: To which
great enterprise, all things being now ripe, she calls the Hero of this poem.

Mr. Settle was once a writer in some vogue, particularly with his party; for
he was the Author or publisher of many noted pamphlets in the time of King
Charles the second. He answered all Dryden's political poems; and being cried
up on one side, succeeded not a little in his Tragedy of the Empress of Morocco
(the first that was ever printed with cuts.) "Upon this he grew insolent, the
Wits writ against his Play, he replied, and the Town judged he had the better.
In short Settle was then thought a formidable rival to Mr. Dryden; and not only
the Town, but the University of Cambridge was divided which to prefer; and in
both places the younger sort inclined to Elkanab." DENNIS, Pref. to Rem. on Hom.

For the latter part of his history, see the Note on the third Book, verse 279.

V. 96. John Heywood.] Whose Interludes were printed in the time of Henry the
eighth.

V. 101. Old Pryn in restless Daniel.] The first edition had it, She saw in
Norton all his father shine; a great mistake! for Daniel de Foe had parts, but
Norton de Foe was a wretched writer, and never attempted Poetry. Much more
justly is Daniel himself made successor to W. Pryn, both of whom wrote Verses
as well as Politics; as appears by the poem De jure divino, etc. of De Foe,
and by these lines in Cowley's Miscellanies of the other. -- One lately did not
fear
(Without the Muses leave) to plant verse here.
But it produced such base, rough, crabbed, hedge-
Rhymes, as even set the hearers ears on edge:
Written by William Prynn Esqui-re, the
Year of our Lord, six hundred thirty-three.
Brave Jersey Muse! and he is for his high style
Called to this day the Homer of the Isle.
And both these authors had a resemblance in their fates as well as writings,
having been alike sentenced to the Pillory.

V. 102. And Eusden eke out, etc.] Laurence Eusden, Poet Laureate: Mr. Jacob
gives a catalogue of some few only of his works, which were very numerous. Mr.
Cook in his Battle of Poets says of him, Eusden, a laureled Bard, by fortune
raised,
By very few was read, by fewer praised.
Mr. Oldmixon in his Arts of Logic and Rhetoric* p. 413, 414. affirms, "That of
all the Galimatia's he ever met with, none comes up to some verses of this
Poet, which have as much of the Ridiculum and the Fustian in 'em as can well be
jumbled together, and are of that sort of nonsense which so perfectly confounds
all Idea's, that there is no distinct one left in the mind. Further he says of
him, that he has prophesied his own poetry shall be sweeter than Catullus,
Ovid, and Tibullus, but we have little hope of the accomplishment of it from
what he has lately published." Upon which Mr. Oldmixon has not spared a
reflection, "That the putting the Laurel on the head of one who writ such
verses, will give futurity a very lively idea of the Judgment and justice of
those who bestowed it." Ibid. p. 417. But the well-known learning of that Noble
Person who was then Lord Chamberlain, might have screen'd him from this
unmannerly reflection. Mr. Eusden was made Laureate for the same reason that
Mr. Tibbald was made Hero of This Poem, because there was no better to be had.
Nor ought Mr. Oldmixon to complain, so long after, that the Laurel would better
have become his own brows, or any other's: It were more decent to acquiesce in
the opinion of the Duke of Buckingham upon this matter. -- In rushed Eusden,
and cried, Who shall have it,
But I the true Laureate to whom the King gave it?
Apollo begged pardon, and granted his claim,
But vowed, that till then he never heard of his name.
Session of Poets. Of Blackmore, see book 2. verse 256. Of Philips, book 3.
verse 322.

Nahum Tate was Poet-Laureate, a cold writer, of no invention, but sometimes
translated tolerably when befriended by Mr. Dryden. In his second part of
Absalom and Achitophel are above two hundred admirable lines together of that
great hand, which strongly shine through the insipidity of the rest* Something
parallel may be observed of another Author here mentioned.

V. 104. And all the Mighty Mad.] This is by no means to be understood
literally, as if Mr. Dennis were really mad, according to the Narrative of Dr.
Norris in Swift and Pope's Miscellanies, vol* 3* No -- I is spoken of that
Excellent and Divine Madness, so often mentioned by Plato, that poetical rage
an enthusiasm, with which Mr. D. has, in his time, been highly possessed; and
of those extraordinary hints and, motions whereof he himself so feelingly
treats in his preface to the Rem. on Pr. Arth. [See notes on book 2. verse
256.] SCRIBL.

V. 104. And all the Mighty Mad in Dennis rage.] Mr. Theobald in the Censor,
vol. 2. No. 33. calls Mr. Dennis by the name of Furius. "The modern Furius is
to be looked on as more the object of pity, than of that which he daily
provokes, laughter and contempt. Did we really know how much this poor man (I
wish that reflection on poverty had been spared) suffers by being contradicted,
or which is the same thing in effect, by hearing another praised; we should in
compassion sometimes attend to him with a silent nod, and let him go away with
the triumphs of his ill nature. -- Poor Furius (again) when any of his
cotemporaries are spoken well of, quitting the ground of the present dispute,
steps back a thousand years to call in the succor of the Ancients. His very
panegyric is spiteful, and he uses it for the same reason as some Ladies do
their commendations of a dead beauty, who never would have had their good word,
but that a living one happened to be mentiond in their company. His applause is
not the tribute of his Heart, but the sacrifice of his Revenge," etc. Indeed
his pieces against our Poet are somewhat of an angry character, and as they are
now scarce extant, a taste of his style may be satisfactory to the curious. "A
young squab, short gentleman, whose outward form though it should be that of
downright monkey, would not differ so much from human shape, as his unthinking
immaterial part does from human understanding. -- He is as stupid and as
venomous as a hunchbacked toad -- A book through which folly and ignorance,
those brethren so lame and impotent, do ridiculously look very big, and very
dull, and strut, and hobble cheek by jowl, with their arms on kimbo, being led
and supported, and bully-backed by that blind Hector, Impudence." Reflect. on
the Essay on Crit. page 26, 29, 30.

It would be unjust not to add his reasons for this Fury, they are so strong
and so coercive. "I regard him (says he) as an *Enemy, not so much to me, as
to my King, to my Country, to my Religion, and to that Liberty which has been
the sole felicity of my life. A vagary of fortune, who is sometimes pleased to
be frolicksome, and the epidemick Madness of the times, have given him
Reputation, and Reputation (as Hobbs says) is Power, and that has made him
dangerous. Therefore I look on it as my duty to King George, whose faithful
subject I am; to my Country, of which I have appeared a constant lover; to the
Laws, under whose protection I have so long lived; and to the Liberty of my
Country, more dear than life to me, of which I have now for forty years been a
constant asserter, etc. I look upon it as my duty, I say, to do -- you shall
see what -- to pull the lion's skin from this little Ass, which popular error
has thrown round him; and to show, that this Author who has been lately so much
in vogue, has neither sense in his thoughts, nor english in his expressions."
DENNIS. Rem. on Hom. Pref. p. 2. and p. 91, etc.

Besides these publick-spirited reasons, Mr. D. had a private one; which by his
manner of expressing it in page 92, appears to have been equally strong. He was
even in bodily fear of his life, from the machinations of the said Mr. P. "The
story (says he) is too long to be told, but who would be acquainted with it,
may hear it from Mr. Curl my Bookseller. -- However, what my reason has
suggested to me, that I have with a just confidence said, in defiance of his
two clandestine weapons, his Slander and his Poison." Which last words of his
book plainly discover, Mr. D. his suspicion was that of being poisoned, in like
manner as Mr. Curl had been before him. Of which fact, see A full and true
account of a horrid and barbarous revenge by poison on the body of Edmund Curl;
printed in 1716, the year antecedent to that wherein these Remarks of Mr.
Dennis were published. But what puts it beyond all question, is a passage in a
very warm treatise in which Mr. D. was also concerned, price twopence, called,
A true character of Mr. Pope and his writings, printed for S. Popping, 1716. in
the tenth page whereof he is said, "to have insulted people on those calamities
and diseases, which he himself gave them by administering Poison to them;" and
is called (p. 4.) "a lurking way-laying coward, and a stabber in the dark."
Which (with many other things most lively set forth in that piece) must have
rendered him a terror, not to Mr. Dennis only, but to all christian people.

For the rest, Mr. John Dennis was the son of a Sadler in London, born in 1657.
He paid court to Mr. Dryden; and having obtained some correspondence with Mr.
Wycherly and Mr. Congreve, he immediately obliged the public with their
Letters. He made himself known to the Government by many admirable schemes and
projects; which the Ministry, for reasons best known to themselves, constantly
kept private. For his character as a writer, it is given us as follows. "Mr.
Dennis is excellent at pindarick writings, perfectly regular in all his
performances, and a person of sound Learning. That he is master of a great deal
of Penetration and Judgment, his criticisms (particularly on Prince Arthur) do
sufficiently demonstrate." From the same account it also appears, that he writ
Plays "more to get Reputation than Money." DENNIS of himself. See Giles Jacob's
Lives of Dram. Poets, gage 68, 69. compared with page 286.

V. 106. But chief in Tibbald.] Lewis Tibbald (as pronounced) or Theobald (as
written) was bred an Attorney, and son to an Attorney (says Mr. Jacob) of
Sittenburn in Kent. He was Author of many forgotten Plays, Poems, and other
pieces, and of several anonymous Letters in praise of them in Mist's Journal.
He was concerned in a Paper called the Censor, and a translation of Ovid, as we
find from DENNIS'S remarks on Pope's Homer, p. 9, 10.. "There is a notorious
Idiot, one hight Whachum, who from an under-spur-leather to the Law, is become
an understrapper to the Play house, who has lately burlesqu'd the Metamorphoses
of Ovid by a vile translation, etc. This fellow is concerned in an impertinent
Paper called the Censor." But notwithstanding this severe character, another
Critic says of him, "That he has given us some pieces which met with
approbation: and that the Cave of Poverty is an excellent Poem." JACOB Lives of
the Poets, vol. 2. p. 211. He had once a mind to translate the Odyssey, the
first book whereof was printed in 1717 by B. Lintot, and probably may yet be
seen at his shop. What is still in memory is a piece printed in 4to, 1726; it
had the title of Shakespeare Restored: Of this he was so proud himself, as to
say in one of Mist's Journals, June 8. "That to expose any errors in it was
impracticable." And in another, April 27. "That whatever care might for the
future be taken either by Mr. P. or any other assistants, he would still give
above 500 emendations that shall escape them all." During two whole years while
Mr. Pope was preparing his edition, he published Advertisements, requesting
assistance, and promising satisfaction to any who could contribute to its
greater perfection. But this Restorer, who was at that time soliciting favors
of him by letters, did wholly conceal that he had any such design, till after
its publication: (which he was since not ashamed to own, in a Daily Journal of
Nov. 26. 1728.) And then an outcry was made in the Prints, that our Author had
joined with the Bookseller to raise an extravagant subscription; in which he
had no share, of which he had no knowledge, and against which he had publicly
advertised in his own Proposals for Homer. Probably that proceeding elevated
Tibbald to the dignity he holds in this Poem, which he seems to deserve no
other way better than his brethren; unless we impute it to the share he had in
the Journals, cited among the Testimonies of Authors prefixed to this work.

V. 106. -- monster-breeding breast.] This alludes to the extravagancy of the
Farces of that author; in which he alone could properly be represented as
successor to Settle, who had written Pope Joan, St. George for England, and
other pieces for Bartlemew-Fair. See book 3. p. 279.

V. 109. -- supperless he sat.] It is amazing how the sense of this has been
mistaken by all the former Commentators, who most idly suppose it to imply that
the Hero of the Poem wanted a supper. In truth a great absurdity! Not that we
are ignorant that the Hero of Homer's Odyssey is frequently in that
circumstance, and therefore it can no way derogate from the grandeur of Epic
Poem to represent such Hero under a calamity, to which the greatest not only of
Critics and Poets, but of Kings and Warriors, have been subject. But much more
refined, I will venture to say, is the meaning of our author: It was to give us
obliquely a curious precept, or what Bossu calls a disguised sentence, that
"Temperance is the life of Study." The language of Poesy brings all into
action; and to represent a Critic encompassed with books, but without a supper,
is a picture which lively expresses how much the true Critic prefers the diet
of the mind to that of the body, one of which he always castigates and often
totally neglects, for the greater improvement of the other. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 117. Volumes, whose size, etc.] This library is divided into two parts; the
one (his polite learning) consists of those books which seem to be the models
of his poetry, and are preferred for one of these three reasons (usual with
collectors of Libraries) that they fitted the shelves, or were gilded for show,
or adorned with pictures: The other class our author calls solid learning; old
bodies of Philosophy, old Commentators, old english Printers, or old english
Translations; all very voluminous, and fit to erect Altars to Dullness.

V. 121. -- Ogilby the great.] " John Ogilby was one, who from a late
initiation into literature, made such a progress as might well style him the
Prodigy of his time! sending into the world so many large Volumes! His
translations of Homer and Virgil, done to the life, and with such excellent
sculptures! and (what added great grace to his works) he printed them all on
special good paper, and in a very good letter." WINSTANLY, Lives of Poets.

V. 122. There, stamped with arms, Newcastle shines complete.] "The Duchess of
Newcastle was one who busied her self in the ravishing delights of Poetry;
leaving to posterity in print three ample Volumes of her studious endeavors."
WINSTANLY, ibid. Langbaine reckons up eight Folio's of her Grace's; which were
usually adorned with gilded covers, and had her coat of arms upon them.

V. 126. -- worthy Withers, Quarles, and Blome.] " George Withers was a great
pretender to poetical zeal against the vices of the times, and abused the
greatest personages in power, which brought upon him frequent Correction. The
Marshalsea and Newgate were no strangers to him." WINSTANLY. Quarles was as
dull a writer, but an honester man. Blome's books are remarkable for their cuts.

V. 129, Caxton.] A Printer in the time of Edw. 4. Rich. 3. and Hen. 7. Wynkin
de Word, his successor, in that of Hen. 7. and 8. The former translated into
prose Virgil's Aeneis as a history; of which he speaks in his Proeme in a very
singular manner, as of a book hardly known. "Happened that to my hand came a
lytyl book in frenshe. which late was translated out of latin by some noble
clerk of france, which book is named Eneydos (made in latin by that noble
poet and great clerk Vyrgyle) which book I saw over and read therein. How
after the general destruccyon of the great Troy, Eneas departed berynge his
old fader anchises upon his sholdres, his lytyl son yolas on his hand. his
wife with much other people followynge, and how he shipped and departed with
all thystorye of his adventures that he had er he came to the achievement of
his conquest of ytalye, as all alonge shall be showed in this present book. In
which book I had great playsyr, by cause of the fair and honest terms and
words in frenshe, Which I never saw to sore like. ne none so playsaunt ne so
well ordered which book as me seemed should be much requysyte to noble men to
see, as well for the eloquence as the historyes. How well that many hundred yerys
passed was the said book of Eneydos with other works made and learned daily in
scolis specially in ytalye and other places, which historye the said Vyrgyle
made in meter."

Tibbald quotes a rare passage from him in Mist's Journal of March 16, 1728,
concerning a strange and mervayllouse beast called Sagittarye, which he would
have Shakespeare to mean rather than Teucer, the archer celebrated by Homer.

V. 133. Nich. de Lyra, or Harpsfeld, a very voluminous commentator, whose
works in five vast folio's were printed in 1472.

V. 134. "" Philemon Holland, Doctor in Physic. He translated so many books,
that a man would think he had done nothing else, insomuch that he might be
called Translator-general of his age. The books alone of his turning into
English, are sufficient to make a Country Gentleman a complete Library."
WINSTANL.

V. 142. A little Ajax.] In duodecimo, translated from Sophocles by Tibbald.

V. 162. Ner sleeps one error -- Old puns restore, lost blunders, etc.] As
where he labored to prove Shakespeare guilty of terrible Anachronisms, or low
Conundrums, which Time had covered; and conversant in such authors as Caxton
and Wynkin, rather than in Homer or Chaucer. Nay, so far had he lost his
reverence to this incomparable author, as to say in print, He deserved to be
whipped. An insolence which nothing sure can parallel! but that of Dennis, who
can be proved to have declared before company, that Shakespeare was a Rascal. O
tempora! O mores. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 164. And crucify poor Shakespeare once a week.] For some time, once a week
or fortnight, he printed in Mist's Journal a single remark or poor conjecture
on some word or pointing of Shakespeare, either in his own name, or in letters
to himself as from others without name. He since published an edition of
Shakespeare, with alterations of the Text, upon bare conjectures either of his
own, or any others who sent them to him, to which Mr. M. alludes in these
Verses of his excellent Poem on Verbal Criticism, He with low industry goes
gleaning on,
From good, from bad, from mean, neglecting none:
His brother Bookworm so, on shelf or stall,
Will feed alike on Woolston and on Paul --
Such the grave bird in northern seas is found,
(Whose name a Dutchman only knows to sound)
Where're the king of fish moves on before,
This humble friend attends from shore to shore;
With eye still earnest, and with bill declined,
He picks up what his patron drops behind;
With such choice cates his palate to regale,
And is the careful Tibbald of a whale.


V. 166. With all such reading as was never read.] Such as Caxton
abovementioned, the three destructions of Troy by Wynkin, and other like
classicks.

V. 168. Notes to dull books, and prologues to dull plays.] As to Cook's
Hesiod, where sometimes a note, and sometimes even half a note, are carefully
owned by him: And to Moore's Comedy of the Rival Modes, and other authors of
the same rank: These were people who writ about the year 1726.

V. 177. As forced from wind guns.]The Thought of these four verses is found in
a poem of our author's of a very early date (namely writ at fourteen years old,
and soon after printed, To the author of a poem called Successio,) where they
stand thus, The heaviest Muse the swiftest course has gone,
As clocks run fastest when most lead is on.
-- So forced from engines lead itself can fly,
And ponderous slugs move nimbly through the sky.


V. 189. My Flaccus.] A familiar manner of speaking used by modern critics of a
favorite author. Mr. T. might as justly speak thus of Horace, as a French wit
did of Tully, seeing his works in a library. Ah! moncher Ciceron! Je le connois
bien: c'est le meme que Marc Tulle.

V. 190. Take up the Attorney 's Guide.] In allusion to his first profession of
an attorney.

V. 191. Or rob the Roman geese, etc.] Relates to the well-known story of the
geese that saved the Capitol, of which Virgil, Aen. 8. Atque hic auratis
volitans argenteus anser
Porticibus, Gallos in limine adesse canebat.
a passage I have always suspected. Who sees not the antithesis of auratis and
argenteus to be unworthy the Virgilian majesty? and what absurdity to say a
goose sings? canebat. Virgil gives a contrary character of the voice of this
silly bird in Ec. 9. -- argutos interstrepere anser olores.
Read it therefore adesse strepebat. And why auratis porticibus? does not the
very verse preceding this inform us, Romuleoque recens horrebat regia culmo.
Is this thatch in one line, and gold in another, consistent? I scruple not
(repugnantibus omnibus manuscriptis) to correct it, auritis. Horace uses the
same epithet in the same sense, -- Auritas fidibus canoris
Ducere quercus.
And to say that walls have ears is common even to a proverb. SCRIBL.

V. 194. Mighty Mist!] Nathaniel Mist was publisher of a famous Tory paper (see
notes on l. 3.) in which this author was sometimes permitted to have a part.

V. 197. Adieu my children!] This is a tender and passionate apostrophe to his
own works which he is going to sacrifice, agreeable to the nature of man in
great affliction, and reflecting like a parent on the many miserable fates to
which they would otherwise be subject.

V. 200. Or shipped with Ward to ape and monkey land.] " Edward Ward, a very
voluminous poet in hudibrastick verse, but best known by the London Spy, in
prose. He has of late years kept a public house in the City (but in a genteel
way) and with his wit, humor, and good liquor (Ale) afforded his guests a
pleasurable entertainment, especially those of the high-church party." JACOB
Lives of Poets, vol. 2. p. 225. Great numbers of his works were yearly sold
into the plantations. Ward in a book called Apollo's Maggot, declared this
account to be a great falsity, protesting that* his public house was not in
the City, but in Moorfields.

V. 208. Now flames old Memnon, now Rodrigo burns,
In one quick flash see Proserpine expire.]
Memnon, a hero in the Persian Princess, very apt to take fire, as appears by
these lines with which he begins the play, By heaven it fires my frozen blood
with rage,
And makes it scald my aged trunk. --
Rodrigo, the chief personage of the Perfidious Brother (a play written between
T. and a Watchmaker.) The Rape of Proserpine, one of the farces of this author,
in which Ceres setting fire to a corn field, endangered the burning of the
playhouse.

V. 210. And last, his own cold Aeschylus took fire.] He had been (to use an
expression of our poet) about Aeschylus for ten years, and had received
subscriptions for the same, but then went about other books. The character of
this tragic poet is fire and boldness in a high degree, but our author supposes
it very much cooled by the translation: upon sight of a specimen of which was
made this Epigram, Alas! poor Aeschylus! unlucky dog!
Whom once a lobster killed, and now a log.
But this is a grievous error, for Aeschylus was not slain by the fall of a
lobster on his head, but of a tortoise. test Val. Max. l. 9. cap. 12. SCRIBL.

V. 212. When the last blaze sent Ilion to the skies.] See Virgil Aen. 2. where
I would advise the reader to peruse the story of Troy's destruction, rather
than in Wynkin. But I caution him alike in both, to beware of a most grievous
error, that of thinking it was brought about by I know not what Trojan Horse;
there never having been any such thing. For first it was not Trojan, being made
by the Greeks, and secondly it was not a horse, but a mare. This is clear from
many verses in Virgil, Uterum armato milite complent --
Inclusos utero Danaos --
Can a horse be said Utero gerere? Again,
Uteroque recusso Insonuere cavae --
Atque utero sonitum quater arma dedere.
Nay is it not expressly said,
Scandit fatalis machina muros
Foeta armis --


How is it possible the word foeta can agree with a horse? and indeed can it be
conceived, that the chaste and virgin Goddess Pallas would employ her self in
forming and fashioning the Male of that species? But this shall be proved to a
demonstration in our Virgil Restored. SCRIBLER.

V. 214. Thule] An unfinished poem of that name, of which one sheet was printed
fifteen years ago; by Amb. Philips, a northern author. It is an usual method of
putting out a fire, to cast wetsheets upon it: Some critics have been of
opinion, that this sheet was of the nature of the Asbestos, which cannot be
consumed by fire; but I rather think it only an allegorical allusion to the
coldness and heaviness of the writing.

V. 221. -- the sacred dome.] The Cave of Poverty abovementioned; where he no
sooner enters, but he reconnoitres the place of his original; as Plato says the
spirits shall do, at their entrance into the celestial regions. His dialogue of
the Immortality of the soul was translated by T. in the familiar modern style
of Prithee Phaedo, and For God's sake Socrates: printed for B. Lintot, 1713.

V. 226. And in sweet numbers celebrates the seat.] He writ a poem called the
Cave of Poverty, which concludes with a very extraordinary wish, "That some
great genius, or man of distinguished merit may be starved, in order to
celebrate her power, and describe her cave." It was printed in octavo, 1715.

V. 240. Can make a Cibber.] "Mr. Colly Cibber, an author and actor, of a good
share of wit, and uncommon vivacity, which are much improved by the
conversation he enjoys, which is of the best." JACOB Lives of Dram. Poets, p.
38. Besides two volumes of plays in 4to, he has made up and translated several
others. Mr. Jacob omitted to remark, that he is particularly admirable in
Tragedy.

V. 240. -- Johnson.] " Charles Johnson, famous for writing a play every
season, and for being at Button's every day: he had probably thriven better in
his vocation, had he been a small matter leaner: he may justly be called a
martyr to obesity, and to have fallen a victim to the rotundity of his parts."
CHARACT. of the TIMES, p. 19. Some of his plays are, Love in a Forest
(Shakespeare's As you like it) Wife's Relief (Shirley's Gamester) The Victim
(Racine's Iphigenia) The Sultaness (Racine's Bajazet, the prologue to which
abused Dr. Arbuthnot, Mr. Pope, and Mr. Gay) The Cobbler of Preston, his own.

V. 240. -- Or Ozell.] "Mr. John Ozell, if we credit Mr. Jacob, did go to
school in Leicestershire, where somebody left him something to live on, when he
shall retire from business. He was designed to be sent to Cambridge in order
for priestood; but he chose rather to be placed in an office of accounts in the
City, being qualified for the same by his skill in arithmetic, and writing the
necessary hands. He has obliged the world with many translations of French
plays." JACOB Lives of Dram. Poets, p. 198.

Mr. Jacob's character of Mr. Ozell, seems vastly short of his merits; and he
ought to have further justice done him, having since fully confuted all
Sarcasms on his learning and genius, by an advertisement of Sept. 20. 1729. in
a paper called the Weekly Medley, etc. "As to my learning, this envious wretch
knew, and every body knows, that the whole bench of Bishops, not long ago, were
pleased to give me a purse of guineas, for discovering the erroneous
translations of the common prayer in Portuguese, Spanish, French, Italian, etc.
As for my genius, let Mr. Cleland show better verses in all Pope's works than
Ozell's version of Boileau's Lutrin, which the late Lord Halifax was so pleased
with, that he complimented him with leave to dedicate it to him, etc. etc. Let
him show better and truer poetry in the Rape of the Lock, than in Ozell's Rape
of the Bucket, (la Secchia rapita) which, because an ingenious author happened
to mention in the same breath with Pope's, viz. Let Ozell sing the Bucket, Pope
the Lock, the little Gentleman had like to run mad. -- And Mr. Toland and Mr.
Gildon publicly declared, Ozell's translation of Homer to be, as it was prior,
so likewise superior to Pope's. -- Surely, surely, every man is free to deserve
well of his country!" JOHN OZELL.

We cannot but subscribe to such reverend testimonies, as those of the bench of
Bishops, Mr. Toland, and Mr. Gildon.

V 244. A Heideggre.] A strange bird from Swizzerland, and not (as some have
supposed) the name of an eminent person who was a man of parts, and as was said
of Petronius, Arbiter Elegantiarum.

V. 250. Banks.] was author of the play of the Earl of Essex, Ann Boleyn, etc.
He followed the law, as a solicitor, like Tibbald.

V. 250. Gildon.] Charles Gildon, a writer of criticisms and libels of the last
age, bred at St. Omer's with the Jesuits, but renonuncing popery, he published
Blount's books against the divinity of Christ, the Oracles of reason, etc. He
signalized himself as a critic, having written some very bad plays; abused Mr.
P. very scandalously in an anonymous pamphlet of the Life of Mr. Wycherley
printed by Curl, in another called the New Rehearsal printed in 1714, in a
third entitled the Complete Art of English Poetry in two volumes, and others.

V. 251 -- Howard.] Hon. Edward Howard, author of the British Princes, and a
great number of wonderful pieces, celebrated by the late Earls of Dorset and
Rochester, Duke of Buckingham, Mr. Waller, etc.

V. 252. Impatient waits, till ** grace the quire.] The reader may supply this
verse with H -- y or V -- y, which he pleases, two Noble Men who listed
themselves with the Gentlemen of the Dunciad, but whether noble Writers, may be
judged by their works; a paper called An Epistle to a Doctor of Divinity from
Hampton Court, and another entitled, Dunces out of State, both printed in 1733.

V. 256. A Nursing-mother.] Some understand this of Alma Matter, (who is said in
lib. 3. to be dissolved in Port) others of Mother Osborne.

V. 258. As sings thy great fore-father, Ogilby.] See his Aesop. Fab. where
this excellent hemystic is to be found. Our author manifests here, and
elsewhere, a prodigious tenderness for the bad writers. We see he selects the
only good passage perhaps in all that ever Ogilby writ; which shows how candid
and patient a reader he must have been. What can be more kind and affectionate
than these words in the preface to his Poems, 4to. 1717. where he labors to
call up all our humanity and forgiveness toward these unlucky men, by the most
moderate representation of their case that has ever been given by any author?
"Much may be said to extenuate the fault of bad poets: What we call a Genius is
hard to be distinguished, by a man himself, from a prevalent inclination: And
if it be never so great, he can at first discover it no other way than by that
strong propensity, which renders him the more liable to be mistaken. He has no
other method but to make the experiment by writing* and so appealing to the
judgment of others: And if he happens to write ill (which is certainly no sin
in itself) he is immediately made the object of ridicule! I wish we had the
humanity to reflect, that even the worst authors might endeavor to please us,
and in that endeavor, deserve something at our hands. We have no cause to
quarrel with them, but for their obstinacy in persisting, and even that may
admit of alleviating circumstances: For their particular friends may be either
ignorant, or unsincere; and the rest of the world too well-bred, to shock them
with a truth which generally their booksellers are the first that inform them
of."

But how much all indulgence is lost upon these people, may appear from the
just reflection made on their constant conduct, and constant fate, in the
following Epigram.

Ye little wits, that gleam'd awhile,
When P -- pe vouchsafed a ray,
Alas! deprived of his kind smile,
How soon ye fade away!
To compass Phoebus car about,
Thus empty vapors rise;
Each lends his cloud, to put him out
That reared him to the Skies.
Alas! those Skies are not your sphere;
There, He shall ever burn:
Weep, weep and fall! for Earth ye were,
And must to Earth return.
End of the FIRST BOOK.
IMITATIONS.
V. 3. Say great Patricians! since your selves inspire
These wondrous Works -- ]
Ovid. Met. 1. -- Dii caeptis (nam vos mutastis and illas.)


V. 6.] Alluding to a verse of Mr. Dryden, And Tom the second reigns like Tom
the first.


V. 33. This the Great Mother, etc.] Aen. 1. Urbs antiqua fuit --
Quam Juno fertur terris magis omnibus unam
Posthabita coluisse Samo; hic illius arma,
Hic currus fuit: hic regnum Dea gentibus esse
(Siqua fata sinant) jam tum tenditque fovetque


V. 39. Hence hymning Tyburn -- Hence, etc.] -- Genus unde Latinum
Albanique patres, atque altae maenia Romae.
Virg. ibid.

V. 43. In clouded majesty she shone.] Milton, Lib. 4. -- The Moon
Rising in clouded Majesty. --


V. 45. That knows no fears Of hisses, blows, or want, or loss of ears.] Horat.
Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula (...)


V. 53. Here she beholds the Chaos dark and deep, Where nameless Somethings,
etc.] That is to say, unformed things, which are either made into poems or
plays, as the booksellers or the players bid most. These lines allude to the
following in Garth's Dispensary, Cant. 6. Within the chambers of the globe they
spy
The beds where sleeping vegetables lie,
'Till the glad summons of a genial ray
Unbinds the glebe, and calls them out to day.


V. 62. And ductile dullness.] A Parody on a verse in Garth, Cant. 1. How
ductile matter new meanders takes.


77. The cloud-compelling Queen.] From Homer 's epithet of Jupiter, (...).

V. 115. He rolled his eyes that witnessed huge dismay.] Milt. l. 1. -- Round
he throws his eyes
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay.
The progress of a bad Poet in his thoughts, being (like the progress of the
Devil in Milton) through a Chaos, might probably suggest this imitation.

V. 120. -- admires new beauties not its own.] Virg. Geor. 2. Miraturque novas
frondes and non sua poma.


V. 146. With whom my Muse began, with whom shall end.] Virg. Ecl. 8. A te
principium, tibi desinet -- from Theoc.
(...)
So Horace. Prima dicte mibi, summa dicende camaena.


V. 183. Had heaven decreed such works a longer date, etc.] Virg. Aen. 2. Me si
coelicoloe voluissent ducere vitam,
Has mihi servassent seeds. --


V. 187. Could Troy be saved -- His gray-goose weapon.] Virg. ibid. -- Si
Pergama dextra
Defendi possent, etiam hat defensa fuissent.


V. 197. Adieu my children! etc.] Virg. Aen. 3. -- Felix Priameia virgo!
Jussa mori: quae sortitus non pertulit ullos,
Nec victoris heri tetigit captiva cubile!
Nos patria incensa, diversa per aequor a vectae, etc.


V. 202. And visit alehouse.] Waller on the navy,
Those towers of oak over fertile plains may go,
And visit mountains where they once did grow.


Ver. 203. -- He lifted thrice the sparkling brand,
And thrice he dropped it. -- ]
Ovid of Althaea on the like occasion, burning her offspring, Tum conata quater
flammis imponere torrem,
Caepta quater tenuit.


V. 208. Now flames old Memnon, etc.] Virg. Aen. 2. -- Jam. Deiphobi dedit
ampla ruinam
Vulcano superante, domus; jam proximus ardet
Ucalegon. --


V. 219. Great in her charms! as when on Shrieves and May'rs
She looks, and breathes her self into their airs.]
Alma parens confessa Deam; qualisque videri
Coelicolis, and quanta solet -- Virg. Aen. 2.
Et laetos oculis afflarat honores. -- Id. Aen. 1.


THE DUNCIAD.
ARGUMENT to BOOK the SECOND.
The King being proclaimed, the solemnity is graced with public games and
sports of various kinds; not instituted by the Hero, as by Aeneas in Virgil,
but for greater honor by the Goddess in person (in like manner as the games
Pythia, Isthmia, etc. were anciently said to be by the Gods, and as Thetis
berself appearing according to Homer Odyss. 24. proposed the prizes in honor
of her son Achilles.) Hither flock the Poets and Critics, attended, as is but
just, with their Patrons and Booksellers. The Goddess is first pleased for her
disport to propose games to the Booksellers, and sets up the phantom of a
Poet which they contend to overtake. The Races described, with their diverse
accidents: next, the Game for a Poetess: then follow the exercises for the
Poets, of tickling, vociferating, diving: the first holds forth the arts and
practices of Dedicators, the second of disputants and fustian poets, the third
of profund, dark, and dirty authors. Lastly, for the Critics, the Goddess
proposes (with great propriety) an exercise not of their parts but their
patience; in hearing the works of two voluminous authors, one in verse and the
other in prose, deliberately read, without sleeping: The various effects of
which, with the several degrees and manners of their operation, are here set
forth: till the whole number, not of critics only, but of spectators, actors,
and all present fall fast asleep, which naturally and necessarily ends the
games.

HIGH on a gorgeous seat, that far out-shone
Henley's gilt tub, or Fleckno's Irish throne,
Or that, where on her Curls the public pours,
All-bounteous, fragrant grains, and golden showers:
Great Tibbald nods: The proud Parnassian sneer,
The conscious simper, and the jealous leer,
Mix on his look. All eyes direct their rays
On him, and crowds grow foolish as they gaze.
Not with more glee, by hands pontific crowned,
With scarlet hats, wide waving, circled round,
Rome in her Capitol saw Querno sit,
Throned on sev'n hills, the Antichrist of wit.
To grace this honored day, the Queen proclaims
By herald hawkers, high heroic games.
She summons all her sons: An endless band
Pours forth, and leaves unpeopled half the land;
A motley mixture! in long wigs, in bags,
In silks, in crapes, in garters, and in rags,
From drawing rooms, from colleges, from garrets,
On horse, on foot, in hacks, and gilded chariots,
All who true dunces in her cause appeared,
And all who knew those dunces to reward.
Amid that Area wide she took her stand,
Where the tall May Pole once o'erlook'd the Strand;
But now, so ANNE and piety ordain,
A church collects the saints of Drury Lane.
With authors, Stationers, obeyed the call,
The field of glory is a field for all;
Glory, and gain, the industrious tribe provoke;
And gentle Dullness ever loves a joke;
A poet's form she placed before their eyes,
And bad the nimblest racer seize the prize;
No meagre, muse-rid mope, adust and thin,
In a dun nightgown of his own loose skin,
But such a bulk as no twelve bards could raise,
Twelve starveling bards of these degenerate days.
All as a partridge plump, full-fed, and fair,
She formed this image of well-bodied air,
With pert flat eyes she window'd well its head,
A brain of feathers, and a heart of lead,
And empty words she gave, and sounding strain,
But senseless, lifeless! idol void and vain!
Never was dashed out, at one lucky hit,
A fool, so just a copy of a wit;
So like, that critics said, and courtiers swore,
A wit it was, and called the phantom, More.
All gaze with ardour: some, a poet's name,
Others, a sword-knot and laced suit inflame.
But lofty Lintot in the circle rose;
"This prize is mine; who tempt it, are my foes:
"With me began this genius, and shall end."
He spoke, and who with Lintot shall contend!
Fear held them mute. Alone untaught to fear
Stood dauntless Curl, "Behold that rival here!
"The race by vigor, not by vaunts is won;
"So take the hindmost Hell -- He said, and run.
Swift as a bard the bailiff leaves behind,
He left huge Lintot, and out-strip'd the wind.
As when a dab-chick waddles through the copse,
On feet and wings, and flies, and wades, and hops;
So laboring on, with shoulders, hands, and head,
Wide as a windmill all his figure spread,
With legs expanded Bernard urged the race,
And seemed to emulate great Jacob's pace.
Full in the middle way there stood a lake,
Which Curl's Corinna chanced that morn to make:
(Such was her wont, at early dawn to drop
Her evening cates before his neighbor's shop,)
Here fortuned Curl to slide; loud shout the band,
And Bernard! Bernard! rings through all the Strand.
Obscene with filth the miscreant lies bewrayed,
Fallen in the plash his wickedness had laid:
Then first (if poets aught of truth declare)
The caitiff Vaticide conceived a prayer.
Hear Jove! whose name my bards and I adore,
As much at least as any God's, or more;
And him and his if more devotion warms,
Down with the Bible, up with the Pope's Arms.
A place there is, betwixt earth, air and seas,
Where from Ambrosia, Jove retires for ease.
There in his seat two spacious vents appear,
On this he sits, to that he leans his ear,
And hears the various vows of fond mankind,
Some beg an eastern, some a western wind:
All vain petitions, mounting to the sky,
With reams abundant this abode supply;
Amused he reads, and then returns the bills
Signed with that Ichor which from Gods distills.
In office here fair Cloacina stands,
And ministers to Jove with purest hands;
Forth from the heap she picked her vot'ry's prayer,
And placed it next him, a distinction rare!
(Often, as he fished her nether realms for wit,
The Goddess favored him, and favors yet.)
Renewed by ordure's sympathetic force,
As oil'd with magic juices for the course,
Vigorous he rises, from the effluvia strong
Imbibes new life, and scours and stinks along;
Re-passes Lintot, vindicates the race,
Nor heeds the brown dishonours of his face.
And now the victor stretched his eager hand
Where the tall Nothing stood, or seemed to stand;
A shapeless shade, it melted from his sight,
Like forms in clouds, or visions of the night!
To seize his papers, Curl, was next thy care;
His papers light, fly diverse, tossed in air:
Songs, sonnets, epigrams the winds uplift,
And whisk 'em back to Evans, Young, and Swift.
The embroidered suit, at least, he deemed his prey;
That suit, an unpaid tailor snatched away!
No rag, no scrap, of all the beau, or wit,
That once so fluttered, and that once so writ.
Heaven rings with laughter: Of the laughter vain,
Dullness, good Queen, repeats the jest again.
Three wicked imps of her own Grubstreet choir
She decked like Congreve, Addison and Prior;
Mears, Warner, Wilkins run: delusive thought!
Breval, Besalcel, Bond, the varlets caught.
Curl stretches after Gay, but Gay is gone,
He grasps an empty Joseph for a John:
So Proteus, hunted in a nobler shape,
Became, when seized, a puppy, or an ape.
To him the Goddess. Son! thy grief lay down,
And turn this whole illusion on the town.
As the sage dame, experienced in her trade,
By names of Toasts retails each battered jade,
(Whence hapless Monsieur much complains at Paris
Of wrongs from Duchesses and Lady Mary's)
Be thine, my stationer! this magic gift;
Cook shall be Prior, and Concanen, Swift;
So shall each hostile name become our own,
And we too boast our Garth and Addison.
With that, she gave him (piteous of his case,
Yet smiling at his ruful length of face.)
A shaggy tap'stry, worthy to be spread
On Codrus' old, or Dunton's modern bed;
Instructive work! whose wry-mouthed portraiture
Displayed the fates her confessors endure.
Ear-less on high, stood un-abash'd Defoe,
And Tutchin flagrant from the scourge, below:
There Ridpath, Roper, cudgelled might ye view,
The very worsted still looked black and blue:
Himself among the storied Chiefs he spies,
As from the blanket high in air he flies,
And oh! (he cried) what street, what lane but knows
Our purgings, pumpings, blanketings and blows?
In every loom our labors shall be seen,
And the fresh vomit run for ever green!
See in the circle next, Eliza placed;
Two babes of love close clinging to her waste;
Fair as before her works she stands confessed,
In flowers and pearls by bounteous Kirkall dressed.
The Goddess then: "Who best can send on high
"The salient spout, far-streaming to the sky;
"His be you Juno of majestic size,
"With cow-like udders, and with ox-like eyes.
"This China-Jordan, let the chief overcome
"Replenish, not ingloriously, at home.
Chapman and Curl accept the glorious strife,
(Though one his son dissuades, and one his wife)
This on his manly confidence relies,
That on his vigor and superior size.
First Chapman leaned against his lettered post;
It rose, and labored to a curve at most:
So Jove's bright bow displays its watery round,
(Sure sign, that no spectator shall be drowned)
A second effort brought but new disgrace,
The wild Maeander washed the Artist's face:
Thus the small jett which hasty hands unlock,
Spirts in the gardeners eyes who turns the cock.
Not so from shameless Curl; impetuous spread
The stream, and smoking, flourished over his head.
So, (famed like thee for turbulence and horns,)
Eridanus his humble fountain scorns;
Through half the heavens he pours the exalted urn;
His rapid waters in their passage burn.
Swift as it mounts, all follow with their eyes;
Still happy Impudence obtains the prize.
Thou triumph'st, Victor of the high-wrought day,
And the pleased dame, soft-smiling, leads away.
Chapman, through perfect modesty overcome,
Crowned with the Jordan, walks contented home.
But now for Authors nobler palms remain;
Room for my Lord! three Jockeys in his train:
Six huntsmen with a shout precede his chair;
He grins, and looks broad nonsense with a stare.
His honored meaning Dullness thus expressed;
"He wins this Patron who can tickle best.
He chinks his purse, and takes his seat of state:
With ready quills the Dedicators wait,
Now at his head the dext'rous task commence,
And instant, fancy feels the imputed sense;
Now gentle touches wanton over his face,
He struts Adonis, and affects grimace:
Rolli the feather to his ear conveys,
Then his nice taste directs our Opera's:
Bentley his mouth with classic flattery opes,
And the puffed orator bursts out in tropes.
But Welsted most the poet's healing balm
Strives to extract, from his soft, giving palm;
Unlucky Welsted! thy unfeeling master,
The more thou ticklest, gripes his fist the faster.
While thus each hand promotes the pleasing pain,
And quick sensations skip from vein to vein,
A youth unknown to Phoebus, in despair,
Puts his last refuge all in heaven and prayer.
What force have pious vows? the Queen of Love
His Sister sends, her vot'ress, from above.
As taught by Venus, Paris learnt the art
To touch Achilles' only tender part;
Secure, through her, the noble prize to carry,
He marches off, his Grace's Secretary.
Now turn to different sports (the Goddess cries)
And learn, my sons, the wondrous power of Noise.
To move, to raise, to ravish every heart,
With Shakespeare's nature, or with Johnson's art,
Let others aim: It Is yours to shake the soul
With Thunder rumbling from the mustard-bowl,
With horns and trumpets now to madness swell,
Now sink in sorrows with a tolling Bell.
Such happy arts attention can command,
When fancy flags, and sense is at a stand.
Improve we these. Three Cat-calls be the bribe,
Of him, whose chatt'ring shames the Monkey tribe,
And his this Drum, whose hoarse heroic base
Drowns the loud clarion of the braying Ass.
Now thousand tongues are heard in one loud din:
The Monkey-mimicks rush disordant in:
'Twas chatt'ring, grinning, mouthing, jabb'ring all,
And Noise, and Norton, Brangling, and Breval,
Dennis, and Dissonance; and captious art,
And snip-snap short, and interruption smart.
Hold (cried the Queen) A Cat-call each shall win,
Equal your merits! equal is your din!
But that this well-disputed game may end,
Sound forth, my Brayers, and the welkin rend.
As when the long-ear'd milky mothers wait
At some sick miser's triple-bolted gate,
For their defrauded, absent foals they make
A moan so loud, that all the Guild awake;
Sore sighs Sir Gilbert, starting, at the bray,
From dreams of millions, and three groats to pay!
So swells each windpipe; Ass intones to Ass,
Harmonic twang, of leather, horn, and brass;
Such, as from laboring lungs the Enthusiast blows,
High sounds, attempred to the vocal nose.
But far over all, sonorous Blackmore's strain;
Walls, steeples, skies, bray back to him again:
In Tot'nam fields, the brethren with amaze
Prick all their ears up, and forget to graze;
Long Chanc'ry*lane retentive rolls the sound,
And courts to courts return it round and round:
Thames waft it thence to Rufus' roaring hall,
And Hungerford re-ecchoes, bawl for bawl.
All him victor in both gifts of song,
Who sings so loudly, and who sings so long.
This labor past, by Bridewell all descend,
(As morning-pray'r and flagellation end)
To where Fleet-ditch with disemboguing streams
Rolls the large tribute of dead dogs to Thames,
The King of dykes! than whom no sluice of mud
With deeper sable blots the silver flood.
"Here strip my children! here at once leap in!
"Here prove who best can dash through thick and thin,
"And who the most in love of dirt excel,
"Or dark dexterity of groping well.
"Who flings most filth, and wide pollutes around
"The stream, be his the Weekly Journals bound;
"A pig of lead to him who dives the best:
A peck of coals a-piece shall glad the rest.
In naked majesty Oldmixon stands,
And Milo-like, surveys his arms and hands,
Then sighing, thus. "And am I now threescore?
"Ah why, ye Gods! should two and two make four?
He said, and climbed a stranded Lighter's height,
Shot to the black abyss, and plunged downright.
The Senior's judgment all the crowd admire,
Who but to sink the deeper, rose the higher.
Next Smedley dived; slow circles dimpled over
The quaking mud, that closed, and opened no more.
All look, all sigh, and call on Smedly lost;
Smedley in vain resounds through all the coast.
Then * essayed, scarce vanished out of sight,
He buoys up instant, and returns to light:
He bears no token of the sabler streams,
And mounts far off, among the swans of Thames.
True to the bottom, see Concanen creep,
A cold, long winded, native of the deep!
If perseverance gain the Diver's prize,
Not everlasting Blackmore this denies:
No noise, no stir, no motion can thou make,
The unconscious flood sleeps over thee like a lake.
Not so bold Arnall; with a weight of scull,
Furious he sinks, precipitately dull.
Whirlpools and storms his circling arm invest,
With all the might of gravitation blessed.
No crab more active in the dirty dance,
Downward to climb, and backward to advance.
He brings up half the bottom on his head,
And loudly claims the Journals and the Lead.
Sudden, a burst of thunder shook the flood:
Lo Smedley rose in majesty of mud!
Shaking the horrors of his ample brows,
And each ferocious feature grim with ooze.
Greater he looks, and more than mortal stares;
Then thus the wonders of the deep declares.
First he relates, how sinking to the chin,
Smit with his mien, the mud-nymphs sucked him in:
How young Lutetia, softer than the down,
Nigrina black, and Merdamante brown,
Vy'd for his love in jetty bowers below;
As Hylas fair was ravished long ago.
Then sung, how shown him by the nutbrown maids,
A branch of Styx here rises from the Shades,
That tinctured as it runs with Lethe's streams,
And wafting vapors from the land of dreams,
(As under seas Alphaeus' secret sluice
Bears Pisa's offerings to his Arethuse)
Pours into Thames: Each City-bowl is full,
Of the mixed wave, and all who drink grow dull.
How to the banks where bards departed doze,
They led him soft; how all the bards arose,
Tailor, sweet Swan of Thames, majestic bows,
And Shadwell nods the poppy on his brows;
While Milbourn there, deputed by the rest,
Gave him the cassock, surcingle, and vest;
And "Take (he said) these robes which once were mine,
"Dullness is sacred in a sound Divine.
He ceased, and showed the robe; the crowd confess
The reverend Flamen in his lengthened dress.
Slow moves the Goddess from the sable flood,
(Her Priest preceding) through the gates of Lud.
Her Critics there she summons, and proclaims
A gentler exercise to close the games.
Hear you! in whose grave heads, as equal scales,
I weigh what author's heaviness prevails;
Which most conduce to sooth the soul in slumbers,
My Henley's periods, or my Blackmore's numbers?
Attend the trial we propose to make:
If there be man who over such works can wake,
Sleep's all-subduing charms who dares defy,
And boasts Ulysses' ear with Argus' eye;
To him we grant our amplest powers to sit
Judge of all present, past, and future wit,
To cavil, censure, dictate, right or wrong,
Full, and eternal privilege of tongue.
Three Cambridge Sophs and three pert Templars came,
The same their talents, and their tastes the same,
Each prompt to query, answer, and debate,
And smit with love of Poesy and Prate.
The ponderous books two gentle readers bring.
The heroes sit; the vulgar form a ring.
The clamorous crowd is hushed with mugs of Mum,
'Till all tuned equal, send a general hum.
Then mount the clerks, and in one lazy tone,
Through the long, heavy, painful page, drawl on;
Soft creeping, words on words, the sense compose,
At every line, they stretch, they yawn, they doze.
As to soft gales top-heavy pines bow low
Their heads, and lift them as they cease to blow;
Thus often they rear, and often the head decline,
As breathe, or pause, by fits, the airs divine:
And now to this side, now to that, they nod,
As verse, or prose, infuse the drowzy God.
Thrice Budgel aimed to speak, but thrice suppressed
By potent Arthur, knocked his chin and breast.
Toland and Tindal, prompt at priests to jeer,
Yet silent bowed to Christ's No kingdom here.
Who sat the nearest, by the words overcome
Slept first, the distant nodded to the hum.
Then down are rolled the books; stretched over 'em lies
Each gentle clerk, and mutt'ring seals his eyes.
At what a Dutchman plumps into the lakes,
One circle first, and then a second makes,
What Dullness dropped among her sons impressed
Like motion, from one circle to the rest;
So from the mid-most the nutation spreads
Round, and more round, over all the sea of heads.
At last Centlivre felt her voice to fail,
Motteux himself unfinished left his tale,
Boyer the State, and Law the Stage gave over,
Nor Kelsey talked, nor Naso whispered more;
Norton, from Daniel and Ostroea sprung,
Blessed with his father's front, and mother's tongue,
Hung silent down his never-blushing head;
And all was hushed, as Folly's self lay dead.
Thus the soft gifts of Sleep conclude the day,
And stretched on bulks, as usual, Poets lay.
Why should I sing what bards the nightly Muse
Did slumbring visit, and convey to stews:
Who prouder marched, with magistrates in state,
To some famed round-house, ever-open gate:
How Laurus lay inspired beside a sink,
And to mere mortals seemed a Priest in drink.:
While others, timely, to the neighboring Fleet
(Haunt of the Muses) made their safe retreat.
REMARKS on BOOK the SECOND.
Two things there are, upon the supposition of which the very basis of all
Verbal criticism is founded and supported: The first, that an author could
never fail to use the best word, on every occasion: The second, that a Critic
cannot choose but know, which that is? This being granted, whenever any word
does not fully content us, we take upon us to conclude, first that the author
could never have used it, and secondly, that he must have used that very one
which we conjecture in its stead.

We cannot therefore enough admire the learned Scriblerus, for his alteration
of the text in the two last verses of the preceding book, which in all the
former editions stood thus, Hoarse thunder to the bottom shook the bog,
And the loud nation croak'd, God save King Log!
He has with great judgment tranposed these two epithets, putting hoarse to the
nation, and loud to the thunder: and this being evidently the true reading, he
vouchsafed not so much as to mention the former; for which assertion of the
just right of a Critic, he merits the acknowledgment of all sound commentators.

V. 2. Henley 's gilt Tub.] The pulpit of a dissenter is usually called a tub;
but that of Mr. Orator Henley was covered with velvet, and adorned with gold.
He had also a fair altar, and over it this extraordinary inscription, The
Primitive Eucharist. See the history of this person, book 3. verse 195.

V. 2. Or Fleckno 's Irish Throne.] Richard Fleckno was an Irish priest, but
had laid aside (as himself expressed it) the mechanic part of priesthood. He
printed some plays, poems, letters and travels. I doubt not our author took
occasion to mention him in respect to the poem of Mr. Dryden, to which this
bears some resemblance; though of a character more different from it than that of
the Aeneid from the Iliad, or the Lutrin of Boileau from the Defaits des Bouts
rimees of Sarazin.

V. 3. Or that, where on her Curls the public pours.] Edm. Curl stood in the
pillory at Charing Cross, in March, 1727-8,

Mr. Curl loudly complained of this note as an untruth, protesting, "that he
stood in the pillory not in March but in February;" And of another on verse
144. "Saying, he was not tossed in a blanket, but a rug." Curliad in 120. 1729.
p. 19 and 25.

V. 11. Rome in her capitol saw Querno sit.] Camillo Querno was of Apulia, who
hearing the great encouragement which Leo the tenth gave to poets, traveled to
Rome with a harp in his hand, and sung to it twenty thousand verses of a poem
called Alexias. He was introduced as a buffoon to Leo, and promoted to the
honor of the laurel; a jest, which the court of Rome and the Pope himself
entered into so far, as to cause him to ride on an elephant to the Capitol, and
to hold a solemn festival on his coronation; at which it is recorded the poet
himself was so transported, as to weep for joy. He was ever after a constant
frequenter of the Pope's table, drank abundantly, and poured forth verses
without number. PAULUS JOVIUS, Elog. Virg. doct. chapter 82. Some idea of his
poetry is given by Fam. Strada in his Prolusions.

V. 43. Never was dashed out, at one lucky hit.] Our author here seems willing
to give some account of the possibility of Dullness making a wit, (which could
be done no other way than by chance.) The fiction is the more reconciled to
probability by the known story of Apelles, who being at a loss to express the
foam of Alexander's horse, dashed his pencil in despair at the picture, and
happened to do it by that fortunate stroke.

V. 46. And called the phantom, More.] CURL in his key to the Dunciad, affirmed
this to be James More Smith, Esquire and it is probable (considering what is said
of him in the Testimonies) that some might fancy our author obliged to
represent this gentleman as a plagiary, or to pass for one himself. His case
indeed was like that of a man I have heard of, who as he was sitting in
company, perceived his next neighbor had stolen his handkerchief. "Sir (said
the thief, finding himself detected) "do not expose me, I did it for mere want:
be so good but to take it privately out of my pocket again, and say nothing."
The honest man did so, but the other cried out, "See gentlemen! what a thief we
have among us! look, he is stealing my handerchief."

The plagiarisms of this person gave occasion to the following Epigram: M -- re
always smiles whenever he recites;
He smiles (you think) approving what he writes;
And yet in this no Vanity is shown;
A modest man may like what is not his own.
His only work was a comedy called the Rival Modes; the town condemned it in
the action, but he printed it in 1726-7 with this modest Motto, Hic caestus,
artemque repono.
The smaller pieces which we have heard attributed to this author, are, An
Epigram on the bridge at Blenheim, by Dr. Evans: Cosmelia, by Mr. Pit, Mr.
Jones, etc. The Saw-pit, a simile, by a Friend, and some unown'd letters,
advertisements and epigrams against our author in the Daily Journal.

Notwithstanding what is here collected of the person imagined by Curl to be
meant in this place, we cannot be of that opinion; since our poet had certainly
no need of vindicating half a dozen verses to himself which every reader had
done for him; since the name itself is not spelled Moore but More; and lastly,
since the learned Scriblerus has so well proved the contrary.

V. 46. The phantom, More.] It appears from hence that this is not the name of
a real person, but fictitious. More from (...), stultus, (...), stultitia, to
represent the folly of a plagiary. Thus Erasmus: Admonuit me Mori cognomen
tibi, quod tam ad Moriae vocabulum accedit quam es ipse a re alienus.
Dedication of Moriae Encomion to Sir Tho. More; the farewell of which may be our
author's to his plagiary, Vale More! and Moriam tuam gnaviter defend. Adieu
More, and be sure strongly to defend thy own folly. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 49. But lofty Lintot.] We enter here upon the episode of the Booksellers:
persons, whose names being more known and famous in the learned world than
those of the Authors in this poem, do therefore need less explanation. The
action of Mr. Lintot here imitates that of Dares in Virgil, rising just in this
manner to lay hold on a Bull. This eminent Bookseller printed the Rival Modes
abovementioned.

V. 54. Stood dauntless Curl, etc.] We come now to a character of much respect,
that of Mr. Edmond Curl. As a plain repetition of great actions is the best
praise of them, we shall only say of this eminent man, that he carried the
Trade many lengths beyond what it ever before had arrived at, and that he was
the envy and admiration of all his profession. He possessed himself of a
command over all authors whatever; he caused them to write what he pleased;
they could not call their very names their own. He was not only famous among
these; he was taken notice of by the State, the Church, and the Law, and
received particular marks of distinction from each.

It will be owned that he is here introduced with all possible dignity; he
speaks like the intrepid Diomed; he runs like the swift-footed Achilles; if he
falls, it is like the beloved Nisus; and (what Homer makes to be the chief of
all praises) he is favored of the Gods: He says but three words, and his
prayer is heard; a Goddess conveys it to the seat of Jupiter: though he loses the
prize, he gains the victory; the great Mother her self comforts him, she
inspires him with expedients, she honors him with an immortal present (such as
Achilles receives from Thetis and Aeneas from Venus) at once instructive and
prophetical: After this, he is unrivaled and triumphant.

The tribute our author here pays him, is a grateful return for several
unmerited obligations: Many weighty animadversions on the public affairs, and
many excellent and diverting pieces on private persons, has he given to his
name. If ever he owed two verses to any other, he owed Mr. Curl some thousands.
He was every day extending his fame, and enlarging his writings: witness
innumerable instances! but it shall suffice only to mention the Court-Poems,
which he meant to publish as the work of the true writer, a Lady of quality;
but being first threatened, and afterward punished for it by Mr. Pope, he
generously transferred it from her to him, and ever since printed it in his
name. The single time that ever he spoke to C. was on that affair, and to that
happy incident he owes all the favors since received from him: So true is the
saying of Dr. Sydenham, that "any one shall be, at some time or other, the
better or the worse, for having but seen or spoken to a good, or a bad man."

V. 66. Curl's Corinna.] This name it seems was taken by one Mrs. T --,who
procured some private letters of Mr. Pope's, while almost a boy, to Mr.
Cromwell, and sold them without the consent of either of those gentlemen to
Curl, who printed them in 120. 1727. He has discovered her to be the publisher
in his Key, p. 11. We only take this opportunity of mentioning the manner in
which those letters got abroad, which the author was ashamed of as very trivial
things, full not only of levities, but of wrong judgments of men and books, and
only excusable from the youth and inexperience of the writer.

V. 71. Obscene with filth, etc.] Though this incident may seem too low and base
for the dignity of an Epic poem, the learned very well know it to be but a copy
of Homer and Virgil; the very words (...) and Fimus are used by them, though our
poet (in compliance to modern nicety) has remarkably enriched and colored his
language, as well as raised the versication, in these two Episodes. Mr. Dryden
in Mack-Fleckno, has not scrupled to mention the Morning Toast at which the
fishes bite in the Thames, Pissing-Alley, Relics of the Bum, etc. but our
author is more grave, and (as a fine writer says of Virgil in his Georgics)
tosses about his dung with an air of majesty. If we consider that the exercises
of his Authors could with justice be higher than tickling, chatt'ring, braying,
or diving, it was no easy matter to invent such games as were proportioned to
the meaner degree of Booksellers. In Homer and Virgil, Ajax and Nisus, the
persons drawn in this plight are heroes; whereas here they are such, with whom
it had been great impropriety to have joined any but vile ideas; besides the
natural connection there is between Libellers and common nusances. Nevertheless
I have often heard our author own, that this part of his poem was (as it
frequently happens) what cost him most trouble and pleased him least: but that
he hoped 'twas excusable, since levelled at such as understand no delicate
satire: Thus the politest men are sometimes obliged to swear, when they happen
to have to do with porters and oyster-wenches.

V. 78. Down with the Bible, up with the Pope 's Arms.] The Bible, Curl's sign,
the Cross-keys, Lintot's,

V. 210. An unpaid Tailor.] This line has been loudly complained of in Mist,
June 8* Dedic. to Sawney, and others, as a most inhuman satire on the poverty
of poets: but it is thought our author would be acquitted by a jury of Tailors.
To me this instance seems unluckily chosen; if it be a satire on any body, it
must be on a bad paymaster, since the person to whom they have here applied it
was a man of fortune. Not but poets may well be jealous of so great a
prerogative as non-payment: which Mr. Dennis so far asserts: as boldly to
pronounce, that "if Homer himself was not in debt, it was because no body would
trust him." (Pref. to Rem. on the Rape of the Lock, p. 15.)

V. 116. Like Congrvee, Addison, and Prior.] These authors being such whose
names will reach posterity, we shall not give any account of them, but proceed
to those of whom it is necessary. -- Besalcel Morris was author of some satires
on the translators of Homer, with many other things printed in newspapers. --
" Bond writ a satire against Mr. P -- Capt. Breval was author of The
Confederates, an ingenious dramatic performance to expose Mr. P. Mr. Gay, Dr.
Arb. and some ladies of quality," says CURL, Key, p. 11.

V. 117. Mears, Warner, Wilkins.] Booksellers and Printers of much anonymous
stuff.

V. 118. Breval, Besaleel, Bond.] I foresee it will be objected from this line,
that we were in an error in our assertion on verse 46. of this book, that More
was a fictitious name, since these persons are equally represented by the poet
as phantoms. So at first sight it may seem; but be not deceived, reader! these
also are not real persons. It Is true Curl declares Breval, a captain, author of
a piece called The Confederates: But the same Curl first said it was written by
Joseph Gay: Is his second assertion to be credited any more than his first? He
likewise affirms Bond to be one who writ a satire on our poet; but where is
such a satire to be found? where was such a writer ever heard of? As for
Besaleel, it carries forgery in the very name, nor is it, as the others are, a
surname. Thou may depend on it no such authors ever lived: all phantoms!
SCRIBLERUS.

V. 120. Joseph Gay, a fictitious name put by Curl before several pamphlets,
which made them pass with many for Mr. Gay's.

V. 124. And turn this whole Illusion on the town.] It was a common practice of
this bookseller, to publish vile pieces of obscure hands under the names of
eminent authors.

V. 130. Cook shall be Prior.] The man here specified was the son of a
Muggletonian, who kept a public house at Braintree in Essex. He writ a thing
called The Battle of Poets, of which Philips and Welsted were the heroes, and
wherein our author was attacked in his moral character, in relation to his
Homer and Shakespeare: He writ moreover a farce of Penelope, in the preface of
which also he was squinted at, and some malevolent things in the British,
London and Daily Journals. At the same time the honest gentleman wrote letters
to Mr. P. in the strongest terms protesting his innocence. His chief work was a
translation of Hesiod, to which Theobald writ notes, and half-notes, as has
already been said.

V. ibid. And Concanen, Swift.] In the first edition of this poem there were
only Asterisks in this place, but the names were since inserted, merely to fill
up the verse, and give ease to the ear of the reader.

V. 132. And we too boast our Garth and Addison.] Nothing is more remarkable
than our author's love of praising good writers. He has celebrated Sir Isaac
Newton, Mr. Dryden, Mr. Congreve, Mr. Wycherley, Dr. Garth, Mr. Walsh, Duke of
Buckingham, Mr. Addison, Lord Lansdown; in a word, almost every man of his time
that deserved it. It was very difficult to have that pleasure in a poem on this
subject, yet he found means to insert their panegyric, and has made even
dullness out of her own mouth pronounce it. It must have been particularly
agreeable to him to celebrate Dr. Garth; both as his constant friend, and as he
was his predecessor in this kind of satire. The Dispensary attacked the whole
body of Apothecaries, a much more useful one undoubtedly than that of the bad
poets (if in truth this can be called a body, of which no two members ever
agreed.) It also did what Mr. Theobald says is unpardonable, drew in parts of
private character, and introduced persons independent of his subject. Much more
would Boileau have incurred his censure, who left all subjects whatever on all
occasions, to fall upon the bad poets; which it is to be feared would have been
more immediately his concern.) But certainly next to commending good writers,
the greatest service to learning is to expose the bad, who can only that one
way be made of any use to it. This truth is very well set forth in these lines,
addressed to our author. The craven Rook, and pert Jackdaw,
(Though neither birds of moral kind)
Yet serve, if hanged, or stuffed with straw,
To show us, which way blows the wind.
Thus dirty knaves, or chatt'ring fools,
Strung up by dozens in thy lay,
Teach more by half than Dennis' rules,
And point instruction every way.
With Aegypt's art thy pen may strive,
One potent drop let this but shed,
And every Rogue that stunk alive
Becomes a precious Mummy dead.


V. 134 Ruful length of face.] "The decrepid person or figure of a man are no
reflections upon his Genius: An honest mind will love and esteem a man of
worth, though he be deformed or poor. Yet the author of the Dunciad has libelled
a person for his ruful length of face!" MIST'S JOURN. June 8. This Genius and
man of worth whom an honest mind should love, is Mr. Curl. True it is, he stood
in the Pillory, an incident which will lengthen the face of any man though it
were ever so comely, therefore is no reflection on the natural beauty of Mr.
Curl. But as to reflections on any man's face, or figure, Mr. Dennis says
excellently; "Natural deformity comes not by our fault; it is often occasioned
by calamities and diseases, which a man can no more help, than a monster can
his deformity. There is no one misfortune, and no one disease, but what all the
rest of mankind are subject to. -- But the deformity of this Author is visible,
present, lasting, unalterable, and peculiar to himself. It Is the mark of God
and Nature upon him, to give us warning that we should hold no society with
him, as a creature not of our original, nor of our species: And they who have
refused to take this warning which God and Nature have given them, and have in
spite of it by a senseless presumption ventured to be familiar with him, have
severely suffered, etc. It Is certain his original is not from Adam, but from
the Devil," etc. DENNIS Charact. of Mr. P. 8vo. 1716.

Admirably is it observed by Mr. Dennis against Mr. Law, p. 33. "That the
language of Billingsgate can never be the language of Charity, nor consequently
of Christianity." I should else be tempted to use the language of a Critic: For
what is more provoking to a commentator, than to behold his author thus
portrayed? Yet I consider it really hurts not him; whereas maliciously to call
some others dull, might do them prejudice with a world too apt to believe it.
Therefore though Mr. D. may call another a little ass or a young toad, far be it
from us to call him a toothless lion, or an old serpent. Indeed, had I written
these notes (as was once my intent) in the learned language, I might have given
him the appellations of Balatro, Calceatum caput, Scurra in triviis, being
phrases in good esteem and frequent usage among the best learned: But in our
mother tongue, were I to tax any gentleman of the Dunciad, surely it should be
in words not to the vulgar intelligible; whereby christian charity, decency,
and good accord among authors, might be preserved.

SCRIBLERUS. The good Scriblerus here, as on all occasions, eminently shows his
humanity. But it was far otherwise with the gentlemen of the Dunciad, whose
scurrilities were always personal: They went so far as to libel an eminent
sculptor for making our author's Busto in marble, at the request of Mr. Gibbs
the Architect: which rhimes had the undeserved honor to be answered in an
Impromptu by the Earl of B --. Well Sir, suppose, the Busto's a damned head,
Suppose, that Pope's an Elf;
All he can say for it is, he neither made
The Busto, nor Himself.
And by another Person of Quality. Rysbrake, to make a Pope of stone,
Must labor hard and sore;
But it would cost him labor none,
To make a stone of Moor.
Their scurrilities were of that nature as provoked every honest man but Mr.
Pope, yet never to be lamented, since they occasioned the following Amiable
Verses. While Malice, Pope, denies thy page
It Is own celestial fire,
While Critics, and while Bards in rage
Admiring will not admire;
While wayward pens thy worth assail,
And envious tongues decry,
These times though many a Friend bewail,
These times bewail not I.
But when the World's loud praise is thine,
And spleen no more shall blame,
When with thy Homer thou shall shine
In one established fame,
When none shall rail, and every lay
Devote a wreath to thee;
That day (for come it will) that day
Shall I lament to see.


V. 135. A shaggy Tap'stry.]. A sorry kind of Tapestry frequent in old Inns,
made of worsted or some coarser stuff: like that which is spoken of by Done --
Faces as frightful as theirs who whip Christ in old hangings. The imagery woven
in it alludes to the mantle of Cloanthus, in Aen. 5.

V. 136 On Codrus' old, or Dunton 's modern bed.] Of Codrus the poet's bed see
Juvenal, describing his poverty very copiously. Sat. 3. v. 103, etc. Lectus
erat Codro, etc.
Codrus had but one bed, so short too boot,
That his short Wife's short legs hung dangling out:
His cupboard's head six earthen pitchers graced,
Beneath them was his trusty tankard placed;
And to support this noble plate, there lay
A bending Chiron, cast from honest clay.
His few Greek books a rotten chest contained,
Whose covers much of mouldiness complained,
Where mice and rats devoured poetic bread,
And on heroic Verse luxuriously were fed.
It Is true, poor Codrus nothing had to boast,
And yet poor Codrus all that nothing lost.
Dryd.

But Concanen in his dedication of the letters, advertisements, etc. to the
author of the Dunciad, assures us, that " Juvenal never satirized the poverty
of Codrus."

John Dunton was a broken bookseller and abusive scribler: he writ Neck or
Nothing, a violent satire on some ministers of state; The danger of a deathbed
repentance, a libel on the Duke of Devonshire and on the Rt. Rev. Bishop of
Peterborough, etc.

V. 140. And Tutchin flagrant from the Scourge.] John Tutchin, author of some
vile verses, and of a weekly paper called the Observator: He was sentenced to
be whipped through several towns in the west of England, upon which he petitioned
King James II. to be hanged. When that Prince died in exile, he wrote an
invective against his memory, occasioned by some humane elegies on his death.
He lived to the time of Queen Anne.

V. 141. There Ridpath, Roper.] Authors of the Flying-Post and Post* Boy, two
scandalous papers on different sides, for which they equally and alternately
were cudgelled, and deserved it.

V. 143. Himself among the storied chiefs he spies, etc.] The history of Curl's
being tossed in a blanket, and whipped by the scholars of Westminster, is
ingeniously and pathetically related in a poen entitled, Neck or Nothing. Of
his purging and vomiting, see a full and true account of a horrid revenge on
the body of Edm. Curl, etc. in Swift's and Pope's Miscell.

V. 149. See in the circle next, Eliza placed.] In this game is exposed in the
most contemptuous manner the profligate licentiousness of those shameless
scriblers (for the most part of that Sex, which ought least to be capable of
such malice or impudence) who in libellous Memoirs and Novels, reveal the
faults or misfortunes of both sexes, to the ruin of public fame or disturbance
of private happiness. Our good poet, (by the whole cast of his work being
obliged not to take off the Irony) where he could not show his indignation,
has shown his contempt, as much as possible: having here drawn as Vile a
picture as could be represented in the colors of Epic poesy. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 149. Eliza Haywood.] This woman was authoress of those most scandalous
books, called The Court of Carimania, and The New Utopia. For the two Babes of
Love, See CURL, Key, p. 22: But whatever reflection he is pleased to throw upon
this Lady, surely 'twas what from him she little deserved, who had celebrated
his undertakings for Reformation of Manners, and declared her self "to be so
perfectly acquainted with the sweetness of his disposition, and that tenderness
with which he considered the errors of his fellow creatures; that though she
should find the little inadvertencies of her own life recorded in his papers,
she was certain it would be done in such a manner as she could not but
approve." Mrs. HAYWOOD, Hist. of Clar. printed in the Female Dunciad, p. 18.

V. 152. Kirkall, the name of a Graver. Some of this Lady's works were printed
in four volumes duod. with her picture thus dressed up, before them.

V. 159. Chapman, a Bookseller who printed Mrs. Haywood's New Utopia, etc. --
Henry Curl, the worthy son of his father Edmund.

V. 175. Through half the heavens he pours the exalted urn.] In a manuscript
Dunciad (where are some marginal corrections of some gentlemen some time
deceased) I have found another reading of these lines, thus, And lifts his urn,
through half the heavens to flow;
His rapid waters in their passage glow.
This I cannot but think the right: For first, though the difference between burn
and glow my seem not very material to others, to me I confess the latter has an
elegance, a Jenescay quoy, which is much easier to be conceived than explained.
Secondly, every reader of our Poet must have observed how frequently he uses
this word glow in other parts of his works: To instance only in his Homer,

(1.) Iliad 9. v. 726. -- With one resentment glows.

(2.) Iliad 11. v. 626. -- There the battle glows.

(3.) Ibid. 985. -- The closing flesh that instant ceased to glow

(4.) Il. 12. v. 45. -- Encompassed Hector glows.

(5.) Ibid. 475. -- His beating breast with generous ardour glows.

(6.) Iliad 18. v. 591. -- Another part glowed with refulgent arms.

(7.) Ibid. v. 654. -- And curled on silver props in ororder glow.

I am afraid of growing too luxuriant in examples, or I could stretch this
catalogue to a great extent, but these are enough to prove his fondness for
this beautiful word, which therefore, let all future editions replace here.

I am aware after all, that burn is the proper word to convey an idea of what
was said to be Mr. Curl's condition at this time: But from that very reason I
infer the direct contrary. For surely every lover of our author will conclude
he had more humanity, than to insult a man on such a misfortune or calamity
which could never befall him purely by his own fault, but from an unhappy
communication with another. This Note is half Mr. THEOBALD, half SCRIBLERUS.

V. 179. The high-wrought day.] Some affirm, this was originally -- the well-p
-- st day: but the Poet's decency would not suffer it.

Here the learned Scriblerus manifests great anger; he exclaims against all
such Conjectural Emendations in this manner. "Let it suffice, O Pallas! that
every noble ancient, Greek or Roman, has suffered the impertinent correction
of every Dutch, German, and Switz Schoolmester! Let our English at least
escape, whose intrinsic is scarce of marble so solid, as not to be impaired or
soiled by such rude and dirty hands. Suffer them to call their works their own,
and after death at least to find rest and sanctuary from Critics! When these
men have ceased to rail, let them not begin to do worse, to comment! let them
not conjecture into nonsense, correct out of all correctness, and restore into
obscurity and confusion. Miserable fate! which can besal only the sprightliest
wits that have written, and will befall them only from such dull ones as could
never write!" SCRIBLERUS*

V. 195. Paolo Antonio Rolli, an Italian Poet, and writer of many Opera's in
that language, which, partly by the help of his genius, prevailed in England
near twenty years. He taught Italian to some fine Gentlemen who affected to
direct the Opera's.

V. 197. Bentley his mouth, etc.] Not spoken of the famous Dr. Richard Bentley,
but of one Thom. Bentley, student in physic, a small critic, who aped his
Uncle in a little Horace. The great one was intended to be dedicated to the
Lord Hallifax, but (on a change of the Ministry) was given to the Earl of
Oxford; for which reason the little one was dedicated to his son the Lord
Harley. A Taste of his Classic Elocution may be seen in this following
Panegyricon the Peace of Utrecht. Cupimus Patrem tuum, fulgentissimum illud
Orbis Anglicani jubar, adorare. O ingens Reipublicae nostroe columen! O
fortunatam tanto Hero Britanniam! Illi tali tantoque viro, DEUM per Omnia
adfuisse manumque ejus and mentem direxisse, CERTISSIMUM EST. Hujus enim Unius
ferme opera, Aequissimis and perhonorificis conditionibus, diuturno heu nimium!
Bello, finem impositum videmus. Oh Diem aeterna memoria dignissimam! qua
terrores Patriae omnes excidit, Pacem que diu exoptatam toti fere Europae
restituit, ille Populi Anglicani Amor, Harleius.

Thus critically (that is verbally) translated.

"Thy Father, that most refulgent Star of the Anglican Orb, we much desire to
adore! oh mighty Column of our Republic! Oh Britain fortunate in such an Hero!
That to such and so great a Man GOD was ever present, in every thing, and all
along directed both his Hand and his Heart, is a Most Absolute Certainty! For,
it is in a manner by the operation of this Man Alone, that we behold a War
(alas! how much too long an one!) brought at length to an end, on the most just
and the most honorable Conditions. Oh Day eternally to be memorated! wherein
All the Terrors of this Country were ended; and a PEACE (long wished for by
almost all Europe) restored by HARLEY, the Love and Delight of the People of
England."

But that this Gentleman can write in a different Style, may be seen in a
Letter to Mr. Pope, occasioned by Sober Advice from Horace, wherein several
Noble Lords are treated in most extraordinary Language, particularly the Lord
Bolingbroke abused for that very PEACE, which he here makes the single work of
the Earl of Oxford, directed by God Almighty.

V. 199. Welsted.] LEONARD WELSTED, author of the Triumvirate, or a Letter in
verse from Palaemon to Celia at Bath, which was meant for a Satire on Mr. P.
and some of his friends, about the year 1718. He writ other things which we
cannot remember. Smedley in his Metamorphosis of Scriblerus mentions one, the
Hymn of a Gentleman to his Creator: and there was another in praise either of a
Cellar, or a Garret. L. W. characteris'd in the treatise (...) or the Art of
Sinking, as a Didapper, and after as an Eel, is said to be this person, by
Dennis, Daily Journal of May 11, 1728. He was also characteris'd under another
animal, a Mole, by the author of the ensuing Simile which was handed about at
the same time.

Dear Welsted, mark, in dirty hole,
That painful animal, a Mole:
Above-ground never born to go,
What mighty stir it keeps below?
To make a Molehill, all this strife!
It digs, pokes, undermines for life.
How proud, a little Dirt to spread!
Conscious of nothing over its head.
Till, laboring on for want of eyes,
It blunders into Light -- and dies.
You have him again in book 3. v. 163.

V. 205. A youth unknown to Phoebus, etc.] The satire of this Episode being
levelled at the base flatteries of authors to worthless wealth or greatness,
concludes here with an excellent lesson to such men; That although their pens and
praises were as exquisite as they conceit of themselves, yet (even in their own
mercenary views) a creature unlettered, who serves the passions, or pimpeth to
the pleasures, of such vain, braggart, puffed Nobility, shall with those patrons
be much more inward, and of them much higher rewarded. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 218. With Thunder rumbling from the mustard-bowl.] The old way of making
Thunder and Mustard were the same; but since, it is more advantageously
performed by troughs of wood with stops in them. Whether Mr. Dennis was the
inventor of that improvement, I know not; but it is certain, that being once at
a Tragedy of a new Author, he fell into a great passion at hearing some, and
cried, "God's Death! that is my Thunder."

V. 220. With a tolling Bell.] A mechanical help to the Pathetic, not unuseful
to the modern writers of Tragedy.

V. 223. Three Cat-Calls.] Certain musical instruments used by one sort of
Critics to confound the Poets of the Theater.

V. 230. Norton,] See verse 383 -- J. Durant Breval, Author of a very
extraordinary Book of Travels, and some Poems. See before, Note on verse 116.

V. 251 Long Chanc'ry-lane.] The place where the offices of Chancery are kept:
The long detention of Clients in that Court, and the difficulty of getting out,
is humourously allegoriz'd in these lines.

V. 256. Who sings so loudly, and who sings so long.] A just character of Sir
Richard Blackmore, Knt, who (as Mr. Dryden expressed it.) Writ to the rumbling
of his Coach's wheels, and whose indefatigable Muse produced no less than six
Epic poems: Prince and King Arthur, 20 Books; Eliza, 10; Alfred, 12; The
Redeemer, 6: besides Job in folio, the whole Book of Psalms, The Creation, 7
Books; Nature of Man, 3 Books, and many more. It Is in this sense he is styled
afterward, the Everlasting Blackmore. Notwithstanding all which, Mr. Gildon
seems assured, that "this admirable author did not think himself upon the same
foot with Homer." Comp. Art of Poetry, Vol. 1. p. 108.

But how different is the judgment of the author of Characters of the Times? p.
25. who says, "Sir Richard is unfortunate in happening to mistake his proper
talents, and that he has not for many years been so much as named or even
thought of among writers." Even Mr. Dennis differs greatly from his friend Mr.
Gilden; " Blackmore's Action (says he) has neither unity, nor integrity, nor
morality, nor universality; and consequently he can have no Fable, and no
Heroic Poem: His Narration is neither probable, delightful, nor wonderful: His
Characters have none of the necessary qualifications. The things contained in
his Narration are neither in their own nature delightful, nor numerous enough,
nor rightly disposed, nor surprising, nor pathetick. -- Nay he proceeds so far
as to say Sir Richard has no Genius; first laying down, "that Genius is caused
by a furious joy and pride of soul, on the conception of an extraordinary Hint.
Many Men (says he) have their Hints, without these motions of fury and pride of
soul, because they want fire enough to agitate their spirits; and these we call
cold writers: Others who have a great deal of fire, but have not excellent
organs, feel the forementioned motions, without the extraordinary hints; And
these we call fustian writers. But he declares that Sir Richard had neither the
Hints, nor the Motions." Remarks on Pr. Arth. 8vo. 1696. Preface.

This gentleman in his first works abused the character of Mr. Dryden, and in
his last of Mr. Pope, accusing him in very high and sober terms of profaneness
and immorality (Essay on polite writing, Vol. 2. p. 270.) on a mere report from
Edm. Curl, that he was author of a Travestie on the first Psalm. Mr. Dennis
took up the same report, but with the addition of what Sir Richard had
neglected, an Argument to prove it; which being very curious, we shall here
transcribe. (Remarks on Homer, 8vo. p. 27.) "It was he who burlesqu'd the Psalm
of David. It is apparent to me that Psalm was burlesqu'd by a Popish rhymester.
Let rhymeing persons who have been brought up Protestants be otherwise what
they will, let them be rakes, let 'em be scoundrels, let 'em be Atheists, yet
education has made an invincible impression on them in behalf of the sacred
writings. But a Popish rhymester has been brought up with a contempt for those
sacred writings, Now show me another Popish rhymester but he." This manner of
argumentation is usual with Mr. Dennis; he has employed the same against Sir
Richard himself in a like charge of Impiety and Irreligion. "All Mr.
Blackmore's celestial Machines, as they cannot be defended so much as by
common-receiv'd opinion, so are directly contrary to the doctrine of the Church
of England: For the visible descent of an Angel must be a miracle. Now it is
the doctrine of the Church of England that miracles had ceased a long time
before Prince Arthur came into the world. Now if the doctrine of the Church of
England be true, as we are obliged to believe, then are all the celestial
machines in Prince Arthur unsufferable, as wanting not only human but divine
probability. But if the machines are sufferable, that is if they have so much
as divine probability, then it follows of necessity that the doctrine of the
Church is false: So I leave it to every impartial Clergyman to consider, etc."
Preface to the Remarks on Prince Arthur.

V. 258. As morning-pray'r and flagellation end.] It is between eleven and
twelve in the morning, after church service, that the criminals are whipped in
Bridewell. -- This is to mark punctually the Time of the day: Homer does it by
the circumstance of the Judges rising from court, or of the Labourer's dinner;
our author by one very proper both to the Persons and the Scene of his Poem;
which we may remember commenced in the evening of the Lord mayor's day: The
first book passed in that night; the next morning the games begin in the
Strand, thence along Fleetstreet (places inhabited by Booksellers) then they
proceed by Bridewell toward Fleetditch, and lastly through Ludgate to the City
and the Temple of the Goddess.

V. 261. The Diving*] "This I fancy (says a great Enemy to the Poem) is a Game
which no body could ever think of but the Author: however, it is worked up
admirably well, especially in those lines where he describes Eusden (he should
say Smedley) rising up again." ESSAY on the DUNCIAD, p. 19.

V 264, 265, 266. dash through thick and thin -- Love of dirt -- dark dexterity.]
The three chief qualifications of Party-writers; to stick at nothing, to
delight in flinging dirt, and to slander in the dark by guess.

V. 268. The Weekly Journals.] Papers of news and scandal intermixed, on
different sides and parties, and frequently shifting from one side to the
other, called the London Journal, Mist's Journal, British Journal, Daily
Journal, etc. the concealed writers of which for some time were Oldmixon,
Room, Arnall, Concanen, and others; persons never seen by our author.

V. 270. A peck of coals a-piece.] Our indulgent Poet, whenever he has spoken
of any dirty or low work, constantly puts us in mind of the poverty of the
offenders, as the only extenuation of such practices. Let any one but remark,
when a Thief, a Pickpocket, a Highwayman, or a Knight of the Post is spoken of,
how much our hatred to those characters is lessened, if they add a needy Thief,
a poor Pickpocket, a hungry Highwayman, a starving Knight of the Post, etc.

V. 271. In naked majesty Oldmixon stands.] Mr. JOHN OLDMIXON, next to Mr.
Dennis the most ancient Critic of our Nation: an unjust censurer of Mr. Addison
in his Prose Essay on Criticism, whom also in his imitation of Bouhours (called
the Arts of Logic and Rhetoric) he misrepresents in plain matter of fact: for
in p. 45, he cites the Spectator as abusing Dr. Swift by name, where there is
not the least hint of it; And in p. 304, is so injurious as to suggest, that
Mr. Addison himself writ that Tatler, No. 43, which says of his own Simile,
that "'it is as great as ever entered into the mind of man." In Poetry, he was
not so happy as laborious, and therefore uncharacterized by the Tatler, No. 62,
by the name of Omicron the Unborn Poet." Curl, Key, p. 13. "He writ Dramatic
works, and a volume of Poetry, consisting of heroic Epistles, etc. some whereof
are very well done," says that great Judge Mr. Jacob, in his Lives of Poets,
Vol. 2. p. 303.

In his Essay on Criticism, and the Arts of Logic and Rhetoric, he frequently
reflects on our Author. But the top of his character was a Perverter of
History, in that seadalous one of the Stuarts in folio, and his Critical
History of England, 2 vol. 8vo. Being employed by Bishop Kennet in publishing
the Historians in his Collection, he falsified Daniel's Cronicle in numberless
places. Yet this very man, in the Preface to the first of these, advanced a
particular Fact to charge three eminent Persons of falsifying the Lord
Clarendon's History; which Fact has been disproved by the Bishop of Rochester,
then the only survivor of them; and the particular part produced since, after
almost ninety years, in that noble Author's own hand. He was all his life a
virulent Party-writer for hire, and received his reward in a small place which
he yet enjoys.

He is here likened to Milo, in allusion to that verse of Ovid, -- Fletque
Milon senior, cum spectat inanes
Herculeis similes, fluidos pendere lacertos;
either with regard to his Age, or because he was undone by trying to pull to
pieces an Oak that was too strong for him. -- Remember Milo's end,
Wedged in that timber which he strove to rend.
Lord Rose.

V. 279. Next Smedley dived.] In the surreptitious editions, this whole Episode
was applied to an initial letter E --, by whom if they meant the Laureate,
nothing was more absurd, no part agreeing with his character. The Allegory
evidently demands a person dipped in scandal, and deeply immersed in dirty
work: whereas Mr. Eusden's writings rarely offended but by their length and
multitude, and accordingly are taxed of nothing else in book 1. verse 102. But
the person here mentioned, an Irishman, was author and publisher of many
scurrilous pieces, a weekly Whitehall Journal in the year 1722, in the name of
Sir James Baker, and particularly whole volumes of Billingsgate against Dr.
Swift and Mr. Pope, called Gulliveriana and Alexandriana, printed in 8vo. 1728.

V. 283. Then * essayed.] A Gentleman of genius and spirit, who was secretly
dipped in some papers of this kind, on whom our Poet bestows a panegyric instead
of a Satire, as deserving to be better employed than in Party-quarrels and
Personal-invectives.

V. 287. Concanen.] MATTHEW CONCANEN, an Irishman bred to the law: he abused
Dr. Swift, to whom he had obligations, to which Smedley (one of his brethren in
enmity to Swift) alludes in his Metamorphosis of Scriblerus, p. 7. accusing him
of having "boasted of what he had not written, but others had revised and done
for him.". He was author of several dull and dead scurrilities in the British
and London Journals, and in a paper called the Speculatist. In a pamphlet
called a Supplement to the Profund, he dealt very unfairly with our poet, not
only frequently imputing to him Mr. Broome's verses, (for which he might indeed
seem in some degree accountable, having corrected what that gentleman did) but
those of the Duke of Buckingham, and others. To this rare piece, somebody
humourously caused him to take for his motto, De profundis clamavi. He was
since a hired Scribler in the Daily Courant, where he poured forth much
Billingsgate against the Lord Bolingbroke and others; after which this man was
surprizingly promoted to administer Justice and Law in Jamaica.

Ver. 293. Arnall.] WILLIAM ARNALL bred an Attorney, was a perfect Genius in
this Art: He began under twenty with furious Party-papers: then succeeded
Concanen in the British Journal. At the first publication of the Dunciad, he
prevailed on the Author not to give him his due place in it, by a letter
professing his detestation of all such practices as his predecessor's: but
since, by the most unexampled insolence, impudent Billingsgate language, and
personal abuse of several great men the Poet's particular friends, he has most
amply deserved a Niche in the Temple of Infamy. Witness a paper called the Free
Briton, a Dedication entitled, To the Genuine Blunderer, 1732, and many others.
He writ for hire, and valued himself upon it; but frequently through his fury, or
folly, exceeded all the bounds of his Commission, and obliged his honorable
Patron to disavow his scurrilities.

V. 312. As Hylas fair.] Who was ravished by the water-nymphs and drawn into
the river. The story is told at large by Valerius Flaccus, Lib. 3. Argon. See
Virg. Ecl. 6.

V. 314, etc. A branch of Styx, etc.] Homer, Il. 2. Catal. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Of the land of Dreams in the same region, he makes mention, Odyss. 24. See
also Lucian's true history. Lethe and the Land of Dreams allegorically
represent the Stupefaction and visionary Madness of Poets equally dull and
extravagant. Of Alphaeus his waters gliding secretly under the sea of Pisa, to
mix with those of Arethuse in Sicily, vid. Moschus Idyl. 8. Virg. Ecl. 10. Sic
tibi, cum fluctus subter labere Sicanos,
Doris amara suam non intermisceat undam.
And again, Aen. 3. -- Alphaeum, fama est, huc Elidis amnem
Occultas egisse vias, subter mare, qui nunc
Ore Arethusa tuo, Siculis confunditur undis.


V. 323. Tailor, sweet Swan of Thames.] John Tailor the Water Poet, an honest
man, who owns he learned not so much as his Acccidence: a rare example of
modesty in a Poet! I must confess I do want eloquence,
And never scarce did learn my Accidence,
For having got from Possum to Posset,
I there was gravelled, could no farther get.
He wrote fourscore books in the reign of James I. and Charles I. and
afterward (like Edw. Ward) kept an Alehouse in Long Acre. He died in 1654.

V. 324. And Shadwell nods the poppy.] Shadwell took Opium for many years, and
died of too large a dose of it, in the year 1692.

V. 325. While Milbourn.] Luke Milbourn a Clergyman, the fairest of Critics;
who when he wrote against Mr. Dryden's Virgil, did him justice, in printing at
the same time his own Translations of him, which were intolerable. His manner
of writing has a great resemblance with that of the Gentlemen of the Dunciad
against our author, as will be seen in the Parallel of Mr. Dryden and him.
Appen.

V. 332. Gates of Lud.] "King Lud repairing the City, called it after his own
name, Lud's town; the strong gate which he built in the west part he likewise
for his own honor named Ludgate. In the year 1260, this gate was beautified
with images of Lud and other Kings. Those images in the reign of Edward VI had
their heads smitten off, and were otherwise defaced by unadvised folks. Queen
Mary did set new heads upon their old bodies again. The 28th of Queen Elizabeth
the same gate was clean taken down, and newly and beautifully builded with
images of Lud and others as before." STOW's Survey of London.

V. 342. See Hom. Odyss. 12. Ovid. Met. 1.

V. 356. Through* the long, heavy, painful page, etc.] "All these lines very well
imitate the slow drowziness with which they proceed. It is impossible for any
one who has a poetical ear to read them, without perceiving the heaviness that
lags in the verse, to imitate the action it describes. The Simile of the Pines
is very just and well-adapted to the subject." ESSAY on the DUNC. p. 21.

V. 365. Thrice Budgel aimed to speak.] Famous for his speeches on many
occasions about the South Sea Scheme, etc. "He is a very ingenious gentleman,
and has written some excellent epilogues to plays, and one small piece on
love, which is very pretty." JACOB Lives of Poets, vol. 2. p. 289. But this
gentleman has since made himself much more eminent and personally well-known to
the greatest Statesmen of all parties, in this nation.

V. 367. Toland and Tindal.] Two persons not so happy as to be obscure, who
writ against the Religion of their Country. The surreptitious editions placed
here the name of a Gentleman, who, though no great friend to the Clergy, is a man
of morals and ingenuity. Tindal was Author of the Rights of the Christian
Church: He also wrote an abusive pamphlet against Earl S --, which was
suppressed while yet in manuscript by an eminent Person then out of the
Ministry, to whom he showed it expecting his approbation: This Doctor
afterward published the same piece, mutatis mutandis, against that very Person.

V. 368. Christ's No Kingdom, etc.] This is said by CURL, Key to Dunc. to
allude to a sermon of a reverend Bishop.

V. 379. Centlivre.] Mrs. Susanna Centlivre, wife to Mr. Centlivre, Yeoman of
the Mouth to his Majesty. She writ many Plays, and a song (says Mr. Jacob, vol.
1. p. 32.) before she was seven years old. She also writ a Ballad against Mr.
Pope's Homer, before he begun it.

V. 381. Boyer the State, and Law the Stage gave over.] A. Boyer, a voluminous
compiler of Anuals, Political Collections, etc. -- William Law, A. M. wrote
with great zeal against the Stage, Mr. Dennis answered with as great. Their
books were printed in 1726. Mr. Law affirmed that "the Playhouse is the Temple
of the Devil, the peculiar pleasure of the Devil, where all they who go, yield
to the Devil, where all the Laughter is a laughter among Devils, and that all
who are there are hearing Music in the very Porch of Hell." To which Mr.
Dennis replied, that "there is every jot as much difference between a true
Play, and one made by a Poetaster, as between Two religious books, the Bible
and the Alcoran." Then he demonstrates that "All those who had written against
the Stage were Jacobites and Nonjurors, and did it always at a time when
something was to be done for the Pretender. Mr. Collier published his Short
View, when France declared for the Chevalier; and his Dissuasive just at the
great Storm, when the devastation which that Hurricane wrought had amazed and
astonished the minds of men, and made them obnoxious to melancholy and
desponding thoughts: Mr. Law took the opportunity to attack the Stage upon the
great preparations he heard were making abroad, and which the Jacobites
flattered themselves were designed in their favor: And as for Mr. Bedford's
Serious Remonstrance, though I know nothing of the time of publishing it, yet I
dare to lay odds it was either upon the Duke D'Aumont's being at
Somerset House, or upon the late Rebellion." DENNIS, Stage defended against Mr.
Law, page* ult.

V. 383. Norton] Norton de Foe, offspring of the famous Daniel. Fortes creantur
fortibus. One of the authors of the Flying-Post, in which well-bred work Mr. P.
had sometime the honor to be abused with his betters, and of many hired
scurrilities and daily papers to which he never set his name, in a due fear of
Laws and Cudgels.

V. 394. And to mere mortals seemed a Priest in drink.] This line presents us
with an excellent moral, that we are never to pass judgment merely by
appearances; a lesson to all men who may happen to see a reverend person in the
like situation, not to determine too rashly: since not only the Poets
frequently describe a Bard inspired in this posture, (On Came 's fair bank where
Chaucer lay inspired, and the like) but an eminent Casuist tells us, that if a
Priest be seen in any indecent action, we ought to account it a deception of
sight, or illusion of the Devil, who sometimes takes upon him the shape of holy
men on purpose to cause scandal. How little the profane author of the
Characters of the Times printed 1728, regarded this admonition, appears from
these words page 26. (speaking of the reverend Mr. Laurence Eusden) "A most
worthy successor of Tate in the Laureatship, a man of insuperable modesty,
since certainly it was not his Ambition that led him to seek this illustrious
post, but his Affection to the Perquisite of Sack." SCRIBLERUS.

V. 395. Fleet.] A Prison for insolvent Debtors on the bank of the Ditch.

End of the SECOND BOOK.
V. 1. High on a gorgeous seat.] Parody of Milton, lib. 2. High on a throne of
royal state, that far
Outshone the wealth of Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her Kings barbaric pearl and gold,
Satan exalted sat, --


V. 31. A poet's form she placed before their eyes.] This is what Juno does to
deceive Turnus, Aen. 10. Tum dea nube cava, tenuem fine viribus umbram,
In faciem Aeneae (visu mirabile monstrum)
Dardaniis ornat telis, clypeumque jubasque
Divini assimilat capitis -- Dat inania verba,
Dat fine mente sonum --
The reader will observe how exactly some of these verses suit with their
allegorical application here to a plagiary: There seems to me a great propriety
in this Episode, where such an one is imag'd by a phantom that deludes the
grasp of the expecting Bookseller.

V. 35. But such a bulk as no twelve bards.] Virg. 12* Vix illud lecti bis sex
--
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus.


V. 54, etc. Something like this is in Homer Il. 10. ver. 220. of Diomed. Two
different manners of the same author in his similies are also imitated in the
two following; the first of the Bailiff is short, unadorned, and (as the
Critics well know) from familiar life; the second of the Waterfowl more
extended, picturesque, and from rural life. The 55th verse is likewise a
literal translation of one in Homer.

V. 56. So take the hindmost Hell.] Horace de Art. Occupet extremum scabies;
mihi turpe relinqui est.


V. 60. On feet, and wings, and flies, and wades, and hops;
So laboring on, with shoulders, hands, and head.]
Milton, lib. 2. -- So eagerly the fiend
Over bog, over steep, through strait, rough, dense or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.


V. 69. Here fortuned Curl to slide.] Virg. Aen. 5. of Nisus. Labitur infelix,
caesis ut forte juvencis
Fusus humum viridesque super madefecerat herbas --
Concidit, immundoque fimo, sacroque cruore.


V. 70. And Bernard! Bernard!] Virg. Ecl, 6. -- Ut littus, Hyla, Hyla, omne
sonaret.


V. 79. See Lucian's Icaro-Menippus; where this fiction is more extended.

V. id. A place there is, betwixt earth, air and seas.] Ovid. Met. 12. Orb
locus medio est, inter terrasque, fretumque,
Coelestesque plagas --


V. 88. Alludes to Homer, Iliad. 5. (...)
(...)
A stream of nectarous humor issuing flowed,
Sanguin, such as celestial spirits may bleed. Milton.


V. 89. Cloacina.] The Roman Goddess of the common-shores. V. 93. Often as he
fished, etc.] See the preface to Swift and Pope's Miscellanies. V. 96. As oil'd
with magic juices.] Alluding to the opinion that there are ointments used by
witches to enable them to fly in the air, etc. V. 105. Nor heeds the brown
dishonours of his face.] Virg. Aen. 5. -- faciem ostentabat, and udo
Turpia membra fimo --


V. 130. A shapeless shade, etc.] Virg. Aen. 6. -- Effugit imago,
Par levibus ventis, volucrique simillima somno.


V. 106. His papers light, fly diverse, tossed in air.] Virg 6. of the Sybils
leafs, Carmina -- turbata volent rapidis ludibria ventis.
The persons mentioned in the next line are some of those, whose writings,
epigrams or jests he had owned. See note on verse 46.

V. 133. -- piteous of his case,
Yet smiling at his ruful length of face.)
Virg. Aen. 5. -- Risit pater optimus illi.
Me liceat casum miserare insontis amici --
Sic fatus, Gaetuli tergum immane leonis, etc.


V. 143. Himself among the storied chiefs he spies, etc.] Virg. Aen. 1. Se
quoque principibus permixtum agnovit Achivis --
Consiitit and lacrymans. Quis jam locus, inquis, Achate!
Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris?


V. 148. And the fresh vomit run for ever green.] A parody on these of a late
noble author. His bleeding arm had furnished all their rooms,
And run for ever purple in the looms.


V. 150. Two babes of love close clinging to her waste.] Virg. Aen. 5. Cressa
genus, Pholoe, geminique sub ubere nati.


V. 155. -- Yon Juno --
With cow-like udders, and with ox like eyes.]
In allusion to Homer's (...).

V. 157. This China Jordan, etc.] Virg. Aen. 5. Tertius, Argolica hac galea
contentus abito.


V. ibid. This China Jordan.] In the games of Homer Il. 23. there are set
together as prizes, a Lady and a Kettle; as in this place Mrs. Haywood and a
Jordan. But there the preference in value is given to the Kettle, at which Mad.
Dacier is justly displeased: Mrs. H. here is treated with distinction, and
acknowledged to be the more valuable of the two.

V. 161. This on his manly confidence relies, That on his vigor.] Vir. Aen. 5.
-- Ille melior motu, fretusque juventa,
Hic membris and mole valens.


V. 165. So Jove's bright bow -- Sure sign -- ] The words of Homer of the
Rainbow, in Iliad 11. (...)
(...)
que le fills de Saturn a fondez dans les nues, pour etre
dans tous les ages un sign a tous les mortels.
Dacier.

V. 173. So, (famed like thee for turbulence and horns,) Eridanus.] Virgil
mentions these two qualifications of Eridanus, Geor. 4. Et gemina auratus
taurino cornua vultu,
Eridanus, quo non alius per pinguia culta
In mare purpureum violentior effluit amnis.
The Poets fabled of this river Eridanus, that it flowed through the skies.
Denham, Cooper's Hill. Heaven her Eridanus no more shall boast,
Whose fame like thine in lesser currents lost,
Thy nobler stream shall visit Jove's abodes,
To shine among the stars, and bathe the Gods.


V. 215. To move, to raise, etc. -- Let others aim -- It Is yours to shake,
etc.] Virgil. Aen. 6. Excudent alii spirantia mollius era,
Credo equidem, vivos ducant e marmore vultus, etc.
Tu, regere imperio populos, Roman, memento,
Hoe tibi erunt arts --


V. 233. -- A Cat-call each shall win, etc. Virg. Ecl. 3. Non nostrum inter vos
tantas componere lites,
Et vitula tu dignus, and hic --


V. 237. A Simile with a long tail, in the manner of Homer.

V. 248. -- bray back to him again.] A figure of speech taken from Virgil, Et
vox assensu nemorum ingeminata remugit.
Geor. 3. He hears his numerous herds low over the plain,
While neighboring hills low back to them again.
Cowley. The poet here celebrated, Sir R. B delighted much in the word Bray,
which he endeavored to ennoble by applying it to the sound of Armor, War,
etc. In imitation of him, and strengthened by his authority, our author has
here admitted it into Heroic poetry.

V. 250. Prick all their ears up, and forget to graze.] Virg. Ecl. 8. Immemor
herbarum quos est mirata juvenca.
The progress of the sound from place to place, and the scenary here of the
bordering regions, Tot'nam-fields, Chancery Lane, the Thames, Westminster Hall,
and Hungerford*stairs, are imitated from Virg. Aen. 7. on the sounding the horn
of Alecto.

Audiit and Triviae long lacus, audiit amnis
Sulphurea Nar albus aqua, fontesque Velini, etc.
V. 261. The King of dykes! etc.] Virg. Fluviorum rex Eridanus,
-- quo non alius, per pingvia culta,
In mare purpureum violentior influit amnis.


V. 281. -- and call on Smedley lost, etc.] Lord Roscommon's translation of
Virgil's 6th Eclog.
Alcides wept in vain for Hylas lost,
Hylas in vain resounds through all the coast.


V. 290. Not everlasting Blackmore.] Virg. Aen. 5. Nec bonus Eurytion praelato
invidit honori, etc.


V. 302. -- in majesty of mud.] Milton, -- in majesty of darkness round
Circled --


V. 305. Greater he looks, and more than mortal stares.] Virg. 6. of the Sybil.
-- majorque videri
Nec mortale sonans --


V. 321. How to the banks, etc.] Virg, Ecl. 6. Tum canit errantem Permessi ad
flumina Gallum,
Utque viro Phoebi chorus assurexerit omnis;
Ut Linus haec illi divino carmine pastor,
Floribus atque apio crines ornatus amaro,
Dixerit, Hos tibi dant calamos, en accipe, Musae.
Ascraeo quos ante seni -- etc.


V. 348. The same their talents -- Each prompt, etc.] Virg. Ecl. 7. Ambo
florentes aetatibus, Arcades ambo,
Et certare pares, and respondere parati.


V. 350. Smit with the love of sacred song --
Milt.

V. 352. The heroes sit; the vulgar form a ring.] Ovid. M. 13 Consedere duces,
and vulgi stante corona.


V. 378. Over all the sea of heads.] Blackm. Job. A waving sea of heads was
round me spread,
And still fresh streams the gazing deluge fed.


V. 386. And all was bush'd, as Folly's self lay dead.]Alludes to Dryden's
verse in the Indian Emperor, All things are bush'd, as Nature's self lay dead.


THE DUNCIAD.
ARGUMENT to BOOK the THIRD.
After the other persons are disposed in their proper places of rest, the
Goddess transports the King to her Temple, and there lays him to slumber with
his head on her lap; a position of mavelous virtue, which causes all the
visions of wild enthusiasts, projectors, politicians, inamorato's,
castle-builders, chemists and poets. He is immediately carried on the wings of
Fancy to the Elyzian shade, where on the banks of Lethe the souls of the dull
are dipped by Bavius, before their entrance into this world. There he is met by
the ghost of Settle, and by him made acquainted with the wonders of the place,
and with those which he is himself destined to perform. He takes him to a Mount
of Vision, from whence he shows him the past triumphs of the Empire of Dullness,
then the present, and lastly the future: How small a part of the world was ever
conquered by Science, how soon those conquests were stopped, and those very
nations again reduced to her dominion. Then distinguishing the Island of Great
Britain, shows by what aids, and by what persons, it shall be forthwith brought
to her empire. These he causes to pass in review before his eyes, describing
each by his proper figure, character, and qualifications. On a sudden the Scene
shifts, and a vast number of Miracles and prodigies appear, utterly surprising
and unknown to the King himself, till they are explained to be the wonders of
his own reign now commencing. On this subject Settle breaks into a
congratulation, yet not unmixed with concern, that his own times were but the
types of these; He prophecies bow first the nation shall be overrun with
Farces, Opera's, and Shows; and the throne of Dullness advanced over both the
Theaters; Then how her sons shall preside in the seats of Arts and sciences,
till in conclusion all shall return to their original Chaos* A scene, of which
the present Action of the Dunciad is but a Type or Foretaste, giving a Glimpse
or Pisgah-sight of the promised Fulnefs of her Glory; the Accomplishment
whereof will, in all probability, hereafter be the Theme of many other and
greater Dunciads.

BUT in her Temple's last recess enclosed,
On Dullness lap the Anointed head reposed.
Him close she curtain'd round with vapors blue,
And soft besprinkled with Cimmerian dew.
Then raptures high the seat of sense overflow,
Which only heads refined from reason know.
Hence, from the straw where Bedlam's Prophet nods,
He hears loud Oracles, and talks with Gods:
Hence the Fool's paradise, the Statesman's scheme,
The air-built Castle, and the golden Dream,
The Maid's romantic wish, the Chymist's flame,
And Poet's vision of eternal fame.
And now, on Fancy's easy wing conveyed,
The King descended to the Elyzian Shade.
There, in a dusky vale where Lethe rolls,
Old Bavius sits, to dip poetic Souls,
And blunt the sense, and fit it for a scull
Of solid proof, impenetrably dull:
Instant when dipped, away they wing their flight,
Where Brown and Mears unbar the gates of Light,
Demand new bodies, and in Calf's array,
Rush to the world, impatient for the day.
Millions and millions on these banks he views,
Thick as the stars of night, or morning dews,
As thick as bees over vernal blossoms fly,
As thick as eggs at Ward in Pillory.
Wondering he gazed: When lo! a Sage appears,
By his broad shoulders known, and length of ears,
Known by the band and suit which Settle wore,
(His only suit) for twice three years before:
All as the vest, appeared the wearers frame,
Old in new state, another yet the same.
Bland and familiar as in life, begun
Thus the great Father to the greater Son.
Oh born to see what none can see awake!
Behold the wonders of the oblivious Lake.
Thou, yet unborn, have touched this sacred shore;
The hand of Bavius drenched thee over and over.
But blind to former, as to future Fate,
What mortal knows his pre-existent state?
Who knows how long, thy transmigrating soul
Might from Boeotian to Boeotian roll!
How many Dutchmen she vouchsafed to third?
How many stages through old Monks she rid?
And all who since, in mild benighted days,
Mixed the Owl's ivy with the Poet's bays?
As man's maeanders to the vital spring
Roll all their tides, then back their circles bring;
Or whirligigs, twirl'd round by skilful swain,
Suck the thread in, then yield it out again:
All nonsense thus, of old or modern date,
Shall in thee center, from thee circulate.
For this, our Queen unfolds to vision true
Thy mental eye, for thou have much to view:
Old scehes of glory, times long cast behind
Shall first recalled, rush forward to thy mind;
Then stretch thy sight over all her rising reign,
And let the past and future fire thy brain.
Ascend this hill, whose cloudy point commands
Her boundless empire over seas and lands.
See round the Poles where keener spangles shine,
Where spices smoke beneath the burning Line,
(Earth's wide extremes) her sable flag displayed;
And all the nations covered in her shade!
Far eastward cast thine eye, from whence the Sun
And orient Science at a birth begun.
One god-like Monarch all that pride confounds,
He, whose long wall the wandering Tartar bounds.
Heavens! what a pyle? whole ages perish there:
And one bright blaze turns Learning into air.
Thence to the south extend thy gladden'd eyes;
There rival flames with equal glory rise,
From shelves to shelves see greedy Vulcan roll,
And lick up all their Physic of the soul.
How little, mark! that portion of the ball,
Where, faint at best, the beams of Science sall:
Soon as they dawn, from Hyperborean skies,
Embodied dark, what clouds of Vandals rise!
Lo where Moeotis sleeps, and hardly flows
The freezing Tanais through a waste of snows,
The North by myriads pours her mighty sons,
Great nurse of Goths, of Alans, and of Huns.
See Alaric's stern port, the martial frame
Of Genseric! and Attila's dread name!
See, the bold Ostrogoths on Latium fall;
See, the fierce Visigoths on Spain and Gaul.
See, where the morning gilds the palmy shore
(The soil that arts and infant letters bore)
His conquering tribes the Arabian prophet draws,
And saving Ignorance enthrones by Laws.
See Christians, Jews, one heavy sabbath keep;
And all the Western world believe and sleep.
Lo Rome her self, proud mistress now no more
Of arts, but thundering against heathen lore;
Her gray-hair'd Synods damning books unread,
And Bacon trembling for his brazen head;
Padua with sighs beholds her Livy burn,
And even the Antipodes Vigilius mourn.
See, the Cirque falls! the unpillar'd Temple nods!
Streets paved with Heroes, Tyber choked with Gods!
Till Peter's keys some christened Jove adorn,
And Pan to Moses lends his pagan horn;
See graceless Venus to a Virgin turned,
Or Phidias broken, and Apelles burned.
Behold yon' Isle, by Palmers, Pilgrims trod,
Men bearded, bald, cowl'd, uncowl'd, shod, unshod,
Peeled, patched, and pyebald, linsey-woolsey brothers,
Grave mummers! sleeveless some, and shirtless others.
That once was Britain -- Happy! had she seen
No fiercer sons, had Easter never been.
In peace, great Goddess! ever be adored;
How keen the war, if Dullness draw the sword?
Thus visit not thy own! on this blessed age
Oh spread thy Influence, but restrain thy Rage!
And see! my son, the hour is on its way,
That lifts our Goddess to imperial sway*
This favorite Isle, long severed from her reign,
Dove like, she gathers to her wings again.
Now look through Fate! behold the scene she draws!
What aids, what armies, to assert her cause?
See all her progeny, illustrious sight!
Behold, and count them, as they rise to light.
As Berecynthia, while her offspring vye
In homage, to the Mother of the sky,
Surveys around her in the blessed abode
A hundred sons, and every son a God:
Not with less glory mighty Dullness crowned
Shall take through Grubstreet her triumphant round,
And her Parnassus glancing over at once,
Behold a hundred sons, and each a dunce.
Mark first that youth who takes the foremost place,
And thrusts his person full into your face.
With all thy father's virtues blessed, be born!
And a new Cibber shall the Stage adorn.
A second see, by meeker manners known,
And modest as the maid that sips alone;
From the strong fate of drams if thou get free,
Another Dursey, Ward! shall sing in thee.
Thee shall each Alehouse, thee each Gill-house mourn,
And answ'ring Gin-shops sowrer sighs return!
Lo next two slip-shod Muses traipse along,
In lofty madness, meditating song,
With tresses staring from poetic dreams,
And never washed, but in Castalia's streams:
Haywood, Centlivre, glories of their race!
Lo Horneck's fierce, and Roome's funeral face;
Lo sneering Good, half malice and half whim,
A fiend in glee, ridiculously grim.
Jacob, the scourge of Grammar, mark with awe,
Nor less revere him, blunderbuss of Law.
Lo Bond and Foxton, every nameless name,
All crowd, who foremost shall be damned to fame?
Some strain in rhyme; the Muses, on their racks,
Scream, like the winding of ten thousand Jacks:
Some free from rhyme or reason, rule or check,
Break Priscian's head, and Pegasus's neck;
Down, down they larum, with impetuous whirl,
The Pindars, and the Miltons, of a Curl.
Silence, ye wolves! while Ralph to Cynthia howls,
And makes Night hideous -- Answer him ye Owls!
Sense, speech, and measure, living tongues and dead,
Let all give way -- and Morris may be read.
Flow Welsted, flow! like thine inspirer Beer,
Though stale, not ripe; though thin, yet never clear;
So sweetly mawkish, and so smoothly dull;
Heady, not strong; and foaming, though not full.
Ah Dennis! Gildon ah! what ill-starr'd rage
Divides a friendship long consirm'd by age?
Blockheads with reason wicked wits abhor,
But fool with fool is barbarous civil war.
Embrace, embrace my sons! be foes no more!
Nor glad vile Poets with true Critics gore.
Behold yon Pair, in strict embraces joined;
How like in manners, and how like in mind!
Famed for good nature, Burnet, and for truth;
Ducket for pious passion to the youth.
Equal in wit, and equally polite,
Shall this a Pasquin, that a Grumbler write;
Like are their merits, like rewards they share,
That shines a Consul, this Commissioner.
"But who is he, in closet close y pent,
"Of sober face, with learned dust besprent?
Right well mine eyes arede the myster wight,
On parchment scraps y-fed, and Wormius hight.
To future ages may thy dullness last,
As thou preserv'st the dullness of the past!
There, dim in clouds, the poreing Scholiasts mark,
Wits, who like owls see only in the dark,
A Lumberhouse of books in every head,
For ever reading, never to be read!
But, where each Science lifts its modern type,
History her Pot, Divinity his Pipe,
While proud Philosophy repines to show
Dishonest sight! his breeches rent below;
Imbrown'd with native bronze, lo Henley stands,
Tuning his voice, and balancing his hands.
How fluent nonsense trickles from his tongue!
How sweet the periods, neither said nor sung!
Still break the benches, Henley! with thy strain,
While Kennet, Hare, and Gibson preach in vain.
Oh great Restorer of the good old Stage,
Preacher at once, and Zany of thy age!
Oh worthy thou of Aegypt's wise abodes,
A decent priest, where monkeys were the gods!
But fate with butchers placed thy priestly stall,
Meek modern faith to murder, hack, and mawl;
And bade thee live, to crown Britannia's praise,
In Toland's, Tindal's, and in Woolston's days.
Yet oh my sons! a father's words attend:
(So may the fates preserve the ears you lend)
It Is yours, a Bacon or a Lock to blame,
A Newton's Genius, or a Milton's flame:
But O! with one, immortal One dispense,
The source of Newton's Light, of Bacon's Sense!
Content, each Emanation of his fires
That beams on earth, each Virtue he inspires,
Each Art he prompts, each Charm he can create,
What-e'er he gives, are given for you to hate.
Persist, by all divine in Man un-aw'd,
But learn, ye Dunces! not to scorn your GOD.
Thus he, for then a ray of reason stole
Half through the solid darkness of his soul;
But soon the cloud returned -- and thus the Sire:
See now, what Dullness and her sons admire!
See what the charms that smite the simple heart
Not touched by nature, and not reached by art.
He looked, and saw a sable Sorc'rer rise,
Swift to whose hand a winged volume flies:
All sudden, Gorgons hiss, and dragons glare,
And ten-horn'd fiends and Giants rush to war.
Hell rises, Heaven descends, and dance on Earth,
Gods, imps, and monsters, music, rage, and mirth,
A fire, a jig, a battle, and a ball,
Till one wide conflagration swallows all.
Thence a new world to Nature's laws unknown,
Breaks out refulgent, with a heaven its own:
Another Cynthia her new journey runs,
And other planets circle other suns:
The forests dance, the rivers upward rise,
Whales sport in woods, and dolphins in the skies;
And last, to give the whole creation grace,
Lo! one vast Egg produces human race.
Joys fills his soul, joy innocent of thought:
What power, he cries, what power these wonders wrought?
Son! what thou seek'st is in thee. Look, and find
Each monster meets his likeness in thy mind.
Yet would thou more? In yonder cloud behold,
Whose sarcenet skirts are edged with flamy gold,
A matchless youth! His nod these worlds controuls,
Wings the red lightning, and the thunder rolls.
Angel of Dullness, sent to scatter round
Her magic charms over all unclassic ground:
Yon stars, yon suns, he rears at pleasure higher,
Illumes their light; and sets their flames on fire.
Immortal Rich! how calm he sits at ease
Mid snows of paper, and fierce hail of pease;
And proud his mistress' orders to perform,
Rides in the whirlwind, and directs the storm.
But lo! to dark encounter in mid air
New wizards rise: here Booth, and Cibber there:
Booth in his cloudy tabernacle shrin'd,
On grinning dragons Cibber mounts the wind:
Dire is the conflict, dismal is the din,
Here shouts all Drury, there all Lincoln's Inn;
Contending Theaters our empire raise,
Alike their labors, and alike their praise.
And are these wonders, Son, to thee unknown?
Unknown to thee? These wonders are thy own.
For works like these let deathless Journals tell,
"None but thy self can be thy parallel.
These, Fate reserved to grace thy reign divine,
Foreseen by me, but ah! withheld from mine.
In Lud's old walls though long I ruled renowned,
Far, as loud Bow's stupendous bells resound;
Though my own Aldermen conferred my bays,
To me committing their eternal praise,
Their full-fed Heroes, their pacific May'rs,
Their annual trophies, and their monthly wars:
Though long my Party built on me their hopes,
For writing pamphlets, and for roasting Popes;
(Different our parties, but with equal grace
The Goddess smiles on Whig and Tory race,
It Is the same rope at several ends they twist,
To Dullness, Ridpath is as dear as Mist.)
Yet lo! in me what authors have to brag on!
Reduced at last to hiss in my own dragon.
Avert it, heaven! that thou or Cibber ever
Should wag two serpent-tails in Smithfield fair.
Like the vile straw that is blown about the streets,
The needy Poet sticks to all he meets,
Coach'd, carted, trod upon, now loose, now fast,
And carried off in some Dog's tail at last.
Happier thy fortunes! like a rolling stone,
Thy giddy dullness still shall lumber on.
Safe in its heaviness, can never stray,
And licks up every blockhead in the way.
Thy dragons Magistrates and Peers shall taste,
And from each show rise duller than the last,
Till raised from Booths to Theater, to Court,
Her seat imperial, Dullness shall transport.
Already Opera prepares the way,
The sure forerunner of her gentle sway.
To aid her cause, if heaven thou can not bend,
Hell thou shall move; for Faustus is thy friend:
Pluto with Cato thou for her shall join,
And link the Mourning-Bride to Proserpine.
Grubstreet! thy fall should men and Gods conspire,
Thy stage shall stand, ensure it but from fire.
Another Aeschylus appears! prepare
For new abortions, all ye pregnant fair!
In flames, like Semeles, be brought to bed,
While opening hell spouts wildfire at your head.
Now Bavius take the poppy from thy brow,
And place it here! here all ye heroes bow!
This, this is he, foretold by ancient rhymes:
The Augustus, born to bring Saturnian times:
Beneath his reign, shall Eusden wear the bays,
Cibber preside, Lord-Chancellor of Plays.
Benson sole judge of architecture sit,
And Ambrose Philips be preferred for wit!
While naked mourns the Dormitory wall,
And Jones and Boyle's united labors fall,
While Wren with sorrow to the grave descends,
Gay dies unpension'd with a hundred friends,
Hibernian politics, O Swift, thy doom,
And Pope's translating three whole years with Broom.
Proceed great days! till learning fly the shore,
Till birch shall blush with noble blood no more,
Till Thames see Eton's sons for ever play,
Till Westminster's whole year be holiday;
Till Isis' elders reel, their pupils sport;
And Alma Matter lie dissolved in port!
Signs following signs lead on the mighty year;
See! the dull stars roll round and re-appear.
She comes! the cloud-compelling Power, behold!
With Night primaeval, and with Chaos old.
Lo! the great Anarch's ancient reign restored;
Light dies before her uncreating word.
As one by one, at dread Maedea's strain,
The sickening stars fade off the ethereal plain;
As Argus' eyes, by Hermes wand oppressed,
Closed one by one to everlasting rest;
Thus at her felt approach, and secret might,
Art after art goes out, and all is night.
See sculking Truth in her old cavern lie,
Secured by mountains of heaped casuistry:
Philosophy, that touched the heavens before,
Shrinks to her hidden cause, and is no more:
See Physic beg the Stagyrite's defense!
See Metaphysic call for aid on sense!
See mystery to Mathematics fly!
In vain! they gaze, turn giddy, rave, and die.
Thy hand, great Dullness! lets the curtain fall,
And universal darkness buries all.
Enough! enough! the raptured monarch cries;
And through the Ivory gate the vision flies.
REMARKS on BOOK the THIRD.
V. 5, 6, etc.] Hereby is intimated that the following Vision is no more than
the chimera of the dreamer's brain, and not a real or intended satire on the
present Age, doubtless more learned, more inlighten'd, and more abounding with
great Genius's in Divinity, Politics, and whatever arts and sciences, than all
the preceding. For fear of any such mistake of our Poet's honest meaning, he
has again at the end of the Vision repeated this monition, saying that it all
past through the Ivory gate, which (according to the Ancients) denotes Falsity.
SCRIBLERUS.

V. 16. Old Bavius sits.] Bavius was an ancient Poet, celebrated by Virgil for
the like cause as Tibbald by our author, though not in so christian-like a
manner: For heathenishly it is declared by Virgil of Bavius, that he ought to
be hated and detested for his evil works; Qui Bavium non odit; whereas we have
often had occasion to observe our Poet's great good nature and mercifulness,
through the whole course of this poem.

Mr. Dennis warmly contends that Bavius was no inconsiderable author; nay, that
"he and Maevius had (even in Augustus's days) a very formidable Party at Rome,
who thought them much superior to Virgil and Horace:" For (says he) "I cannot
believe they would have fixed that eternal brand upon them, if they had not
been coxcombs in more than ordinary credit." Rem. on Pr. Arthur, part 2. c. 1.
(An argument which if this Poem should last, will conduce to the honor of the
Gentlemen of the Dunciad.) In like manner he tells us of Settle, that "he was
once a formidable Rival to Mr. Dryden, and that in the University of Cambridge
there were those who gave him the preference." Mr. Welsted goes yet farther in
his behalf. "Poor Settle was formerly the Mighty Rival of Dryden: nay, for many
years, bore his reputation above him." Pref. to his Poems, 8vo. p. 51.] And Mr.
Milbourn cried out, "How little was Dryden able, even when his blood run high,
to defend himself against Mr. Settle!" Notes on Dryd. Virg. p. 175. These are
comfortable opinions! and no wonder some authors indulge them. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 20. Brown and Mears.] Booksellers, Printers for Tibbald, Mrs. Haywood, or
any body. -- The Allegory of the souls of the dull coming forth in the form of
books, dressed in calve's leather, and being let abroad in vast numbers by
Booksellers, is sufficiently intelligible.

V. 26. Ward in Pillory.] John Ward of Hackney, Esquire Member of Parliament, being
convicted of Forgery, was first expelled the House, and then sentenced to the
Pillory on the 17th of Febr. 1727. Mr. Curl (having likewise stood there) looks
upon the mention of such a Gentleman in a satire, as a great act of Barbarity,
Key to the Dunc. 3 d Edit. p. 16. And another Author thus reasons upon it.
Durgen, 8vo. page 11, 12. "How unworthy is it of Christian Charity to animate
the rabble to abuse a worthy man in such a situation? What could move the Poet
thus to mention a brave Sufferer, a gallant Prisoner, exposed to the view of
all mankind! It was laying aside his Senses, it was committing a Crime for
which the Law is deficient not to punish him! nay a Crime which Man can scarce
forgive, nor Time efface! Nothing surely could have induced him to it but being
bribed by a great Lady," (to whom this brave, honest, worthy Gentleman was
guilty of no offense but Forgery proved in open Court, etc.) But it is evident
this verse could not be meant of him; it being notorious, that no Eggs were
thrown at that Gentleman: Perhaps therefore it might be intended of Mr. Edward
Ward the Poet.

V. 28. And length of Ears.] This is a sophisticated reading. I think I may
venture to affirm all the Copyists are mistaken here: I believe I may say the
same of the Critics; Dennis, Oldmixon, Welsted, have passed it in silence: I
have also stumbled at it, and wondered how an error so manifest could escape
such accurate persons? I dare assert it proceeded originally from the
inadvertency of some Transcriber, whose head run on the Pillory mentioned two
lines before: It is therefore amazing that Mr. Curl himself should overlook it!
Yet that Scholiast takes not the least notice hereof. That the learned Mist
also read it thus, is plain, from his ranging this passage among those in which
our Author was blamed for personal Satire on a Man's Face (whereof doubtless he
might take the Ear to be a part;) So likewise Concanen, Ralph, the Flying-Post,
and all the Herd of Commentators. -- Tota armenta sequuntur.

A very little Sagacity (which all these Gentlemen therefore wanted) will
restore to us the true sense of the Poet, thus,

By his broad Shoulders known, and length of years. See how easy a change! of
one single letter! That Mr. Settle was old is most certain, but he was
(happily) a stranger to the Pillory. This Note partly Mr. THEOBALD, partly
SCRIBLERUS.

V. 42. Might from Boeotian, etc.] See the Remark on Book 1. V. 23.

V. 61, 62. See round the Poles, etc.] Almost the whole Southerrn and Northern
Continent wrapped in Ignorance.

V. 65.] Our author favors the opinion that all Sciences came from the Eastern
nations.

V. 69.] Chi Ho-am*ti, Emperor of China, the same who built the great wall
between China and Tartary, destroyed all the books and learned men of that
empire.

V. 73, 74.] The Caliph, Omar I. having conquered Egypt, caused his General to
burn the Ptolomaean library, on the gates of which was this inscription,
Medicina Animae, The Physic of the Soul.

V. 88. The Soil that arts and infant letters bore.] Phoenicia, Syria, etc.
where Letters are said to have been invented. In these countries Mahomet began
his conquests.

V. 93. Thundering against heathen lore.] A strong instance of this pious rage
is placed to Pope Gregory's account. John of Salisbury gives a very odd
Encomium to this Pope, at the same time that he mentions one of the strangest
effects of this excess of zeal in him. Doctor sanctissimus ille Gregorius, qui
melleo praedicationis imbre totam rigavit and inebriavit ecclesiam, non modo
Mathesin jussit ab aula; sen, ut traditur a majoribus, incendio dedit probatae
lectionis scripta, Palatinus quaecunque tenebat Apollo. And in another place:
Fertur beatus Gregorius bibliothecam combussisse gentilem; quo divinae paginae
gratior esset locus, and major authoritas, and diligentia studiosior.
Desiderius Archbishop of Vienna was sharply reproved by him for teaching
Grammar and Literature, and explaining the Poets; Because (says this Pope) in
uno se ore cum Jovis laudibus, Christi lauds non capiunt: Et quam grave
nefandumque sit, Episcopis canere quod nec Laico religioso conveniat, ipse
considera. He is said, among the rest to have burned Livy; Quia in
superstitionibus and sacris Romanorum perpetuo versatur. The same Pope is
accused by Vossius and others of having caused the noble monuments of the old
Roman magnificence to be destroyed, lest those who came to Rome should give
more attention to Triumphal Arches, etc. than to holy things. BAIL, Dict.

V. 101. Till Peter's keys some christened Jove adorn, etc.] After the
Government of Rome devolved to the Popes, their zeal was for some time exerted
in demolishing the heathen Temples and Statues, so that the Goths scarce
destroyed more monuments of Antiquity out of rage, than these out of devotion.
At length they spared some of the Temples by converting them to Churches, and
some of the Statues, by modifying them into images of Saints. In much later
times, it was thought necessary to change the statues of Apollo and Pallas on
the tomb of Sannazarius, into David and Judith; the Lyre easily became a Harp,
and the Gorgon's head turned to that of Holofernes.

V. 110. Happy -- had Easter never been.] Wars in England anciently, about the
right time of celebrating Easter.

V. 145. Haywood, Centlivre] See book 2.

V. 146. Lo Horneck 's fierce and Room 's, etc.] This stood in one edition And
M -- 's ruful face. But the person who supposed himself meant, applying to our
author in a modest manner, and with declarations of his innocence, he removed
the occasion of his uneasiness. At the same time promising to "do the like to
any other who could give him the same assurance, of having never writ
scurrilously against him."

V. 146. Horneck and Room.] These two are worthily coupled, being both
virulent Party-writers; and one would think prophetically, since immediately
after the publishing of this piece, the former dying, the latter succeeded him
in Honor and Employment. The first was Philip Horneck, Author of a
Billingsgate paper called The High German Doctor, in the 2d Vol. of which No.
14. you may see the regard he had for Mr. P --. Edward Room, son of an
Undertaker for Funerals in Fleetstreet, writ some of the papers called Pasquin,
and Mr. Ducket others; where by malicious Innuendos it was endeavored to
represent him guilty of malevolent practices with a great man then under
prosecution of Parliament. He since reflected on his, and Dr. Swift's
Miscellanies, in his paper called the Senator. Of this Man was made the
following Epigram.

You ask why Room diverts you with his jokes,
Yet, if he writes, is dull as other folks?
You wonder at it -- This Sir is the case,
The Jest is lost, unless he prints his Face.
V. 147. Good.] An ill-natured Critic who writ a Satire on our Author, called
The mock Aesop, and many anonymous Libels in Newspapers for hire.

V. 149 Jacob, the Scourge of Grammar, mark with awe.] "This Gentleman is son
of a considerable Maltsier of Romsey in Southamptonshire, and bred to the Law
under a very eminent Attorney: who, between his more laborious Studies, has
diverted himself with Poetry. He is a great admirer of Poets and their works,
which has occasioned him to try his genius that way -- He has writ in prose the
Lives of the Poets, Essays, and a great many Law Books, The Accomplished
Conveyancer, Modern Justice, etc." GILES JACOB of himself, Lives of Poets, Vol.
1. He very grossly, and unprovoked, abused in that book the Author's Friend Mr.
Gay,

V. 149. Jacob, the Scourge of Grammar, mark with awe; Nor less revere him
Blunderbuss of Law] There may seem some Error in these verses, Mr. Jacob having
proved our Author to have a Respect for him, by this undeniable Argument. "He
had once a Regard for my Judgment; otherwise he would never have subscribed Two
Guineas to me, for one small Book in Octavo." [Jacob 's Letter to Dennis, in
his Remarks on the Dunciad, page 49.] Therefore I should think the Appellation
of Blunderbuss to Mr. Jacob, like that of Thunderbolt to Scipio, was meant in
his honor.

Mr. Dennis argues the same way. "My writings having made great impression on
the minds of all sensible men, Mr. P -- repented, and to give proof of his
Repentance, subscribed to my two volumes of select Works -- and afterward to
my two volumes of Letters." [Ibid. page 40.] We should hence believe, the Name
of Mr. Dennis has also crept into this poem by some mistake. But from hence,
gentle reader! thou may beware, when thou give thy money to such Authors,
not to flatter thy self that thy motives are good nature, or Charity.

V. 151. Bond and Foxton.] Two inoffensive offenders against our poet; persons
unknown, but by being mentioned by Curl.

V. 159. Ralph.] James Ralph, a name inserted after the first editions, not
known to our author till he writ a swearing-piece called Sawney, very abusive
of Dr. Swift, Mr. Gay, and himself. These lines allude to a thing of his,
entitled Night, a Poem. Shakespeare, Hamlet.

-- Visit thus the glimpses of the Moon,
Making Night hideous --
This low writer constantly attended his own works with panegyricks in the
Journals, and once in particular praised himself highly above Mr. Addison, in
wretched remarks upon that Author's account of English Poets, printed in a
London Journal, Sept. 1723. He was wholly illiterate, and knew no language, not
even French. Being advised to read the rules of dramatic poetry before he began
a Play, he smiled and reploy'd, Shakespeare writ without rules. He ended at last
in the common Sink of all such writers, a political Newspaper, to which he was
recommended by his friend Arnall, and received a small pittance for pay.

V. 162. Morris.] Besaleel, See Book 2. ver. 118.

V. 163. Flow Welsted, etc.] Of this Author see the Remark on Book 2. v. 199.
But (to be impartial) add to it the following different character of him.

Mr. Welsted had, in his youth, raised so great expectations of his future
genius, that there was a kind of struggle between the most eminent in the two
Universities, which should have the honor of his education? To compound this,
he (civilly) became a member of both, and after having passed some time at the
one, he removed to the other. From thence he returned to town, where he became
the darling Expectation of all the polite Writers, whose encouragement he
acknowledged in his occasional poems, in a manner that will make no small part
of the Fame of his protectors. It also appears, from his Works, that he was
happy in the patronage of the most illustrious characters of the present age --
Encouraged by such a Combination in his favor, he -- published a book of
poems, some in the Ovidian, some in the Horatian manner, in both which the most
exquisit Judges pronounce he even rivaled his masters -- His Love-verses have
rescued that way of writing from contempt -- In his Translations, he has given
us the very soul and spirit of his author. His Ode -- his Epistle -- his Verses
-- his Love-tale -- all, are the most perfect things in all poetry, etc.
WELSTED of Himself. Char. of the Times, 8vo. 1728. page 23, 24.

V. 167. Ab Dennis, etc.] The reader, who has seen through the course of these
notes, what a constant attendance Mr. Dennis paid to our Author and all his
works, may perhaps wonder he should be mentioned but twice, and so flightly
touched, in this poem. But in truth he looked upon him with some esteem, for
having (more generously than all the rest) set his Name to such writings. He
was also a very old man at this time. By his own account of himself in Mr.
Jacoh's Lives, he must have been above threescore in the mayoralty of Sir
George Thorold in 1720, and has since happily lived ten years more. So that he
is already senior to Mr. Durfey, who hitherto of all our Poets enjoyed the
longest Bodily life.

V. Famed for good nature, Burnet, etc. Ducket for pious passion to the youth.]
The first of these was son of the late bishop of S. Author of a weekly paper
called The Grumbler, as the other was concerned in another called Pasquin, in
which Mr. Pope was abused with the late Duke of Buckingham and Bishop of
Rochester. They also joined in a piece against his first undertaking to
translate the Iliad, entitled Homerides, by Sir Iliad Dogrel, prtnted 1715. Mr.
Curl gives us this further account of Mr. Burnet. "He did himself write a
Letter to the E. of Hallifax, informing his Lordship (as he tells him) of what
he knew much better before: And he published in his own name several political
pamphlets, A certain information of a certain discourse, A second Tale of a
Tub, etc. All which it is strongly affirmed were written by Colonel Ducket."
CURL, Key, p. 17. But the author of the Characters of the Times tells us, these
political pieces were not approved of by his own Father, the Reverend Bishop.

Of the other works of these Gentlemen, the world has heard no more than it
would of Mr. Pope's, had their united laudable endeavors discouraged him from
his undertaking. How few good works had ever appeared (since men of true merit
are always the least presuming) had there been always such champions to stifle
them in their conception? And were it not better for the public, that a
million of monsters should come into the world, which are sure to die as soon
as born, than that the Serpents should strangle one Hercules in his cradle?

The Union of these two Authors gave occasion to this Epigram.

Burnet and Ducket, friends in spite,
Came hissing forth in Verse;
Both were so forward, each would write,
So dull, each hung an A --
Thus Amphisboena (I have read)
At either end assails;
None knows which leads, or which is led,
For both Heads are but Tails.
V. 173. Behold yon pair, in strict embraces joined.] Virg. Aen. 6. Illae autem
paribus quas fulgere cernis in armis,
Concordes animae --
And in the fifth, Euryalus, forma insignis viridique juventa,
Nisus amore pio pueri.


V. 167 -- for pious passion to the youth.] The verse is a literal translation
of Virgil, Nisus amore pio pueri -- and here, as in the original, applied to
Friendship: That between Nisus and Euryalus is allowed to make one of the most
amiable Episodes in the world, and surely was never interpreted in a perverse
sense. But it will astonish the reader to hear, that on no other occasion than
this line, a Dedication was written to this Gentleman to induce him to think
something further. "Sir, you are known to have all that affection for the
beautiful part of the creation which God and Nature designed. -- Sir, you have
a very sine Lady -- and, Sir, you have eight very sine Children, -- etc."
[Dedic. to Dennis Rem. on the Rape of the Lock.] The truth is, the poor
Dedicator's brain was turned upon this article; he had taken into his head that
ever since some books were written against the Stage, and since the Italian
Opera had prevailed, the nation was infected with a vice not fit to be named:
He went so far as to print upon the subject, and concludes his argument with
this remark, "that he cannot help thinking the Obscenity of Plays excusable at
this juncture; since, when that execrable sin is spread so wide, it may be of
use to the reducing men's minds to the natural desire of women." DENNIS, Stage
defended against Mr. Law, p. 20. Our author solemnly declared, he never heard
any creature but the Dedicator mention that Vice and this Gentleman together.

V. 184. Wormius hight.] Let not this name, purely fictitious, be conceited to
mean the learned Olaus Wormius; much less (as it was unwarrantably foisted into
the surreptitious editions) our own Antiquary Mr Thomas Herne, who had no way
aggrieved our Poet, but on the contrary published many curious tracts which he
has to his great contentment perused.

Most rightly are ancient Words here employed, in speaking of such who so
greatly delight in the same: We may say not only rightly, but wisely, yea
excellently, inasmuch as for the like practice the like praise is given to
Hopkins and Sternhold by Mr. Herne himself. [Glossar. to Rob. of Gloucester.]
Artic. BEHETT; "others say BEHIGHT, promised, and so it is used excellently
well by Tho. Norton in his translation into meter of the 116 Psalm, verse 14."

I to the Lord will pay my vows,
That I to him BEHIGHT.
"Where the modern innovators, not understanding the propriety of the word
(which is truly English, from the Saxon) have most unwarrantably altered it
thus, I to the Lord will pay my vows,
With joy and great delight.


V. ibid. -- HIGHT, "In Cumberland they say to hight, for to promife or vow;
but HIGHT usually signifies was called; and so it does in the North even to
this day, notwithstanding what is done in Cumberland." HERNE, ibid.

V. 183. AREDE.] Read or peruse; though sometimes used for counsel, "READ THY
READ, take thy counsel. Thomas Sternbolde in his translation of the first
Psalm into English meter, has wisely made use of this word, The man is blessed
that has not bent
To wicked READ his ear.
But in the last spurious editions of the singing Psalms the word READ is
changed into men. I say spurious editions, because not only here, but quite
throughout the whole book of Psalms, are strange alterations, all for the
worse! And yet the title page stands as it used to do! and all (which is
abominable in any book, much more in a sacred work) is ascribed to Thomas
Sternhold, John Hopkins, and others! I am confident, were Sternhold and Hopkins
now living, they would proceed against the innovators as cheats -- A liberty
which, to say no more of their intolerable alterations, ought by no means to be
permitted or approved of, by such as are for Uniformity and have any regard for
the old English Saxon tongue." HEARNE, Gloss. on Rob. of Gloc. Art. read.

I do herein agree with Mr. H. Little is it of avail to object, that such words
are become unintelligible. since they are truly English, men ought to
understand them; and such as are for Uniformity should think all alterations in
a language, strange, abominable, and unwarrantable. Rightly therefore, I say
again, has our Poet used ancient words, and poured them forth as a precious
ointment upon good old Wormius in this place. SCRIBLERUS.

V. ibid. Myster wight.] uncouth mortal.

V. 188. Wits, who like Owls, etc.] These few lines exactly describe the right
verbal Critic: He is to his author as a Quack to his patients, the more they
suffer and complain, the better he is pleased; like the famous Doctor of that
sort, who put up in his bills, He delighted in matters of difficulty. Some body
said well of these men, that their heads were Libraries out of order.

V. 195. -- Lo! Henley stands, etc.] J. Henly, the Orator; he preached on the
sundays upon Theological matters, and on the wednesdays upon all other
sciences. Each auditor paid one shilling. He declaimed some years unpunished
against the greatest persons, and occasionally did our Author that honor.
WELSTED, in Oratory Transactions, No. 1. published by Henley himself, gives the
following account of him. "He was born at Melton Mowbray in Leicestershire.
From his own Parish school he went to St. John's College in Cambridge. He began
there to be uneasy; for it shocked him to find he was commanded to believe
against his judgment in points of Religion, Philosophy, etc. for his genius
leading him freely to dispute all propositions, and call all points to account,
he was impatient under those fetters of the freeborn mind. -- Being admitted
to Priest's orders, he found the examination very short and superficial, and
that it was not necessary to conform to the Christian Religion in order either
to Deaconship or Priesthood." He came to town, and after having for some years
been a writer for Booksellers, he had an ambition to be so for Ministers of
state, The only reason he did not rise in the Church we are told, "was the envy
of others, and a disrelish entertained of him, because he was not qualified to
be a complete Spaniel." However he offered the service of his pen, in one
morning, to two great men of opinions and interests directly opposite; by both
of whom being rejected, he set up a new Project, and styled himself the
Restorer of ancient Eloquence. He thought "it as lawful to take a license from
the King and Parliament at one place, as another; at Hick's hall, as at
Doctors-Commons; so set up his Oratory in Newport-Market, Butcher-row." There
(says his friend) "he had the assurance to form a Plan which no mortal ever
thought of; he had success against all opposition; challenged his adversaries
to fair disputations, and none would dispute with him; writ, read and studied
twelve hours a day; composed three dissertations a week on all subjects;
undertook to teach in one year what Schools and Universities teach in five; was
not terrified by menaces, insults or satires, but still proceeded, matured his
bold scheme, and put the Church and all that, in danger." WELSTED, Narrative,
in Orat. Transact. No. 1.

After having stood some Prosecutions, he turned his rhetoric to Buffoonry upon
all public and private occurrences. All this passed in the same room; where
sometimes he broke jests, and sometimes that bread which he called the
Primitive Eucharist -- This wonderful person struck Medals, which he dispersed
as Tickets to his subscribers: The device, a Star rising to the meridian, with
this motto, AD SUMMA; and below, INVENIAM VIAM AUT FACIAM.

V. 208 Of Toland and Tindal, see book 2. Tho. Woolston was an impious madman,
who wrote in a most insolent style against the Miracles of the Gospel; in the
years 1726, etc.

V. 222. But learn, ye Dunces! not to scorn your God.] Virg. Aen. 6. puts this
precept into the mouth of a wicked man, as here of a stupid one, Discite
justitiam moniti, and non temnere divos!


V. 229. -- a sable Sorc'rer.] Dr. Faustus, the subject of a set of Farces,
which lasted in vogue two or three seasons, in which both Play Houses strove to
outdo each other in the Years 1726, 1727. All the extravagancies in the sixteen
lines following were introduced on the Stage, and frequented by persons of the
first quality in England, to the twentieth and thirtieth time.

V. 233. Hell rises, Heaven descends, and dance on earth.] This monstrous
absurdity was actually represented in Tibbald 's Rape of Proserpine.

V. 244. Lo! one vast Egg.] In another of these Farces Harlequin is hatched
upon the stage, out of a large Egg.

V. 257. Immortal Rich.] Mr. John Rich, Master of the Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, was the first that excelled this way.

V. 262. Booth and Cibber, two of the managers of the Theater in Drury Lane.

V. 272. None but thy self can be thy parallel.] A mavelous line of Theobald;
unless the Play called the Double Falsehood be (as he would have it believed)
Shakespeare's: But whether this line be his or not, he proves Shakespeare to have
written as bad, (which methinks in an author for whom he has a veneration
almost rising to idolatry, might have been concealed) as for example, Try what
Repentance can: what can it not?
But what can it, when one cannot repent?
-- For Cogitation
Resides not in the man who does not think, etc.
MIST'S JOURN.

But this last line is no man's nonsense but Tibbald's, as he might have found,
had he read the Context -- -- who does not think
My wife is slippery --
Cymbeline.

V. id.] The former Annotator seeming to be of opinion that the Double Falsehood
is not Shakespeare's; it is but justice to give Mr. Theobald's Arguments to the
contrary, in his preface to that play. First that the MS. was above sixty years
old: secondly that once Mr. Betterton had it, or he has heard so: thirdly,
that somebody told him the author gave it to a bastard-daughter of his: but
fourthly and above all, "that he has a great mind every thing that is good in
our tongue should be Shakespeare 's." I allow these reasons to be truly
critical; but what I am infinitely concerned at is, that so many Errors have
escaped the learned Editor: a few whereof we shall here amend out of a much
greater number, as an instance of our regard to this dear relick.

ACT 1. SCENE 1. I have his letters of a modern date,
Wherein by Julio, good Camillo's son
(Who as he says, [] shall follow hard upon,
And whom I with the growing hour [] expect)
He does solicit the return of gold,
To purchafe certain horse that like him well.
This place is corrupted: the epithet good is a mere insignificant expletive,
but the alteration of that single word restores a clear light to the whole
context, thus,

I have his letters of a modern date,
Wherein, by July, (by Camillo's son,
Who, as he says, shall follow hard upon,
And whom I with the growing hours expect)
He does solicit the return of gold.
Here you have not only the Person specified, by whose hands the return was to
be made, but the most necessary part, the Time by which it was required.
Camillo's son was to follow hard upon -- what? why upon July. -- Horse that
like him well, is very absurd: Read it, without contradiction,

-- Horse, that he likes well.
ACT 1. at the end. -- I must stoop to gain her,
Throw all my gay Comparisons aside
And turn my proud additions out of service:
Says Henriquez of a maiden of low condition, objecting his high quality: What
have his Comparisons here to do? Correct it boldly, Throw all my gay Caparisons
aside,
And turn my proud additions out of service.


ACT 2. SCENE 1. All the verse of this Scene is confounded with prose.
-- O that a man
Could reason down this Fever of the blood,
Or sooth with words the tumult in his heart!
Then Julio, I might be indeed thy friend.
Read -- this fervor of the blood,
Then Julio, I might be in deed thy friend.
marking the just opposition of deeds and words.
ACT 4. SCENE 1. How his eyes shake fire! -- said by Violante, observing how
the lustful shepherd looks at her. It must be, as the sense plainly demands,

-- How his eyes take fire!
And measure every piece of youth about me!
Ibid. That, though I wore disguises for some ends.
She had but one disguse, and wore it but for one end.
Restore it, with the alteration but of two letters,
That, though I were disguised for some end.
ACT 4. SCENE 2. -- To oaths no more give credit,
To tears, to vows; false both!
False Grammar I Am sure. Both can relate but to two things: And see! how easy a
change sets it right? To tears, to vows, false troth --
I could show you that very word Troth, in Shakespeare a hundred times.

Ib. For there is nothing left thee now to look for, That can bring comfort,
but a quiet grave.


This I fear is of a piece with None but itself can be its parallel: for the
grave puts an end to all sorrow, it can then need no comfort. Yet let us
vindicate Shakespeare where we can: I make no doubt but he wrote thus, For there
is nothing left thee now to look for,
Nothing that can bring quiet, but the grave.
Which reduplication of the word gives a much stronger emphasis to Violante's
concern. This figure is called Anadyplosis. I could show you a hundred just
such in him, if I had nothing else to do. SCRIBLERUS.

V. 280. Annual trophies, on the Lord Mayor's Day; and monthly wars, in the
Artillery Ground,

V. 281. Though long my Party.] Settle, like most Partywriters, was very
uncertain in his political principles. He was employed to hold the pen in the
Character of a Popish successor, but afterward printed his Narrative on the
contrary side. He had managed the ceremony of a famous Pope-burning on Nov. 17.
1680: then became a trooper in King James's army at Hounslow-heath. After the
Revolution he kept a Booth at Bartlemew-fair, where in the Droll called St.
George for England, he acted in his old age in a Dragon of green leather of his
own invention. He was at last taken into the Charter House, and there dyed,
aged about 60 years.

V. 286. To Dullness, Ridpath is as dear as Mist.] George Ridpath, author for
several years of the Flying-Post, a Whig-paper; Nathaniel Mist, publisher of
the Weekly Journal, a Tory-paper.

V. 299. Thy dragons Magistrates and Peers shall taste.] It stood in the first
edition with blanks, Thy dragons ** and ***. Concanen was sure "they must needs
mean nobody but King GEORGE and Queen CAROLINE, and said he would insist it
was so, till the poet cleared himself by filling up the blanks otherwise,
agreeably to the context, and consistent with his allegiance." Pref. to a
collection of verses, essays, letters, etc. against Mr. P. printed for A.
Moore, page 6.]

V. 307. -- Faustus is thy friend, Pluto with Cato, etc.] Names of miserable
farces of Tibbald and others, which it was their custom to get acted at the end
of the best tragedies, to spoil the digestion of the audience.

V. 310. -- ensure it but from fire.] In Tibbald's farce of Proserpine a
corn-field was set on fire; where-upon the other playhouse had a barn burnt
down for the recreation of the spectators. They also rivaled each other in
showing the burnings of hellfire, in Dr. Faustus.

V. 311. Another Aeschylus appears! etc.] It is reported of Aeschylus, that
when his tragedy of the Furies was acted, the audience were so terrified that
the children fell into fits, and the big-bellied women miscarried. Tibbald is
translating this author: he printed a specimen of him many years ago, of which
I only remember that the first note contains some comparison between Promotheus
and Christ crucisy'd.

V. 317. Eusden wear the bays.] See Book 1. verse 102. I have before observed
something like prophecy in our author. Eusden, whom he here couples with
Cibber, no sooner died but his place of Laureate was supplied by Cibber, in the
year 1730, on which was made the ensuing epigram. In merry old England it once
was a rule,
The King had his poet, and also his fool:
But now we are so frugal, I Would have you to know it,
That Cibber can serve both for fool and for poet.


V. 321. Benson sole judge of architecture sit.] W -- m Benson (late surveyor
of the buildings to his Majesty King George I.) gave in a report to the Lords,
that their house and the painted chamber adjoining were in immediate danger of
falling. Whereupon the Lords met in a committee, to appoint some other place to
fit in, while the house should be taken down. But it being proposed to cause
some other builders first to inspect it, they found it in very good condition.
The Lords, upon this, were going upon an address to the King against Benson,
for such a misrepresentation; but the Earl of Sunderland, then secretary, gave
them an assurance that his Majesty would remove him, which was done
accordingly. In favor of this man, the famous Sir Christopher Wren, who had
been architect to the crown for above fifty years, who built most of the
Churches in London, laid the first stone of St. Paul's, and lived to finish it,
had been displaced from his employment at the age of near ninety years.

V. 322. And Ambrose Philips.] He was (says Mr. JACOB) "one of the wits at
Button's, and a justice of the peace." But since he has met with higher
preferment in Ireland: and a much greater character we have of him in Mr.
Gildon's complete Art of poetry, v. 1. p. 157. "Indeed he confesses, he dares
not set him quite on the same foot with Virgil, lest it should seem flattery:
but he is much mistaken if posterity does not afford him a greater esteem than
he at present enjoys." He endeavored to create some misunderstanding between
our author and Mr. Addison, whom also soon after he abused as much. His
constant cry was, that Mr. P. was an Enemy to the government; and in particular
he was the avowed author of a report very industriously spread, that he had a
hand in a party-paper called the Examiner: A falsehood well known to those yet
living, who had the direction and publication of it. Qui meprise Cotin,
n'estime point son Roy,
Et n'a, (selon Cotin,) ni Dieu, ni Foy, ni Loy.


V. 323. Dormitory wall.] The dormitory in Westminster was a building intended
for the lodging of the King's scholars; toward which a sum was left by Dr. Edw.
Hannes, the rest was raised by contributions procured from several eminent
persons by the interest of Francis late Bishop of Rochester, and Dean of
Westminster. He requested the Earl of Burlington to be the Architect, who
carried on the work till the bill against that learned prelate was brought in,
which ended in his banishment. The shell being finished according to his
design, the succeeding Dean and Chapter employed a common builder to do the
inside, which is performed accordingly.

V. 324. And Jones and Boil 's united labors fall.] At the time when this
poem was written, the banqueting house of Whitehall, the church and piazza of
Covent Garden, and the palace and chapel of Semerset-house, the works of the
famous Inigo Jones, had been for many years so neglected as to be in danger of
ruin. The portico of Covent Garden church had been just then restored and
beautified at the expense of the Earl of Burlington; who, at the same time, by
his publication of the designs of that great Master and Palladio, as well as by
many noble buildings of his own, revived the true taste of Architecture in this
Kingdom.

V. 326. Gay dies unpension'd, etc.] See Mr. Gay's fable of the Hare and Many
Friends. This gentleman was early in the friendship of our author, which
continued to his death. He wrote several works of humor with great success,
the Shepherd's Week, Trivia, the What-d'ye-call-it, Fables, and lastly, the
celebrated Beggars Opera; a piece of satire which hit all tastes and degrees of
men, from those of the highest quality to the very rabble: That verse of Horace
Primotes populi arripuit, populumque tributim,
could never be so justly applied as to this. The vast success of it was
unprecedented, and almost incredible: What is related of the wonderful effects
of the ancient music or tragedy hardly came up to it: Sophocles and Euripides
were less followed and famous. It was acted in London sixty-three days,
uninterrupted; and renewed the next season with equal applauses. It spread into
all the great towns of England, was played in many places to the 30th, and 40th
time, at Rath and Bristol 50, etc. It made its progress into Wales, Scotland,
and Ireland, where it was performed 24 days together It was lastly acted in
Minorca. The fame of it was not confined to the author only; the ladies carried
about with 'em the favorite songs of it in fans; and houses were furnished
with it in screens. The person who acted Polly, till then obscure, became all
at once the favorite of the town; her pictures were ingraved and sold in great
numbers; her life written; books of letters and verses to her published; and
pamphlets made even of her sayings and jests.

Furthermore, it drove out of England for that season the Italian Opera, which
had carried all before it for ten years: That idol of the Nobility and the
people, which the great Critic Mr. Dennis by the labors and outcries of a
whole life could not overthrow, was demolished by a single stroke of this
gentleman's pen. This remarkable period happened in the year 1728. Yet so great
was his modesty, that he constantly prefixed to all the editions of it this
motto, Nos haec novimus esse nibil.

V. 327. Hibernian politics, O Swift! thy doom.] See book 1. verse. 24.

V. 328. And Pope 's translating three whole years with Broom.] He concludes
his irony with a stroke upon himself; For whoever imagines this is a sarcasm on
the other ingenious person, is surely mistaken. The opinion our author had of
him was sufficiently shown, by his joining him in the undertaking of the
Odyssey: in which Mr. Broom having engaged without any previous agreement,
discharged his part so much to Mr. Pope's satisfaction, that he gratified him
with the full sum of Five hundred pounds, and a present of all those books for
which his own interest could procure him Subscribers, to the value of One
hundred more. The author only seems to lament, that he was so long employed in
translation.

V. 337, etc. She comes! the cloud-compelling power, behold! etc.] Here the
muse, like Jove's eagle, after a sudden stoop at ignoble game, soareth again to
the skies. As prophecy has ever been one of the chief provinces of poesy, our
poet here foretells from what we feel, what we are to fear; and in the style of
other prophets, has used the future tense for the preterit: since what he says
shall be, is already to be seen, in the writings of some even of our most
adored authors, in divinity, philosophy, physics, metaphysics, etc. (who are
too good indeed to be named in such company.) Do not gentle reader, rest too
secure in thy contempt of the instruments for such a revolution in learning, or
despise such weak agents as have been described in our poem, but remember what
the Dutch stories somewhere relate, that a great part of their provinces was
once over-flow'd, by a small opening made in one of their dykes by a single
water-rat.

However, that such is not seriously the judgment of our poet, but that he
conceives better hopes from the diligence of our schools, from the regularity
of our universities, the discernment of our great men, the encouragement of our
patrons, and the genius of our writers in all kinds, (notwithstanding some few
exceptions in each) may plainly be seen from his conclusion; where by causing
all this vision to pass through the Ivory gate, he expressly in the language of
poesy declares all such imaginations to be wild, ungrounded, and fictitious.
SCRIBLERUS.

V. 347. Truth in her old cavern lie.] Alludes to the saying of Democritus,
that truth lay at the bottom of a deep well.

V. 8. Hence from the straw where Bedlam's Prophet nods,
He hears loud Oracles, and talks with Gods.
Virg. Aen. 7. Et varias audit voces, fruiturque deorum
Colloquio --


V. 15. There in a dusky vale, etc.] Virg. Aen. 6. -- Videt Aeneas in valle
reducta
Seclusum nemus --
Lethaeumque domos placidas qui praenatat amnem, etc.
Hunc circum innumerae gentes, etc.


V. 16. Old Bavius sits, to dip poetic souls.] Alluding to the story of Thetis
dipping Achilles to render him impenetrable.

At pater Anchises penitus convalle virenti
Inclusas animas, superumque ad lumen ituras,
Lustrabat --
Virg. Aen. 6. V. 20. Unbar the gates of Light.] Milton.

V. 23. Millions and millions -- Thick as the stars, etc.] Virg. 6. Quam multa
in sylvis autumni frigore primo
Lapsa cadunt folia, aut ad terram gurgite ab alto
Quam multae glomerantur aves, etc.


V. 46. Mixed the Owl's Ivy with the Poet's Bays.] Virg. Ec. 8. -- fine tempora
circum
Inter victrices hederam tibi serpere lauros.


V. 53. For this, our Queen unfolds to vision true
Thy mental eye, for thou have much to view.]
This has a resemblance to that passage in Milton, l. 11. where the Angel To
nobler sights from Adam's eye removed
The film; then purged with Euphrasie and Rue
The visual nerve -- For he had much to see.
There is a general allusion in what follows to that whole Episode.

V. 110. Happy -- had Easter never been.] Virg. Ecl. 6. Et fortunatam, si
nunquam armenta fuissent.


V. 119, 121. Now look through Fate -- See all her Progeny -- etc. Virg. Aen. 6.
Nunc age, Dardaniam prolem quae deinde sequatur
Gloria, qui maneant Itala de gente nepotes,
Illustres animas, nostrumque in nomen ituras,
Expediam.


V. 123. As Berecynthia, etc.] Virg. ib. Felix prole virum, qualis Berecynthia
matter
Invehitur curru Phrygias turrita per urbes,
Laeta deum partu, centum complexa nepotes,
Omnes coelicolas, omnes supera alta tenentes.


V. 131. Mark first the youth, etc.] Virg. Aen. 6. Ille vides, pura juvenis qui
nititur hasta,
Proxima sort tenet lucis loca. --


V. 133. With all thy Father's virtues blessed, be born!] A manner of expression
used by Virgil, Ecl. 8. Nascere! praeque diem veniens, age Lucifer --
As also that of patriis virtutibus. Ecl. 4.

V 137. From the strong fate of drams if thou get free, etc.] Virg. Aen. 6. --
si qua fata aspera rumpas,
Tu Marcellus eris! --


V. 139. Thee shall each Alehouse, etc.] Aen. 7. Te nemus Angitiae, vitrea te
Fucinus unda,
Te liquidi flevere lacus.
Virgil again, Ecl. 10.
Illum etiam lauri, illum flevere myricae, etc.


V. 150.] Virg. Aen. 6. -- duo fulmina belli
Scipiadas, cladem Lybiae!


V. 163. Flow Welsted, flow! etc.] Parody on Denham, Cooper's Hill. O could I
flow like thee, and make thy stream
My great example, as it is my theme.
Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull;
Strong without rage; without overflowing, full.


V. 171. Embrace, embrace my Sons! be foes no more.] Virg. Aen. 6. -- Ne tanta
animis assuescite bella,
Neu patriae validas in viscera vertite vires:
Tuque prior, tu parce -- sanguis mous! --


V. 181. But who is he, etc.] Virg. Aen. 6. questions and answers in this
manner, of Numa, Quis procul ille autem ramis insignis olivae
Sacra ferens? -- nosco crines, incanaque menta, etc.


V. 240. And other planets.] Virg. Aen. 6. -- solemque suum, sua sydera norunt.


V. 242. Whales sport in woods, and dolphins in the skies.] Hor. Delphinum
sylvis appingit, fluctibus aprum.


V. 247. Son! what thou seek'st is in thee.] Quod petis in te est -- Ne te
quaesiveris extra.
Pers.

V. 252. Wings the red lightning, etc.] Like Sasmoneus in Aen. 6. Dum flammas
Jovis, and sonitus imitatur olympi.
-- nimbos, and non imitabile fulmen,
Aere and cornipedum cursu simularat Equorum.


V. 254. -- over all unclassic ground.] alludes to Mr. Addison's verse in the
praises of Italy, Poetic fields incompass me around,
And still I seem to tread on Classic ground.
As verse 260 is a Parody on a noble one of the same Author in the Campaign;
and verse 255, 256. on two sublime verses of Dr. Y.

V. 283-84. -- With equal grace
Our Goddess smiles on Whig and Tory race.]
Virg. Aen. 10. Tros Rutulusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebo.
-- Rex Jupiter omnibus idem.


V. 305. -- If heaven thou can not bend,
Hell thou shall move -- ]
Virg. Aen. 7. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.


V. 315 -- Like Semeles -- ] See Ovid, Met. 3.

V. 317. This, this is he, foretold by ancient rhymes, The Augustus, etc.]
Virg. Aen. 6. Hic vir, hic est! tibi quem promitti saepius audis,
Augustus Caesar, divum genus; aurea condet
Saecula qui rursus Latio, regnata per arva
Saturno quondam --
Saturnian here relates to the age of Lead, mentioned book 1. ver. 26.

V. 329. Proceed great days.] Virg. Ecl. 4. -- Incipiunt magni procedere menses.


V. 343. As Argus' eyes by Hermes wand oppressed.] Ovid. Met. 2. Et quamvis sopor
est oculorum part receptus,
Part tamen vigilat -- Vidit Cyllenius omnes
Succubuisse oculos, etc. ibid.


V. 358. And through the Ivory gate the vision flies.] Virg. Aen. 6. Sunt geminae
somni portae; quarum altera fertur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris;
Altera, candenti perfecta nintens elephanto,
Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia manes.


FINIS.
By the Author A DECLARATION.
WHEREAS certain Haberdashers of Points and Particles, being instigated by the
Spirit of Pride, and assuming to themselves the Name of Critics and Restorers*
have taken upon them to adulterate the common and current Sense of out Glorious
Ancestors, Poets of this Realms by clipping, coining, defacing the Images, or
mixing their own base Allay, or otherwise falsifying the same, which they
publish, utter, and vend as genuine: The said Haberdashers having no Right
thereto* as neither Heirs; Executors, Administrators, Assigns, or in any sort
Related to such Poets, to all, or any of Them: Now we, having carefully revised
this our Dunciad beginning with the word Books, and ending with the word fli^s*
containing the entire Sum of one thousand and twelve Lines, do declare every
Dord, Figure, Point, and Comma of this Impression to be Authentic: And do
therefore strictly enjoin and forbid any Person or Persons whatsoever, to
erase, reverse, put between hooks, or by any other means directly or indirectly
change or mangle any of them. And we do hereby earnestly exhort all our
Brethren to follow This our Example, which we heartily wish our Great
Predecessors had heretofore set, as a Remedy and Prevention of all such Abuses.
Provided always, that nothing in this Declaration shall be construed to limit
the lawful and undoubted Right of every Subject of this Realm, to judge,
censure, or condemn, in the whole or in part, any Poem or Poet whatsoever.

Given under our hand at London, this third day of January, in the Year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred thirty and two. Declarat' cor'-me. JOHN BARBER,
Mayor.

INDEX OF PERSONS celebrated in this POEM.
A.
AMBROSE Philips i. 103. iii. 322 Alaric iii. 83 Attila iii. 84
B.
BLACKMORE, Sir Richard. i. 102. ii. 249 Besaleel, Morris, ii. 118 iii, Banks
i. 250 Blome i. 126 Bond ii. 118. iii. 151 Brown iii. 20 Budgel, Esquire ii. 367
Bentley, Thomas ii. 197. Boyer, Abel, ii. 383 Breval (J. Durant) ii. 118, and
232 Bavius. iii 16 Burnet, Thomas, Esquire iii 174, 175. Benson, Will. Esquire ili. 321
Boeotians. iii. 43 Bruin and Bears. i. 99
C.
CAXTON, Will, i. 129 Curll, Edm. i. 38 ii. 3, 54, 161, etc. Cook, Tho. ii.
130. and 287 Concanen, Matthew. ibid. Centlivre, Susannah. ii. ^^ iii. 145
Cibber, Colly. i. 240 iii. 32 Chi-hoamti Emperor of China. iii. 67
D.
DANIEL, Defoe. i. 101. ii. 139 Dennis, John. i. 104 ii. 233, iii. 167 Ducket,
George, Esquire iii. 175 Dunton, John. ii. 136 Durfey. iii. 138. Dutchmen. iii. 43.
E.
EUSDEN (Laurence,) i. 102 iii. 319 Eliza, Haywood, ii. 149, and iii. 145
F.
FLECKNO, Richard. ii. 2 Foxton iii. 151
G.
GILDON, Charles. i. 250. iii. 167 Goths iii. 83 Good, Barn. iii. ^^7
H.
HOLLAND, Philemon. i. 134 Horneck, Philip. iii. 146 Haywood, Eliza. ii. 149,
etc. iii. 145 Howard, Edward. i. 250 Henley, John, the Orator. ii. 2. iii. 195,
etc. Huns. iii. 82.
I.
JOHNSON, Charles. i. 240 Jacob, Giles iii. 149
L.
LINTOT, Bernard. i. 38. ii. 49. King Log. i. 260 Laurus. ii. 395
M.
MORE (James) ii. 46, etc. Morris (Besaleel) ii. 118 iii, 161. Mist, Nathaniel.
i. 194. iii. 286 Milbourn, Luke. ii. 327 Mahomet. iii. 89. Mears, W. ii. 117.
iii. 20 Motteux, Peter. ii. 384 Monks. iii. 44
N.
NORTON de Foe. ii. 233, and 385 Naso ii. 384 Namby Pamby. iii. 322
O.
OGILBY, John, i. 121 Oldmixon, John, ii. 271. Ozell, John, i. 240 Ostrogoths.
iii. 85 Omar, the Caliph. iii. 73 Owls. i. 35. iii. 160
P.
PRYNN, William, i. 101 Philips, Ambrose, i. 103. iii. 322
Q
QUARLES, Francis, i. 126 Querno, Camillo. ii. 11 Roper, Abel, ii. 141.
R.
RALPH, James. iii. 159 Room, Ed. iii. 146 Ridpath, George, ii. 141. iii. 286.
S.
SETTLE, Elkanah. i. 88, 185. iii. 27. Smedley (Jonathan) ii. 281, etc.
Shadwell, Tho. ii. 326 Scholiasts i. 159
T.
THEOBALD, Lewis- passim. Tutchin, John. ii. 140 Toland, John. ii. 369. iii.
208 Tindal, Dr. ii. 369. iii. 208 Tailor, John, the Water Poet. ii. 325
U
VANDALS. iii. 78 Visigoths. iii. 86.
W.
WITHERS, George. i. 126 Wynkin de Werde. i. 129 Ward, Edward, i. 200. iii. 26.
138 Warner, Tho. ii. 117 Wilkins, ibid. Welsted, Leonard. ii. 199 295 iii. 163
Woolston, Tho. iii. 210 Wormius. iii. 184
INDEX OF THE AUTHORS of the NOTES.
MR. Winstanley, Mr. Giles Jacob, Authors of Lives of Poets. Book i. Verse 121,
122, 126, 134 -- B. i, v. 104, 106, 200, 240. ii. 201, 367. iii. 149.
Mr. Edm. Curl, b. i. v. 48, 240. ii. 46, 66, 116, 149, 370. iii. 26. Mr
Charles Gildon, ii. 258, 134, iii. 322. Mr. Lewis Theobald, b. i. v. 48, 104,
106, 129, 162, 221. ii. 177. iii. 28 Mr. John Dennis, b. i. v. 61, 88, 104,
106, 162, ii. 111, 134, 258, 295, 382. iii. 16. Mr. Mist, Publisher of the
Journal, b. i. v. 106, 129. ii. 134. Flying-Post, b. ii. 383. London Journal,
b. ii. and iii. Daily Journal, b. i. 61, etc. Mr Jonathan Smedley, b. ii. 130,
295. Mr. John Oldmixon, b. i. 102. iii. 319. Mr. J. Ralph, b. i. v. 1, 28, 31.
ii. 111. Mr. Welstede, b. iii. 16, 195. The learned Martinus Scriblerus, and
others, passim.
APPENDIX.
I.
PREFACE prefixed to the five first imperfect Editions of the DUNCIAD, printed
at Dublin and London, in Octavo and Duod.
The Publisher.] Who he was is uncertain; but Edward Ward tells us in his
preface to Durgen, "that most judges are of opinion this preface is not of
English extraction but Hibernian, etc." He means Dr. Swift, who whether
publisher or not, may be said in a sort to be author of the poem: For when he,
together with Mr. Pope, (for reasons specified in the preface to their
Miscellanies) determined to own the most trifling pieces in which they had any
hand, and to destroy all that remained in their power, the first sketch of this
poem was snatched from the fire by Dr. Swift, who persuaded his friend to
proceed in it, and to him it was therefore inscribed. But the occasion of
printing it was as follows.

There was published in those Miscellanies, a Treatise of the Bathos, or Art of
Sinking in Poetry, in which was a chapter, where the species of bad writers
were ranged in classes, and initial letters of names prefixed for the most part
at random. But such was the number of poets eminent in that art, that some one
or other took every letter to himself. All fell into so violent a fury, that
for half a year or more the common Newspapers (in most of which they had some
property, as being hired writers) were filled with the most abusive falsehoods
and scurrilities they could possibly devise: A liberty no ways to be wondered
at in those people, and in those papers, that, for many years, during the
uncontrolled license of the press, had aspersed almost all the great characters
of the age, and this with impunity, their own persons and names being utterly
secret and obscure. This gave Mr. Pope the thought, that he had now some
opportunity of doing good, by (...) and dragging into light these common
enemies of mankind; since to invalidate this universal slander, it sufficed to
show what contemptible men were the authors of it. He was not without hopes,
that by manifesting the dullness of those who had only malice to recommend
them, either the booksellers would not find their account in employing them, or
the men themselves, when discovered, want courage to proceed in so unlawful an
occupation. This it was that gave birth to the Dunciad, and he thought an
happiness, that by the late flood of slander on himself, he had acquired such a
peculiar right over their names as was necessary to his design.


The PUBLISHER to the READER.
IT will be found a true observation, though somewhat surprising, that when any
scandal is vented against a man of the highest distinction and character,
either in the State or in Literature, the public In general afford it a most
quiet reception; and the arger part accept it as favorably as if it were some
kindness done to themselves: whereas if a known scoundrel or blockhead but
chance to be touched upon, a whole legion is up in arms, and it becomes the
common cause of all Scriblers, Booksellers, and Printers whatsoever.

Not to search too deeply into the reason hereof, I will only observe as a
fact, that every week for these two months past, the town has been persecuted
with Pamphlets, Advertisements, etc.] See the list of these anonymous papers,
with their dates and authors thereunto annexed, in the third article of this
Appendix.
. pamphlets, advertisements, letters, and weekly essays, not only against the
wit and writings, but against the character and person of Mr. Pope. And that of
all those men who have received pleasure from his works, which by modest
computation may be about a About a hundred thousand.] It is surprising with
what stupidity this preface, which is almost a continued irony, was taken by
those authors. This passage among others they understood to be serious.
. hundred thousand in these Kingdoms of England and Ireland; (not to mention
Jersey, Guernsey, the Orcades, those in the New world, and Foreigners who have
translated him into their languages) of all this number, not a man has stood
up to say one word in his defense.

The only exception is the The Author of the following Poem, etc.] A very plain
irony, speaking of Mr. Pope himself.
. author of the following poem, who doubtless had either better insight into
the grounds of this clamor, or better opinion of Mr. Pope's integrity, joined
with a greater personal love for him, than any other of his numerous friends
and admirers.

Further, that he was in his peculiar intimacy, appears from the knowledge he
manifests of the most private authors of all the anonymous pieces against him,
and from his having in this poem attacked The publisher in these words went a
little too far: but it is certain whatever names the reader finds that are
unknown to him, are of such: and the exception is only of two or three, whose
dullness or scurrility all mankind agreed to have justly entitled them to a
place in the Dunciad.
. no man living, who had not before printed, or published, some scandal against
this gentleman.

How I came possessed of it, is of no concern to the reader; but it would have
been a wrong to him had I detained this publication: since those names which
are its chief ornaments die off daily so fast, as must render it too soon
unintelligible If it provoke the author to give us a more perfect edition, I
have my end.

Who he is I cannot say, and (which is great pity) there is certainly There is
certainly nothing in his Style, etc.] This irony had small effect in concealing
the author. The Dunciad, imperfect as it was, had not been published two days,
but the whole town gave it to Mr. Pope.
. nothing in his style and manner of writing which can distinguish or discover
him: For if it bears any resemblance to that of Mr. Pope, it is not improbable
but it might be done on purpose, with a view to have it pass for his. But by
the frequency of his allusions to Virgil, and a labored (not to say affected)
shortness in imitation of him, I should think him more an admirer of the Roman
poet than of the Grecian, and in that not of the same taste with his friend.

I have been well informed, that this work was the labor of full The labor of
full six years, etc.] This also was honestly and seriously believed, by diverse
of the gentlemen of the Dunciad. J. Ralph, pref. to Sawney, "We are told, it
was the labor of six years, with the utmost assiduity and application: It is
no great compliment to the author's sense to have employed so large a part of
his life, etc." So also Ward, pref. to Durgen, "The Dunciad, as the publisher
very wisely confesses, cost the author six years retirement from all the
pleasures of life, though it is somewhat difficult to conceive, from either its
bulk or beauty, that it could be so long in hatching, etc. But the length of
time and closeness of application were mentioned to prepossess the reader with
a good opinion of it."

They just as well understood what Scriblerus said of this poem.


. six years of his life, and that he wholly retired himself from all the
avocations and pleasures of the world, to attend diligently to its correction
and perfection; and six years more he intended to bestow upon it, as it should
seem by this verse of Statius which was cited at the head of his manuscript, Oh
mihi bissenos multum vigilata per annos, The prefacer to curl's Key took this
word to be really in Statius. "By a quibble on the word Duncia. the Dunciad is
formed," page 3. Mr. Ward also follows him in the same opinion.
. Duncia.


Hence also we learn the true title of the Poem; which with the same certainty
as we call that of Homer the Iliad, of Virgil the Aeneid, of Camoens the
Lusiad, of Voltaire the The Henriad.] The French poem of Monsieur Voltaire,
entitled La Henriade, had been published at London the year before.
. Henriad, we may pronounce could have been, and can be no other, than

The DUNCIAD.

It is styled Heroic, as being doubly so; not only with respect to its nature,
which according to the best rules of the ancients, and strictest ideas of the
moderns, is critically such; but also with regard to the heroical disposition
and high courage of the writer, who dared to stir up such a formidable,
irritable, and implacable race of mortals.

The time and date of the Action is evidently in the last reign, when the
office of City poet expired upon the death of Elkanah Settle, and it is fixed
to the Mayoralty of Sir Geo. Thorold. But there may arise some obscurity in
Chronology from the names in the poem, by the inevitable removal of some
authors, and insertion of others, in their niches. For whoever will consider
the unity of the whole design, will be sensible, that the Poem was not made for
these Authors, but these Authors for the Poem: I should judge that they were
clapped in as they rose, fresh and fresh, and changed from day to day; in like
manner as when the old boughs wither, we thrust new ones into a chimney.

I would not have the reader too much troubled or anxious, if he cannot
decypher them; since when he shall have found them out, he will probably know
no more of the persons than before.

Yet we judged it better to preserve them as they are, than to change them for
fictitious 'names, by which the satire would only be multiplied and applied to
many instead of one. Had the Hero, for instance, been called Codrus, how many
would have affirmed him to have been Mr. W. Mr. D. Sir R. B, etc. but now all
that unjust scandal is saved by calling him Theobald, which by good luck
happens to be the name of a real person.

I am indeed aware, that this name may to some appear too mean for the Hero of
an Epic Poem: But it is hoped, they will alter that opinion, when they find,
that an author no less eminent than la Bruyere has honored him with frequent
mention, and thought him worthy a place in his characters.

Voudriez vous, THEOBALDE, que je crusse que vous etes baisse? que vous n' etes
plus Poet, ni bell esprit? que vous etes presentement auss: mauvais Juge de
tout genre d'Ouvrage, que mechant Auteur? Votre air libre and presumtueux me
rassure, and me persuade tout la contraire, etc. Characters, Vol. I. de la
Societe and de la Conversation, etc.

II.
A LIST of Books, Papers, and Verses, in which our Author was abused, before
the publication of the Dunciad: With the true Names of the Authors.
REFLECTIONS critical and satirical on a late Rhapsody called an Essay on
Criticism by Mr. Dennis, printed for B. Lintot, price 6 d.

A new Rehearsal, or Bays the Younger, containing an Examen of Mr. Rowe's
plays, and a word or two on Mr. Pope's Rape of the Lock. Anon. [by Charles
Gildon] printed for J. Roberts, 1714, price 1 s.

Homerides, or a letter to Mr. Pope, occasioned by his intended translation of
Homer. By Sir Iliad Dogrel. [Tho. Burnet and G. Ducket, Esquires] printed for
W. Wilkins, 1715, price 9 d.

Aesop at the Bear-garden. A vision in imitation of the Temple of Fame. By Mr.
Preston. Sold by John Morphew 1715, price 6 d.

The Catholic Poet, or Protestant Barnaby's Sorrowful Lamentation, a Ballad
about Homer's Iliad, by Mrs. Centlivre and others, 1715, price 1 d.

An Epilogue to a Puppet-show at Bath, concerning the said Iliad, by George
Ducket, Esquire printed by E. Curl.

A complete Key to the What-d'ye-call it. Anon. By Griffin a Player, supervis'd
by Mr. Th --, printed by J. Roberts 1715.

A true Character of Mr. Pope and his writings, in a letter to a friend, Anon.
[Dennis] printed for S. Popping 1716, price 3 d.

The Confederates, a Farce. By Joseph Gay [J. D. Breval] printed for R.
Burleigh, 1717, price 1 s.

Remarks upon Mr. Pope's translation of Homer, with two letters concerning the
Windsor Forest and the Temple of Fame. By Mr. Dennis. Printed for E. Curl,
1717, price 1 s. 6 d.

Satires on the translators of Homer, Mr. P. and Mr. T. Anon. Bez. Morris,
1717, price 6 d.

The Triumvirate, or a letter from Palaemon to Celia at Bath. Anon. [Leonard
Welsted] price 1 s. 1711. Folio.

The Battle of Poets, a heroic poem. By Tho. Cook. Printed for J. Roberts,
Folio, 1725.

Memoirs of Lilliput, Anon. [Mrs. Elizabeth Heywood,] 8vo. printed 1727.

An Essay on Criticism, in Prose, by the Author of the Critical History of
England [J. Oldmixon] 8vo. printed 1728.

Gulliveriana and Alexandriana. With an ample preface and critique on Swift and
Pope's Miscellanies. By Jonathan Smedley. Printed by J. Roberts, 8vo. 1728.
Advertised before the publication of the Dunciad in the Daily Journal, April
13, 1728.

Characters of the Times, or an account of the writings, characters, etc. of
several gentlemen libelled by S -- and P -- in a late Miscellany, 8vo. 1728.

Remarks on Mr. Pope's Rape of the Lock, in Letters to a Friend. By Mr. Dennis.
Written in 1724, though not printed till 1728, 8vo.

Verses, Letters, Essays or Advertisements, in the public Prints.
British Journal, Nov. 25, 1727. A Letter on Swift and Pope's Miscellanies.
[Writ by M. Concanen.]

Daily Journal, March 18, 1728. A Letter by Philomauri. James Moore Smyth.

Id. March 29. A Letter about Thersites, accusing the author of disaffection to
the Government, by James Moore Smyth.

Mist's Weekly Journal, March 30. An Essay on the Arts of a Poet's sinking in
reputation, or a supplement to the Art of sinking in Poetry [supposed by Mr.
Theobald.]

Daily Journal, April 3. A Letter under the name of Philoditto, by James Moore
Smyth.

Flying Post, April 4. A Letter against Gulliver and Mr. P. [by Mr. Oldmixon.]

Daily Journal, April 5. An Auction of Goods at Twickenham, by James Moore
Smyth.

Flying Post, April 6. A Fragment of a Treatise upon Swift and Pope, by Mr.
Oldmixon.

The Senator, April 9. On the same, by Edward Room.

Daily Journal, April 8. Advertisement, by James Moore Smyth.

Flying Post, April 13, Verses against Dr. Swift, and against Mr. P -- 's
Homer, by J. Oldmixon.

Daily Journal, April 23, Letter about a translation of the character of
Thersites in Homer, by Thomas Cook, etc.

Mist 's Weekly Journal, April 27. A Letter of Lewis Theobald.

Daily Journal, May 11. A Letter against Mr. P. at large, Anon. John Dennis.

All these were afterward reprinted in a pamplet entitled, A collection of all
the Verses, Essays, Letters and Advertisements occasioned by Mr Pope and
Swift's Miscellanies, prefaced by Concanen, Anonymous, 8vo. and printed for A.
Moore, 1728, price 1 s. Others of an elder date, having lain as waste paper
many years, were upon the publication of the Dunciad brought out, and their
Authors betrayed by the mercenary Booksellers (in hope of some possibility of
vending a few) by advertising them in this manner -- "The Confederates, a
Farce, by Capt. Breval, (for which he is put into the Dunciad.) An Epilogue to
Powel's Puppet-show, by Col. Ducket, (for which he is put into the Dunciad.)
Essays. etc. by Sir Richard Blackmore. NB. It is for a passage of this book
that Sir Richard was put into the Dunciad." And so of others.

After the DUNCIAD, 1728.
An Essay on the Dunciad, 8vo. printed for J. Roberts. [In this book, page 9.
it was formally declared "That the complaint of the aforesaid Libels and
Advertisements was forged and untrue, that all mouths had been silent except in
Mr. Pope's praise, and nothing against him published, but by Mr. Theobald.]"

Sawney, in blank verse, occasioned by the Dunciad: with a critique on that
poem, by J. Ralph, [a person never mentioned in it at first, but inserted
after] printed for J. Roberts, 8vo.

A complete Key to the Dunciad, by E. Curl, 120. price 6 d.

A second and third edition of the same, with additions, 120.

The Popiad, by E. Curl, extracted from J. Dennis, Sir R. Blackmore, etc. 120.
price 6 d.

The Curliad, by the same E. Curl.

The Female Dunciad, collected by the same Mr. Curl, 120. price 6 d. With the
Metamorphosis of P. into a stinging Nettle, by Mr. Foxton, 120.

The Metamorphosis of Scriblerus into Snarlerus, by J. Smedley, printed for A.
Moore, folio, price 6 d.

The Dunciad dissected, by Curl, and Mrs. Thomas, 120.

An Essay on the Taste and Writings of the present times, said to be writ by a
gentleman of C. C. C. Oxon, printed for J. Roberts, 8vo.

The Arts of Logic and Rhetoric, partly taken from Bouhours, with new
Reflections, etc. by John Oldmixon, 8vo.

Remarks on the Dunciad, by Mr. Dennis, dedicated to Theobald, 8vo.

A Supplement to the Profund, Anon. by Matthew Concanen. 8vo.

Mist's Weekly Journal, June 8. A long Letter signed W. A. writ by some or
other of the Club of of Theobald, Dennis, Moore, Concanen, Cook, who for some
time held constant weekly meetings for these kind of performances.

Daily Journal, June 11. A Letter signed Philoscriberus, on the name of Pope.
-- Letter to Mr. Theobald in verse, signed B. M. [Bezaleel Morris] against Mr.
P --. Many other little Epigrams about this time in the same papers, by James
Moore and others.

Mist's Journal, June 22. A Letter by Lewis Theobald.

Flying Post, August 8. Letter on Pope and Swift.

Daily Journal, August 8. Letter charging the Author of the Dunciad with
Treason.

Durgen. A plain satire on a pompous satireist, by Edward Ward, with a little
of James Moore.

Apollo's Maggot in his Cups, by E. Ward.

Gulliveriana Secunda, Being a collection of many of the Libels in the
Newspapers, like the former Volume under the same title, by Smedley.
Advertised in the Craftsman, November 9, 1728, with this remarkable promise,
that " any thing which any body should send as Mr. Pope's or Dr. Swift's,
should be inserted and published as Theirs."

Pope Alexander's Supremacy and Infallibility examined, etc. 4to. By George
Ducket and John Dennis.

Dean Jonathan's Paraphrase on the 4th Chapter of Genesis. Writ by E. Room,
fol. 1729.

Labeo, a paper of Verses by Leonard Welsted, which after came into One
Epistle, and was published by James Moore, 4to. 1730. Another part of it came
out in Welsted's own name in 1731, under the just Title of Dullness and Scandal,
fol.

Verses on the Imitator of Horace, by a Lady [or between a Lady, a Lord, and a
Court Squire] Printed for J. Roberts, fol. 1733.

An Epistle from a Nobleman to a Dr. of Divinity, from Hampton Court. [Lord H
-- y] Printed for J. Roberts also, fol. 1733.

III.
A PARALLEL OF THE CHARACTERS OF Mr. DRYDEN and Mr. POPE. As drawn by certain
of their Cotemporaries.
Mr. DRYDEN. His POLITICS, RELIGION, MORALS.
MR. Dryden is a mere Renegado from Monarchy, Poetry, and good Sense Milbourn
on Dryden's Virgil, 8vo. School, p. 6.
. A true Republican Son of a monarchical Church page 38.
. A Republican Atheist page 192.
. Dryden was from the beginning an (...), and I doubt not will continue so to
the last page 8.
.

IV.
A PARALLEL OF THE CHARACTERS OF Mr. DRYDEN and Mr. POPE.
Mr. DRYDEN. His POLITICS, RELIGION, MORALS.
MR. Pope is an open and mortal Enemy to his Country, and the Commonwealth of
Learning Dennis, Remarks on the Rape of the Lock, pref. p. 12.
. Some call him a Popish Whig, which is directly inconsistent Dunciad dissected.
. Pope as a Papist must be a Tory and High-Flyer Preface to Gulliveriana.
. He is both a Whig and a Tory Denn. Character of Mr. P.
.

In the Poem called Absalom and Achitophel are notoriously traduced, The KING,
the QUEEN, the LORDS and GENTLEMEN, not only their Honorable Persons exposed,
but the whole NATION and its REPRESENTATIVES notoriously libelled; It is
Scandalum Magnatum, yea of MAJESTY itself Whip and Key, 4to. printed for R.
Janeway 1682. Preface.
.

He looks upon God's Gospel as a foolish fable, like the Pope, to whom he is a
pitiful Purveyor Ibid.
. His very Christianity may be questioned Milbourn, p. 9.
. He ought to expect more severity than other men, as he is most unmerciful in
his own Reflections on others Ibid. p. 175.
. With as good a right as his Holiness, he sets up for Poetical Infallibility
page 39.
.

Mr. DRYDEN only a Versifyer.
His whole Libel is all bad matter, beautified (which is all that can be said
of it) with good meter Whip and Key, Pref.
. Mr. Dryden's Genius did not appear in any thing more than his Versification,
and whether he is to be ennobled for that only, is a question? Oldmixon, Essay
on Criticism, p. 84. m Milbourn, page 2.


Mr. DRYDEN's VIRGIL.
Tonson calls it Dryden's Virgil, to show that this is not that Virgil so
admired in the Augustaean age, but a Virgil of another stamp, a silly,
impertinent, nonsensical Writer m. None but a Bavius, a Mcevius, or a Batbyllus
carp'd at Virgil, and none but such unthinking He has made it his custom to
cackle to more than one Party in their own Sentiments Theobald, Letter in
Mist's Journal, June 22, 1728.
.

In his Miscellanies, the Persons abused are, The KING, the QUEEN, His late
MAJESTY, both Houses of PARLIAMENT, the Privy Council, the Bench of BISHOPS,
the Established CHURCH, the present MINISTRY, etc. To make sense of some
passages, they must be construed into ROYAL SCANDAL List, at the end of a
Collection of Verses, Letters, Advertisements, 8vo. Printed for A. Moore, 1728,
and the Preface to it, page 6.
.

He is a Popish Rhymester, bred up with a Contempt of the Sacred Writings
Dennis's Remarks on Homer, p. 27.
. His Religion allows him to destroy Heretics, not only with his pen, but with
fire and sword; and such were all those unhappy Wits whom he sacrificed to his
accursed Popish Principles Preface to Gulliveriana, p. 11.
. It deserved Vengeance to suggest, that Mr. Pope had less Infallibility than
his Namesake at Rome Dedication to the Collection of Verses, Letters, p. 9.
.

Mr. POPE only a Versifyer.
The smooth numbers of the Dunciad are all that recommend it, nor has it any
other merit Mist's Journal of June 8, 1728.
. It must be owned that he has got a notable Knack of rhymeing, and writing
smooth verse Character of Mr. P. and Dennis on Homer.
.

Vermin admire his Translator Page 35.
. It is true, soft and easy lines might become Ovid's Epistles or Art of Love
-- But Virgil who is all great and majestic, etc. requires strength of lines,
weight of words, and closeness of expressions, not an ambling Muse running on
Carpet-ground, and shod as lightly as a Newmarket racer -- He has numberless
faults in his Author's meaning, and in propriety of expression Page 22, and 192.
.

Mr. DRYDEN understood no Greek or Latin.
Mr. Dryden was once, I have heard, at Westminster School: Dr. Busby would have
whipped him for so childish a Paraphrase Milbourn, p. 72.
The meanest Pedant in England would whip a Lubber of twelve for construing so
absurdly Page 203.
. The Translator is mad, every line betrays his Stupidity Page 78.
. The faults are innumerable, and convince me that Mr. Dryden did not, or would
not understaad his Author Page 206.
. This shows how fit Mr. D. may be to translate Homer! A mistake in a single
letter might fall on the Printer well enough, but (...) for (...) must be the
error of the Author. Nor had he art enough to correct it at the Press Page 19.
. Mr. Dryden writes for the Court Ladies. -- He writes for the Ladies, and not
for use Page 124, 190.
.

The Translator puts in a little Burlesque now and then into Virgil, for a
Ragout to his cheated Subscribers Page 67.
.

Mr. POPE'S HOMER.
The Homer which Lintot prints, does not talk like Homer, but like Pope; and he
who translated him one would swear had a Hill in Tipperary for his Parnassus,
and a puddle in some Bog for his Hippocrene Dennis's Remarks on Pope's Homer, p
12
. He has no Admirers among those that can distinguish, discern, and judge Ibid.
.

He has a knack at smooth verse, but without either Genius or good sense, or
any tolerable knowledge of English. The qualities which distinguish Homer are
the beauties of his Diction and the Harmony of his Versification -- But this
little Author who is so much in vogue, has neither sense in his Thoughts, nor
English in his Expressions Character of Mr. P. p. 17. and Remarks on Homer, p.
91.
.

Mr. POPE understood no Greek.
He has undertaken to translate Homer from the Greek, of which he knows not
one word, into English, of which he understands as little Dennis's Remark's on
Homer, p. 12.
. I wonder how this Gentleman would look should it be discovered, that he has
not translated ten verses together in any book of Homer with justice to the
Poet, and yet he dares reproach his fellow-writers with not understanding Greek
Daily Journal of April 23, 1728. Supplement to the Profund. Pref.
. He has stuck so little to his Original, as to have his knowledge in Greek
called in question r. I should be glad to know which it is of all Homer's
Excellencies which has so delighted the Ladies, and the Gentlemen who judge
like Ladies? s Oldmixon, Essay on Criticism, p. 66.


Mr. DRYDEN tricked his Subscribers.
I wonder that any man who could not but be conscious of his own unfitness for
it, should go to amuse the learned world with such an undertaking! A man ought
to value his Reputation more than Money; and not to hope that those who can
read for themselves, will be imposed upon, merely by a partially and
unseasonably-celebrated Name Page 192.
. Poetis quidlibet audendi shall be Mr. Dryden's Motto, though it should extend
to Picking of Pockets Ibid. p. 125.
.

Names bestowed on Mr. DRYDEN.
An APE] A crafty Ape dressed up in a gaudy gown -- Whips put into an Ape's paw,
to play pranks with -- None but Apish and Papish Brats will heed him. Whip and
Key, Pref.

An ASS.] A Camel will take upon him no more burden than is sufficient for his
strength, but there is another Beast that crouches under all: Mr. Dryden, etc.
Milb. p. 105.

A FROG.] Poet Squab endued with Poet Maro's Spirit! an ugly, croaking kind of
Vermin, which would swell to the bulk of an Ox, p. 11.

A COWARD.] A Clinias or a Damaetas, or a man of Mr. Dryden's own Courage, p.
176.

A KNAVE.] Mr. Dryden has heard of Paul, the Knave of Jesus Christ: And if I
mistake not, I Have read somewhere of John Dryden, Servant to his Majesty, p. 57.

A FOOL.] Had he not been such a self-conceited Fool -- Whip and Key, pref.
Some great Poets are positive Blockheads. Milbourn, p. 34.

A THING.] So little a Thing as Mr. Dryden. Ibid. p. 35.

But he has a notable talent at Burlesque; his genius slides so naturally into
it, that he has burlesqu'd Homer without designing it Dennis's Remarks, p. 28.
.

[Mr. POPE tricked his Subscribers.
It Is indeed somewhat bold, and almost prodigious, for a single man to
undertake such a work! But it is too late to dissuade by demonstrating the
madness of the Project. The Subscribers expectations have been raised in
proportion to what their Pockets have been drained of Burnet Homerides, p. 1,
etc.
. Pope has been concerned in Jobs, and hired out his Name to Booksellers
British Journal, Nov. 25, 1727.
.

Names bestowed on Mr. POPE.
An APE.] Let us take the initial letter of his christian name, and the initial
and final letters of his surname, viz. A. P. E. and they give you the same Idea
of an Ape, as his face, etc. Dennis, Daily Journal, May 11, 1728.

An ASS.] It is my duty to pull off the Lion's skin from this little Ass.
Dennis's Rem. on Homer. pref.

A FROG.] A squab short Gentleman -- a little creature that like the Frog in
the Fable, swells and is angry that it is not allowed to be as big as an Ox.
Dennis's Remarks on the Rape of the Lock, pref. p. 9.

A COWARD.] A lurking way-laying coward. Char. of Mr. P. page 3.

A KNAVE.] He is one whom God and nature have marked for want of common
honesty. Ibid.

A FOOL.] Great Fools will be christened by the names of great Poets, and Pope
will be called Homer. Dennis's Rem. on Homer, p. 37.

A THING.] A little abject Thing. Ibid. p. 8.

INDEX To the DUNCIAD
Of THINGS (including AUTHORS) to be found in the NOTES, etc. The first Number
denotes the BOOK, the second the VERSE. Pro. Prolegomena.
A.
ADDISON (Mr.) written against with vehemence, by J. Dennis. Book ii. Verse
271. Railed at by A. Philips. iii. 320. Abused by J. Oldmixon, in his
Prose-Essay on Criticism, etc. ii. 271 -- by J. Ralph, in a London Journal,
iii. 159 -- Celebrated by our Author -- Upon his Discourse of Medals -- In his
Prologue to Cato -- and in this Poem. ii. 132 False Facts concerning him and
our Author related by anonymous Persons in Mist's Journals, etc. Pro. p. 75, 76
-- Disproved by the Testimonies of -- The Earl of Burlington, -- Mr. Tickel, --
Mr. Addison himself. Anger, one of the Characteristics of Mr. Dennis's Critical
Writings, i. 104 -- Affirmation, another: Pro. p. 71 [To which are added by Mr.
Theobald, Ill Nature, Spite, Revenge, i. 104.] Altar of Tibbald's Works, how
built, and how founded? i. 135, etc. Aeschylus, how long he was about him, i.
120. -- In what respect like him, iii. 309 Asses, at a Citizen's gate in a
morning, ii. 237 Appearances, that we are never to judge by them, especially of
Poets and Divines, ii. 393 Alehouse, The Birthplace of many Poems, i. 202 --
And of some Poets, ii. 130 -- One kept by Tailor the Water-poet, ii. 323 -- and
by Edward Ward, i. 200
B.
BAVIUS, Book iii. verse 16. Mr. Dennis his great opinion of him, ibid. Bawdry,
in Plays, not disapproved of by Mr. Dennis, iii. 176 BLACKMORE, (Sir Rich.) his
Impiety and Irreligion, proved by Mr. Dennis, ii. 256 -- His Quantity of Works,
and various Opinions of them. -- His abuse of Mr. Dryden and Mr. Pope, ib.
Bray, a word much beloved by Sir Richard, ii. 248 Braying, described, ii. 243.
Birch, by no means proper to be applied to young Noblememen, iii. 328 BROOM,
(Rev. Mr. Will.) His Sentiments of our Author's Virtue, Pro. -- Our Author's of
his abilities, iii. 326 -- And how he rewarded them, ib. Billingsgate-language,
how to be used by learned Authors, ii. 134 BOND, BEZALEEL, BREVAL, not living
Writers, but Phantoms, ii. 118 Booksellers, how they run for a Poet, ii. 27,
etc. Bailiffs, how Poets run from them, ii. 57
C.
Cardinal Virtues of Dullness, Book i. Verse 45 to 50 Cave of Poverty, a Poem of
Tibbald, commended by Mr. Giles Jacob, i. 106. Its extraordinary Conclusion, i.
226 COOK, (Tho.) abused Mr. Pope's moral Character, ii. 130 CONCANEN (Mat.)
one of the Authors of the Weekly Journals, ii. 287. Obliged to Dr Swift, and
writ scurrilously of him, ibid. -- Declared that when this Poem had Blanks,
they meant Treason, iii. 297 -- Of opinion that Juvenal never satiriz'd the
Poverty of Codrus, ii. 136 Critics, verbal ones, must have two Postulata
allowed them, ii. 1 Cat-calls, ii. 223 CURL, Edm. His Panegyric, ii. 54 -- His
Corinna, and what she did, 66 -- His Prayer 75. -- Like Eridanus, 176 -- Much
favored by Cloacina, 93, etc. -- Tossed in a Blanket and whipped, ib. --
Pillory'd, ii. 3
D.
Dispensary of Dr. Garth, Book ii. Verse 132 Daniel de Foe, in what resembled
to Will. Prynn, i. 101 DENNIS (John) His Character of himself, i. 104 -- Senior
to Mr. Durfey, iii. 167 -- Esteemed by our Author, and why, ib. -- His Love of
Puns, i. 61 -- And Politics, i. 104. ii. 271 -- His great Loyalty to King
George how proved, i. 104 A great Friend to the Stage -- and to the State, ii.
381 How he proves that none but Nonjurors and disaffected Persons writ against
Stage Plays, ibid. -- His respect to the Bible and Alcoran, ibid. -- His Excuse
for Obscenity in Plays, iii. 176. -- His mortal fear of Mr. Pope, founded on
Mr. Curl's assurances, i. 104 -- Of opinion that he poisoned Curl, ib. -- His
Reason why Homer was, or was not in debt, ii. 111. -- His Accusations of Sir R.
Blackmore, -- As no Protestant, ii. 256 -- As no Poet, ibid.
-- His wonderful Dedication to George Ducket, Esquire iii. 176 Drams, dangerous to
a Poet, iii. 137 Double-Falsehood, a Play published by Tibbald, iii. 270 -- A
famous Verse of it, ibid. -- How plainly proved by him to be Shakespeare's,
ibid. -- But grievous Errors committed by him in the Edition: A Specimen of
'em, ibid. Dedicators, ii. 189, etc. Dunciad, how to be correctly spelled, i. 1
-- How it came to be written, App. No. 1. Note p. 177 -- How long in writing,
various Opinions thereof, ibid. p. 179 Dullness, the Goddess; her Griginal and
Parents, i. 9. Her ancient Empire, 14. Her cardinal Virtues, 45, etc. Her
Idaeas, Productions, and Creation, 53, etc. Her Survey and Contemplation of her
Works, 77, etc. And of her Children, 93. Their uninterrupted Succession, 96,
etc. to 110. What Nations in special manner favored by her, 156. Her
Scholiasts, Commentators, etc. 159 to 172. Her beloved Seat in the City, i. 30.
The Crisis of her Empire there at Settle's death, 88, 185. Her appearance to
Tibbald, 217. She manifests to her Works, 227, etc. Anoints him, 241, etc.
Institutes Games for her Sons ii. 15, etc. How useful in Business i. 147. How
beneficent to Man 151. The manner how she makes a Wit ii. 43. A great Lover of
a Joke 30 -- And loves to repeat the same over again 114. Her ways and means to
procure the Pathetick and Terrible in Tragedy 218, etc. Incourages Chattering
and Bawling 223, etc. And is Patroness of Party-writing and railing 263. Makes
use of the heads of Critics as Scales to weigh the heaviness of Authors 335.
Promotes Slumber, with the Works of the said Authors ibid. The wonderful Virtue
of sleeping in her Lap iii. 5, etc. Her Elyzium 15, etc. The Souls of her Sons
dipped in Lethe ibid. How brought into the world? 20. Their Transfiguration and
Metemsychosis 41. The Extent and Glories of her Empire, at large, in Book iii.
Her Conquests throughout the World, 60 to 100. A Catalogue of her present
Forces in this Nation, to the end.
E.
EUSDEN (Laurence) i. 102. iii. 317 Taxed by Oldmixon with Nonsense i. 102 --
by Curl with Ebriety ii. 393. -- Defended from the Charge of Libelling ii. 279
Ears: Some people advised how to preserve them iii. 210
F.
FALSEHOODS, told of our Author in Print. Of his taking Verses from James
Moore, Pro. p. 76 And of his intending to abuse Bishop Burnet, p. 77, ibid. By
John Dennis, of his really poisoning Mr. Curl ii. 104 And of contempt for the
sacred Writings ii. 256 By Edward Ward, of his being bribed by a Duchess to
satirize Ward of Hackney in the pillory iii. 26 By Mist's Journalists, of
unfair proceeding in the Undertaking of the Odyssey and Shakespeare, Pro. p. 74
-- Disproved by the testimony of the Lords, Harcourt and Bathurst, 75, ibid. --
By Tho. Cook, of the same, ii. 130 By Mist's Journalists, concerning Mr.
Addison and him, two or three Lies, Pro. p. 73 and 75 By Pasquin, of his being
in a Plot, iii. 146 By Sir Richard Blackmore, of his burlesquing Scripture,
upon the authority of Curl ii. 256 Mac Fleckno, not so decent and chaste in the
Diction as the Dunciad ii. 71 Friendship, understood by Mr. Dennis to be
somewhat else, in Nisus and Euryalus, etc. iii. 176 Furius, Mr. Dennis called
so by Mr. Theobald i. 104 Fleet-ditch ii. 258. Its Nymphs 308. Smedley's
Discoveries there ibid.
G.
Good nature of our Author; Instances of it in this work i. 41, 258. ii. 285.
Good Sense, Grammar, and Verse, desired to give place, for the sake of Mr. Bez.
Morris and his Works iii. 161 GILDON (Charles) abused our Author in many
things, Pro. p. 68, 85. i. 250 -- Printed against Jesus Christ i 250 GILDON and
DENNIS, their unhappy Difference lamented iii. 167 Gentleman, his Hymn to his
Creator, by Welsted iii. 199
H.
HORACE, censured by Mr. Welsted, Pro. p. 69 -- Did not know what he was about
when he wrote his Art of Poetry, ibid. Called Flaccus by Tibbald, and why? i.
189 HENLEY (John the Orator). His Tub and Eucharist ii. 2. His History iii.
195. His Offer to Sir R. W. and the Hon. Mr. P -- ibid. His Opinion of
Ordination and Christian Priesthood ibid. His Medals ibid. HAYWOOD (Mrs.) What
sort of Game for her ii. 155. Won by Curl 182. Her great Respect for him 149.
The Offspring of her Brain and Body, according to Curl) ibid. Not undervalued
by being set against a Jordan 159 H -- Y, (Lord) impatiently expected by Mr.
Edw. Howard i. 251 Hints, extraordinary ones? ii. 256 HORNECK and ROOM, two
Party-Writers iii. 146
I.
JOHNSON (Charles) abused Dr. Arb. Mr. Gay and Mr. P. in a Prologue, i. 240 --
Personally abused by Curl and others for his fatness ibid. Impudence,
celebrated in Mr. Curl ii. 178 -- in Mr. Norton de Foe ii. 383 -- in Mr. Cibber
iii. 131. -- in Mr. Henley iii. 195

L.
Lord-Mayors-Show, i. 85 Library of Tibbald i. 120 Lud (King) ii. 332 Log
(King) i. verse ult. Lintot (Bernard) ii. 42
M.
MOORE (James) His Story of six Verses, and of ridiculing Bishop Burnet in the
Memoirs of a Parish-Clerk, proved false, by the Testimonies of -- The Lord
Bolingbroke, Pro. p. 77 -- Hugh Bethel, Esquire ibid. -- Earl of Peterborough,
ibid. -- Dr. Arbuthnot, ibid.
-- His Plagiarisms, some few of them, ibid. and ii. 108. What he was real
Author of (beside the Story abovementioned) Vide List of scurrilous Papers in
the Appendix, No. 3. Erasmus, his advice to him ii. 46 MILBOURNE, a fair
Critic, and why? ii. 325 Madness, of what sort Mr. Dennis's was, according to
Plato i. 104 -- According to himself iii. 174 May Pole in the Strand, turned
into a Church, ii. 24 MORRIS, (Besaleel) iii. 162
N.
NORTON DE FOE, a scandalous Writer ii. 385 Nodding, described ii. 359
O.
OLDMIXON (John) abused Mr. Addison and Mr. Pope ii. 271. Falsify'd Daniel's
History, then accused others of falsifying Lord Clarendon's; proved a Slanderer
in it, ibid. -- Mr. Eusden and my Lord Chamberlain i. 102 Odyssey, Falsehood's
concerning Mr. P's. Proposals for that Work, Pro. p. 75 -- Disproved by the
Right Honorable the Lord Bathurst ibid. -- And by those very Proposals ibid.
Owls and Opium i. 35. Opiates, two very considerable ones ii. 238. Their
Efficacy 358, etc. Owls, desired to answer Mr. Ralph iii 160
P.
Pope (Mr.) his Life] Educated by Jesuits -- by a Parson -- by a Monk -- at St.
Omers -- at Oxford -- at home -- no where at all. Pro. p. 68. His Father a
Merchant, a Husbandman, a Farmer, a Hatter, the Devil, ibid. -- His Death
threatened by D. Smedley, ibid. p. 81. but afterward advised to hang himself
or cut his Throat, ibid. To be hunted down like a wild Beast, by Mr. Theobald
ibid. unless hanged for Treason on Information of Pasquin, Mr. Dennis, Mr.
Curl, and Concanen, ibid. Poverty, never to be mentioned in Satire, in the
opinion of the Journalists and Hackney Writers -- The Poverty of Codrus, not
touched upon by Juvenal ii. 136. When, and how far Poverty may be satirized,
Letter p. 8. Whenever mentioned by our Author, it is only as an Extenuation and
Excuse for bad Writers ii. 270 Personal abuses not to be endured, in the
opinion of Mr. Dennis, Theobald, Curl, etc. ii. 134 Personal abuses on our
Author by Mr. Dennis, Gildon, etc. ibid. Pro. -- By Mr. Theobald, Pro. p.
Notes. -- By Mr. Ralph iii. 159. -- By Mr. Welsted ii. 199. -- By Mr. Chapter
Johnson i. 240 -- By Mr. Cook ii. 130. -- By Mr. Concanen iii. 297. -- By Sir
Richard Blackmore ii. 256. -- By Edw. Ward iii. 26. -- And their Brethren,
passim. Personal abuses on others] Mr. Theobald of Mr. Dennis for his Poverty
i. 104. Mr. Dennis of Mr. Theobald for his Livelihood by the Stage and the Law.
i. 106. Mr. Dennis of Sir Richard Blackmore for Impiety ii. 256. D. Smedley o*
Mr. Concanen ii. 130. Mr. Oldmixon's of M. Eusden. i. 102 -- Of Mr. Addison ii.
271 Mr. Cook's of Mr. Eusden i. 102. Politics, very useful in Criticism, Mr.
Dennis's i. 104. ii. 381 Pillory, a post of respect, in the opinion o* Mr. Curl
iii. 26 -- and of Mr. Ward, ibid. Plagiary, described ii. 38, etc. 102, etc.
Plato, in what manner translated by Tibbld* i. 221 Poverty and poetry, their
Cave i. 30 Profaneness, not to be endured in our A^thor, but very allowable in
Shakespeare i. 48 Party-Writers, their three Qualifications, i. 264 Poetesses
iii. 141 Pindars and Miltons, of the modern sort ii. 158
R.
Rag-fair i. 27 Round-house ii. 392 RALPH (James) iii. 160. See Sawney ROOM
and HORNECK iii. 146
S.
Shakespeare, to be spelled always with an e at te end i. 1 -- Crucified once a
week by Tibbald i. 164 -- Proved by him to borrrow of Winkin i. 162 -- To have
made great Blunders, Puns, and Anacr nisms, ibid. -- To have had a Bastard iii.
70 -- Said by him to deserve Whipping i. 162 -- And by Dennis called a Rascal,
ibid. SETTLE (Elkanah) Mr. Dennis's Account of him i. 88. iii. 16. And Mr.
Welsted's, ibid. A Party-writer of Pamphlets i. 88. and iii. 279. Once
preferred to Dryden i. 88. A writer of Farces and Drolls, and employed at last
in Bartholomew-fair iii. 279 Sawney, a Poem: The Author's great Ignorance in
Classical Learning i. 1 -- In Rules of Criticism iii. 159 -- In Languages,
ibid. -- In English Grammar i. 28. -- His Prays of himself above Mr. Addison
iii. 159 -- His own opinion of his Equality to Shakespeare, ibid. Scholiasts i.
159. ili. 188 Supperless, a mistake concerning this word set right, with
respect to Mr. Theobald and other temperate Students i. 109
T.
TIBBALD, why he was made Hero of this Poem according to Scriblerus. Pro. The
true reason i. 102. Why Successor to Settle i. 108. Concealed his Intentions
upon Shakespeare all the time Mr. Pope desired assistance, and promised
Encouragement, toward perfecting an Edition of him i. 106 His own Confession of
that Proceeding in a Daily Journal -- yet asked favors of Mr. P. at that time.
i. 106 One of Mist's Writers i. 106, 164. And Author secretly and abettor of
Scurrilities against Mr. P. i. 106. Vid. Pro. p. 74, 80. and Appendix, No. 3.
How he was like Aeschylus iii. 309 Like Shakespeare iii. 270 -- And like Settle
i. 108. and iii 279 Tailors, a good word for them, against Poets and ill
Paymasters ii. 111 Thunder, how to make it, by Mr. Dennis's receipt ii. 218
V.
Verbal Critics. Two Points always to be granted them ii. 1
W.
WARD (Edw.) a Poet and Alehouse-keeper in Moorfields i. 200 -- His high
opinion of his Namesake, -- and his respect for the Pillory iii. 26 WELSTED
(Leonard) one of the Authors of the Weekly Journals, abused our Author, etc.
many years since ii. 199. And afresh, ibid. Taken by Dennis for a Didapper,
ibid. The Character of his Poetry ii. 199. iii. 163 Weekly Journals, by whom
written? ii. 268, 279 Whirligigs iii. 49
FINIS.

