MEMOIRS Of the Extraordinary LIFE, WORKS, AND DISCOVERIES OF MARTINUS
SCRIBLERUS.

By Mr. POPE.

DUBLIN: Printed by and for GEORGE FAULKNER. M.DCC.XLI.

INTRODUCTION TO THE READER.
IN the Reign of Queen ANNE, (which notwithstanding those happy Times which
succeeded, every Englishman may remember) thou may possibly, gentle Reader,
have seen a certain Venerable Person who frequented the Outside of the Palace
of St. James's, and who by the Gravity of his Deportment and Habit, was
generally taken for a decayed Gentleman of Spain. His stature was tall, his
visage long, his complexion olive, his brows were black and even, his eyes
hollow yet piercing, his nose inclined to Aquiline, his beard neglected and
mixed with gray: All this contributed to spread a solemn Melancholy over his
countenance. Pythagoras was not more silent, Pyrrho more motionless, nor Zeno
more austere. His Wig was as black and smooth as the plumes of a Raven, and
hung as strait as the hair of a River-God rising from the water. His Cloak so
completely covered his whole person, that whether or no he had any other
clothes (much less any linen) under it, I shall not say; but his sword
appeared a full yard behind him, and his manner of wearing it was so stiff,
that it seemed grown to his Thigh. his whole figure was so utterly unlike any
thing of this world, that it was not natural for any man to ask him a question
without blessing himself first, Those who never saw a Jesuit, took him for one,
and others believed him some High Priest of the Jews.

But under this macerated form was concealed a Mind replete with Science,
burning with a Zeal of benefiting his fellowcreatures, and filled with an
honest conscious Pride, mixed with a scorn of doing or suffering the least
thing beneath the dignity of a Philosopher. Accordingly he had a soul that
would not let him accept of any offers of Charity, at the same time that his
body seemed but too much to require it. His lodging was in a small chamber up
four pair of stairs, where he regularly paid for what he had when he eat or
drank, and he was often observed wholly to abstain from both. He declined
speaking to any one, except the Queen, or her first Minister, to whom he
attempted to make some applications; but his real business or intentions were
utterly unknown to all men. Thus much is certain, that he was obnoxious to the
Queen's Ministry; who either out of Jealousy or Envy, had him spirited away,
and carried abroad as a dangerous person, without any regard to the known Laws
of the Kingdom.

One day, as this Gentleman was walking about dinnertime alone in the Mall, it
happened that a Manuscript dropped from under his cloak, which my servant picked
up, and brought to me. It was written in the Latin tongue, and contained many
most profound Secrets, in an unusual turn of reasoning and style. The first
leaf was inscribed with these words, Codicillus, seu Liber Memorialis, Martini
Scribleri. The Book was of so wonderful a nature, that it is incredible what a
desire I conceived that moment to be acquainted with the Author, who I clearly
perceived was some great Philosopher in disguise. I several times endeavored
to speak to him, which he as often industriously avoided. At length I found an
opportunity (as he stood under the Piazza by the Dancing-room in St. James's)
to acquaint him in the Latin tongue, that his Manuscript was fallen into my
hands: and saying this, I presented it to him, with great Encomiums on the
learned Author. Hereupon he took me aside, surveyed me over with a fixed
attention, and opening the clasps of the Parchment cover, spoke (to my great
surprise) in English, as follows.

" Courteous stranger, whoever thou art, I embrace thee as my best friend; for
either the Stars and my Art are deceitful, or the destined time is come which
is to manifest Martinus Scriblerus to the world, and thou the person chosen by
fate for this task. What thou see in me is a body exhausted by the labors of
the mind. I have found in Dame Nature not indeed an unkind, but a very coy
Mistress: Watchful nights, anxious days, slender meals, and endless labors,
must be the lot of all who pursue her, through her labyrinths and meanders. My
first vital air I drew in this Island (a soil fruitful of Philosophers) but my
complexion is become adust, and my body arid, by visiting lands (as the Poet
has it) alio sub sole calentes. I have, through my whole life, passed under
several disguises and unknown names, to skreen my self from the envy and malice
which mankind express against those who are possessed of the Arcanum Magnum.
But at present I am forced to take Sanctuary in the British Court, to avoid the
Revenge of a cruel Spaniard who has pursued me almost through the whole
terraqueous globe. Being about four years ago in the City of Madrid in quest of
natural knowledge, I was informed of a Lady who was marked with a Pomegranate
upon the inside of her right Thigh, which blossomed, and, as it were, seemed to
ripen in the due season. Forthwith was I possessed with an insatiable curiosity
to view this wonderful Phenomenon. I felt the ardour of my passion increase as
the season advanced, till in the month of July I could no longer contain. I
bribed her Duenna, was admitted to the Bath, saw her undressed, and the wonder
displayed. This was soon after discovered by the husband, who finding some
letters I had writ to the Duenna, containing expressions of a doubtful meaning,
suspected me of a crime most alien from the Purity of my Thoughts.
Incontinently I left Madrid by the advice of friends, have been pursued,
dogged, and waylaid through several Nations, and even now scarce think my self
secure within the sacred walls of this Palace. It has been my good fortune to
have seen all the grand Phenomenon of Nature, excepting an Earthquake, which I
waited for in Naples three years in vain; and now by means of some British Ship
(whose Colors no Spaniard dares approach) I impatiently expect, a safe passage
to Jamaica, for that benefit. To thee my Friend, whom Fate has marked for my
Historiographer, I leave these my Commentaries, and others of my works, No more
-- be faithful and impartial."

He soon after performed his promise, and left me the Commentaries, giving me
also further lights by many Conferences; when he was unfortunately snatched
away (as I before related) by the jealousy of the Queen's Ministry.

Though I was thus to my eternal grief deprived of his conversation, he for some
years continued his Correspondence, and communicated to me many of his Projects
for the benefit of mankind. He sent me some of his Writings, and recommended to
my care the recovery of others, straggling about the world, and assumed by
other men. The last time I heard from him was on occasion of his Strictures on
the Dunciad: since when, several years being elapsed, I have reason to believe
this excellent Person is either dead, or carried by his vehement thirst of
knowledge into some remote, or perhaps undiscovered Region of the world. In
either case, I think it a debt no longer to be delayed, to reveal what I know
of this Prodigy of Science, and to give the History of his life, and of his
extensive merits to mankind; in which I dare promise the Reader, that whenever
he begins to think any one Chapter dull, the style will be immediately changed
in the next.

MEMOIRS OF MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
Of the Parentage and Family of Scriblerus, how he was begot, what Care was
taken of him before he was born, and what Prodigies attended his Birth.
IN the City of Munster in Germany, lived a grave and learned Gentleman, by
Profession an Antiquary; who among all his invaluable Curiosities, esteemed
none more highly, than a Skin of the true Pergamenian Parchment, which hung at
the upper-end of his hall. On this was curiously traced the ancient Pedigree of
the Scribleri, with all their Alliances and collateral Relations (among which
were reckoned Albertus Magnus, Paracelsus Bombastus, and the famous Scaligers
in old time Princes of Verona) and deduced even from the Times of the Elder
Pliny to Cornelius Scriblerus: For such was the name of this venerable
Personage; whose glory it was, that by the singular Virtue of the Women, not
one had a Head of a different Cast from his family.

His wife was a Lady of singular beauty, whom not for that reason only he
espoused, but because she was undoubted daughter either of the great
Scriverius, or of Gaspar Barthius. It happened on a time, the said Gaspar made
a visit to Scriverius at Harlem, taking with him a comely Lady of his
acquaintance who was skilful in the Greek Tongue, of whom the learned
Scriverius became so enamored, as to inebriate his friend, and be familiar
with his Mistress. I am not ignorant of what Columesius relates this from Isaac
Vossius, in his Opuscul. p. 102.
Columesius affirms, that the learned Barthius was not so overtaken but he
perceived it; and in Revenge suffered this unfortunate Gentlewoman to be
drowned in the Rhine at her return. But Mrs. Scriblerus (the issue of that
Amor) was a living proof of the falsehood of this Report. Dr. Cornelius was
further induced to his marriage, from the certain information that the
aforesaid Lady, the mother of his wife, was related to Cardan on the father's
side, and to Aldrovandus on the mother's: Besides which, her Ancestors had been
professors of Physic, Astrology, or Chemistry, in German Universities, from
generation to generation.

With this fair Gentlewoman had our Doctor lived in a comfortable Union for
about ten years: But this our sober and orderly pair, without any natural
infirmity, and with a constant and frequent compliance to the chief duty of
conjugal life, were yet unhappy, in that Heaven had not blessed them with any
issue. This was the utmost grief to the good man; especially considering what
exact Precautions and Methods he had used to procure that Blessing: for he
never had cohabitation with his spouse, but he pondered on the Rules of the
Ancients, for the generation of Children of Wit. He ordered his diet according
to the prescription of Galen, confining himself and his wife for almost the
whole first year to Galen Lib. de Cibis boni and mali succi. cap. 3.
Goat's Milk and Honey. It unfortunately befell her, when she was about four
months gone with child, to long for somewhat which that author inveighs
against, as prejudicial to the understanding of the Infant: This her husband
thought fit to deny her, affirming, it was better to be childless, than to
become the Parent of a Fool. His Wife miscarried; but as the Abortion proved
only a female Faetus, he comforted himself, that had it arrived to perfection,
it would not have answered his account; his heart being wholly fixed upon the
learned Sex. However he disdained not to treasure up the Embryo in a Vial,
among the curiosities of his family.

Having discovered that Galen's prescription could not determine the sex, he
forthwith betook himself to Aristotle. Accordingly he withheld the nuptial
embrace when the wind was in any point of the South; this Arist. 14. Sect.
Prob. 5.
Author asserting that the grossness and moisture of the southerly winds
occasion the procreation of females, and not of males. But he redoubled his
diligence when the wind was at West, a wind on which that great Philosopher
bestowed the Encomiums of Fatner of the earth, Breath of the Elysian Fields,
and other glorious Elogies. For our learned man was clearly of opinion, that
the Semina out of which Animals are produced, are Animalcula ready formed, and
received in with the Air. Religion of Nature, Sect. 5. Parag. 15.


Under these regulations, his wife, to his unexpressible joy, grew pregnant a
second time; and, (what was no small addition to his happiness) he just then
came to the possession of a considerable Estate by the death of her Uncle, a
wealthy Jew who resided at London. This made it necessary for him to take a
journey to England; nor would the care of his posterity let him suffer his Wife
to remain behind him. During the voyage, he was perpetually taken up on the one
hand, how to employ his great Riches; and on the other, how to educate his
Child. He had already determined to set apart several annual Sums, for the
recovery of Manuscripts, the effosson of Coins, the procuring of Mummies; and
for all those curious discoveries by which he hoped to become (as himself was
wont to say) a second Peireskius. He had already chalked out all possible
schemes for the improvement of a male child, yet was so far prepared for the
worst that could happen, that before the nine months were expired, he had
composed two Treatises of Education; the one he called A Daughter's Mirror,
and the other A Son's Monitor.

This is all we can find relating to Martinus, while he was in his Mother's
womb, excepting that he was entertained there with a Consort of Music once in
twenty four hours, according to the Custom of the Magi: and that on a Ramsey's
Cyrus.
particular day, he was observed to leap and kick exceedingly, which was on the
first of April, the birthday of the great Basilius Valentinus.

The Truth of this, and every preceding Fact, may be depended upon, being taken
literally from the Memoirs. But I must be so ingenuous as to own, that the
Accounts are not so certain of the exact time and place of his birth. As to the
first, he had the common frailty of old men, to conceal his age: as to the
second, I only remember to have heard him say, that he first saw the light in
St. Giles's Parish. But in the investigation of this point, Fortune has
favored our diligence. For one day as I was passing by the Seven Dials, I
overheard a dispute concerning the place of Nativity of a great Astrologer,
which each man alleged to have been in his own street. The circumstances of
the time, and the description of the person, made me imagine it might be that
universal Genius whose life I am writing. I returned home, and having maturely
considered their several arguments, which I found to be of equal weight, I
quieted my curiosity with this natural conclusion, that he was born in some
point common to all the seven streets; which must be that on which the Column
is now erected. And it is with infinite pleasure that I since find my
Conjecture confirmed, by the following passage in the Codicil to Mr. Neale's
Will.

I appoint my Executors to engrave the following Inscription on the Column in
the Center of the seven Streets which I erected. LOC. NOT. INCLUT. PHILOS. MAR.
SCR. But Mr. Neale's Order was never performed, because the Executors durst not
administer.

Nor was the Birth of this great man unattended with Prodigies: He himself has
often told me, that on the night before he was born, Mrs. Scriblerus dreamed
she was brought to bed of a huge Ink-horn, out of which issued several large
streams of Ink, as it had been a fountain. This dream was by her husband
thought to signify, that the child should prove a very voluminous Writer.
Likewise a Virgil's Laurel Donat.
Crab-tree that had been hitherto barren, appeared on a sudden laden with a
vast quantity of Crabs: This sign also the old gentleman imagined to be a
prognostic of the acuteness of his Wit. A great swarm of Plato, Lucan, etc.
Wasps played round his Cradle without hurting him, but were very troublesome
to all in the room besides: This seemed a certain presage of the effects of his
Satire. A Dunghill was seen within the space of one night to be covered all
over with Mushroom: This some interpreted to promise the infant great fertility
of fancy, but no long duration to his works: but the Father was of another
opinion.

But what was of all most wonderful, was a thing that seemed a monstrous Fowl,
which just then dropped through the sky-light, near his wife's apartment. It had
a large body, two little disproportioned wings, a prodigious tail, but no head.
As its color was white, he took it at first sight for a Swan, and was
concluding his son would be a Poet: but on a nearer view, he preceived it to be
speckled with black, in the form of letters; and that it was indeed a Paper
kite which had broke its leash by the impetuosity of the wind. His back was
armed with the Art Military, his belly was filled with Physic, his wings were
the wings of Quarles and Withers, the several Nodes of his voluminous tail were
diversified with several branches of Science; where the Doctor beheld with
great joy a knot of Logic, a knot of Metaphysick, a knot of Casuistry, a knot
of Polemical Divinity, and a knot of Common Law, with a Lanthorn of Jacob
Behmen.

There went a Report in the family, that as soon as he was born he uttered the
voice of nine several animals: he cried like a Calf, bleated like a Sheep,
chattered like a Mag-pye, grunted like a Hog, neighed like a Foal, croaked like
a Raven, mewed like a Cat, gabbled like a Goose, and brayed like an Ass. And
the next morning he was found playing in his bed with two Owls, which came down
the chimney. His Father greatly rejoiced at all these signs, which betokened
the variety of his Eloquence, and the extent of his Learning; but he was more
particularly pleased with the last, as it nearly resembled what happened at the
birth of Vid. Eustat. in Odyss. l. 12. ex Alex. Paphio. and Leo. Allat. de
patr. Hom. page 45.
Homer.

CHAP. II.
The Speech of Cornelius over his Son, at the Hour of his Birth.
NO sooner was the cry of the Infant heard, but the old gentleman rushed into
the Room, and snatching it in his arms, examined every limb with attention. He
was infinitely pleased to find, that the Child had the Wart of Cicero, the wry
Neck of Alexander, knots upon his legs like Marius, and one of them shorter
than the other like Agesilaus. The good Cornelius also hoped he would come to
stammer like Demosthenes, in order to be as eloquent; and in time arrive at
many other Defects of famous men. He held the child so long, that the Midwife
grown out of all patience, snatched it from his arms, in order to swaddle it. '
Swaddle him? (quoth he) far be it from me to submit to such a pernicious
Custom! Is not my son a Man? and is not Man the Lord of the Universe? Is it
thus you use this Monarch at his first arrival in his dominions, to manacle and
shackle him hand and foot? Is this what you call to be freeborn? If you have
no regard to his natural Liberty, at least have some to his natural Faculties.
Behold with what agility he spreads his Toes, and moves them with as great
variety as his Fingers! a power, which in the small circle of a year may be
totally abolished, by the enormous confinement of shoes and stockings. His Ears
(which other animals turn with great advantage toward the sonorous object)
may, by the ministry of some accursed Nurse, for ever lie flat and immovable.
Not so the Ancients, they could move them at pleasure, and accordingly are
often described arrectis auribus." ' What a devil (quoth the Midwife) would you
have your son move his Ears like a Drill?" ' Yes fool (said he) why should he
not have the perfection of a Drill, or of any other animal?" Mrs. Scriblerus,
who lay all this while fretting at her husband's discourse, at last broke out
to this purpose. ' My dear, I have had many disputes with you upon this subject
before I was a month gone: We have but one child, and can not afford to throw
him away upon experiments. I Will have my boy bred up like other gentlemen, at
home, and always under my own eye." All the Gossips with one voice, cried, Ay,
ay; but Cornelius broke out in this manner. ' What, bred at home? Have I taken
all this pains for a creature that is to lead the inglorious life of a Cabbage,
to suck the nutritious juices from the spot where he was first planted? No; to
perambulate this terraqueous Globe is too small a Range; were it permitted, he
should at least make the Tour of the whole System of the Sun. Let other Mortals
pore upon Maps, and swallow the legends of lying travelers; the son of
Cornelius shall make his own Legs his Compasses; with those he shall measure
Continents, Islands, Capes, Bays, Streights, and Isthmus's: He shall himself
take the altitude of the highest mountains, from the piek of Derby to the piek
of Tenariff; when he has visited the top of Taurus, Imaus, Caucasus, and the
famous Ararat where Noah's Ark first moored, he may take a flight view of the
snowy Riphaeans; nor would I have him neglect Athos and Olympus, renowned for
poetical fictions. Those that vomit fire will deserve a more particular
attention: I will therefore have him observe with great care Vesuvius, Aetna,
the burning mountain of Java, but chiefly Hecla the greatest rarity in the
Northern Regions. Then he may likewise contemplate the wonders of the Mephitick
cave. When he has dived into the bowels of the earth, and surveyed the works of
Nature under ground, and instructed himself fully in the nature of Vulcanos,
Earthquakes, Thunders, Tempests and Hurricanes, I hope he will bless the world
with a more exact survey of the deserts of Arabia and Tartary, than as yet we
are able to obtain: Then will I have him cross the seven Gulphs, measure the
currents in the fifteen famous Streights, and search for those fountains of
fresh water that are at the bottom of the Ocean." -- At these last words Mrs.
Scriblerus fell into a trembling: the description of this terrible Scene made
too violent an impression upon a woman in her condition, and threw her into a
strong hysteric Fit; which might have proved dangerous, if Cornelius had not
been pushed out of the room by the united force of the women.

CHAP. III.
Showing what befell the Doctor's Son and his Shield, on the Day of the
Christ'ning.
THE day of the Christ'ning being come, and the house filled with Gossips, the
Levity of whose Conversation suited but ill with the Gravity of Dr. Cornelius,
he cast about how to pass this day more agreeably to his Character; that is to
say, not without some Profitable Conference, nor wholly without observance of
some Ancient Custom.

He remembered to have read in Theocritus, that the Cradle of Hercules was a
Shield; and being possessed of an antique Buckler which he held as a most
inestimable Relick, he determined to have the infant laid therein, and in that
manner brought into the Study, to be shown to certain learned men of his
acquaintance.

The regard he had for this Shield, had caused him formerly to compile a
Dissertation concerning it, proving from the several properties, and
particularly the color of the Rust, the exact chronology thereof.

With this Treatise, and a moderate supper, he proposed to entertain his
Guests; though he had also another design, to have their assistance in the
calculation of his Son's Nativity.

He therefore took the Buckler out of a Case (in which he always kept it least
it might contract any modern rust), and entrusted it to his Housemaid, with
orders, that when the company was come she should lay the Child carefully in
it, covered with a mantle of blue Satin.

The Guests were no sooner seated, but they entered into a warm Debate about
the Triclinium and the manner of Decubitus of the Ancients, which Cornelius
broke off in this manner.

This day, my Friends, I purpose to exhibit my son before you; a Child not
wholly unworthy of Inspection, as he is descended from a Race of Virtuosi. Let
the Phisiognomists examine his features; let the Chirographists behold his
Palm; but above all let us consult for the calculation of his Nativity. To this
end, as the child is not vulgar, I will not present him unto you in a vulgar
manner. He shall be cradled in my Ancient Shield, so famous through the
Universities of Europe. You all know how I purchased that invaluable piece of
Antiquity at the great (though indeed inadequate) expense of all the Plate of
our family, how happily I carried it off, and how triumphantly I transported it
hither, to the inexpressible grief of all Germany. Happy in every circumstance,
but that it broke the heart of the great Melchior Insipidus!

Here he stopped his Speech, upon sight of the Maid, who entered the room with
the Child: He took it in his arms and proceeded:

Behold then my Child, but first behold the Shield: Behold this Rust, -- or
rather let me call it this precious Aerugo, -- behold this beautiful Varnish of
Time, -- this venerable Verdure of so many Ages --

In speaking these words, he slowly lifted up the Mantle, which covered it,
inch by inch; but at every inch he uncovered, his cheeks grew paler, his hand
trembled, his nerves failed, till on sight of the whole the Tremor became
universal: The Shield and the Infant both dropped to the ground, and he had only
strength enough to cry out, O God! my Shield, my Shield!

The Truth was, the Maid (extremely concerned for the reputation of her own
cleanliness, and her young master's honor) had scoured it as clean as her
Andirons.

Cornelius sunk back on a chair, the Guests stood astonished, the infant
squawl'd, the maid ran in, snatched it up again in her arms, flew into her
mistresses room, and told what had happened. Down stairs in an instant hurried
all the Gossips, where they found the Doctor in a Trance: Hungary water,
Hartshorn, and the confused noise of shrill voices, at length awakened him:
when opening his eyes, he saw the Shield in the hands of the Housemaid. O
Woman! Woman! he cried (and snatched it violently from her) was it to thy
ignorance that this Relick owes its ruin? where, where is the beautiful Crust
that covered thee so long? where those Traces of Time, and Fingers as it were
of Antiquity? Where all those beautiful obscurities, the cause of much
delightful disputation, where doubt and curiosity went hand in hand and
eternally exercised the speculations of the learned? All this the rude Touch of
an ignorant woman has done away! The curious Prominence at the belly of that
figure, which some taking for the Cuspis of a sword, denominated a Roman
Soldier; others accounting the Insignia Virilia, pronounced to be one of the
Dii Termini; behold she has cleaned it in like shameful sort, and shown to be
the head of a Nail. O my Shield! my Shield! well may I say with Horace, non
been relicta Parmula.

The Gossips, not at all inquiring into the cause of his sorrow, only asked if
the Child had no hurt? and cried, Come, come, all is well; what has the woman
done but her duty? a tight cleanly wench I warrant her; what a stir a man makes
about a Basin, that an hour ago, before this labor was bestowed upon it, a
Country Barber would not have hung at his shop door. A Basin! (cried another)
no such matter, it is nothing but a paultry old Sconce, with the nozzle broke
off. The learned Gentlemen, who till now had stood speechless, hereupon looking
narrowly on the Shield, declared their Assent to this latter opinion; and
desired Cornelius to be comforted, assuring him it was a Sconce and no other.
But this, instead of comforting, threw the Doctor into such a violent Fit of
passion, that he was carried off groaning and speechless to bed; where, being
quite spent, he fell into a kind of slumber.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Suction and Nutrition of the Great Scriblerus in his Infancy, and of
the first Rudiments of his Learning.
AS soon as Cornelius awaked, he raised himself on his elbow, and casting his
eye on Mrs. Scriblerus, spoke as follows. Wisely was it said by Homer, that in
the Cellar of Jupiter are two barrels, the one of good, the other of evil,
which he never bestows on mortals separately, but constantly mingles them
together. Thus at the same time has Heaven blessed me with the birth of a Son,
and afflicted me with the scouring of my Shield. Yet let us not repine at his
Dispensations, who gives and who takes away; but rather join in prayer, that
the Rust of Antiquity which he has been pleased to take from my Shield, may be
added to my Son; and that so much of it as it is my purpose he shall contract
in his Education, may never be destroyed by any Modern Polishing.

He could no longer bear the sight of the Shield, but ordered it should be
removed for ever from his eyes. It was not long after purchased by Dr.
Woodward, who, by the assistance of Mr. Kemp incrusted it with a new Rust, and
is the same whereof a Cut has been engraved, and exhibited to the great
Contentation of the learned.

Cornelius now began to regulate the Suction of his Child. Seldom did there
pass a day without disputes between him and the Mother, or the Nurse,
concerning the nature of Aliment. The poor woman never dined but he denied her
some dish or other, which he judged prejudicial to her milk. One day she had a
longing desire to a piece of beef, and as she stretched her hand toward it,
the old gentleman drew it away, and spoke to this effect. Had thou read the
Ancients, O Nurse, thou would prefer the welfare of the Infant which thou
nourishest, to the indulging of an irregular and voracious Appetite. Beef, it
is true, may confer a Robustness on the limbs of my son, but will hebetate and
clogg his Intellectuals. While he spoke this, the Nurse looked upon him with
much anger, and now and then cast a wishful eye upon the Beef -- Passion
(continued the Doctor, still holding the dish) throws the mind into too violent
a fermentation; it is a kind of Fever of the soul, or, as Horace expresses it,
a Short Madness. Consider Woman, that this day's Suction of my son may cause
him to imbibe many ungovernable Passions, and in a manner spoil him for the
temper of a Philosopher. Romulus by sucking a Wolf, became of a fierce and
savage disposition; and were I to breed some Ottoman Emperor or Founder of a
Military Commonwealth, perhaps I might indulge thee in this carnivorous
Appetite. -- What, interrupted the Nurse, Beef spoil the understanding? that is
fine indeed -- how then could our Parson preach as he does upon Beef, and
Pudding too, if you go to that? Don't tell me of your Ancients, had not you
almost killed the poor babe with a dish of Daemonial black Broth? --
Lacedemonian black Broth, thou would say, (replied Cornelius) but I cannot
allow the surfeit to have been occasioned by that diet, since it was
recommended by the Divine Lycurgus. No, Nurse, thou must certainly have eaten
some meats of ill digestion the day before, and that was the real cause of his
disorder. Consider Woman, the different Temperaments of different Nations: What
makes the English Phlegmatic and melancholy but Beef? what renders the Welsh
so hot and choleric, but cheese and leeks? the French derive their levity from
their Soups, Frogs, and Mushrooms: I would not let my Son dine like an Italian,
lest like an Italian he should be jealous and revengeful: The warm and solid
diet of Spain may be more beneficial, as it might indue him with a profound
Gravity, but at the same time he might suck in with their food their
intolerable Vice of Pride. Therefore Nurse, in short, I hold it requisite to
deny you at present, not only Beef, but likewise whatsoever any of those
Nations eat. During this speech, the Nurse remained pouting and marking her
plate with the knife, nor would she touch a bit during the whole dinner. This
the old Gentleman observing, ordered that the Child, to avoid the risque of
imbibing ill humors, should be kept from her breast all that day, and be fed
with Butter mixed with Honey, according to a Prescription he had met with
somewhere in Eustathius upon Homer. This indeed gave the Child a great
looseness, but he was not concerned at it, in the opinion that whatever harm it
might do his body, would be amply recompensed by the improvements of his
understanding. But from thenceforth he insisted every day upon a particular
Diet to be observed by the Nurse; under which having been long uneasy, she at
last parted from the family, on his ordering her for dinner the Paps of a Sow
with Pig; taking it as the highest indignity, and a direct Insult upon her Sex
and Calling.

Four years of young Martin's life passed away in squabbles of this nature.
Mrs. Scriblerus considered it was now time to instruct him in the fundamentals
of Religion, and to that end took no small pains in teaching him his Catechism:
But Cornelius looked upon this as a tedious way of Instruction, and therefore
employed his head to find out more pleasing methods, the better to induce him
to be fond of learning. He would frequently carry him to the Puppet-show, of
the Creation of the world, where the Child with exceeding delight gained a
notion of the History of the Bible. His first rudiments in profane history were
acquired by seeing of Raree-shows, where he was brought acquainted with all the
Princes of Europe. In short the old Gentleman so contrived it, to make every
thing contribute to the improvement of his knowledge, even to his very Dress.
He invented for him a Geographical suit of clothes, which might give him some
hints of that Science, and likewise some knowledge of the Commerce of different
Nations. He had a French Hat with an African Feather, Holland Shirts and
Flanders Lace, English Cloth lined with Indian Silk, his Gloves were Italian,
and his Shoes were Spanish: He was made to observe this, and daily catechis'd
thereupon, which his Father was wont to call Traveling at home. He never gave
him a Fig or an Orange but he obliged him to give an account from what Country
it came. In Natural history he was much assisted by his Curiosity in
Sign-Posts, insomuch that he has often confessed he owed to them the knowledge
of many Creatures which he never found since in any Author, such as White
Lions, Golden Dragons, etc. He once thought the same of Green Men, but had
since found them mentioned by Kercherus, and verified in the History of William
of Newbury. Gul. Neubrig. Book i. Chapter 27.


His disposition to the Mathematics was discovered very early, by his drawing
Pascal's Life. Lock of Educ. etc.
parallel lines on his bread and butter, and intersecting them at equal Angles,
so as to form the whole Superficies into squares. But in the midst of all these
Improvements, a stop was put to his learning the Alphabet, nor would he let him
proceed to Letter D, till he could truly and distinctly pronounce C in the
ancient manner, at which the Child unhappily boggled for near three months. He
was also obliged to delay his learning to write, having turned away the Writing
Master because he knew nothing of Fabius's Waxen Tables.

Cornelius having read, and seriously weighed the methods by which the famous
Montaigne was educated, and resolving in some degree to exceed them, resolved
he should speak and learn nothing but the learned Languages, and especially the
Greek; in which he constantly eat and drank, according to Homer. But what most
conduced to his easy attainment of this Language, was his love of Ginger-bread;
which his Father observing, caused it to be stamped with the Letters of the
Greek Alphabet; and the child the very first day eat as far as Iota. By this
particular application to this language above the rest, he attained so great a
proficience therein, that Gronovius ingenuously confesses he durst not confer
with this child in Greek at eight years old; and at fourteen he composed a
Tragedy in the same language, as the younger Plin. Epist. Lib. 7.
Pliny had done before him.

He learned the Oriental Languages of Erpenius who resided some time with his
father for that purpose. He had so early a Relish for the Eastern way of
writing, that even at this time he composed (in imitation of it) the Thousand
and One Arabian Tales, and also the Persian Tales, which have been since
translated into several languages, and lately into our own with particular
elegance, by Mr. Ambrose Philips. In this work of his Childhood, he was not a
little assisted by the historical Traditions of his Nurse.

CHAP. V.
A Dissertation upon Play-things.
HERE follow the Instructions of Cornelius Scriblerus concerning the Plays and
Play-things to be used by his son Martin.

' Play was invented by the Lydians as a remedy against Hunger. Sophocles says
of Palamedes, that he invented Dice to serve sometimes instead of a dinner. It
is therefore wisely contrived by Nature, that Children, as they have the
keenest Appetites, are most addicted to Plays. From the same cause, and from
the unprejudiced and incorrupt simplicity of their minds it proceeds, that the
Plays of the Ancient Children are preserved more entire than any other of their
Customs. In this matter I would recommend to all who have any concern in my
Son's Education, that they deviate not in the least from the primitive and
simple Antiquity.

' To speak first of the Whistle, as it is the first of all Play-things. I will
have it exactly to correspond with the ancient Fistula, and accordingly to be
composed, septem paribus disjuncta cicutis.

' I heartily wish a diligent search may be made after the true Crepitaculum or
Rattle of the Ancients, for that (as Archytas Tarentinus was of opinion) kept
the children from breaking Earthen Ware. The China Cups in these days are not
at all the safer for the modern Rattles; which is an evident proof how far
their Crepitacula exceeded ours.

' I would not have Martin as yet to scourge a Top, till I am better informed
whether the Trochus which was recommended by Cato be really our present Top, or
rather the Hoop which the boys drive with a stick. Neither Cross and Pile, nor
Ducks and Drakes are quite so ancient as Handy-dandy, though Marcobius and St.
Augustine take notice of the first, and Minutius Foelix describes the latter;
but Handy-dandy is mentioned by Aristotle, Plato, and Aristophanes.

' The Play which the Italians call Cinque, and the French Mourre, is extremely
ancient; it was played at by Hymen and Cupid at the Marriage of Psyche, and
termed by the Latins, digitis micare.

' Julius Pollux describes the Omilla or Chuck farthing: though some will have
our modern Chuck-farthing to be nearer the Aphetinda of the Ancients. He also
mentions the Basilinda, or King I am; and Myinda, or Hoopers-Hide.

' But the Chytindra described by the same Author is certainly not our
Hot-cockle; for that was by pinching and not by striking; though there are good
authors who affirm the Rathapygismus to be yet nearer the modern Hot-cockle. My
son Martin may use either of them indifferently, they being equally antique.

' Building of Houses, and Riding upon Sticks have been used by children in all
ages, Aedificare casas, equitare in arundine longa. Yet I must doubt whether
the Riding upon Sticks did not come into use after the age of the Centaurs.

' There is one Play which shows the gravity of ancient Education, called the
Acinetinda, in which children contended who could longest stand still. This we
have suffered to perish entirely; and if I might be allowed to guess, it was
certainly first lost among the French.

' I will permit my Son to play at Apodidiascinda, which can be no other than
our Puss in a Corner.

' Julius Pollux in his ninth book speaks of the Melolouthe or the Kite; but I
question whether the Kite of Antiquity was the same with ours: And though the
(...) or Quailfighting is what is most taken notice of, they had doubtless
Cock-matches also, as is evident from certain ancient Gems and Relievo's.

' In a word, let my son Martin disport himself at any Game truly Antique,
except one, which was invented by a people among the Thracians, who hung up one
of their Companions in a Rope, and gave him a Knife to cut himself down; which
if he failed in, he was suffered to hang till he was dead; and this was only
reckoned a sort of joke. I am utterly against this, as barbarous and cruel.

' I cannot conclude, without taking notice of the beauty of the Greek names,
whose Etymologies acquaint us with the nature of the sports; and how
infinitely, both in sense and sound, they excel our barbarous names of Plays.

Notwithstanding the foregoing Injunctions of Dr. Cornelius, he yet
condescended to allow the Child the use of some few modern Play-things; such as
might prove of any benefit to his mind, by instilling an early notion of the
sciences. For example, he found that Marbles taught him Percussion and the Laws
of Motion; Nut-crackers the use of the Leaver; Swinging on the ends of a Board,
the Balance; Bottlescrews, the Vice; Whirligigs the Axis and Peritrochia;
Bird-cages, the Pully; and Tops the Centrifugal motion.

Others of his sports were farther carried to improve his tender soul even in
Virtue and Morality. We shall only instance one of the most useful and
instructive, Bob-cherry, which teaches at once two noble Virtues, Patience and
Constancy; the first in adhering to the pursuit of one end, the latter in
bearing a disappointment.

Besides all these, he taught him as a diversion, an odd and secret manner of
Stealing, according to the Custom of the Lacedaemonians; wherein he succeeded
so well, that he practiced it to the day of his death.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Gymnasticks, in what Exercises Martinus was educated; something
concerning Music, and what sort of a Man his Uncle was.
NOR was Cornelius less careful in adhering to the rules of the purest
Antiquity, in relation to the Exercises of his Son. He was stripped, powdered,
and anointed, but not constantly bathed, which occasioned many heavy complaints
of the Laundress about dirtying his linen. When he played at Quoits, he was
allowed his Breeches and Stockings; because the Discoboli (as Cornelius well
knew) were naked (...) the middle only. The Mother often contended for modern
Sports and common Customs, but this was his constant reply, Let a Daughter be
the care of her Mother, but the Education of a Son should be the delight of his
Father.

It was about this time, he heard to his exceeding content, that the Harpastus
of the Ancients was yet in use in Cornwall, and known there by the name of
Hurling. He was sensible the common Football was a very imperfect imitation of
that exercise; and thought it necessary to send Martin into the West, to be
initiated in that truly ancient and manly part of the Gymnasticks. The poor boy
was so unfortunate as to return with a broken leg. This Cornelius looked upon
but as a slight ailment, and promised his Mother he would instantly cure it: He
slit a green Reed, and cast the knife upward, then tying the two parts of the
Reed to the disjointed place, pronounced these words, Pliny Hist. Not. lib. 17.
in fine. Carmen contra luxata membra, eujus verba inserere non equidem serio
ausim, quanquam a Catone prodita. Vid. Cato de re rust. c. 160.
Daries, daries, astataries, dissunapiter; huat, hanat, huat, ista, pista
fista, domi abo, damnaustra. But finding to his no small astonishment, that
this had no effect, in five days he condescended to have it set by a modern
Surgeon.

Mrs. Scriblerus, to prevent him from exposing her Son to the like dangerous
Exercises for the future, proposed to send for a Dancing Master, and to have
him taught the Minuet and Rigadoon. Dancing (quoth Cornelius) I much approve,
for Socrates said the best Dancers were the best Warriors; but not those
species of Dancing which you mention: They are certainly Corruptions of the
Comic and Satyric Dance, which were utterly disliked by the sounder Ancients.
Martin shall learn the Tragic Dance only, and I will send all over Europe till
I find an Antiquary able to instruct him in the Saltatio Pyrrhica. Scalig.
Poetic. l. 1. c. 9. Hanc saltationem Pyrrhicam, nos saepe and diu, jussu
Bonifacii patrui, coram Divo Maximiliano, non sine stupore totius Germaniae,
repraesentavimus. Quo tempore vox illa Imperatoris, Hic puer out Thoracem pro
pelle out pro cunis habuit.
Scaliger, from whom my son is lineally descended, boasts to have performed
this warlike Dance in the Presence of the Emperor, to the great admiration of
all Germany. What would he say, could be look down and see one of his posterity
so ignorant, as not to know the least step of that noble kind of Saltation?

The poor Lady was at last enured to bear all these things with a laudable
patience, till one day her husband was seized with a new thought. He had met
with a saying, that ' Spleen, Garter, and Girdle are the three impediments to
the Cursus.' Therefore Pliny (lib. xi. cap. 37.) says, that such as excel in
that exercise have their Spleen cauteriz'd. My son (quoth Cornelius) runs but
heavily; therefore I will have this operation performed upon him immediately.
Moreover it will cure that immoderate Laughter to which I perceive he is
addicted: For laughter (as the same author has it, ibid.) is caused by the
bigness of the Spleen. This design was no sooner hinted to Mrs. Scriblerus, but
she burst into tears, wrung her hands, and instantly sent to his Brother
Albertus, begging him for the love of God to make haste to her husband.

Albertus was a discreet man, sober in his opinions, clear of Pedantry, and
knowing enough both in books and in the world, to preserve a due regard for
whatever was useful or excellent, whether ancient or modern: If he had not
always the authority, he had at least the art, to divert Cornelius from many
extravagancies. It was well he came speedily, or Martin could not have boasted
the entire Quota of his Viscera. What does it signify (quoth Albertus) whether
my Nephew excels in the Cursus or not? Speed is often a symptom of Cowardice,
witness Hares and Deer. -- Do not forget Achilles (quoth Cornelius) I know that
Running has been condemned by the proud Spartans, as useless in war; and yet
Demosthenes could say (...), a thought which the English Hudibras has well
rendered, For he that runs may fight again,
Which he can never do that is slain.
That Is true (quoth Albertus) but pray consider on the other side that Animals
Blackmore's Essay on Spleen.
spleened grow extremely salacious, an experiment well known in dogs. Cornelius
was struck with this, and replied gravely; If it be so, I will defer the
Operation, for I will not increase the powers of my son's body at the expense
of those of his mind. I am indeed disappointed in most of my projects, and fear
I must down at last contented with such methods of Education as modern
barbarity affords. Happy had it been for us all, had we lived in the age of
Augustus! Then my son might have heard the Philosophers dispute in the Porticos
of the Palestra and at the same time formed his Body and his Understanding. It
is true (replied Albertus) we have no Exedra for the Philosophers, adjoining to
our Tennis-Courts; but there are Alehouses where he will hear very notable
argumentations: Though we come not up to the Ancients in the Tragic-dance, we
excel them in the (...), or the art of Tumbling. The Ancients would have beat
us at Quoits, but not so much at the Jaculum or pitching the Bar. The
Fisty-Cuffs.
Pugilatus is in as great perfection in England as in old Rome, and the
Cornish-Hug in the Wrestling.
Luctus is equal to the volutatoria of the Ancients. You could not (answered
Cornelius) have produced a more unlucky instance of modern folly and barbarity,
than what you say of the Jaculum. The Arist, politic. lib. 2, cap. 3.
Cretians wisely forbid their servants Gymnasticks, as well as Arms; and yet
your modern Footmen exercise themselves daily in the Jaculum at the corner of
Hyde-Park, whist their enervated Lords are lolling in their chariots (a species
of Vectitation seldom used amongst the Ancients, except, by old Men.) You say
well (quoth Albertus) and we have several other kinds of Vectitation unknown to
the Ancients, particularly flying Chariots, where the people may have the
benefit of this exercise at the small expense of a farthing. But suppose (which
I readily grant) that the Ancients excelled us almost in every thing, yet why
this singularity? your son must take up with such masters as the present age
affords; we have Dancing-masters, Writing-masters, and Musick-masters.

The bare mention of Music threw Cornelius into a passion. How can you dignify
(quoth he) this modern fidling with the name of Music? Will any of your best
Hautboys encounter a Wolf now adays with no other arms but their instruments,
as did that ancient piper Pythocaris? Have ever wild Boars, Elephants, Deer,
Dolphins, Whales or Turbotts, showed the least emotion at the most elaborate
strains of your modern Scrapers, all which have been as it were tamed and
humaniz'd by ancient Musicians? Does not Aelian Hist. Animal. lib. xi. cap. 18.
and lib. xii. cap. 44.
Aelian tell us how the Lybian Mares were excited to horsing by Music? (which
ought in truth to be a caution to modest Women against frequenting Operas; and
consider, brother, you are brought to this dilemma, either to give up the
virtue of the Ladies, or the power of your Music) Whence proceeds the
degeneracy of our Morals? Is it not from the loss of ancient Music, by which
(says Aristotle) they taught all the Virtues? Else might we turn Newgate into a
College of Dorian Musicians, who should teach moral Virtues to those People.
Whence comes it that our present diseases are so stubborn? whence is it that I
daily deplore my Sciatical pains? Alas! because we have lost their true cure,
by the melody of the Pipe. All this was well known to the Ancients, as
Athenaeus, lib. xiv.
Theophrastus assures us, (whence Lib. de sanitat. tuend cap. 2.
Caelius calls it loca dolentia decantare) only indeed some small remains of
this skill is preserved in the cure of the Tarantula. Did not Quintilian lib. 1
cap. 10.
Pythagoras stop a company of drunken Bullies from storming a civil house, by
changing the strain of the Pipe to the sober Spondaeus? and yet your modern
Musicians want art to defend their windows from common Nickers. It is well
known that when the Lacedaemonian Mob were up, they Suidas in Timotheo.
commonly sent for a Lesbian Musician to appease them, and they immediately
grew calm as soon as they heard Terpander sing: Yet I don't believe that the
Pope's whole band of Music, though the best of this age, could keep his
Holiness's Image from being burnt on a fifth of November. Nor would Terpander
himself (replied Albertus) at Billing sgate, nor Timotheus at Hockley in the
Hole have any manner of effect, nor both of 'em together bring Horneck, a
scurrilous Scribler who wrote a weekly paper, called the High German Doctor.
Horneck to common civility. That Is a gross mistake (said Cornelius very
warmly) and to prove it so, I have here a small Lyra of my own, framed, strung,
and tuned after the ancient manner. I can play some fragments of Lesbian tunes,
and I wish I were to try them upon the most passionate creatures alive. -- You
never had a better opportunity (says Albertus) for yonder are two apple-women
scolding, and just ready to uncoif one another. With that Cornelius, undressed
as he was, jumps out into his Balcony, his Lyra in hand, in his slippers, with
his breeches hanging down to his ankles, a stocking upon his head, and a
waistcoat of murrey-colour'd satin upon his body: He touched his Lyra with a
very unusual sort of an Harpegiatura, nor were his hopes frustrated. The odd
Equipage, the uncouth Instrument, the strangeness of the Man and of the Music,
drew the ears and eyes of the whole Mob that were got about the two female
Champions, and at last of the Combatants themselves. They approached the
Balcony, in as close attention as Orpheus's first Audience of Cattle, or that
of an Italian Opera when some favorite Air is just awakened. This sudden
effect of his Music encouraged him mightily, and it was observed he never
touched his Lyre in such a truly chromatick and enharmonick manner as upon that
occasion. The mob laughed, sung, jumped, danced, and used many odd gestures,
all which he judged to be caused by his various strains and modulations. Mark
(quoth he) in this, the power of the Ionian, in that, you see the effect of the
Aeolian. But in a little time they began to grow riotous, and threw stones:
Cornelius then withdrew, but with the greatest air of Triumph in the world.
Brother (said he) do you observe I have mixed unawares too much of the
Phrygian; I might change it to the Lydian, and soften their riotous tempers:
But it is enough: learn from this Sample to speak with veneration of ancient
Music. If this Lyre in my unskilful hands can perform such wonders, what must
it not have done in those of a Timotheus or a Terpander? Having said this, he
retired with the utmost Exultation in himself, and Contempt of his Brother;
and, it is said, behaved that night with such unusual haughtiness to his
family, that they all had reason to wish for some ancient Tibicen to calm his
Temper.

CHAP. VII.
Rhetoric, Logic, and Metaphysics.
Cornelius having (as has been said) many ways been disappointed in his
attempts of improving the bodily Forces of his son, thought it now high time to
apply to the Culture of his Internal faculties. He judged it proper in the
first place to instruct him in Rhetoric. But herein we shall not need to give
the Reader any account of his wonderful progress, since it is already known to
the learned world by his Treatise on this subject: I mean the admirable
Discourse (...), which he wrote at this time but concealed from his Father,
knowing his extreme partiality for the Ancients. It lay by him concealed, and
perhaps forgot among the great multiplicity of other Writings, till about the
year 1727, he sent it us to be printed, with many additional examples drawn
from the excellent live Poets of this present age. We proceed therefore to
Logic and Metaphysick.

The wise Cornelius was convinced, that these being Polemical Arts, could no
more be learned alone, than Fencing or Cudgel-playing. He thought it therefore
necessary to look out for some Youth of pregnant parts, to be a sort of humble
Companion to his son in those studies. His good fortune directed him to one of
most singular endowments, whose name was Conradus Crambe, who by the father's
side was related to the Crouches of Cambridge, and his mother was Cousin to Mr.
Swan, Gamester and Punster of the City of London. So that from both parents he
drew a natural disposition to sport himself with Words, which as they are said
to be the counters of wise Men, and readymoney of Fools, Crambe had great store
of cash of the latter sort. Happy Martin in such a Parent, and such a
Companion! What might not he atchieve in Arts and Sciences.

Here I must premise a general observation of great benefit to mankind. That
there are many people who have the use only of one Operation of the Intellect,
though like short-sighted men they can hardly discover it themselves: They can
form single apprehensions, but have neither of the other two faculties, the
judicium or discursus. Now as it is wisely ordered, that people deprived of one
sense have the others in more perfection, such people will form single Ideas
with a great deal of vivacity; and happy were it indeed if they would confine
themselves to such, without forming judicia, much less argumentations.

Cornelius quickly discovered, that these two last operations of the intellect
were very weak in Martin, and almost totally extinguished in Crambe; however he
used to say that Rules of Logic are Spectacles to a purblind understanding,
and therefore he resolved to proceed with his two Pupils.

Martin's understanding was so totally immersed in sensible objects, that he
demanded examples from Material things of the abstracted Ideas of Logic: As
for Crambe, he contented himself with the Words, and when he could but form
some conceit upon them, was fully satisfied. Thus Crambe would tell his
Instructor, that All men were not singular; that Individuality could hardly be
praedicated of any man, for it was commonly said that a man is not the same he
was, that madmen are beside themselves, and drunken men come to themselves;
which shows, that few men have that most valuable logical endowment,
Individuality. Cornelius told Martin that a shoulder of mutton was an
individual, which Crambe denied, for he had seen it cut into commons: That Is
true (quoth the Tutor) but you never saw it cut into shoulders of mutton: If it
could (quoth Crambe) it would be the most lovely individual of the University.
When he was told, a substance was that which was subject to accidents; then
Soldiers (quoth Crambe) are the most substantial people in the World. Neither
would he allow it to be a good definition of accident, that it could be present
or absent without the destruction of the subject; since there are a great many
accidents that destroy the subject, as burning does a house, and death a man.
But as to that, Cornelius informed him, that there was a natural death, and a
logical death; that though a man after his natural death was not capable of the
least parish-office, yet he might still keep his Stall amongst the logical
praedicaments.

Cornelius was forced to give Martin sensible images; thus calling up the
Coachman he asked him what he had seen at the Bear-garden? the man answered he
saw two men fight a prize; one was a fair man, a Sergeant in the Guards, the
other black, a Butcher; the Sergeant had red breeches, the Butcher blue; they
fought upon a Stage about four o'clock, and the Sergeant wounded the Butcher in
the leg. Mark (quoth Cornelius) how the fellow runs through the praedicaments.
Men, Substantia; two, quantitas; fair and black, qualitas; Sergeant and
Butcher, relatio; wounded the other, actio and passio; fighting, situs; Stage,
ubi; two a Clock, quando; blue and red Breeches, habitus. At the same time he
warned Martin, that what he now learned as a Logician, he must forget as a
natural Philosopher; that though he now taught them that accidents inher'd in the
subject, they would find in time there was no such thing; and that color,
taste, smell, heat, and cold, were not in the things but only phantasms of our
brains. He was forced to let them into this secret, for Martin could not
conceive how a habit of dancing inher'd in a dancingmaster, when he did not
dance; nay, he would demand the Characteristicks of Relations: Crambe used to
help him out by telling him, a Cuckold, a losing gamester, a man that had not
dined, a young heir that was kept short by his father, might be all known by
their countenance; that, in this last case, the Paternity and Filiation leave
very sensible impressions in the relatum and correlatum. The greatest
difficulty was, when they came to the Tenth Praedicament: Crambe affirmed, that
his Habitus was more a substance than he was; for his clothes could better
subsist without him, than he without his clothes.

Martin supposed an Universal Man to be like a Knight of a Shire or a Burgess
of a Corporation, that represented a great many Individuals. His Father asked
him, if he could not frame the Idea of an Universal Lord Mayor? Martin told
him, that never having seen but one Lord Mayor, the Idea of that Lord Mayor
always returned to his mind; that he had great difficulty to abstract a Lord
Mayor from his Fur, Gown, and Gold Chain; nay, that the horse he saw the Lord
Mayor ride upon not a little disturbed his imagination. On the other hand
Crambe, to show himself of a more penetrating genius, swore that he could frame
a conception of a Lord Mayor not only without his Horse, Gown, and Gold Chain,
but even without Stature, Feature, Color, Hands, Head, Feet, or any Body;
which he supposed was the abstract of a Lord Mayor. Cornelius told him that he
was a lying Rascal; that an Universale was not the object of imagination, and
that there was no such thing in reality, or a part Rei. But I can prove (quoth
Crambe) that there are Clysters a part Rei, but clysters are universales;
ergo. Thus I prove my Minor. Quod aptum est inesse multis, is an universale by
definition: but every clyster before it is administered has that quality;
therefore every clyster is an universale.

He also found fault with the Advertisements, that they were not strict logical
definitions: In an advertisement of a Dog stolen or strayed, he said it ought
to begin thus, An irrational animal of the Genus caninum, etc. Cornelius told
them, that though those advertisements were not framed according to the exact
rules of logical definitions, being only descriptions of things numero
differentibus, yet they contained a faint image of the praedicabilia, and were
highly subservient to the common purposes of life; often discovering things
that were lost, both animate and inanimate. An Italian Grey-bound, of a
mouse-colour, a white speck in the neck, lame of one leg, belongs to such a
Lady. Greyhound, Genus; mouse-colour'd, etc. differentia; lame of one leg,
accidents; belongs to such a Lady, proprium.

Though I Am afraid I have transgressed upon my Reader's patience already, I
cannot help taking notice of one thing more extraordinary than any yet
mentioned; which was Crambe's Treatise of Syllogisms. He supposed that a
Philosopher's brain was like a great Forest, where Ideas ranged like animals of
several kinds; that those Ideas copulated, and engendered Conclusions; that
when those of different Species copulate, they bring forth monsters or
absurdities; that the Major is the male, the Minor the female, which copulate
by the Middle Term, and engender the Conclusion. Hence they are called the
praemissa, or Predecessors of the Conclusion; and it is properly said by
Logicians quod pariunt scientiam, opinionem, they beget science, opinion, etc.
Universal Propositions are Persons of quality; and therefore in Logic they are
said to be of the first Figure. Singular Propositions are Private persons, and
therefore placed in the third or last figure, or rank. From those principles
all the rules of Syllogisms naturally follow. I. That there are only three
Terms, neither more nor less; for to a child there can be only one father and
one mother. II. From universal premises there follows an universal conclusion,
as if one should say that persons of quality always beget persons of quality.
III. From singular premises follows only a singular conclusion, that is, if
the parents be only private people, the issue must be so likewise. IV. From
particular propositions nothing can be concluded, because the Individua vaga
are (like whoremasters and common strumpets) barren. V. There cannot be more in
the conclusion than was in the premises, that is, children can only inherit
from their parents. VI. The conclusion follows the weaker part, that is,
children inherit the diseases of their parents. VII. From two negatives nothing
can be concluded, for from divorce or separation there can come no issue. VIII.
The medium cannot enter the conclusion, that being logical incest. IX. An
hypothetical proposition is only a contract, or a promise of marriage; from
such therefore there can spring no real issue. X. When the premises or parents
are necessarily joined (or in lawful wedlock) they beget lawful issue; but
contingently joined, they beget bastards.


So much for the Affirmative propositions; the Negative must be deferred to
another occasion.

Crambe used to value himself upon this System, from whence he said one might
see the propriety of the expression, such a one has a barren imagination; and
how common it is for such people to adopt conclusions that are not the issue of
their premises? therefore as an Absurdity is a Monster, a Falsity is a
Bastard; and a true conclusion that follows not from the premises, may
properly be said to be adopted. But then what is an Enthymem? (quoth
Cornelius.) Why, an Enthymem (replied Crambe) is when the Major is indeed
married to the Minor, but the Marriage kept secret.

METAPHYSICS were a large field in which to exercise the Weapons Logic had
put into their hands. Here Martin and Crambe used to engage like any prize
fighters, before their Father, and his other Learned companions of the
Symposiacks. And as Prize fighters will agree to lay aside a buckler or some
such defensive weapon, so would Crambe promise not to use simpliciter and
secundum quid, provided Martin would part with materialiter and formaliter: But
it was found, that without the help of the defensive armor of those
Distinctions, the arguments cut so deep, that they fetched blood at every
stroke. Their Theses was picked out of Suarez, Thomas Aquinas, and other
learned writers on those subjects. I shall give the Reader a taste of some of
them. I. If the Innate Desire of the knowledge of Metaphysics was the cause of
the Fall of Adam; and the Arbor Porphyriana the Tree of Knowledge of good and
evil? affirmed. II. If transcendental goodness could be truly praedicated of
the Devil? affirmed. III. Whether one, or many be first? or if one does not
suppose the notion of many? Suarez. IV. If the desire of news in mankind be
appetitus innatus not elicitus? affirmed. V. Whether there is in human
understandings potential falsities? affirmed. VI. Whether God loves a possible
Angel better than an actually-existent fly? denied. VII. If Angels pass from
one extreme to another without going through the middle? Aquinas. VIII. If
Angels know things more clearly in a morning? Aquinas. IX. Whether every Angel
hears what one Angel says to another? denied, Aquinas. X. If temptation be
proprium quarto modo of the Devil? denied. Aquinas. XI. Whether one Devil can
Illuminate another? Aquin. XII. If there would have been any females born in
the state of Innocence? Aquinas. XIII. If the Creation was finished in six
days, because six is the most perfect number; or if six be the most perfect
number because the Creation was finished in six days? Aquinas.
There were several others of which in the course of the life of this learned
person we may have occasion to treat, and one particularly that remains
undecided to this day; it was taken from the learned Suarez. XIV. An praeter
esse reale actualis essentiae sit aliud esse necessarium quo res actualiter
existat? In English thus. Whether besides the real being of actual being, there
be any other being necessary to cause a thing to be?


This brings into my mind a Project to banish Metaphysics out of Spain, which
was supposed might be effectuated by this method: That nobody should use any
Compound or Decompound of the Substantial Verbs but as they are read in the
common conjugations: for every body will allow, that if you debar a
Metaphysician from ens, essentia, entitas, subsistentia, etc. there is an end
of him.

Crambe regretted extremely, that Substantial Forms, a race of harmless beings
which had lasted for many years, and afforded a comfortable subsistence to many
poor Philosophers, should be now hunted down like so many Wolves, without the
possibility of a retreat. He considered that it had gone much harder with them
than with Essences, which had retired from the Schools into the Apothecaries
Shops, where some of them had been advanced into the degree of Quintessences.
He thought there should be a retreat for poor substantial Forms, amongst the
Gentle-ushers at court; and that there were indeed substantial forms, such as
forms of Prayer, and forms of Government, without which, the things themselves
could neyer long subsist. He also used to wonder that there was not a reward
for such as could find out a fourth Figure in Logic, as well as for those who
should discover the Longitude.

CHAP. VIII.
ANATOMY.
Cornelius, it is certain, had a most superstitious veneration for the
Ancients; and if they contradicted each other, his Reason was so pliant and
ductile, that he was always of the opinion of the last he read. But he reckoned
it a point of honor never to be vanquished in a dispute; from which quality he
acquired the title of the Invincible Doctor. While the Professor of Anatomy was
demonstrating to his son the several kinds of Intestines, Cornelius affirmed
that there were only two, the Colon and the Aichos, according to Hippocrates,
who it was impossible could ever be mistaken. It was in vain to assure him this
error proceeded from want of accuracy in dividing the whole Canal of the Guts:
Say what you please (he replied) this is both mine and Hippocrates's opinion.
You may with equal reason (answered the Professor) affirm that a man's Liver
has five Lobes, and deny the Circulation of the blood. Ocular demonstration
(said Cornelius) seems to be on your side, yet I shall not give it up: Show me
any viscus of a human body, and I will bring you a Monster that differs from
the common rule in the structure of it. If Nature shows such variety in the
same age, why may she not have extended it further in several ages? Produce me
a man now of the age of an Antidiluvian; of the strength of Sampson, or the
size of the Giants. If in the whole, why not in parts of the body, may it not
be possible the present generation of men may differ from the Ancients? The
Moderns have perhaps lengthened the channel of the guts by Gluttony, and
diminished the liver by hard drinking. Though it shall be demonstrated that
modern blood circulates, yet I will still believe with Hippocrates, that the
blood of the Ancients had a flux and reflux from the heart, like a Tide.
Consider how Luxury has introduced new diseases, and with them not improbably
altered the whole Course of the Fluids. Consider how the current of mighty
Rivers, nay the very channels of the Ocean are changed from what they were in
ancient days; and can we be so vain to imagine, that the Microcosm of the human
body alone is exempted from the fate of all things? I question not but
plausible Conjectures may be made even as to the Time when the blood first
began to circulate. -- Such disputes as these frequently perplexed the
Professor to that degree, that he would now and then in a passion leave him in
the middle of a Lecture, as he did at this time.

There unfortunately happened soon after, an unusual accident, which retarded
the prosecution of the studies of Martin. Having purchased the body of a
Malefactor, he hired a Room for its dissection near the Pest-fields in St.
Giles's, at a little distance from Tyburn Road. Crambe (to whose care this body
was committed) carried it thither about twelve a clock at night in a
Hackney-coach, few Housekeepers being very willing to let their lodgings to
such kind of Operators. As he was softly stalking up stairs in the dark, with
the dead man in his arms, his burden had like to have slipped from him, which
he (to save from falling) grasped so hard about the belly that it forced the
wind through the Anus, with a noise exactly like the Crepitus of a living man.
Crambe (who did not comprehend how this part of the Animal Economy could
remain in a dead man) was so terrified, that he threw down the body, ran up to
his master, and had scarce breath to tell him what had happened. Martin with
all his Philosophy could not prevail upon him to return to his post. You may
say what you please (quoth Crambe) no man alive ever broke wind more naturally;
nay, he seemed to be mightily relieved by it. The rolling of the corpse down
stairs made such a noise that it awaked the whole house. The maid shrieked, the
landlady cried out Thieves; but the Landlord, in his shirt as he was, taking a
candle in one hand and a drawn sword in the other, ventured out of the Room.
The maid with only a single petticoat ran up stairs, but spurning at the dead
body, fell upon it in a swoon. Now the Landlord stood still and list'ned, then
he looked behind him, and ventured down in this manner one stair after another,
'till he came where lay his maid, as dead, upon another corpse unknown. The wife
ran into the street and cried out Murder! the Watch ran in, while Martin and
Crambe, hearing all this uproar, were coming down stairs. The Watch imagined
they were making their escape, seized them immediately, and carried them to a
neighboring Justice; where, upon searching them, several kind of knives and
dreadful weapons were found upon them. The Justice first examined Crambe. What
is your Name? says the Justice. I have acquired (quoth Crambe) no great Name as
yet; they call me Crambe or Crambo, no matter which, as to my self; though it
may be some dispute to posterity. -- What is yours and your Masters profession?
-- It is our business to imbrue our hands in blood; we cut off the heads, and
pull out the hearts of those that never injured us; we rip up big-belly'd
women, and tear children limb from limb. Martin endeavored to interrupt him;
but the Justice being strangely astonished with the frankness of Crambe's
Confession, ordered him to proceed; upon which he made the following Speech.

May it please your Worship, as touching the body of this man, I can answer
each head that my accusers allege against me, to a hair. They have hitherto
talked like num-sculls without brains; but if your Worship will not only give
ear, but regard me with a favorable eye, I will not be brow-beaten by the
supercilious looks of my adversaries, who now stand cheek by jowl by your
Worship. I will prove to their faces, that their foul mouths have not opened
their lips without a falsity; though they have showed their teeth as if they
would bite off my nose. Now, Sir, that I may fairly slip my Neck out of the
collar, I beg this matter may not be slightly skinned over. Though I have no man
here to back me, I will un-bosom my self, since Truth is on my side, and shall
give them their bellies full, though they think they have me upon the hip.
Whereas they say I came into their lodgings, with arms, and murdered this man
without their Privity, I declare I had not the least Finger in it; and since I
am to stand upon my own legs, nothing of this matter shall be left till I set
it upon a right foot. In the vein I am in, I cannot for my heart's blood and
guts bear this usage: I shall not spare my lungs to defend my good name: I was
ever reckoned a good liver; and I think I have the bowels of compassion. I ask
but justice, and from the crown of my head to the soal of my foot I shall ever
acknowledge my self your Worship's humble Servant.

The Justice stared, the Landlord and Landlady lifted up their eyes, and Martin
fretted, while Crambe talked in this rambling incoherent manner; till at length
Martin begged to be heard. It was with great difficulty that the Justice was
convinced, till they sent for the Finisher of human laws, of whom the Corpse had
been purchased; who looking near the left ear, knew his own work, and gave Oath
accordingly.

No sooner was Martin got home, but he fell into a passion at Crambe. What
Demon, he cried, has possessed thee that thou will never forsake that
impertinent custom of punning? Neither my council nor my example have thus
misled thee; thou governest thy self by most erroneous Maxims. Far from it
(answers Crambe) my life is as orderly as my Dictionary, for by my Dictionary I
order my life. I have made a Calendar of radical words for all the seasons,
months, and days of the year: Every day I am under the dominion of a certain
Word: but this day in particular I cannot be misled, for I am governed by one
that rules all sexes, ages, conditions, nay all animals rational and
irrational. Who is not governed by the word Led? Our Noblemen and Drunkards are
pimp-led, Physicians and Pulses fee-led, their Patients and Oranges pil-led, a
New-married Man and an Ass are bride-led, an Old-married Man and a Pack-horse
sad-led; Cats and Dice are rat-led, Swine and Nobility are sty-led, a Coquet
and a Tinder-box are spark-led, a Lover and a Blunderer are grove-led. And that
I may not be tedious -- Which thou art (replied Martin, stamping with his foot)
which thou art, I say, beyond all human toleration -- Such an unnatural,
unaccountable, uncoherent, unintelligible, unprofitable -- There it is now!
(interrupted Crambe) this is your Day for Uns. Martin could bear no longer --
however composing his Countenance, Come hither -- he cried, there are five
pounds, seventeen shillings and nine pence: thou have been with me eight
months, three weeks, two days, and four hours. Poor Crambe upon the receipt of
his Salary, fell into tears, flung the money upon the ground, and burst forth
in these words: O Cicero, Cicero! if to pun be a crime, it is a crime I have
learned from thee: O Bias, Bias! if to pun be a crime, by thy example was I
bias'd. Whereupon Martin, (considering that one of the greatest of Orators, and
even a Sage of Greece had punned,) hesitted, relented, and re-instated Crambe
in his Service.

CHAP. IX.
How Martin become a great Critic.
IT was a most peculiar Talent in Martinus, to convert every Trifle into a
serious thing, either in the way of Life, or in Learning. This can no way be
better exemplified, than in the effect which the Puns of Crambe had on the Mind
and Studies of Martinus, He conceived, that somewhat of a like Talent to this
of Crambe, of assembling parallel sounds, either syllables, or words, might
conduce to the Emendation and Correction of Ancient Authors, if applied to
their Works, with the same diligence, and the same liberty. He resolved to try
first upon Virgil, Horace, and Terence; concluding, that if the most correct
Authors could be so served with any reputation to the Critic, the amendment
and alteration of all the rest would easily follow; whereby a new, a vast, nay
boundless Field of Glory would be opened to the true and absolute Critic.

This Specimen on Virgil he has given us, in the Addenda to his Notes on the
Dunciad. His Terence and Horace are in every bodies hands, under the names of
Richard B^ley, and Francis H^re. And we have convincing proofs that the late
Edition of Milton published in the name of the former of these, was in truth
the Work of no other than our Scriblerus.

CHAP. X.
Of Martinus's Uncommon Practice of Physic, and how he applied himself to the
Diseases of the Mind.
BUT it is high time to return to the History of the Progress of Martinus in
the Studies of Physic, and to enumerate some at least of the many Discoveries
and Experiments he made therein.

One of the first was his Method of investigating latent Distempers, by the
sagacious Quality of Setting-Dogs and Pointers. The Success, and the Adventures
that besel him, when he walked with these Animals, to smell them out in the
Parks and public places about London, are what we would willingly relate; but
that his own Account, together with a List of those Gentlemen and Ladies at
whom they made a Full Set, will be published in time convenient. There will
also be added the Representation, which on occasion of one distemper which was
become almost epidemical, he thought himself obliged to lay before both Houses
of Parliament, entitled, A Proposal for a General Flux, to exterminate at one
blow the P^x out of this kingdom.

He next proceeded to an Enquiry into the Nature and Tokens of Virginity,
according to the Jewish Doctrines, which occasioned that most curious Treatise
of the Purification of Vid. Esther, chap. 2. verse. 12.
Queen Esther, with a Display of her Case at large; speedily also to be
published.

But being weary of all practice on foetid Bodies, from a certain niceness of
Constitution, (especially when he attended Dr. Woodward through a Twelve-months
course of Vomition) he determined to leave it off entirely, and to apply
himself only to diseases of the Mind. He attempted to find out Specificks for
all the Passions; and as other Physicians throw their Patients into sweats,
vomits, purgations, etc. he cast them into Love, hatred, hope, fear, joy,
grief, etc. And indeed the great Irregularity of the Passions in the English
Nation, was the chief motive that induced him to apply his whole studies, while
he continued among us, to the Diseases of the Mind.

To this purpose he directed, in the first place, his late acquired skill in
Anatomy. He considered Virtues and Vices as certain Habits which proceed from
the natural Formation and Structure of particular parts of the body. A Bird
flies because it has Wings, a Duck swims because it is web-footed: and there
can be no question but the Aduncity of the pounces, and beaks of the Hawks, as
well as the length of the fangs, the sharpness of the teeth, and the strength
of the crural and Massetermuscles in Lions and Tigers, are the cause of the
great and habitual Immorality of those Animals.

Is It, He observed that the Soul and Body mutually operate upon each other, and
therefore if you deprive the Mind of the outward Instruments whereby she
usually expresses that Passion, you will in time abate the Passion itself, in
like manner as Castration abates Lust.

2dly, That the Soul in mankind expresses every Passion by the Motion of some
particular Muscles.

3dly, That all Muscles grow stronger and thicker by being much used; therefore
the habitual Passions may be discerned in particular persons by the strength
and bigness of the Muscles used in the expression of that Passion.

4thly, That a Muscle may be strengthened or weakn'd by weakening or
strengthening the force of its Antagonist. These things premised, he took
notice,

That Complaisance, humility, assent, approbation, and civility, were expressed
by nodding the head and bowing the body forward: on the contrary, dissent,
dislike, refusal, pride, and arrogance, were marked by tossing the head, and
bending the body backwards: which two Passions of assent, and dissent the
Latins rightly expressed by the words adnuere and abnuere. Now he observed that
complaisant and civil people had the Flexors of the head very strong; but in
the proud and insolent there was a great over-balance of strength in the
Extensors of the Neck and the Muscles of the Back, from whence they perform
with great facility the motion of tossing, but with great difficulty that of
bowing, and therefore have justly acquired the Title of stiff-neck'd: In order
to reduce such persons to a just balance, he judged that the pair of Muscles
called Recti interni, the Mastoidal, with other flexors of the head, neck, and
body must be strengthened; their Antagonists, the Splenii Complexi, and the
Extensors of the Spine, weakened; For which purpose Nature herself seems to
have directed mankind to correct this Muscular Immorality by tying such fellows
Neck-and-heels.

Contrary to this, is the pernicious Custom of Mothers who abolish the natural
Signature of Modesty in their Daughters by teaching them tossing and bridling,
rather than the bashful posture of stooping, and hanging down the head.
Martinus charged all husbands to take notice of the Posture of the Head of such
as they courted to Matrimony, as that upon which their future happiness did
much depend.

Flatterers, who have the flexor Muscles so strong that they are always bowing
and cringing, he supposed might in some measure be corrected by being tied down
upon a Tree by the back, like the children of the Indians; which doctrine was
strongly confirmed by his observing the strength of the levatores Scapulae:
This Muscle is called the Muscle of patience, because in that affection of Mind
people shrug and raise up the shoulder to the tip of the ear. This Muscle also
he observed to be exceedingly strong and large in Henpeck'd Husbands, in
Italians, and in English Ministers.

In pursuance of his Theory, he supposed the Constrictors of the Eyelids, must
be strengthened in the supercilious, the abductors in drunkards and
contemplative men, who have the same steady and grave motion of the eye. That
the buccinatores or blowers up of the cheeks, and the dilators of the Nose,
were too strong in Choleric people; and therefore Nature here again directed
us to a remedy, which was to correct such extraordinary dilatation by pulling
by the Nose.

The rolling amorous Eye, in the Passion of Love, might be corrected by
frequently looking through glasses. Impertinent fellows that jump upon Tables,
and cut capers, might be cured by relaxing medicines applied to the Calves of
their legs, which in such people are too strong.

But there were two Cases which he reckoned extremely difficult. First,
Affectation, in which there were so many Muscles of the bum, thighs, belly,
neck, back, and the whole body, all in a false tone, that it required an
impracticable multiplicity of applications.

The second case was immoderate Laughter: When any of that risible species were
brought to the Doctor, and when he considered what an infinity of Muscles these
laughing Rascals threw into a convulsive motion at the same time; whether we
regard the spasms of the Diaphragm and all the muscles of respiration, the
horrible rictus of the mouth, the distortion of the lower jaw, the crisping of
the nose, twinkling of the eyes, or sphaerical convexity of the cheeks, with
the tremulous succussion of the whole human body: when he considered, I say,
all this, he used to cry out Casus plane deplorabilis! and give such Patients
over.

CHAP. XI.
The Case of a young Nobleman at Court, with the Doctor's Prescription for the
same.
AN eminent Instance of Martinus's Sagacity in discovering the Distempers of
the Mind, appeared in the case of a young Nobleman at Court, who was observed
to grow extremely affected in his speech, and whimsical in all his behavior.
He began to ask odd questions, talk in verse to himself, shut himself up from
his friends, and be accessible to none, but Flatterers, Poets, and Pickpockets;
till his Relations and old Acquaintance judged him to be so far gone, as to be
a fit Patient for the Doctor.

As soon as he had heard and examined all the symptoms, he pronounced his
distemper to be Love.

His friends assured him that they had with great care observed all his
motions, and were perfectly satisfied there was no Woman in the case.
Scriblerus was as positive that he was desperately in love with some person or
other. How can that be? (said his Aunt, who came to ask the advice) when he
converses almost with none but himself? Say you so? he replied, why then he is
in love with Himself, one of the most common cases in the world. I am
astonished, people do not enough attend this Disease, which has the same causes
and symptoms, and admits of the same cure, with the other: especially since
here the case of the Patient is the more helpless and deplorable of the two, as
this unfortunate passion is more blind than the other. There are people who
discover from their very youth a most amorous inclination to themselves; which
is unhappily nursed by such Mothers, as with their good will, would never
suffer their children to be crossed in love. Ease, luxury, and idleness, blow
up this flame as well as the other: Constant opportunities of conversation with
the person beloved, (the greatest of incentives) are here impossible to be
prevented. Bawds and Pimps in the other love, will be perpetually doing kind
offices, speaking a good word for the party, and carry about Billet doux.
Therefore I ask you, Madam, if this Gentleman has not been much frequented by
Flatterers, and a sort of people who bring him dedications and verses? O Lord!
Sir, (quoth the Aunt) the house is haunted with them. There it is, (replied
Scriblerus) those are the bawds and pimps that go between a man and himself.
Are there no civil Ladies, that tell him he dresses well, has a gentlemanly
air, and the like? Why truly Sir, my Nephew is not awkward -- Look you Madam,
this is a misfortune to him: In former days these sort of lovers were happy in
one respect, that they never had any Rivals, but of late they have all the
Ladies so -- Be pleased to answer a few questions more. Whom does he generally
talk of? Himself, quoth the Aunt. Whose wit and breeding does he most commend?
His own, quoth the Aunt. Whom does he write letters to? Himself. Whom does he
dream of? All the dreams I ever heard were of himself. Whom is he ogling
yonder? Himself in his looking-glass. Why does he throw back his head in that
languishing posture? Only to be blessed with a smile of himself as he passes by,
Does he ever steal a kiss from himself, by biting his lips? Oh continually,
till they are perfect vermilion. Have you observed him to use Familiarities
with any body? With none but himself: he often embraces himself with folded
arms, he claps his hand often upon his hip, nay sometimes thrusts it into --
his breast.

Madam, said the Doctor, all these are strong symptoms, but there remain a few
more. Has this amorous gentleman presented himself with any Lovetoys; such as
gold Snuff-boxes, repeating Watches, or Tweezer-cases? those are things that in
time will soften the most obdurate heart. Not only so, (said the Aunt) but he
bought the other day a very fine brilliant diamond Ring for his own wearing. --
Nay, if he has accepted of this Ring, the intrigue is very forward indeed, and
it is high time for friends to interpose. Pray Madam, a word or two more -- Is
he jealous that his acquaintance do not behave themselves with respect enough?
will he bear jokes and innocent freedoms? By no means; a familiar appellation
makes him angry; if you shake him a little roughly by the hand, he is in a
rage; but if you chuck him under the chin he will return you a box on the ear.
-- Then the case is plain: he has the true Pathognomick sign of Love,
Jealously; for no body will suffer his mistress to be treated at that rate.
Madam, upon the whole this Case is extremely dangerous. There are some people
who are far gone in this passion of self-love, but then they keep a very secret
Intrigue with themselves, and hide it from all the world besides. But this
Patient has not the least care of the Reputation of his Beloved, he is
downright scandalous in his behavior with himself; he is enchanted, bewitched,
and almost past cure. However let the following methods be tried upon him.

First, let him *** Hiatus. *** Secondly, let him wear a Bob-wig. Thirdly, shun
the Company of flatterers, nay of ceremonious people, and of all Frenchmen in
general. It would not be a miss if he traveled over England in a Stage-coach,
and made the Tour of Holland in a Track-scoute. Let him return the Snuff-boxes,
Tweezer-cases, (and particularly the Diamond Ring) which he has received from
himself. Let some knowing friend represent to him the many vile Qualities of
this Mistress of his: let him be shown that her Extravagance, Pride, and
Prodigality will infallibly bring him to a morsel of bread: Let it be proved,
that he has been False to himself, and if Treachery is not a sufficient cause
to discard a Mistress, what is? In short let him be made to see that no mortal
besides himself either loves or can suffer this Creature. Let all
Looking-glasses, polished Toys, and even clean Plates beremoved from him, for
fear of bringing back the admired object. Let him be taught to put off all
those tender airs, affected smiles, languishing looks, wanton tosses of the
head, coy motions of the body, that mincing gait, soft tone of voice, and all
that enchanting woman-like behavior, that has made him the charm of his own
eyes, and the object of his own adoration. Let him surprise the Beauty he
adores at a disadvantage, survey himself naked, divested of artificial charms,
and he will find himself a forked stradling Animal, with bandy legs, a short
neck, a dun hide, and a pot-belly. It would be yet better if he took a strong
purge once a week, in order to contemplate himself in that condition: at which
time it will be convenient to make use of the Letters, Dedications, etc.
abovesaid. Something like this has been observed by Lucretius and others to be
a powerful remedy in the case of Women. If all this will not do, I must even
leave the poor man to his destiny. Let him marry himself, and when he is
condemned eternally to himself, perhaps he may run to the next pond to get rid
of himself, the Fate of most violent Self-lovers.

CHAP. XII.
How Martinus endeavored to find out the Seat of the Soul, and of his
Correspondence with the Free-Thinkers.
IN this Design of Martin to investigate the Diseases of the Mind, he thought
nothing so necessary as an Enquiry after the Seat of the Soul; in which at
first he labored under great uncertainties. Sometimes he was of opinion that
it lodged in the Brain, sometimes in the Stomach, and sometimes in the Heart.
Afterward he thought it absurd to confine that sovereign Lady to one
apartment, which made him infer that she shifted it according to the several
functions of life: The Brain was her Study, the Heart her State-room, and the
Stomach her Kitchen. But as he saw several Offices of life went on at the same
time, he was forced to give up this Hypothesis also. He now conjectured it was
more for the dignity of the Soul to perform several operations by her little
Ministers, the Animal Spirits, from whence it was natural to conclude, that she
resides in different parts according to different Inclinations, Sexes, Ages,
and Professions. Thus in Epicures he seated her in the mouth of the Stomach,
Philosophers have her in the Brain, Soldiers in their Heart, Women in their
Tongues, Fiddlers in their Fingers, and Rope-dancers in their Toes. At length he
grew fond of the Glandula Pinealis, dissecting many Subjects to find out the
different Figure of this Gland, from whence he might discover the cause of the
different Tempers in mankind. He supposed that in factious and
restless-spirited people he should find it sharp and pointed, allowing no room
for the Soul to repose herself; that in quiet Tempers it was flat, smooth, and
soft, affording to the Soul as it were an easy cushion. He was confirmed in
this by observing, that Calves and Philosophers, Tigers and Statesmen, Foxes
and Sharpers, Peacocks and Fops, Cock-Sparrows and Coquets, Monkeys and
Players, Courtiers and Spaniels, Moles and Misers, exactly resemble one another
in the conformation of the Pineal Gland. He did not doubt likewise to find the
same resemblance in Highwaymen and Conquerors: In order to satisfy himself in
which, it was, that he purchased the body of one of the first Species (as has
been before related) at Tyburn, hoping in time to have the happiness of one of
the latter too, under his Anatomical knife.

We must not omit taking notice here that these Enquiries into the Seat of the
Soul gave occasion to his first correspondence with the society of
Free-Thinkers, who were then in their infancy in England, and so much taken
with the promising endowments of Martin, that they ordered their Secretary to
write him the following Letter.

To the learned Inquisitor into Nature, MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS: The Society of
Free-Thinkers greeting.
Grecian Coffee-House, May 7.
IT is with unspeakable joy we have heard of your Inquisitive Genius, and we
think it great pity that it should not be better employed, than in looking
after that Theological Nonentity commonly called the Soul: Since after all
your enquiries, it will appear you have lost your labor in seeking the
Residence of such a Chimera, that never had being but in the brains of some
dreaming Philosophers. Is it not Demonstration to a person of your Sense, that
since you cannot find it, there is no such thing? In order to set so hopeful a
Genius right in this matter, we have sent you an answer to the ill-grounded
Sophisms of those crack-brain'd fellows, and likewise an easy mechanical
Explanation of Perception or Thinking.

One of their chief Arguments is, that Self-consciousness cannot inhere in any
system of Matter, because all matter is made up of several distinct beings,
which never can make up one individual thinking being.

This is easily answered by a familiar instance. In every Jack there is a
meatroasting Quality, which neither resides in the Fly, nor in the Weight, nor
in any particular wheel of the Jack, but is the result of the whole
composition: So in an Animal, the Self-consciousness is not a real Quality
inherent in one Being (any more than meat-roasting in a Jack) but the result of
several Modes or qualities in the same subject. As the fly, the wheels, the
chain, the weight, the cords, etc. make one Jack, so the several parts of the
body make one Animal. As perception or consciousness is said to be inherent in
this Animal, so is meat-roasting said to be inherent in the Jack. As sensation,
reasoning, volition, memory, etc. are the several Modes of thinking; so
roasting of beef, roasting of mutton, roasting of pullets, geese, turkeys, etc.
are the several modes of meat-roasting. And as the general Quality of
meat-roasting, with its several modifications as to beef, mutton, pullets, etc.
does not inhere in any one part of the Jack; so neither does consciousness,
with its several modes of sensation, intellection, volition, etc. inhere in any
one, but is the result from the mechanical composition of the whole Animal.

Just so, the Quality or disposition in a Fiddle to play tunes, with the
several modifications of this tune-playing quality in playing of Preludes,
Sarabands, Jigs, and Gavotts, are as much real qualities in the Instrument, as
the thought or the imagination is in the mind of the Person that composes them.

The Parts (say they) of an animal body are perpetually changed, and the fluids
which seem to be subject of consciousness, are in a perpetual circulation; so
that the same individual particles do not remain in the Brain; from whence it
will follow, that the idea of Individual Consciousness must be constantly
translated from one particle of matter to another, whereby the particle A, for
example, must not only be conscious, but conscious that it is the same being
with the particle B that went before.

We answer, this is only a fallacy of the imagination, and is to be understood
in no other sense than that maxim of the English Law, that the King never dies.
This power of thinking, selfmoving, and governing the whole Machine, is
communicated from every Particle to its immediate Successor; who, as soon as he
is gone, immediately takes upon him the Government, which still preserves the
Unity of the whole System.

They make a great noise about this Individuality: how a man is conscious to
himself that he is the same Individual he was twenty years ago; notwithstanding
the flux state of the Particles of matter that compose his body. We think this
is capable of a very plain answer, and may be easily illustrated by a familiar
example.

Sir John Cutler had a pair of black worsted stockings, which his maid darn'd
so often with silk, that they became at last a pair of silk, stockings. Now
supposing those stockings of Sir John's endued with some degree of
Consciousness at every particular darning, they would have been sensible, that
they were the same individual pair of stockings both before and after the
darning; and this sensation would have continued in them through all the
succession of darnings; and yet after the last of all, there was not perhaps
one thread left of the first pair of stockings, but they were grown to be silk
stockings, as was said before.

And whereas it is affirmed, that every animal is conscious of some individual
self-moving, self-determining principle; it is answered, that as in a House of
Commons all things are determined by a Majority, so it is in every Animal
system. As that which determines the House is said to be the reason of the
whole assembly; it is no otherwise with thinking Beings, who are determined by
the greater force of several particles; which, like so many unthinking Members,
compose one thinking System.

And whereas it is likewise objected, that Punishments cannot be just that are
not inflicted upon the same individual, which cannot subsist without the notion
of a spiritual substance. We reply, that this is no greater difficulty to
conceive, than that a Corporation, which is likewise a flux body, may be
punished for the faults, and liable to the debts, of their Predecessors.

We proceed now to explain, by the structure of the Brain, the several Modes of
thinking. It is well known to Anatomists that the Brain is a Congeries of
Glands, that separate the finer parts of the blood, called Animal Spirits; that
a Gland is nothing but a canal of a great length, variously intorted and wound
up together. From the Arietadion and Motion of the Spirits in those Canals,
proceed all the different sorts of Thoughts: Simple Ideas are produced by the
motion of the Spirits in one simple Canal: when two of these Canals disembogue
themselves into one, they make what we call a Proposition; and when two of
these propositional Channels empty themselves into a third, they form a
Syllogism, or a Ratiocination. Memory is performed in a distinct apartment of
the brain, made up of vessels similar, and like situated to the ideal,
propositional, and syllogistical vessels, in the primary parts of the brain.
After the same manner it is easy to explain the other modes of thinking; as
also why some people think so wrong and perversely, which proceeds from the bad
configuration of those Glands. Some for example, are born without the
propositional or syllogistical Canals; in others that reason ill, they are of
unequal capacities; in dull fellows, of too great a length, whereby the motion
of the spirits is retarded; in trifling genius's, weak and small: in the
over-refining spirits, too much intorted and winding; and so of the rest.

We are so much persuaded of the truth of this our Hypothesis, that we have
employed one of our Members, a great Virtuoso at Nuremberg, to make a sort of
an Hydraulick Engine, in which a chimical liquor resembling Blood, is driven
through Elastick channels resembling Arteries and veins, by the force of an
Embolus like the heart, and wrought by a pneumatick Machine of the nature of
the lungs, with ropes and pullies, like the nerves, tendons and muscles: And we
are persuaded that this our artificial Man will not only walk, and speak, and
perform most of the outward actions of the animal life, but (being wound up
once a week) will perhaps reason as well as most of your Country Parsons.

We wait with the utmost impatience for the honor of having you a Member of
our Society, and beg leave to assure you that we are, etc.


What return Martin made to this obliging Letter we must defer to another
occasion: let it suffice at present to tell, that Crambe was in a great rage at
them, for stealing (as he thought) a hint from his Theory of Syllogisms,
without doing him the honor so much as to mention him. He advised his Master
by no means to enter into their Society, unless they would give him sufficient
security, to bear him harmless from any thing that might happen after this
present life.

CHAP. XIV.
The DOUBLE MISTRESS.
N. B. The style of this Chapter in the Original Memoirs is so singularly
different from the rest, that it is hard to conceive by whom it was penned. But
if we consider the particular Regard which our Philosopher had for it, who
expressly directed that not one Word of this Chapter should be altered, it will
be natural to suspect that it was written by himself, at the Time when Love
(ever delighting in Romances) had somewhat tinctured his Style; and that the
Remains of his first and srongest Passion gave him a Partiality to this
Memorial of it. Thus it begins.

BUT now the successful Course of the Studies of Martin was interrupted by
Love: Love, that unnerves the Vigor of the Hero, and softens the Severity of
the Philosopher. It chanced, that as Martin was walking forth to inhale the
fresh breeze of the Evening, after the long and severe Studies of the day, and
passing through the Western Confines of the famous Metropolis of Albion, not
far from the proud Battlements of the Palace of Whitehall, whose walls are
embraced by the silver Thames; his eyes were drawn upwards by a large square
piece of Canvas, which hung forth to the view of the passing Citizens. Upon it
was pourtrayed by some accurate pencil, the Lybian Leopard more fierce than in
his native Desert; the mighty Lion, who boasted thrice the bulk of the Nemaean
monster; before whom stood the little Jackall, the faithful spy of the King of
beasts: Near these was placed, of two Cubits high, the black Prince of
Monomotapa; by whose side were seen the glaring Cat-a-mountain, the
quill-darting Porcupine, and the Man-mimicking Manteger. Close adjoining to
this, hung another piece of Canvas on which was displayed the pourtrait of two
Bohemian Damsels, whom Nature had as closely united as the ancient
Hermaphroditus and Salmacis; and whom it was as impossible to divide, as the
mingled waters of the gentle Thames and the amorous Isis. While Martin stood in
a meditating posture, feasting his eyes on this Picture, he heard on a sudden
the sonorous notes of a Clarion, which seemed of the purest crystal: In an
instant the passing multitude flocked to the sound, as when a Drum summons the
straggling soldiers to the approaching Battle. The youthful Virtuoso, who was
in daily pursuit of the Curiosities of Nature, was immediately surrounded by
the gazing throng. The doors, for ever barred to the pennyless populace, seemed
to open themselves at his producing a silver Sixpence, which (like Aeneas's
golden bough) gained him admission into that Scene of Wonders. He no sooner
entered the first apartment, but his nostrils were struck with the scent of
Carnage; broken Bones and naked Carcasses bestrow'd the floor. The majestic
Lion roused from his bed, and shook his brindled Mane; the spotted Leopard
gnash'd his angry teeth, and walking to and fro, in indignation rattled his
chains. Martin with infinite pleasure heard the History of the several
Monsters, which was courteously opened to him by a Person of a grave and
earnest mien; whose frank behavior and ready answers discovered him to have
been long conversant with different Nations, and to have journey'd through
distant Regions. By him he was informed, that the Lion was hunted on the hills
of Lebanon, by the Basha of Jerusalem; that the Leopard was nursed in the
uninhabited woods of Lybia; the Porcupine came from the kingdom of
Prester-John, and the Manteger was a true descendant of the celebrated Hanniman
the Magnificent. Sir, said Mr. Randal (for that was the name of the Master of
the Show) the whole World cannot match these prodigies: twice have I sailed
round the Globe; these feet have traversed the most remote and barbarous
nations; and I can with conscience affirm, that not all the Deserts of the four
Quarters of the Earth furnish out a more complete set of Animals than what are
contained within these walls. Friend, (answered Martin) bold is thy Assertion,
and wonderful is the knowledge of a Traveller. But did thou ever risque thy
self among the Pliny lib. 7. cap. 2.
Scythian Canibals, or those wild men of Abarimon, who walk with their feet
backwards? have thou ever seen the Sciopi, so called because when laid supine,
they shelter themselves from the Sunbeams with the shadow of their feet? can
thou procure me a Troglodyte footman, who can catch a Roe at his full speed?
have thou ever beheld those Illyrian damsels who have two sights in one eye,
whose looks are poisonous to males that are adult? have thou ever measured the
gigantick Ethiopian, whose stature is above eight cubits high, or the
sesquipedalian Pigmey? have thou ever seen any of the Cynocephali, who have the
head and voice of a Dog, and whose Pilny 16.
milk is the only true specific for Consumptions? Sir (replied Mr. Randal) all
these have I beheld, upon my honor, and many more which are set forth in my
Journal: As for your dogfac'd men, they are no other than what stands before
you; that is naturally the fiercest, but by art the tamest Manteger in the
world. That word (replies Martin) is a corruption of the Aelian. lib. 4. cap.
2. Pliny lib. 11. cap 51. Pliny lib. 8. cap. 30. lib. 8. cap. 25. Aelian lib.
3. cap. 42. Aelian. lib. 1. cap. 49. Aelian. lib 1. cap. 2.
Mantichora of the Ancients, the most noxious Animal that ever infested the
earth; who had a Sting above a cubit long, and would attack a rank of armed men
at once, flinging his poisonous darts several miles around him. Can thou
inform me whether the Boars grunt in Macedonia? Can thou give me a
Certificate that the Lions in Africa are afraid of the scolding of Women? have
thou ever heard the sagacious Hyaena counterfeit the voice of a shepherd,
imitate the vomiting of a man to draw the dogs together, and even call a
shepherd by his proper name? Your Crocodile is but a small one, but you ought
to have brought with him the bird Trochilos that picks his teeth after dinner,
at which the silly animal is so pleased, that he gapes wide enough to give the
Ichneumon, his mortal enemy, an entrance into his belly. Your modern Ostriches
are dwindled to mere Larks in comparison with those of the Ancients; theirs
were equal in stature to a man on horseback. Alas! we have lost the chaste bird
Porphyrion! the whole Race was destroyed by Women, because they discovered the
infidelity of wives to their husbands. The Merops too is now no where to be
found, the only bird that flew backward by the tail. But say, can thou inform
me, what Dialect of the Greek is spoken by the birds of Diomedes'island? for it
is from them only we can learn the true pronunciation of that ancient language.
-- Mr. Randal made no satisfactory answer to these demands, but harangued
chiefly upon modern Monsters, and seemed willing to confine his instances to
the Animals of his own collection, pointing to each of them in order with his
Rod.

After Martin had satisfied his curiosity here, he was conducted into another
Apartment. Just at the entrance of the door appeared a Negroe Prince. His
habiliments bespoke him royal; his head was crowned with the feather of an
Ostrich, his sable feet and legs were interlaced with Purple and Gold, spangled
with the Diamonds of Cornwall, and the precious stones of Bristol. Though his
stature was of the lowest, yet he behaved himself with such an Air of Grandeur,
as gave evident tokens of his Regal Birth and Education. He was mounted upon
the lest Palfrey in the Universe; a Palfrey whose natural Beauty stood not in
need of those various colored Ribbons which braided his Mane, and were
interwoven with his Tail. Again the crystal Clarion founded, and after several
courteous speeches between the black Prince and Martin, our youthful
Philosopher walked into the midst of the room, to bless his sight with the most
beautiful Curiosity of Nature. On a sudden entered at another door the two
Bohemian Sisters, whose common parts of Generation, had so closely allied them,
that Nature seemed here to have conspired with Fortune, that their lives should
run in an eternal Parallel.

The Sun had twice eight times performed his annual course, since their Mother
brought them into the world with double pangs. Lindamira's eyes were of a
lively blue; Indamora's were black and piercing. Lindamira's cheeks might rival
the blush of the morning; in Indamora the Lilly overcame the Rose. Lindamira's
tresses were of the paler Gold, while the locks of Indamora were black and
glossy as the Plumes of a Raven.

How great is the power of Love in human breasts! In vain has the Wise man
recourse to his Reason, when the insinuating Arrow touches his heart, and the
pleasing poison is diffused through his veins. But then how violent, how
transporting must that passion prove, where not only the Fire of Youth, but the
unquenchable Curiosity of a Philosopher, pitched upon the same object! For how
much soever our Martin was enamored on her as a beautiful Woman, he was
infinitely more ravished with her as a charming Monster. What wonder then, if
his gentle Spirit, already humaniz'd by a polite Education to receive all soft
impressions, and fired by the sight of those beauties so lavishly exposed to
his view, should prove unable to resist at once so pleasing a Passion, and so
amiable a Phenomenon?

Martin, who felt the true emotions of Love, blushed that the Object of his
flame should be so openly prostituted to vulgar eyes. And though he had been
permitted to peruse her most secret charms, yet his honorable passion was so
strong, that it ran into the extreme of bashfulness; so that at the first
interview he made no Overtures of his Love. Pensive he returned, and flinging
himself on his Couch, passed away the tedious hours of the night in the utmost
Inquietude. The rushy Taper afforded a glimmering light, by which he
contemplated the tender lines of Ovid; but alas! his Remedy of Love was no cure
for our unhappy Lover's Anxiety! He closed the amorous volume, sighed, and
casting his eyes around on the Books that adorned his room, broke forth in this
pathetic Apostrophe.

O ye Spirits of Antiquity, who yet live in those sacred leaves! why do I make
you conscious of my shame? Yet why should I depreciate the noble Passion of
Love, and call it Shame? your Heroes have felt it, your Poets and Orators have
praised it. Were I enamored on some gaudy Virgin, did I dote on vulgar
Perfection, the Luster of an Eye, or the Rose of a Cheek; with reason might I
blush before you, most learned Inquisitors into Nature! most reverend Pliny,
Aelian, and Aldrovandus! Yet sure you cannot disapprove of this, which is no
wanton Passion, but excited by so unparalled a Production; a flame, that may
not only justify itself to the Severity of a Philosopher, but even to the
Avarice of a Parent; since she who causes it carries a most plentiful Fortune
in the sole Exhibition of her person. Heavens! how I wonder at the Stupidity of
mankind, who can affix the opprobrious Name of Monstrosity to what is only
Variety of Beauty, and a Profusion of generous Nature? If there are charms in
one face, one mouth, one body; if there are charms in two eyes, two breasts,
two arms; are they not all redoubled in the Object of my Passion? What tho'she
be the common Gaze of the multitude, and is followed about by the stupid and
ignorant; does she not herein resemble the greatest Princes, and the greatest
Beauties? only with this difference, that her Admirers are more numerous, and
more lasting.

Thus sighed he away the melancholy Night; but no sooner had Aurora, with
blushes in her cheeks (as conscious that she was just risen from the embraces
of Tithon) advanced through the purple gates of the east, but Martin rose: He
rose indeed, but Melancholy, the companion of his slumbers, rose and waked with
him. This was the first day that he amused himself with the gaudy Ornaments of
the body; that with secret pleasure he contemplated his Face, and the symmetry
of his limbs in a looking-glass. And now forsaking his solitary apartment, he
walked directly to the habitation that confined the Object of his desires. But
as it is observed that the Curious never wander into the City to indulge their
thirst of knowledge'till about the hours of eleven or twelve; the Morning has
ever been the season of Repose for all those Animals, who (trapann'd by the
frauds of Men) have been obliged to change their Woods and Wildernesses for
Lodgings in Cities at the rate of four shillings a week. Therefore Martin at
this early hour was neither saluted by the sound of the Trumpet, nor were his
eyes feasted as before with the pleasing picture of his Mistress; but he walked
to and fro before the door with folded arms, from the hour of five to eleven,
humming in a low and melancholy tune.

The Trumpet no sooner sounded, but his heart leapt for joy, and a second
sixpence gained him a second admittance into her apartment. Yet this day also,
he only owned his Passion in the language of his Eyes: But alas! this language
is only understood by those that love, and Lindamira remained still ignorant of
his Passion.

In the mean time it was no small cause of wonder to Mr. Randal, that this
Gentleman should come every day to behold the same show. He, no less covetous
than the Guardian of a rich Heiress, entertained a suspicion that Martin had a
design of stealing the Ladies. He thereupon issued out strict Orders, not to
admit our Lover on any pretense whatsoever. What Torments must this occasion in
the raging fever of Love! Martin had now recourse to Stratagem, and by a Bribe
(which often even the Ermine and Scarlet Robe cannot resist) gained the Dwarf
who kept the gates of the Show-room, to promote his Amor. He promised to
convey a Letter to Lindamira the same evening, if he would bring it him when
darkness favored his design, at the apartment next the Monsters. Martin
overjoyed, hasted home, and after having consulted all the Authors that treat
of Love, composed his Billetdoux, and at the time appointed went to entrust it
to the hands of his Confident. Softly he stole up stairs, approached the door,
and gave a gentle rap; when on a sudden a small hand was thrust through a
little hole at the bottom of the door, whence issued an unintelligible,
squeaking voice. Martin concluding it to be the Signal, delivered his Epistle,
and made his retreat unobserved. He was no sooner retired, but Mr. Randal
entered, and (as it was his usual custom before he went to bed) took a view if
all were safe in the Show-room. At his coming in, he saw his Monkey exceedingly
busy in picking the Seal-wax by little bits from a Letter, which he turned over
and over with infinite satisfaction. Mr. Randal, not thinking it a breach of
honor to pry into the secrets of his own family, took the Letter from him, and
read as follows.

To the most amiable LINDAMIRA,
WHile others, O darling of Nature, look upon thee with the eyes of Curiosity,
I behold thee with those of Love. Since I have been struck with thy most
astonishing Charms, how have I called upon Nature to make a new head, new arms,
and a new body to sprout from this single Trunk of mine, and to double every
member, so to render me a proper Mate for so lovely a Pair! but think to how
little purpose it will be for thee to stay till Nature shall form another of
thy kind! In such beauties she exhausts her whole art, and cannot afford to be
prodigal. Ages must be numbered, nay perhaps some Comet may vitrify this Globe
on which we tread, before we behold a Castor and a Pollux resembling the
beauteous Lindamira and Indamora. Nature forms her wonders for the Wise, and
such a Masterpiece she could design for none but a Philosopher. Cease then to
display those beauties to the profane Vulgar, which were created to crown the
desires of

Your Passionate Admirer, MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS.


The Dwarf entered as he was reading the Letter, and perceiving his Master
moved with passion, immediately fell on his knees and confessed the whole
affair. Mr. Randal bent on revenge, caused him to hasten to Martin's house,
with assurances that Lindamira had read his Letter with infinite satisfaction,
and conjured him that he would immediately favor her escape. Martin overjoyed
at the news, flew thither on the Wings of Love. The perfidious Dwarf conducted
him up stairs in the dark, gently opened the door, and bad him enter. How happy
was Martin in that instant, who thought of nothing but leaping into the four
soft arms of his Mistress! when lo, on a sudden he saw at the further end of
the Room two glittering balls of Fire, which rolled to and fro in a most
terrible manner. Immediately his ears were invaded with horrid hissings and
spittings, the balls of Fire drew nearer him, and the noise redoubled as he
approached. Our Philosopher bold and resolute with love, ventured toward it;
when all at once he perceived something grasp him hard by the throat, and fix
as it were sharp lances in his cheek, so that blood trickled amain down his
chin. Thrice Martin essayed to free himself, but vain were all his endeavors:
till at length, to save his life, he was forced to betray his Intrigue, and
alarm the house with reiterated cries of Murder. The apartment of the Bohemian
Beauties being the adjoining Room, they were the first that entered with a
light to his assistance. Martin all bloody as he was, a most fierce
Cat-a-mountain hanging at his chin, (which Mr. Randal had maliciously placed
there on purpose) at the sight of Lindamira forgot his distress. Ah, my Love!
(he cried) how like is thy fate to that of Thisbe! who staying but a moment too
late, found, as she thought, her miserable Lover torn in pieces by a Savage
beast! The affrighted Damsels skriek'd aloud, Mr. Randal with all his Retinue
rushed into the room, and now every hand conspired to free his underjaw from
the sharp teeth of the enraged-Monster. But the Lady, whose heart melted at the
piteous Spectacle, was so zealous in this office of Humanity, that the
Cat-a-mountain, provoked at her good-natured diligence, leaped furiously on
her, and wounded three of her hands and her two noses, to such a barbarous
degree that she was not fit to be shown publicly for the space of three weeks.
The generous Lover, more wounded at this Spectacle than at all the scratches he
had himself received, charged the monster again with the utmost Intrepidity,
and rescued his mangled Mistress. Then (having taken her by the hand, and given
it a gentle grasp) he retreated with his eye fixed upon her, and just as he
left the room (in a low and tender Accent) thus breathed forth his Soul.
Behold, all this have I suffered for you.

Such, and so modest was the first Declaration of Love, made on this eminent
occasion by our youthful Philosopher. Nor was it ungently received by the
simple and innocent Lindamira; who hitherto unused to the soft Protestations of
adoring Slaves, had rather been wondered at than beloved; and received but
imperfect notions of that tender language, from the Addresses only of the black
Prince or the Dwarf.

Martin, notwithstanding this unfortunate adventure, still pursued his wishes.
His Letters were now no more intercepted. Lindamira read them, and behaved like
other courteous dames when they receive those amorous Testimonials; concealed
them from her Guardian, and returned the most engaging answers. In short, she
was so far captivated, as to resolve no longer to be gazed at like a public
Beauty in her own Assembly; but retire from the world, and become the virtuous
Mistress of a Family.

But Fate had so ordained, that Martin was not more enamoured on Lindamira,
than Indamora was on Martin. She, jealous that her Sister had the greatest
share in this conquest, resented that an equal application had not been made to
herself. She teiz'd Lindamira to such a degree on this subject, as made her
promise to see Martin no more. But then again might Indamora be deemed the
unhappiest of Women, whom her Passion and Imprudence had robbed of the sight of
her Lover. Yet shame caused her to conceal those anxieties from her Sister. And
let the Reader judge how unhappy the Nymph must be, who was even deprived the
universal Relief of a Soliloquy. However, thus she thought, without being
allowed to tell it to any Grove or purling Stream.

Wretched Indamora! if Lindamira must never more see Martin, Martin shall never
again bless the eyes of Indamora: Yet why do I say wretched? since my Rival can
never possess my Lover without me. The pangs that others feel in Absence, from
the thought of those Joys that bless their Rivals, can never sting thy bosom;
nor can they mortify thee by making thee a Witness, without giving thee at the
same time a share of their Endearments. Change then thy proceeding, Indamora;
thy Jealousy must act a new and unheard of part, and promote the interest of
thy Rival, as the only way to the enjoyment of thy Lover.

From that moment she studied by all methods to advance her Sister's Amor, and
in that her own. And thus there appeared in these three Lovers as extraordinary
a Conjunction of Passions as of Persons: Love had reconciled himself to his
mortal foes, to Philosophy in Martin, and to Jealousy in Indamora.

And now flourished the Amor of Martin; Success even prevented his wishes; the
Marriage was agreed on, and the day appointed. Sunday was the time when Mr.
Randal's Absence favored their hopes, who never on that day, omitted taking
the fresh air in the fields: The key of the door he always took with him.
Crambe was ready laid at a convenient distance, who accommodated them with a
ladder of ropes. The ladder was thrown up, and the Signal given at the window.
Lindamira hastened to the Alarm of Love, when behold a new Disaster! As she was
getting out of the window, the weight of her body on one side, and that of
Indamora's on the other, unluckily caused them to stick in the midway:
Lindamira hung with her coats stripped up to the navel without, and Indamora in
no less immodest posture within. The Manteger, who for his gentleness was
allowed to walk at large in the house, was so heightened at this sight, that he
rushed upon Indamora like a barborous Ravisher. Indamora cried aloud for help.
Martin flew to revenge this insolent attempt, of a Rape on his wedding day. The
lustful Monster, driven from our double Lucrece, fled into the middle of the
room, pursued by the valorous and indignant Martin. Three times the hot
Manteger, frighted at the furious menaces of his Antagonist, made a circle
round the chamber, and three times the swift-footed Martin pursued him. He
caught up the Horn of a Unicorn, which lay ready for the entertainment of the
curious spectator, and brandishing it over his head in airy circles, hurled it
against the hairy son of Hanniman; who wrinkling his brown forehead, and
gnashing his teeth in indignation, stooped low: The horny Lance just razed his
left shoulder, and stuck into the tapestry hangings. Provoked at this the
grinning Offspring of Hanniman caught up the pointed Horn of an Antelope, and
aimed a blow against his undismayed Adversary. Our heroic Lover, who held his
hat before him like a shield, received the weapon full on the Crown; it pierced
the beaver, and gave a small rent to his breeches. Then the human Champion
flung with mighty violence the hinder foot of an Elk, which hit the bestial
Combatant full on the nether jaw. He reeled, but soon recovering, and his skill
in war lying rather in the close fight than in projectile weapons, he
endeavored to close with him: Forthwith assailing him behind unawares, he
clamber'd up his back, and plucked up by the roots a mighty grasp of hair --
but Martin soon dismounted him, and kept him at a distance. Love not only
inspired his breast with Courage, but gave double strength to his sinews; he
heaved up the hand of a prodigious Sea Monster; which when the chatt'ring
Champion beheld, he no less furious, wielded the ponderous Thigh Bone of a
Giant. And now they stood opposed to each other, like the dread Captain of the
sevenfold Shield and the redoubted Hector. The Thigh Bone missed its aim; but
the hand of the Sea Monster descended directly on the head of the Sylvian
Ravisher. The Monster chatter'd horribly; he stretched his quivering limbs on
the floor; and eternal sleep locked fast his eyelids.

The Lady from the window, like another Helen from the Trojan wall, was witness
of the Combat caused by her own beauty. She saw with what gracefulness her Hero
entered the Lists, admired his activity and courage in the combat, and was a
joyful witness of his Triumph: She gave a spring from the window, and with open
arms and legs embraced the neck and shoulders of her Champion. Our Philosopher
received her with his face turned modestly from her, and in that manner
conveyed her into the street. He called a Chair with all haste, but no chairman
would take her; which obliged him to bear his extraordinary burden till he
found a Coach, in which he carried her off, and was happily united to her that
very evening, by a Reverend Clergyman in the Fleet, in the holy Bands of
Matrimony.

CHAP. XV.
Of the strange, and never to be paralleled Process at Law upon the Marriage
of Scriblerus, and the Pleadings of the Advocates.
BUT Nemesis, who delights in traversing the best-laid designs of Cupid,
maliciously contrived the means to make these three Lovers unhappy. No sooner
had the Master of the Show received notice of their flight, but he seized on
the Bohemian Ladies by a Warrant; and not content with having recovered the
Possession of them, resolved to open all the Sluices of the Law upon Martin. So
he instantly went to Council to advise upon all possible methods of revenge.

The first point he proceeded on was the Property of his Monster, and the
question propounded was, An Servi possint invitis Dominis Matrimonium
contrahere?
" Whether Slaves could marry without the consent of their Master?" To this he
was answered in the Affirmative, but told at the same time, " That An Servus
Matrimonio eximitur a Domini obsequio?
the Marriage did not exempt them from Servitude."

This put him in no small hopes of having Martin added to his Show, and
acquiring a property in his Bodily issue by the Ladies. But his joy was soon
dashed, when he was informed, that since Martin was a Free Man, An Liberi
sequuntur conditionem Patris, an Matris?
" The children must follow the condition of the Father: or, that indeed, if
they were to follow that of their Mother, the Case would be the same, there
being no slavery in England."

Then his Counsel judged it more advisable to plead for a Dissolution of the
Marriage, upon the impossibility of Conjugal dues in the Wife. But then the
Canon Law allowed a Triennal Cohabitation, which entirely ruined this Project
also. Besides it was evident by the same Law, that " Monstrosity could not
incapacitate from Marriage," witness the Case of Hermaphrodites, who are
allowed " Facultatem Conjugii, provided they make Election before the Parish
Priest, in what sex they will act, and take an Oath never to perform in the
other capacity." Sanchez. Hostiens. Sylvest.


It was next consulted whether Martin should not be permitted to take away his
Wife? since upon his so doing " he might be sued for a Rape upon the body of
her Sister, there being plainly the four conditions of a Violentia, Causa
Libidinis, Traductio ad Locum, Mulier honesta.
Rape." But then again they considered, that Martin might answer he claimed
nothing but his own; and if another person had fixed herself to his Wife, he
must not for that cause be debarred the use of his Property.

Yet still, upon the same head of Martin's possessing his spouse, a Suit might
be devised in the name of Lindamira, on this account; Uxor non tenetur vivere
cum viro Concubinam tenente.
That a " Wife was not obliged to live with a Concubine, and such her Sister
Indamora must be accounted to Martin from the common Tactus, amplexus,
cohabitatio.
Proofs." To this too it was replied, that the Law ordered the Wife to reside
with the Husband if there were sufficient security given to expel the
Concubine. So Martin might say he was ready to accomplish his part of the
Covenant, if his wife would perform hers, and consent to the An Uxor tenetur
Incisionem pati? Sanchez de Matrimonio.
Incision. But this being an impossibility on the side of the Wife, it could no
way be exacted of the Husband.

At length Mr. Randal, being vexed at the heart, to have been so long and so
quaintly disappointed, determined to commence a Suit against Martin for Bigamy
and Incest. Mean while he left no Artifice or Address untried to perplex the
unhappy Philosopher: He even contrived with infinite cunning, to alienate
Indamora's affections from him; and debauched her into an Intrigue with a
Creature, of his own, the black Prince; whom he secretly caused to marry her,
while her Sister was asleep.

Hereupon Martin was reduced to turn Plaintiff, and commenced a Suit in the
Spiritual Court against the black Prince, for Cohabitation with his said wife.
He was advised to insist upon a new Point, (viz.) " That Lindamira and Indamora
together made up but one lawful wife."

The Monster-master, further to distress Martin, forced Lindamira to petition
for Aliment, lite pendente: which was no sooner allowed her by the Court, but
he obliged her to allege, that " it was not sufficient to maintain both
herself and her Sister; and if her Sister perished, she could not live with the
dead body about her."

Martin now began to repent that he had not executed a resolution he formerly
conceived, of marrying Crambe to Indamora, as an Expedient to have made all
secure. Moreover, it was insisted on, that the other also had a right to
Aliment, " because if Martin's Wife should prove with child, the said Sister
must necessarily perform the Offices of a wife, in contributing to the
Nutrition and Gestation of the said child." A Jury of Physicians being
impannel'd, declared, that as to Nutrition they were doubtful, whether any
blood of Lindamira circulated through Indamora: But as to Gestation, it was
evidently true. And upon this, Martin was ordered to allow Aliment to both, the
Black Prince appearing insolvent.

Then the Court proceeded to the Trial. And as both the Cause and the Pleadings
are of an extraordinary Nature, we think sit here to insert them at length.

Dr. Penny-feather thus pleaded for Martinus Scriblerus the Plaintiff.

Dr. PENNY-FEATHER.

" I appear before your Honor in behalf of Martinus Scriblerus, Bachelor of
Physic, in a Complaint against Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw, commonly called the black
Prince of Monopotapa; Inasmuch as the said Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw, has maliciously,
forcibly, and unlawfully seized, ravished, and detained Lindamira-Indamora, the
wife of the said Martin, and the body of the said Lindamira-Indamora, from time
to time ever since, has wickedly, leudly, and indecently used, handled, and
evil entreated. And in order to make this his Villainy more lasting, has
presumed to marry this our Wife, pretending to give his wickedness the Sanction
of a Law. And forasmuch as the Adulterer does not deny the fact, but insists
upon his said Marriage as lawful, we cannot open the Case more plainly to your
Honor, than by answering his Reasons, which indeed, to mention, is to confute.

" He maintains no less an absurdity than this, that One is Two; and that
Lindamira-Indamora, the individual wife of the Plaintiff, is not one, but two
Persons: And that the said Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw is not married to Lindamira, the
wife of the said Martin, but to his own lawful wife Indamora, another
individual Person distinct from the said Lindamira, though joined to her by a
strong Ligament of Nature."

In answer whereunto, we shall prove three things: " First, that the said
Lindamira-Indamora, now our lawful wife, makes but one individual person."

" Secondly, that if they made two individual persons, yet they constitute but
one wife."

" Thirdly, that supposing they made two individual persons, and two wives,
each lawfully married to her own husband, yet Prince Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw has no
right to detain Lindamira our lawfully wedded wife, on pretense of being
married to Indamora."

As to the first point: " It will be necessary to determine the constituent
Principle and Essence of Individuality, which in respect of mankind, we take to
be one simple identical soul, in one simple identical body. The individuality,
sameness, or identity of the body, is not determined (as some vainly imagine)
by one head, and a certain number of arms, legs, and other members; but in one
simple, single (...), or member of Generation."

" Let us search Profane History, and we shall find Geryon with three heads,
and Briareus with an hundred hands. Let us search Sacred History, and we meet
with one of the sons of the Giants with six Fingers to each Hand, and six Toes
to each Foot; yet none never accounted Geryon or Briareus more than one Person:
and give us leave to say, the wife of the said Geryon would have had a good
action against any women who should have espoused themselves to the two other
heads of that Monarch. The Reason is plain; because each of these having but
one simple (...), or one member of Generation, could be looked upon but as one
single person."

" In conformity to this, when we behold this one member, we distinguish the
Sex, and pronounce it a Man, or a Woman; or, as the Latins express it, unus
Vir, una Mulier, une Homme, une Femme, One Man, One Woman. For the same Reason
Man and Wife are said to be one Flesh, because united in that part which
constitutes the Sameness and Individuality of each sex."

" And as where there is but one Member of Generation, there is but one Body,
so there can be but one Soul; because the said Organ of Generation is the Seat
of the Soul; and consequently where there is but one such Organ, there can be
but one Soul. Let me here say without injury to truth, that no Philosopher,
either of the past or present age, has taken more pains to discover where the
Soul keeps her residence, than the Plaintiff, the learned Martinus Scriblerus:
And after his most diligent enquiries and experiments, he has been verily
persuaded, that the Organ of Generation is the true and only Seat of the Soul.
That this part is seated in the middle, and near the Center of the whole Body,
is obvious to your Honor's view. From thence, like the Sun in the Center of
the world, the Soul dispenses her warmth and vital influence: Let the Brain
glory in the Wisdom of the aged, the Science of the learned, the Policy of the
statesman, and the Invention of the witty; the accidental Amusements and
Emanations of the Soul, and mortal as the Possessors of them! It is to the
Organs of Generation that we owe Man himself; there the Soul is employed in
works suitable to the Dignity of her Nature, and (as we may say) sits brooding
over ages ye unborn."

" We need not tell your Honor, that it has been the opinion of many most
learned Divines and Philosophers, that the Soul, as well as Body, is produced
Ex Traduce. This doctrine has been defended by arguments irrefragable, and
accounts for difficulties, without it, inexplicable. All which arguments
conclude with equal strength, for the Soul's being seated in the Organs of
Generation. For since the whole man, both Soul and Body, is there formed, and
since nothing can operate but where it is, it follows that the Soul must reside
in that individual place, where she exerts her generative and plastic Powers."

" This our Doctrine is confirmed by all those Experiments, which conspire to
prove the absolute Dominion which that part has over the whole Body. We see
how many Women, who are deaf to the persuasions of the Eloquent, the
insinuations of the Crafty, and the threats of the Imperious, are easily
governed by some poor Logger-head, unfurnished with the least art, but that of
making immediate application to this Seat of the Soul. The impressions made by
the Ear are so distant, and transmitted through so many windings, that they lose
their Energy: But your Honor, by immediately applying to the Organ of
Generation, acts like a bold and wife Petitioner, who goes strait to the very
Throne and Judgment Seat of the Monarch."

" And whereas it is objected, that here are two Wills, and therefore two
different Persons; we answer, if Multiplicity of Wills implied multiplicity of
Persons, there are few Husbands but what are guilty of Poligamy, there being in
the same Woman great and notorious diversity of Wills: A Point which we shall
not need to insist upon before any married person, much less of your Honor's
Experience."

" Thus have we made good our first and principal Point; That if the wife of
the Plaintiff, Lindamira-Indamora, has but one Organ of Generation, she is but
one individual Person, in the truest and most proper sense of Individuality.
And that the matter of Fact is so, we are willing to put upon a fair Trial by a
Jury of Matrons, whom your Honor shall think fit to nominate and appoint, to
inspect the body of the said Lindamira-Indamora."

" Secondly, we are to prove, that though Lindamira-Indamora were two
individual Persons, consisting each of a Soul and Body, yet if they have but
one Organ of Generation, they can constitute but one Wife. For, from whence can
the Unity of any thing be denominated, but from that which constitutes the
Essence or principal Use of it? Thus, if a Knife or Hatchet have but one blade,
though two handles, it will properly be denominated but one Knife, or one
Hatchet; inasmuch as it has but one of that which constitutes the Essence or
principal Use of a Knife or Hatchet. So if there were not only one, but twenty
Supposita Rationalia with one common Organ of Generation, that one System would
only make one Wife. Upon the whole, let not a few Heads, Legs, or Arms
extraordinary, biass your Honor's Judgment, and deprive the Plaintiff of his
legal Property: In which right our Client is so strongly fortified, that
allowing both the former Propositions to be false, and that there were two
Persons, two Bodies, two Rational Souls, yea, and two Organs of Generation, yet
would it still be plain in the third place,"

" That the Defendant, Prince Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw, can have no Right to detain from
the Plaintiff, his lawfully wedded Wife, Lindamira. For, abstracting from the
Priority of the marriage of our Client, by which it would seem he acquired a
property in his Wife and all other Matter inseparably annexed unto her, it is
evident Prince Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw, by his marriage to Indamora, could never
acquire any property in Lindamira; nor can produce any Cause why both of them
should live with himself, rather than with the other? Therefore, we humbly hope
your Honor will order the body of Our said Wife to be restored to us, and due
Censure past on the said Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw."

Dr. Penny-feather having thus ended his Pleading, was thus answered by

Dr. LEATHERHEAD.

" I will not trouble your Honor with any unnecessary Preamble, or false
Colors of Eloquence, which Truth has no need of, and which would prove too
thin a Veil for Falsehood before the penetrating eyes of your Honor. In answer
therefore to what our learned brother, Dr. Penny-feather has asserted, we
shall labor to demonstrate,"

" First, That though there were but one Organ of Generation, yet are there two
distinct persons."

" Secondly, That although there were but one Organ of Generation, so far would
it be from giving the Plaintiff any right to the body of Indamora, the wife of
Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw, that it will subject the Plaintiff to the penalty of Incest,
or of Bigamy."

" Thirdly, We doubt not to prove that the said Lindamira-Indamora has two
distinct parts of Generation."

" And First we will show, that neither the individual Essence of mankind, nor
the Seat of the Soul, does reside in the Organ of Generation; and this first
from Reason. For unreasonable indeed must it be, to make that the Seat of the
Rational Soul, which alone sets us on a level with beasts: or to conceive, that
the Essence of Unity and Individuality should consist in that which is the
Source of Discord and Division. In a word, what can be a greater absurdity,
than to affirm Bestiality to be the Essence of Humanity, Darkness the Center of
Light, and Filthiness the Seat of Purity?"

" We could from the authority of the mos eminent Philosophers of all ages,
confirm this our Assertion; few of whom ever had the impudence to degrade this
Queen, the Rational Soul, to the very lowest and vilest Apartment, or rather
Sink of her whole Palace. But we shall produce fill a greater Authority than
these, to manifest that personal Individuality did subsist, when there was no
such generative Carnality."

" It has been strenuously maintained by many holy Divines (and particularly
by Thomas Aquinas) that our first Parents, in the state of Innocence, did in no
wife propagate their species after the present common manner of men and beasts:
but that the propagation at that time must have been by Intuition, Coalition of
Ideas, or some pure and spiritual manner, suitable to the dignity of their
station. And though the Sexes were distinguished in that State, yet it is plain
it was not by parts, such as we have at present; since, if our First Parents
had any such, they must have known it; And it is written, that they discovered
them not till after the Fall; when it is probable those parts were the
immediate Excrescence of Sin, and only grew forth to render them fitter
companions for those a Beasts among which they were driven."

" It is a Maxim in Philosophy, that Generatio unius est Corruption alterius:
whence it is apparent that the Paradisaical Generation was of a different
nature from ours, free from all Corruption and Imbecility. This is further
corroborated by the Authority of those Doctors of the Church who have asserted,
that before the Fall, Adam was endowed with a continual uninterrupted Faculty
of Generation; which can be explained of no other than of that Intuitive
Generation above said: Since it is well known to all, the least skilled in
Anatomy, that the present (male) part of Generation is utterly incapable of
this continual Faculty."

" We come now to our second point, wherein the Advocate for the Plaintiff
asserteth, that if there were two persons, and one Organ of Generation, this
System would constitute but one Wife. This will put the Plaintiff still in a
worse condition, and render him plainly guilty of Bigamy, Rape, or Incest. For
if there be but one such Organ of Generation, then both the persons of
Lindamira and Indamora have an equal property in it; and what is Indamora's
property cannot be disposed of without her consent. We therefore bring the
whole to this short issue; whether the Plaintiff Martinus Scriblerus had the
Consent of Indamora, or not? If he has had her consent, he is guilty of
Bigamy; if not, he is guilty of a Rape, or Incest, or both."

" The Defendant, Prince Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw, having been lately baptized, has
with singular modesty abstained from Consummation with his said Wife, until he
shall be satisfied from the opinion of your Honor, his learned Judge, how far
in Law and Conscience he may proceed: And therefore he cannot affirm much, nor
positively, as to the structure of the Organ of Generation of this his wife
Indamora. Yet make we no doubt, that it will upon inspection appear, that the
said Organ is distinct from that of Lindamira: Whereupon we crave to hear the
Report of the Jury of Matrons, appointed to inspect the body of the said
gentlewoman."

" And if the Matter of Fact be thus, give me your Honor's permission to
repeat what has been said by the Advocate for the Plaintiff; to wit, that
Martinus Scriblerus, Bachelor in Physic, by this his Marriage with Lindamira,
could, in no wise, acquire any property in the body of Indamora; not show any
Cause why this duplicated Wife Lindamira-Indamora, should abide with him,
rather than with the Defendant Prince Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw of Monomotapa."

The Jury of Matrons having made their Report, and it appearing from thence
that the Parts of Generation in Lindamira and Indamora were distinct; the Judge
took time to deliberate, and the next Court-Day he spoke to this effect.

GENTLEMEN,

" I am of opinion that Lindamira and Indamora are distinct persons, and that
both the Marriages are good and valid: Therefore I order you Martinus
Scriblerus, Bachelor in Physic, and you Ebn-Hai-Paw-Waw, Prince of
Monomotapa, to cohabit with your wives, and to lie in bed each on the side of
his own wife. I hope, Gentlemen, you will seriously consider, that you are
under a stricter Tie than common Brothers-in-law; that being, as it were, Joint
Proprietors of one common Tenement, you will so behave as good fellow-lodgers
ought to do, and with great modesty each to his respective sister-in-law,
abstaining from all further Familiarities than what Conjugal Duties do
naturally oblige you to. Consider also by how small limits the Duty and the
Trespass is divided, lest, while ye discharge the duty of Matrimony, ye
heedlessly slide into the sin of Adultery."

This Sentence pleased neither Party; and Martin appealed from the Consistory
to the Court of Arches; but they confirmed the Sentence of the Consistory.

It was at last brought before a Commission of Delegates; who, having weighed
the Case, reversed the Sentence of the inferior Courts, and disannulled the
marriage, upon the following Reasons: " That allowing the manner of
Cohabitation enjoined to be practicable, (though highly inconvenient) yet the
Jus petendi and reddendi Debitum conjugale being at all times equal in both
husbands and both wives, and at the same time impossible in more than one; Two
persons could not have a Right to the entire possession of the same thing, at
the same time; nor could one so enjoy his property, as to debar another from
the use of his, who has an equal right. So much as to the Debitum petendi, and
as to the Debitum reddendi, nemo tenetur ad impossible."

Therefore the Lords, with great Wisdom, dissolved both Marriages, as
proceeding upon a natural, as well as legal Absurdity.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Secession of Martinus, and some Hints of his Travels.
THIS affair being thus unhappily terminated, and become the whole Talk of the
Town; Martinus, unable to support the Affliction, as well as to avoid the many
disagreeable Consequences, resolved to quit the Kingdom.

But we must not here neglect to mention, that during the whole Course of this
Process, his continual Attendance on the Courts in his own Cause, and his
invincible Curiosity for all that past in the Causes of others, gave him a
wonderful insight into this Branch of Learning, which must be confessed to have
been so improved by the Moderns, as beyond all comparison to exceed the
Ancients. From the day his first Bill was filed, he began to collect Reports;
and before his Suit was ended, he had time abundantly sufficient to compile a
very considerable Volume. His Anger at his ill success caused him to destroy
the greatest part of these Reports; and only to preserve such, as discovered
most of the Chicanery and Futility of the practice. These we have some hopes to
recover, if they were only mislaid at his Removal; if not, the world will be
enough instructed to lament the loss, by the only one now public, viz. The
Case of Stradling and Styles, in an Action concerning certain black and white
Horses.

We cannot wonder that he contracted a violent Aversion to the Law, as is
evident from a whole Chapter of his Travels. And perhaps his Disappointment
gave him also a Dis-inclination to the Fair Sex, for whom on some occasions he
does not express all the Respect and Admiration possible. This doubtless must
be the Reason, that in no part of his Travels we find him beloved by any
strange Princess; nor have we the least account that he ever relapsed into this
Passion, except what is mentioned in the Introduction, of the Spanish Lady's
Phenomenon.

It was in the year 1699 that Martin set out on his Travels. Thou will
certainly be very curious to know what they were? It is not yet time to inform
thee. But what hints I am at liberty to give, I will.

Thou shall know then, that in his first Voyage he was carried by a prosperous
Storm, to a Discovery of the Remains of the ancient Pygmaean Empire.

That in his second, he was as happily shipwrecked on the Land of the Giants,
now the most humane people in the world.

That in his third Voyage, he discovered a whole Kingdom of Philosophers, who
govern by the Mathematics; with whose admirable Schemes and Projects he
returned to benefit his own dear Country, but had the misfortune to find them
rejected by the envious Ministers of Queen Anne, and himself sent treacherously
away.

And hence it is, that in his fourth Voyage he discovers a Vein of Melancholy
proceeding almost to a Disgust of his Species; but above all, a mortal
Detestation to the whole flagitious Race of Ministers, and a final Resolution
not to give in any Memorial to the Secretary of State, in order to subject the
Lands he discovered to the Crown of Great Britain.

Now if, by these hints, the Reader can help himself to a further discovery of
the Nature and Contents of these Travels, he is welcome to as much light as
they afford him; I am obliged by all the ties of honor not to speak more
openly.

But if any man shall ever see such very extraordinary Voyages, into such very
extraordinary Nations, which manifest the most distinguishing marks of a
Philosopher, a Politician, and a Legislator; and can imagine them to belong to
a Surgeon of a Ship, or a Captain of a Merchant-man, let him remain in his
Ignorance.

And whoever he be, that shall further observe, in every page of such a book,
that cordial Love of Mankind, that inviolable Regard to Truth, that Passion for
his dear Country, and that particular attachment to the excellent Princess
Queen Anne; surely that man deserves to be pitied, if by all those visible
Signs and Characters, he cannot distinguish and acknowledge the Great
Scriblerus.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Discoveries and Works of the Great Scriblerus, made and to be made,
written and to be written, known and unknown.
AND here it seems but natural, to lament the unfortunate End of the Amor of
our Philosopher. But the Historian of these Memoirs on the contrary cries out,
" Happy, thrice happy day! which dissolved the Marriage of the great
Scriblerus! let it be celebrated in every language, learned and unlearned! let
the Latin, the Greek, the Arabian, the Coptic; let all the Tongues of
manylanguag'd men, nay of Animals, be employed to resound it! since to this we
owe such immense discoveries, not only of Oceans, Continents, Islands, with all
their Inhabitants, minute, gigantick, mortal, and immortal; but those yet more
enlarged and astonishing Views, of worlds philosophical, physical, moral,
intelligible, and unintelligible!"

Here therefore, at this great Period, we end our first Book. And here, O
Reader, we entreat thee utterly to forget all thou have hitherto read, and to
cast thy eyes only forward, to that boundless Field the next shall open unto
thee; the fruits of which (if thine, or our sins do not prevent) are to spread
and multiply over this our work, and over all the face of the Earth.

In the mean time, know what thou owe, and what thou yet may owe, to this
excellent Person, this Prodigy of our Age; who may well be called The
Philosopher of Ultimate Causes, since by a Sagacity peculiar to himself, he
has discovered Effects in their very Cause; and without the trivial helps of
Experiments, or Observations, has been the Inventor of most of the modern
Systems and Hypotheses.

He has enriched Mathematics with many precise and Geometrical Quadratures of
the Circle. He first discovered the Cause of Gravity, and the intestine Motion
of Fluids.

To him we owe all the observations on the Parallax of the Pole Star, and all
the new Theories of the Deluge.

He it was, that first taught the right use sometimes of the Fuga Vacui, and
sometimes of the Materia Subtilis, in resolving the grand Phenomenon of Nature.

He it was, that first found out the Palpability of Colors; and by the
delicacy of his Touch, could distinguish the different Vibrations of the
heterogeneous Rays of Light.

His were the Projects of Perpetuum Mobiles, Flying Engines, and Pacing
Saddles; the Method of discovering the Longitude, by Bomb-Vessels, and of
increasing the Trade-Wind by vast plantations of Reeds and Sedges.

I shall mention only a few of his Philosophical and Mathematical Works. 1. A
complete Digest of the Laws of Nature, with a Review of those that are obsolete
or repealed, and of those that are ready to be renewed and put in force. 2. A
Mechanical Explication of the Formation of the Universe, according to the
Epicurean Hypothesis. 3. An Investigation of the Quantity of real Matter in the
Universe, with the proportion of the specific Gravity of solid Matter to that
of fluid. 4. Microscopical Observations of the Figure and Bulk of the
constituent Parts of all fluids. A Calculation of the proportion in which the
Fluids of the earth decrease, and of the period in which they will be totally
exhausted. 5. A Computation of the Duration of the Sun, and how long it will
last before it be burned out. 6. A Method to apply the Force arising from the
immense Velocity of Light to mechanical purposes. 7. An answer to the question
of a curious Gentleman; How long a New Star was lighted up before its
appearance to the Inhabitants of our earth? To which is subjoined a
Calculation, how much the Inhabitants of the Moon eat for Supper, considering
that they pass a Night equal to fifteen of our natural days. 8. A Demonstration
of the natural Dominion of the Inhabitants of the Earth over those of the Moon,
if ever an intercourse should be opened between them. With a Proposal of a
Partition-Treaty, among the earthly Potentates, in case of such discovery. 9.
Tide-Tables, for a Comet, that is to approximate toward the Earth. 10. The
Number of the Inhabitants of London determined by the Reports of the
Gold-finders, and the Tonnage of their Carriages; with allowance for the
extraordinary quantity of the Ingesta and Egesta of the people of England, and
a deduction of what is left under dead walls, and dry ditches.


It will from hence be evident, how much all his Studies were directed to the
universal Benefit of Mankind. Numerous have been his Projects to this end, of
which Two alone will be sufficient to show the amazing Grandeur of his Genius.
The first was a Proposal, by a general contribution of all Princes, to pierce
the first crust or Nucleus of this our Earth, quite through, to the next
concentrical Sphere: The advantage he proposed from it was, to find the
Parallax of the Fixed Stars; but chiefly to refute Sir Isaac Newton's Theory of
Gravity, and Mr. Halley's of the Variations. The second was, to build Two Poles
to the Meridian, with immense Light-houses on the top of them; to supply the
defect of Nature, and to make the Longitude as easy to be calculated as the
Latitude. Both these he could not but think very practicable, by the Power of
all the Potentates of the World.

May we presume after these to mention, how he descended from the sublime to
the beneficial parts of Knowledge, and particularly his extraordinary practice
of Physic. From the Age; Complexion, or Weight of the person given, he
contrived to prescribe at a dis^ance, as well as at a Patient's bedside. He
taught the way to many modern Physicians, to cure their Patients by Intuition,
and to others to cure without looking on them at all. He projected a Menstruum
to dissolve the Stone, made of Dr. Woodward's Universal Deluge-water. His also
was the device to relieve Consumptive or Asthmatick persons by bringing fresh
Air out of the Country to Town, by pipes of the nature of the Recipients of
Air-pumps: And to introduce the Native air of a man's country into any other in
which he should travel, with a seasonable Intromission of such Steams as were
most familiar to him; to the inexpressible comfort of many Scotsmen,
Laplanders, and white Bears.

In Physiognomy, his penetration is such, that from the Picture only of any
person, he can write his Life; and from the features of the Parents, draw the
Portrait of any Child that is to be born.

Nor has he been so enrapt in these Studies, as to neglect the Polite Arts of
Painting, Architecture, Music, Poetry, etc. It was he that gave the first hint
to our modern Painters, to improve the Likeness of their Portraits by the use
of such Colors as would faithfully and constantly accompany the Life, not only
in its present state, but in all its alterations, decays, age, and death itself.

In Architecture, he builds not with so much regard to present symmetry or
convenience, as with a Thought well worthy a true lover of Antiquity, to wit,
the noble effect the Building will have to posterity, when it shall fall and
become a Ruin.

As to Music, I think Heidegger has not the face to deny that he has been much
beholden to his Scores.

In Poetry, he has appeared under a hundred different names, of which we may
one day give a Catalogue.

In Politics, his Writings are of a peculiar Cast, for the most part Ironical,
and the Drift of them often so delicate and refined as to be mistaken by the
vulgar. He once went so far as to write a Persuasive to people to eat their own
Children, which was so little understood as to be taken in ill part. He has
often written against Liberty in the name of Freemen and Algernoon Sydney, in
vindication of the Measures of Spain under that of Raleigh, and in praise of
Corruption under those of Cato, and Publicola.

It is true, that at his last departure from England, in the Reign of Queen
Anne, apprehending lest any of these might be perverted to the Scandal of the
weak, or Encouragement of the flagitious, he cast them all, without mercy, into
a Bog-house near St. James's. Some however have been with great diligence
recovered, and fished up with a hook and line by the Ministerial Writers, which
make at present the great Ornaments of their works.

Whatever he judged beneficial to Mankind, he constantly communicated (not only
during his stay among us, but ever since his absence) by some method or other
in which Ostentation had no part. With what incredible Modesty he concealed
himself, is known to numbers of those to whom he addressed sometimes Epistles,
sometimes Hints, sometimes whole Treatises, Advices to Friends, Projects to
First Ministers, Letters to Members of Parliament, Accounts to the Royal
Society, and innumerable others.

All these will be vindicated to the true Author, in the Course of these
Memoirs. I may venture to say they cannot be unacceptable to any, but to those,
who will appear too much concerned as Plagiaries, to be admitted as Judges.
Wherefore we warn the public, to take particular notice of all such as
manifest any indecent Passion at the appearance of this Work, as Persons most
certainly involved in the Guilt.

The END of the First BOOK.
THE CONTENTS OF THE MEMOIRS of SCRIBLERUS.
INtroduction to the Reader. Chap. 1. Of the Parentage and Family of
Scriblerus, how he was begot, what care was taken of him before he was born,
and what Prodigies attended his Birth. Chap. 2. The Speech of Comelius over his
Son, at the Hour of his Birth. Chap. 3. Showing what befell the Doctor's Son,
and his Shield, on the Day of the Christ'ning. Chap. 4. Of the Suction and
Nutrition of the Great Scriblerus in his Infancy, and of the first Rudiments of
his Learning. Chap. 5. A Dissertation upon Play-things. Chap. 6. Of the
Gymnasticks, in what Exercises Martin was educated; something concerning
Music, and what sort of a Man his Uncle was. Chap. 7. Rhetoric, Logic, and
Metaphysics. Chap. 8. Anatomy. Chap. 9. How Crambe had some Words with his
Master. Chap. 10. How Martin became a Critic. Chap. 11. Of Martinus's Uncommon
Practice of Physic, and how he applied himself to the Diseases of the Mind.
Chap. 12. The Case of a young Nobleman at Court, with the Doctor's Prescription
for the same. Chap. 13. How Martinus endeavored to find out the Seat of the
Soul, and of his Correspondence with the Free-Thinkers. Chap. 14. The Double
Mistress. A Novel. Chap. 15. Of the strange, and never to be paralleled Process
at Law upon the Marriage of Scriblerus, and the Pleadings of the Advocates.
Chap. 16. Of the Secession of Martinus, and some Hints of his Travels. Chap.
17. Of the Discoveries and Works of the Great Scriblerus, made and to be made,
written and to be written, known and unknown.

