THE WHOLE PROCEEDINGS ON THE TRIAL OF AN INFORMATION Exhibited ex Officio by
the KING'S ATTORNEY GENERAL AGAINST THOMAS PAIN

For a LIBEL upon the REVOLUTION and SETTLEMENT of the CROWN and REGAL
GOVERNMENT as by Law established; and also upon the BILL of RIGHTS, the
LEGISLATURE, GOVERNMENT, LAWS, and PARLIAMENT of this KINGDOM, and upon the
KING.

Tried by a Special Jury in the Court of King's Bench, GUILDHALL, on Tuesday,
the 18th of December, 1792.

BEFORE THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD KENYON.

Taken in Shorthand By JOSEPH GURNEY.

LONDON: Sold by MARTHA GURNEY, No. 128, HOLBORN-HILL.

M,DCC,XCIII.

(Price Three Shillings and Sixpence.)

[Entered at Stationers' Hall.]

INFORMATION. Of Easter Term, in the 32d Year of King George tht Third.
London, (to wit) BE it remembered, that Sir Archibald Macdonald, Knight,
Attorney General of our present Sovereign Lord King George the Third, who, for
our present Sovereign Lord the King, prosecutes in this behalf in his own
proper person, comes into the court of our said present Sovereign Lord the
King, before the King himself at Westminster, in the county of Middlesex, on
Friday next, after one month from the feast day of Easter in this same term;
and for our said Lord the King gives the court here to understand and be
informed, that THOMAS PAIN, late of London, gentleman, being a wicked,
malicious, seditious, and ill-disposed person, and being greatly disaffected to
our said Sovereign Lord the now King, and to the happy constitution and
government of this kingdom, and most unlawfully, wickedly, seditiously, and
maliciously devising, contriving, and intending to scandalize, traduce, and
vilify, the late happy Revolution, providentially brought about and effected
under the wise and prudent conduct of his Highness William, heretofore Prince
of Orange, and afterward King of England, France, and Ireland, and the
dominions thereunto belonging; and the acceptance of the Crown and royal
dignity of King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the dominions
thereunto belonging, by his said Highness William, and her Highness Mary,
heretofore Prince and Princess of Orange; and the means by which the same
Revolution was accomplished to the happiness and welfare of this realm; and to
scandalize, traduce, and vilify the convention of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, at whose request, and by whose advice, their said
Majesty's did accept the said crown and royal dignity; and to scandalize,
traduce, and vilify, the act of the Parliament holden at Westminster in the
first year of the reign of their said Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary,
entitled, an act, declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, and
settling the succession of the crown, and the declaration of rights and
liberties in the said act contained; and also the limitations and settlements
of the crown and regal government of the said kingdoms and dominions as by law
established; and also by most wicked, cunning, and artful insinuations to
represent, suggest, and cause it to be believed, that the said Revolution, and
the said settlements and limitations of the crown and regal government of the
said kingdoms and dominions, and the said declaration of the rights and
liberties of the subject, were contrary to the rights and interest of the
subjects of this kingdom in general; and that the hereditary regal government
of this kingdom was a tyranny. And also by most wicked, cunning, and artful
insinuations, to represent, suggest, and cause it to be believed, that the
Parliament of this kingdom was a wicked, corrupt, useless, and unnecessary
establishment; and that the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, in Parliament assembled, wickedly tyrannized over and oppressed the
subjects of this kingdom in general, and to infuse into the minds of the
subjects of this kingdom groundless and unreasonable discontents and prejudices
against our present Sovereign Lord the King and the Parliament of this kingdom,
and the constitution, laws, and government thereof; and to bring them into
hatred and contempt, on the sixteenth day of February, in the thirty-second
year of the reign of our said present Sovereign Lord the King, with force and
arms at London aforesaid, to wit, in the parish of Saint Mary le Bow, in the
Ward of Cheap, he, the said Thomas, wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously, did
write and publish, and cause to be written and published, a certain false,
scandalous, malicious, and seditious libel, of and concerning the said late
happy Revolution, and the said settlements and limitations of the crown and
regal government of the said kingdoms and dominions; and the said act,
declaring the rights and liberties of the subject; and the said declaration of
the rights and liberties of the subject therein contained, and the hereditary
regal government of the said kingdoms and dominions; and also of and concerning
the Legislature, Constitution, Government, and Laws, of this kingdom; of and
concerning our present Sovereign Lord the King that now is; and of and
concerning the Parliament of this kingdom, entitled, Rights of Man, Part the
Second, Combining principle and practice, by Thomas Pain, Secretary for
Foreign Affairs to Congress, in the American War, and Author of the Work,
entitled Common Sense, and the First Part of the Rights of Man, the Second
Edition, London, printed for J. S. Jordan, No. 166, Fleet Street, 1792; in
which said libel are contained, amongst other things, diverse false, scandalous,
malicious, and seditious, matters. In one part thereof, according to the tenor
and effect following, that is to say, All hereditary government is in its
nature tyranny. An heritable crown (meaning, amongst others, the crown of this
kingdom) or an heritable throne, (meaning, amongst others, the throne of this
kingdom) or by what other fanciful name such things may be called, have no
other significant explanation than that mankind are heritable property. To
inherit a government, is to inherit the people, as if they were flocks and
herds. And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say) This Convention met at Philadelphia, in May, 1787,
of which General Washington was elected president. He was not at that time
connected with any of the State Governments, or with Congress. He delivered up
his commission when the war ended, and since then had lived a private citizen.
The Convention went deeply into all the subjects, and having, after a variety
of debate and investigation, agreed among themselves upon the several parts of
a Federal Constitution, the next question was the manner of giving it authority
and practice. For this purpose, they did not, like a cabal of courtiers, send
for a Dutch Stadtholder or a German Elector, but they referred the whole matter
to the sense and interest of the country, (thereby meaning and intending that
it should be believed that a cabal of courtiers had sent for the said Prince of
Orange and King George the First, heretofore Elector of Hanover, to take upon
themselves respectively the regal government of the said kingdom and dominions,
without referring to the sense and interest of the subjects of the said
kingdoms.) And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, that is to say, The history of the Edwards and the Henry's (meaning
Edwards and Henry's, heretofore Kings of England) and up to the commencement of
the Stuarts, (meaning Stuarts, heretofore Kings of England) exhibits as many
instances of tyranny as could be acted within the limits to which the nation
had restricted it. The Stuarts (meaning Stuarts, heretofore Kings of England)
endeavored to pass these limits, and their fate is well known. In all those
instances, we see nothing of a constitution, but only of restrictions on
assumed power. After this, another William, (meaning the said William Prince of
Orange, afterward King of England) descended from the same stock, and claiming
from the same origin, gained possession (meaning possession of the crown of
England) and of the two evils, James and William, (meaning James the Second,
heretofore King of England, and the said William Prince of Orange, afterward
King of England) the nation preferred what it thought the least; since from
circumstances it must take one. The act called the Bill of Rights (meaning the
said act of Parliament entitled, "an act declaring the rights and liberties of
the subject, and settling the succession of the crown) comes here into view;
what is it (meaning the said act of Parliament last mentioned) but a bargain
which the parts of the government made with each other to divide powers,
profits and privileges? (meaning that the said last-mentioned act of Parliament
was a bargain which the parts of the government in England made with each other
to divide powers, profits, and privileges. You shall have so much, and I will
have the rest; and with respect to the nation it said, for your share YOU shall
have the right of petitioning. This being the case, the Bill of Rights (meaning
the said last-mentioned act of Parliament) is more properly a Bill of Wrongs
and of insult; as to what is called the Convention Parliament, it (meaning the
said Convention of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons herein before
mentioned) was a thing that made itself, and then made the authority by which
it acted. A few persons got together, and called themselves by that name;
several of them had never been elected, and none of them for the purpose. From
the time of William, (meaning the said King William the Third) a species of
government arose, issuing out of this coalition Bill of Rights; (meaning the
said act, entitled, "an act, declaring the rights and liberties of the
subject, and settling the succession of the crown) and more so since the
corruption introduced at the Hanover succession (meaning the succession of the
Heirs of the Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover to the
crown and dignity of this kingdom) by the agency of Walpole, that (meaning the
said species of government) can be described by no other name than a despotic
legislation. Though the parts may embarrass each other, the whole has no
bounds; and the only right it acknowledges out of itself is the right of
petitioning. Where then is the constitution either that gives or that restrains
power? It is not because a part of the government (meaning the government of
this kingdom) is elective, that makes it less a despotism, if the persons so
elected possess afterward, as a parliament, unlimited powers; election in this
case becomes separated from representation, and the candidates are candidates
for despotism. And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say) The attention of the government of England (for I
rather choose to call it by this name than the English government) appears,
since its political connection with Germany, to have been so completely
engrossed and absorbed by foreign affairs, and the means of raising taxes, that
it seems to exist for no other purposes. Domestic concerns are neglected; and
with respect to regular laws, there is scarcely such a thing; And in another
part thereof, according to the tenor and effect following, (that is to say)
With respect to the two houses of which the English Parliament (meaning the
Parliament of this kingdom) is composed, they appear to be effectually
influenced into one, and, as a Legislature, to have no temper of its own. The
minister, (meaning the minister employed by the King of this realm in the
administration of the government thereof) whoever he at any time may be,
touches it (meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this kingdom) as with an
opium wand; and it (meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this kingdom)
sleeps obedience. But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two Houses
(meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this kingdom) the difference will
appear so great, as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there can
be no certainty of the judgment to use it. Wretched as the state of
representation is in England, (meaning the state of representation of the
Commons of this kingdom) it is manhood compared with what is called the House
of Lords; (meaning the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled)
and so little is this nicknamed House (meaning the House of Lords) regarded,
that the people scarcely inquire at any time what it is doing. It (meaning the
said House of Lords) appears also to be most under influence, and the furthest
removed from the general interest of the nation. And in another part thereof,
according to the tenor and effect following, viz. Having thus glanced at some
of the defects of the two Houses of Parliament, (meaning the Parliament of this
kingdom) I proceed to what is called the crown, (meaning the crown of this
kingdom) upon which I shall be very concise. It (meaning the crown of this
kingdom) signifies a nominal office of a million sterling a year, the business
of which consists in receiving the money, whether the person (meaning the King
of this realm) be wise or foolish, sane or insane, a native or a foreigner,
matters not, every ministry (meaning the ministry employed by the King of this
realm in the administration of the government thereof) acts upon the same idea
that Mr. Burke writes, namely, that the people (meaning the subjects of this
kingdom) must be hoodwinked and held in superstitious ignorance by some bugbear
or other; and what is called the crown (meaning the crown of this kingdom)
answers this purpose, and therefore it answers all the purposes to be expected
from it. This is more than can be said of the other two branches. The hazard to
which this office (meaning amongst others the office of King of this realm) is
exposed in all countries, (meaning amongst others this kingdom) is not from any
thing that can happen to the man, (meaning the King) but from what may happen
to the nation, (meaning amongst others this kingdom) the danger of its coming
to its senses. And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say) I happened to be in England at the celebration of
the centenary of the revolution of 1688. The characters of William and Mary
(meaning the said late King William and Queen Mary) have always appeared to me
detestable; the one (meaning the said King William) seeking to destroy his
uncle, and the other (meaning the said Queen Mary) her father, to get
possession of power themselves; yet as the nation was disposed to think
something of that event, I felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the whole reputation
of it to a man (meaning the said late King William the Third) who had
undertaken it as a jobb, and who, besides what he otherwise got, charged six
hundred thousand pounds for the expense of the little fleet that brought him
from Holland. George the First (meaning George the First, late King of Great
Britain, etc.) acted the same close-fisted part as William the Third had done,
and bought the Duchy of Bremin with the money he got from England, two hundred
and fifty thousand pounds over and above his pay as King; and having thus
purchased it at the expense of England, added it to his Hanoverian Dominions
for his own private profit. -- In fact, every nation that does not govern
itself is governed as a jobb: England has been the prey of jobbs ever since the
revolution. And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say) -- The fraud, hypocrisy, and imposition of
governments, (meaning, amongst others, the government of this kingdom) are now
beginning to be too well understood to promise them any long career. The farce
of monarchy and aristocracy in all countries is following that of chivalry, and
Mr. Burke is dressing for the funeral. Let it then pass quietly to the tomb of
all other follies, and the mourners be comforted. The time is not very distant
when England will laugh at itself for sending to Holland, Hanover, Zell, or
Brunswick, for men, (meaning the Kings of these realms, born out of the same,
who have acceded to the crown thereof at and since the revolution) at the
expense of a million a year, who understood neither her laws, her language, nor
her interest; and whose capacities would scarcely have fitted them for the
office of a parish constable. If Government could be trusted to such hands, it
must be some easy and simple thing indeed; and materials fit for all the
purposes may be found in every town and village in England. In contempt of our
said Lord the King and his laws, to the evil example of all others in the like
case offending, and against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown and
dignity. And the said attorney general of our said Lord the King, for our said
Lord the King, further gives the court here to understand and be informed, that
the said Thomas Pain, being a wicked, malicious, seditious, and ill-disposed
person, and being greatly disaffected to our said Sovereign Lord the now King,
and to the happy constitution and government of this kingdom, and most
unlawfully, wickedly, seditiously, and maliciously devising, contriving, and
intending to scandalize, traduce, and vilify the late happy revolution,
providentially brought about and effected under the wise and prudent conduct of
his Highness William, heretofore Prince of Orange, and afterward King of
England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; and the
acceptance of the Crown and Royal Dignity of King and Queen of England, France,
and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, by his said Highness
William, and her Highness Mary, heretofore Prince and Princess of Orange, and
the means by which the same revolution was accomplished, to the happiness and
welfare of this realm; and to scandalize, traduce, and vilify the convention of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, at whose request, and by whose
advice, their said Majesty's did accept the said Crown and Royal Dignity; and
to scandalize, traduce, and vilify the act of the Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the first year of the reign of their said Majesty's, King
William and Queen Mary, entitled, an act, declaring the rights and liberties
of the subject, and settling the succession of the crown, and the declaration
of rights and liberties in the said act contained; and also the limitations and
settlements of the crown and regal government of the said kingdoms and
dominions, as by law established, and also by most wicked, cunning, and artful
insinuations, to represent, suggest, and cause it to be believed, that the said
revolution, and the said settlements and limitations of the crown and regal
government of the said kingdoms and dominions, and the said declaration of the
rights and liberties of the subject, were contrary to the rights and interest
of the subjects of this kingdom in general; and that the regal government of
this kingdom was a tyranny; and also by most wicked, cunning, and artful
insinuations, to represent, suggest, and cause it to be believed, that the
Parliament of this kingdom was a wicked, corrupt, useless, and unnecessary
establishment; and that the King and Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons,
in Parliament assembled, wickedly tyrannized over and oppressed the subjects of
this kingdom in general; and to infuse into the minds of the subjects of this
kingdom groundless and unreasonable discontents and prejudices against our
present Sovereign Lord the King, and the Parliament of this kingdom; and the
constitution, laws, and government, thereof and to bring them into hatred and
contempt, on the sixteenth day of February, in the thirty-second year of the
reign of our said present Sovereign Lord the King, with force and arms at
London aforesaid, to wit, in the parish of Saint Mary le Bone, in the ward of
Cheap, he, the said Thomas, wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously did print
and publish, and cause to be printed and published, a certain false,
scandalous, malicious, and seditious libel, of and concerning the said late
happy revolution, and the said settlements and limitations of the crown and
regal government of the said kingdoms and dominions; and the said act declaring
the rights and liberties of the subject, and the said declaration of the rights
and liberties of the subject therein contained, and the hereditary Regal
government of the said kingdoms and dominions, and also of and concerning the
Legislature, Constitution, Government, and Laws of this Kingdom, and of and
concerning our present Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and of and
concerning the Parliament of this kingdom, entitled, Rights of Man, part the
second, combining principle and practice, by Thomas Pain, secretary for
foreign affairs to Congress in the American War, and author of the work,
entitled Common Sense, and the first part of the Rights of Man, the Second
Edition, London, Printed for J. S. Jordan, No. 166, Fleet Street. In which said
libel are contained, amongst other things, diverse false, scandalous, malicious,
and seditious matters. In one part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say) All hereditary government is in its nature tyranny.
An heritable crown (meaning, amongst others, the crown of this kingdom) or an
heritable throne, (meaning, amongst others, the throne of this kingdom) or by
what other fanciful name such things may be called, have no other significant
explanation than than that mankind are heritable property. To inherit a
government is to inherit the people, as if they were flocks and herds. And in
another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect following, (that is to
say) This Convention met at Philadelphia in May, 1787, of which General
Washington was elected president. He was not at that time connected with any of
the state governments, or with Congress; he delivered up his commission when
the war ended, and since then had lived a private citizen. The Convention went
deeply into all the subjects, and having, after a variety of debate and
investigation, agreed among themselves upon the several parts of a Federal
Constitution, the next question was the manner of giving it authority and
practice. For this purpose they did not, like a cabal of courtiers, send for a
Dutch Stadtholder or a German Elector; but they referred the whole matter to
the sense and interest of the country. (thereby meaning and intending that it
should be believed that a cabal of courtiers had sent for the said Prince of
Orange and King George the First, heretofore Elector of Hanover, to take upon
themselves respectively the regal government of the said kingdoms and
dominions, without referring to the sense and interest of the subects of the
said kingdoms) And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say) The history of the Edwards and Henry's, (meaning
Edwards and Henry's, heretofore Kings of England) and up to the commencement of
the Stuarts, (meaning Stuarts, heretofore Kings of England) exhibits as many
instances of tyranny as could be acted within the limits to which the nation
had restricted it. The Stuarts (meaning Stuarts, heretofore Kings of England)
endeavored to pass those limits, and their fate is well known. In all those
instances, we see nothing of a constitution, but only of restrictions on
assumed power. After this, another William, (meaning the said William Prince of
Orange, afterward King of England) descended from the same stock, and claiming
from the same origin, gained possession; (meaning possession of the crown of
England) and of the two evils, James and William, (meaning James the Second,
heretofore King of England; and the said William Prince of Orange, afterward
King of England) the nation preferred what it thought the least; since from
circumstances it must take one. The act, called the Bill of Rights, (meaning
the said act of Parliament, entitled, "an act declaring the rights and
liberties of the subject, and settling the succession of the crown") comes here
into view. What is it (meaning the said act of Parliament last mentioned) but a
bargain which the parts of the government made with each other to divide
powers, profits, and privileges, (meaning that the said last-mentioned act of
Parliament was a bargain which the parts of the government in England made with
each other to divide powers, profits, and privileges) You shall have so much,
and I will have the rest. And with respect to the nation, it said, for your
share you shall have the right of petitioning. This being the case, the Bill of
Rights (meaning the said last-mentioned act of Parliament) is more properly a
bill of wrongs and of insult. As to what is called the Convention Parliament,
it (meaning the said convention of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons,
herein-before mentioned) was a thing that made itself, and then made the
authority by which it acted. A few persons got together, and called themselves
by that name; several of them had never been elected, and none of them for the
purpose. From the time of William, (meaning the said King William the Third) a
species of government arose issuing out of this coalition Bill of Rights;
(meaning the said act, entitled, an act declaring the rights and liberties of
the subject, and settling the succession of the crown) and more so since the
corruption introduced at the Hanover succession, (meaning the succession of the
heirs of the Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, to the
crown and dignity of this kingdom) by the agency of Walpole, that (meaning the
said species of government) can be described by no other name than a despotic
legislation. Though the parts may embarrass each other, the whole has no
bounds; and the only right it acknowledges out of itself, is the right of
petitioning. Where then is the constitution either that gives or that restrains
power. It is not because a part of the government (meaning the government of
this kingdom) is elective, that makes it less a despotism. If the persons so
elected possess afterward, as a Parliament, unlimited powers, election, in
this case, becomes separated from representation, and the candidates are
candidates for despotism. And in another part thereof, according to the tenor
and effect following, (that is to say) The attention of the government of
England (for I rather choose to call it by this name than the English
government) appears, since its political connection with Germany, to have been
so completely engrossed and absorbed by foreign affairs, and the means of
raising taxes, that it seems to exist for no other purposes. Domestic concerns
are neglected; and with respect to regular law, there is scarcely such a thing.
And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect following,(that
is to say) With respect to the two Houses of which the English Parliament
(meaning the Parliament of this kingdom) is composed, they appear to be
effectually influenced into one, and, as a Legislature, to have no temper of
its own. The minister, (meaning the minister employed by the King of this
realm, in the administration of the government thereof) whoever he at any time
may be, touches it (meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this kingdom) as
with an opium wand, and it (meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this
kindom) sleeps obedience. But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two
Houses, (meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this kingdom) the difference
will appear so great, as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there
can be no certainty of the judgment to use it. Wretched as the state of
representation is in England, (meaning the state of representation of the
Commons of this kingdom) it is manhood, compared with what is called the House
of Lords; (meaning the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled)
and so little is this nicknamed House (meaning the House of Lords) regarded,
that the people scarcely inquire at any time what it is doing. It (meaning the
said House of Lords) appears also to be most under influence, and the farthest
removed from the general interest of the nation. And in another part thereof,
according to the tenor and effect following, viz. Having thus glanced at some
of the defects of the two Houses of Parliament, (meaning the Parliament of this
kingdom) I proceed to what is called the crown, (meaning the crown of this
kingdom) upon which I shall be very concise. It (meaning the crown of this
kingdom) signifies a nominal office of a million sterling a year, the business
of which consists in receiving the money. Whether the person (meaning the King
of this realm) be wise or foolish, sane or insane, a native or a foreigner,
matters not; every ministry (meaning the ministry employed by the King of this
realm in the administration of the government thereof) acts upon the same idea
that Mr. Burke writes, namely, that the people (meaning the subjects of this
kingdom) must be hoodwinked and held in superstitious ignorance by some bugbear
or other; and what is called the crown (meaning the crown of this kingdom)
answers this purpose, and therefore it answers all the purposes to be expected
from it. This is more than can be said of the other two branches. The hazard to
which this office (meaning, amongst others, the office of King of this realm)
is exposed in all countries, (meaning, amongst others, this kingdom) is not
from any thing that can happen to the man, (meaning the King) but from what may
happen to the nation, (meaning, amongst this kingdom) the danger of coming to
its senses. And in another part thereof, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say) I happened to be in England at the celebration of
the centenary of the Revolution of 1688. The charaters of William and Mary
(meaning the said late King William and Queen Mary) have always appeared to me
detestable; the one (meaning the said late King William) seeking to destroy his
uncle, and the other (meaning the said Queen Mary) her father, to get
possession of power themselves. Yet as the nation was disposed to think
something of that event, I felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the whole reputation
of it to a man (meaning the said late King William the Third) who had
undertaken it as a job, and who, besides what he otherwise got, charged six
hundred thousand pounds for the expense of the little fleet that brought him
from Holland. George the First (meaning George the First, late King of Great
Britain, etc.) acted the same close-fisted part as William (meaning the said
King William the Third) had done, and bought the Duchy of Bremin with the money
he got from England, two hundred and fifty thousand pounds over and above his
pay as King; and having thus purchased it at the expense of England, added it
to his Hanoverian dominions for his own private profit. In fact, every nation
that does not govern itself is governed as a jobb. England has been the prey of
jobbs ever since the Revolution. And in another part thereof, according to the
tenor and effect following (that is to say) The fraud, hypocrisy, and
imposition of governments (meaning amongst others, the government of this
kingdom) are now beginning to be too well understood to promise them any long
career. The farce of monarchy and aristocracy in all countries is following
that of chivalry, and Mr. Burke is dressing for the funeral. Let it then pass
quietly to the tomb of all other follies, and the mourners be comforted. The
time is not very distant when England will laugh at itself for sending to
Holland, Hanover, Zell, or Brunswick, for Men (meaning the Kings of these
realms, born out of the same, who have acceded to the crown thereof at and
since the Revolution) at the expense of a million a year, who understood
neither her laws, her language, nor her interest, and whose capacities would
scarcely have fitted them for the office of a Parish Constable. If government
could be trusted to such hands, it must be some easy and simple thing indeed,
and materials fit for all the purposes may be found in every town and village
in England. In contempt of our said Lord the King and his laws, to the evil
example of all others in the like case offending, and against the peace of our
said Lord the King, his crown and dignity, and the said Attorney General of our
said Lord the King, for our said Lord the King, further gives the Court here to
understand and be informed, that the said Thomas Pain being a wicked,
seditious, and ill-disposed, person, and wickedly, seditiously, and
maliciously, intending to scandalize, traduce, and vilify, the character of the
said late Sovereign Lord, King William the Third, and the said late happy
Revolution, and the Parliament of England, by whose means the same was
established, commonly called the Convention Parliament; and the laws and
statutes of this realm limiting and establishing the succession to the crown of
this kingdom, and the statute declaring the rights and liberties of the
subject, commonly called the Bill of Rights, and the happy constitution and
government of this kingdom, as by law established, and to bring the
constitution, legislation, and government, of this kingdom into hatred and
contempt with his Majestys subjects; and to stir up and excite discontents and
seditions among his Majestys subjects. And to fulfill, perfect, and bring to
effect his said wicked, malicious, and seditious intentions, on the said
Sixteenth Day of February, in the Thirty Second Year aforesaid, at London
aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, he, the said Thomas Pain,
wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously, did write and publish, and cause and
procure to be written and published, a certain other false scandalous,
malicious, and seditious libel, in which, amongst other things, are contained
certain false, scandalous, malicious, and seditious matters, of and concerning
the character of the said late Sovereign Lord King William the Third, and the
said Revolution and the said Parliament, and the laws and statutes of this
realm, and the happy constitution and government thereof, as by law
established, according to the tenor and effect following, (that is to say) The
history of the Edwards and the Henry's, (meaning Edwards and Henry's,
heretofore Kings of England) and up to the commencement of the Stuarts,
(meaning Stuarts, heretofore Kings of England) exhibits as many instances of
tyranny as could be acted within the limits to which the nation (meaning
England) had restricted, it. The Stuarts (meaning Stuarts, heretofore King of
England) endeavored to pass those limits, and their fate is well known. In all
those instances we see nothing of a constitution, but only of restrictions on
assumed power. After this, another William, (meaning the said late King William
the Third) descended from the same stock, and claiming from the same origin,
gained possession; (meaning possession of the crown of England) and of the two
evils, James and William, (meaning James the Second, heretofore King of
England, and the said King William the Third) the nation (meaning England)
preferred what it thought the least, since from circumstances it must take one.
The act called the Bill of Rights (meaning the said statute, declaring the
rights and liberties of the subject, commonly called the Bill of Rights) comes
here into view. What is it (meaning the said last mentioned statute) but a
bargain which the parts of the government made with each other to divide
powers, profits, and privileges? (Meaning that the said last-mentioned statute
was a bargain which the parts of government in England made with each other to
divide powers, profits, and privileges) You shall have so much, and I will have
the rest. And with respect to the nation (meaning England) it said, for your
share you shall have the right of petitioning. This being the case, the Bill of
Rights (meaning the said last-mentioned statute) is more properly a Bill of
Wrongs and of insult. As to what is called the Convention Parliament, (meaning
the aforesaid Parliament of England, commonly called the Convention Parliament)
It (meaning the aforesaid Parliament of England, commonly called the Convention
Parliament) was a thing that made itself, and then made the authority by which
it acted. A few persons got together, and called themselves by that name.
Several of them had never been elected, and none of them for the purpose. From
the time of William, (meaning the said King William the Third) a species of
government (meaning government of England) arose, issuing out of this coalition
Bill of Rights; (meaning the said statute, declaring the rights and liberties
of the subject) and more so since the corruption introduced at the Hanover
Succession; (meaning the succession of the heirs of the Princess Sophia,
Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, to the crown and dignity of this
kingdom) by the agency of Walpole, that (meaning the said species of
government) can be described by no other name than a despotic legislation.
Though the parts may embarrass each other, the whole has no bounds; and the
only right it acknowledges out of itself, is the right of petitioning. Where
then is the constitution either that gives or that restrains power? It is not
because a part of the government (meaning the government of this kingdom) is
elective, that makes it less a despotism. If the persons so elected possess
afterward, as a Parliament, unlimited powers, election, in this case, becomes
separated from representation, and the candidates are candidates for despotism.
In contempt of our said Lord the King and his laws, to the evil example of all
others in the like case offending, and against the peace of our said Lord the
King, his crown and dignity. And the said Attorney General of our said Lord the
King, for our said Lord the King, further gives the court here to understand
and be informed, that the said Thomas Pain being a wicked, seditious, and
ill-disposed person, and wickedly, seditiously, and maliciosly intending to
scandalize, traduce, and vilify the character of the said late Sovereign Lord
King William the Third, and the said late happy revolution, and the Parliament
of England, by whose means the same was established, commonly called the
Convention Parliament; and the laws and statutes of this realm, limiting and
establishing the succession to the crown of this kingdom; and the statute
declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, commonly called the Bill of
Rights; and the happy constitution and government of this kingdom as by law
established; and to bring the Constitution, Legislation, and Government of this
Kingdom into hatred and contempt with his Majesty's subjects; -- and to stir up
and excite discontents and seditious among his Majesty's subjects; and to
fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect his said wicked, malicious, and seditious
intentions, on the said sixteenth day of February, in the thirty second year
aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the parish and ward aforesaid, he, the said
Thomas Pain, wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously, did print and publish,
and cause and procure to be printed and published, a certain other false,
scandalous, malicious, and seditious libel, in which, amongst other things, are
contained certain false, scandalous, malicious, and seditious, matters, of and
concerning the character of the said late Sovereign Lord King William the
Third, and the said revolution, and the said Parliament, and the laws and
statutes of this realm, and the happy constitution and government thereof, as
by law established, according to the tenor and effect following, -- (that is to
say) The history of the Edwards and the Henry's, (meaning Edwards and Henry's
heretofore Kings of England) and up to the commencement of the Stuarts,
(meaning Stuarts, heretofore Kings of England) exhibits as many instances of
tyranny as could be acted within the limits to which the nation (meaning
England) had restricted it. The Stuarts (meaning Stuarts, heretofore Kings of
England) endeavored to pass those limits, and their fate is well known. In all
those instances we see nothing of a constitution, but only of restrictions on
assumed power. After this, another William, (meaning the said late King William
the Third) descended from the same stock, and claiming from the same origin,
gained possession; -- (meaning possession of the crown of England) and of the
two evils, James and William, (meaning James the Second, heretofore King of
England, and the said King William the Third) the nation (meaning England)
preferred what it thought least, since from circumstances it must take one. The
act called the Bill of Rights (meaning the said statute, declaring the rights
and liberties of the subject, commonly called the Bill of Rights) comes here
into view. What is it (meaning the said late-mentioned statute) but a bargain
which the parts of the government made with each other to divide powers,
profits, and privileges? (meaning that the said last-mentioned statute was a
bargain which the parts of the government in England made with each other to
divide powers, profits, and privileges) You shall have so much, and I will have
the rest. And with respect to the nation, (meaning England) it said, for your
share you shall have the right of petitioning. -- This being the case, the Bill
of Rights (meaning the said last-mentioned statute) is more properly a Bill of
Wrongs and of insult. As to what is called the Convention Parliament, (meaning
the aforesaid Parliament of England) it (meaning the aforesaid Parliament of
England, commonly called the Convention Parliament) was a thing that made
itself, and then made the authority by which it acted; a few persons got
together and called themselves by that name; several of them had never been
elected, and none of them for the purpose. From the time of William (meaning
the said King William the Third) a species of government (meaning the
government of England) arose, issuing out of this coalition Bill of Rights;
(meaning the said statute declaring the rights and liberties of the subject)
and more so since the corruption introduced at the Hanover succession (meaning
the succession of the heirs of the Princess Sophia, Electress, and Duchess
Dowger of Hanover to the Crown and Dignity of this kingdom) by the agency of
Walpole: that (meaning the said species of government) can be described by no
other name than a despotic Legislation, though the parts may embarrass each
other, the whole has no bounds; and the only right it acknowledges, out of
itself, is the right of petitioning. -- Where then is the constitution either
that gives, or that restrains power? It is not because a part of the government
(meaning the government of this kingdom) is elective that makes it less a
despotism, if the persons so elected possess afterward, as a Parliament,
unlimited powers. Election in this case becomes separated from representation,
and the canditates are canditates for despotism. In contempt of our said Lord
the King and his laws, to the evil example of all others in the like case
offending, and against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown, and
dignity. And the said Attorney General of our said Lord the King, for our said
Lord the King, further gives the Court here to understand and be informed, that
the said Thomas Pain, being a wicked, malicious, seditious, and ill-disposed
person, and being greatly disaffected to our said present Sovereign Lord the
King, and wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously intending, devising, and
contriving to traduce and vilify our Sovereign Lord the King, and the two
Houses of Parliament of this kingdom, and the Constitution and Government of
this kingdom, and the administration of the government thereof, and to stir up
and excite discontents and seditions amongst his Majesty's subjects, and to
alienate and withdraw the affection, fidelity, and allegiance of his said
Majesty's subjects from his said Majesty; and to fulfill, perfect, and bring to
effect, his said wicked, malicious, and seditious intentions, on the said
sixteenth day of February, in the thirty-second year aforesaid, at London
aforesaid, in the parish and ward aforesaid, he, the said Thomas Pain,
wickedly, sediciously, and maliciously did write and publish, and cause to be
written and published, a certain other false, scandalous, malicious, and
seditious libel; in which libel, amongst other things, are contained certain
false, scandalous, malicious, and seditious matters, of and concerning the
Crown of this kingdom, and the King's administration of the government thereof,
and of and concerning the King and the two Houses of Parliament of this
kingdom, according to the tenor and effect following, viz. Having thus glanced
at some of the defects of the two Houses of Parliament, (meaning the Parliament
of this kingdom,) I proceed to what is called the Crown, (meaning the Crown of
this kingdom,) upon which I shall be very concise. It (meaning the Crown of
this kingdom) signifies a nominal office of a million sterling a year, the
business of which consists in receiving the money: whether the person (meaning
the King of this realm) be wise or foolish, sane or insane, a native or a
foreigner, matters not, every Ministry. (meaning the Ministry employed by the
King of this realm in the administration of the government thereof) acts upon
the same idea that Mr. Burke writes, namely, that the people (meaning the
subjects of this kingdom) must be hoodwinked and held in superstitious
ignorance by some bugbear or other; and what is called the Crown (meaning the
Crown of this kingdom) answers this purpose, and therefore it answers all the
purposes to be expected from it: this is more than can be said of the other two
branches. The hazard to which this office (meaning, amongst others, the office
of King of this realm) is exposed in all countries (meaning, amongst others,
this kingdom) is not from any thing that can happen to the man, (meaning the
King) but from what may happen to the nation, (meaning, amongst others, this
kingdom) the danger of its coming to its senses. In contempt of our said Lord
the King and his laws, to the evil example of all others in the like case
offending, and against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown, and
dignity. And the said Attorney General of our said Lord the King, for our Lord
the King, further gives the Court here to understand and be informed, that the
said Thomas Pain, being a wicked, malicious, seditious and ill-disposed
person, and being greatly disaffected to our said present Sovereign Lord the
King, and wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously intending, devising, and
contriving to traduce and vilify our Sovereign Lord the King, and the two
Houses of Parliament of this kingdom, and the Constitution and Government of
this kingdom, and the administration of the government thereof, and to stir up
and excite discontents and seditions amongst his Majesty's subjects, and to
alienate and withdraw the affection, fidelity, and allegiance of his said
Majesty's subjects from his said Majesty; and to fulfill, perfect, and bring to
effect his said wicked, malicious, and seditious intentions, on the said
sixteenth day of February, in the thirty-second year aforesaid, at London
aforesaid, in the parish and ward aforesaid, he, the said Thomas Pain,
wickedly, seditiously, and maliciously did print and publish, and cause to be
printed and published, a certain other false, scandalous, malicious, and
seditious libel; in which libel, amongst other things, are contained certain
false, scandalous, malicious, and seditious matters, of and concerning the
Crown of this kingdom, and the King's administration of the government thereof,
and of and concerning the King and the two Houses of Parliament of this
kingdom, according to the tenor and effect following, viz. Having thus glanced
at some of the defects of the two Houses of Parliament, (meaning of the
Parliament of this kingdom) I proceed to what is called the Crown, (meaning the
Crown of this kingdom) upon which I shall be very concise. It (meaning the
Crown of this kingdom) signifies a nominal office of a million sterling a year,
the business of which consists in receiving the money: whether the person
(meaning the King of this realm) be wise or foolish, sane or insane, a native
or a foreigner, matters not, every Ministry (meaning the Ministry employed by
the King of this realm in the administration of the government thereof) acts
upon the same idea that Mr. Burke writes, namely, that the people (meaning the
subjects of this kingdom) must be hoodwinked and held in superstitious
ignorance by some bugbear or other, and what is called the Crown (meaning the
Crown of this kingdom) answers this purpose, and therefore it answers all the
purposes to be expected from it: this is more than can be said of the other two
branches. The hazard to which this office (meaning, amongst others, the office
of King of this realm) is exposed in all countries (meaning, amongst others,
this kingdom) is not from any thing that can happen to the man, (meaning the
King) but from what may happen to the nation, (meaning, amongst others, this
kingdom) the danger of its coming to its senses. In contempt of our said Lord
the King and his laws, to the evil example of all others in the like case
offending, and against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown, and
dignity. And the said Attorney General of our said Lord the King, for our said
Lord the King, further gives the Court here to understand and be informed,
that the said Thomas Pain, being a wicked, malicious, seditious, and
ill-disposed person, and being greatly disaffected to our said Lord the King,
and the Constitution and Government of this kingdom, and wickedly, maliciously,
and seditiously intending, devising, and contriving to asperse, defame, and
vilify the characters of the late Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary,
heretofore King and Queen of England, and of George the First, heretofore King
of Great Britain, etc.; and to asperse, defame, and vilify, the happy
Revolution, providentially effected under the wise and prudent conduct of the
said King William and Queen Mary, and to bring the said Revolution, and the
characters of the said King William and Queen Mary, and King George the First,
into hatred and contempt with the subjects of this realm, and to stir up and
excite discontents and seditions among his Majesty's subjects, and to alienate
and withdraw the affection, fidelity, and allegiance of his Majesty's subjects
from his said present Majesty; and to fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect his
said wicked, malicious, and seditious intentions, on the said sixteenth day of
February, in the thirty-second year of the reign of our Lord the now King, at
London aforesaid, in the parish and ward aforesaid, wickedly, maliciously, and
seditiously, did write and publish, and cause to be written and published, a
certain other false, wicked, malicious, scandalous, and seditious libel; in
which same libel, amongst other things, are contained certain false, wicked,
malicious, scandalous, and seditious matters, of and concerning the said King
William and Queen Mary, and the said King George the First, and the said
Revolution, according to the tenor and effect following, (that is to say) I
happened to be in England at the celebration of the centenary of the Revolution
of 1688. (meaning the said Revolution) The characters of William and Mary
(meaning the said late King William and Queen Mary) have always appeared to me
detestable; the one (meaning the said King William) seeking to destroy his
uncle, and the other (meaning the said Queen Mary) her father, to get
possession of power themselves; yet, as the nation was disposed to think
something of that event, I felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the whole reputation
of it to a man (meaning the said late King William the Third) who had
undertaken it as a jobb; and who, besides what he otherwise got, charged six
hundred thousand pounds for the expense of the little fleet that brought him
from Holland. George the First (meaning George the First, late King of Great
Britain, etc.) acted the same close-fisted part as William (meaning the said
King William the Third) had done, and bought the Duchy of Bremin with the money
he got from England, two hundred and fifty thousand pounds over and above his
pay as King; and having thus purchased it at the expense of England, added it
to his Hanoverian dominions for his own private profit: in fact, every nation
that does not govern itself is governed as a jobb: England has been the prey of
jobbs ever since the Revolution. (meaning the aforesaid Revolution.) In
contempt of our said Lord the King and his laws, to the evil and pernicious
example of all others in the like case offending, and against the peace of our
said Lord the King, his crown, and dignity. And the said Attorney General of
our said Lord the King, for our said Lord the King, further gives the Court
here to understand and be informed, that the said Thomas Pain, being a wicked,
malicious, seditious, and ill-disposed person, and being greatly disaffected to
our said Lord the King, and the Constitution and Government of this kingdom,
and wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously intending, devising, and contriving
to asperse, defame, and vilify the characters of the late Sovereign Lord and
Lady William and Mary, heretofore King and Queen of England, and of George the
First, heretofore King of Great Britain, etc. and to asperse, defame, and
vilify the happy Revolution, providentially effected under the wise and prudent
conduct of the said King William and Queen Mary, and to bring the said
Revolution, and the characters of the said King William and Queen Mary, and
King George the First, into hatred and contempt with the subjects of this
realm, and to stir up and excite discontents and seditions among his Majesty's
subjects, and to alienate and withdraw the affection, fidelity, and allegiance
of his Majesty's subjects from his said present Majesty; and to fulfill,
perfect, and bring to effect, his said wicked, malicious, and seditious
intentions, on the said sixteenth day of February, in the thirty-second year of
the reign of our Lord the now King, at London aforesaid, in the parish and ward
aforesaid, wickedly. maliciously, and seditiously, did print and publish, and
cause to be printed and published, a certain other false, wicked, malicious,
scandalous, and seditious libel; in which same libel, amongst other things, are
contained certain false, wicked, malicious, scandalous, and seditious matters,
of and concerning the said King William and Queen Mary, and the said King
George the First, and the said Revolution, according to the tenor and effect
following, (that is to say,) I happened to be in England at the celebration of
the centenary of the Revolution of 1688. (meaning the said Revolution) The
characters of William and Mary (meaning the said late King William and Queen
Mary) have always appeared to me detestable; the one (meaning the said King
William) seeking to destroy his uncle, and the other (meaning the said Queen
Mary) her father, to get possession of power themselves; yet, as the nation was
disposed to think something of that event, I felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the
whole reputation of it to a man (meaning the said late King William the Third)
who had undertaken it as a jobb; and who, besides what he otherwise got,
charged six hundred thousand pounds for the expense of the little fleet that
brought him from Holland. George the First (meaning George the First, late King
of Great Britain, etc.) acted the same close-fisted part as William (meaning
the said King William the Third) had done, and bought the Duchy of Bremin with
the money he got from England, two hundred and fifty thousand pounds over and
above his pay as King; and having thus purchased it at the expense of England,
added it to his Hanoverian dominions for his own private profit: in fact, every
nation that does not govern itself is governed as a jobb: England has been the
prey of jobbs ever since the Revolution. (meaning the aforesaid Revolution.) In
contempt of our said Lord the King and his laws, to the evil and pernicious
example of all others, in the like case offending, and against the peace of our
said Lord the King, his crown and dignity. And the said Attorney General of our
said Lord the King, for our said Lord the King, further gives the court here to
understand and be informed, that the said Thomas Pain being a wicked,
malicious, seditious, and ill-disposed person, and being greatly disaffected to
our said Lord the King, and the Constitution and Government of this kingdom,
and wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously, intending, devising, and
contriving, to asperse, defame, and vilify, the character of the late Sovereign
Lord William, heretofore King o-England, and of George the First, heretofore
King of Great Britain, etc. and to asperse, defame, and vilify, the happy
Revolution, providentially effected under the wise and prudent conduct of the
said King William; and to bring the said Revolution and the characters of the
said King William and King George the First into hatred and contempt with the
subjects of this realm; and to stir up and excite discontents and seditions
among his Majesty's subjects, and to alienate and withdraw the affection,
fidelity, and allegiance, of his Majesty's subjects from his said present
Majesty; and to fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect, his said wicked,
malicious, and seditious, intentions, on the said sixteenth day of February, in
the thirty-second year of the reign of our Lord the now King, at London
aforesaid, in the parish and ward aforesaid, wickedly and maliciously did write
and publish, and cause to be written and published, a certain other false,
wicked, malicious, scandalous, and seditious, libel; in which same libel,
amongst other things, are contained certain false, wicked, malicious,
scandalous, and seditious, matters, of and concerning the said King William the
Third, and the said King George the First, and the said Revolution, according
to the tenor and effect following, (that is to say) The fraud, hypocrisy, and
imposition, of Government (meaning, amongst others, the government of this
kingdom) "are now beginning to be too well undestood to promise them any long
career. The farce of monarchy and aristocracy in all countries is following
that of chivalry, and Mr. Burke is dressing for the funeral. Let it then pass
quietly to the tomb of all other follies, and the mourners be comforted. The
time is not very distant when England will laugh at itself for sending to
Holland, Hanover, Zell, or Brunswick, for men, (meaning the said King William
the Third, and King George the First) at the expense of a million a year, who
understood neither her laws, her language, nor her interest; and whose
capacities would scarcely have fitted them for the office of a parish
constable. If government could be trusted to such hands, it must be some easy
and simple thing indeed; and materials fit for all the purposes may be found in
every town and village in England. In contempt of our said Lord the now King
and his laws, to the evil example of all others in the like case offending, and
against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown and dignity, And the
said Attorney General of our said Lord the King, for our said Lord the King,
further gives the court here to understand and be informed, that the said
Thomas Pain being a wicked, malicious, seditious, and ill-disposed person, and
being greatly disaffected to our said Lord the King, and the constitution and
government of this kingdom, and wickedly, maliciously and seditiously,
intending, devising, and contriving, to asperse, defame, and vilify, the
character of the late Sovereign Lord William heretofore King of England, and of
George the First heretofore King of Great Britain, etc. and to asperse, defame,
and vilify, the happy revolution, providentially effected under the wise and
prudent conduct of the said King William, and to bring the said Revolution and
the characters of the said King William and King George the First into hatred
and contempt with the subjects of this realm; and to stir up and excite
discontents and seditions among his Majesty's subjects, and to alienate and
withdraw the affection, fidelity, and allegiance of his Majesty's subjects from
his said present Majesty, and to fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect, his said
wicked, malicious, and seditious, intentions, on the said sixteenth day of
February, in the thirty-second year of the reign of our Lord the now King, at
London aforesaid, in the parish and ward aforesaid, wickedly, maliciously, and
seditiously, did print and publish, and cause to be printed and published, a
certain other false, wicked, malicious, scandalous, and seditious, libel; in
which same libel, amongst other things, are contained certain false, wicked,
malicious, scandalous, and seditious matters, of and concerning the said King
William the Third, and the said King George the First, and the said Revolution,
according to the tenor and effect following, (that is to say) The fraud,
hypocrisy, and imposition, of Governments, (meaning, among others, the
government of this kingdom) are now beginning to be too well understood to
promise them any long career. The farce of monarchy and aristocracy in all
countries is following that of chivalry, and Mr. Burke is dressing for the
funeral. Let it then pass quietly to the tomb of all other follies, and the
mourners be comforted. The time is not very distant when England will laugh at
itself for sending to Holland, Hanover, Zell, or Brunswick, for men (meaning
the said King William the Third, and King George the First) at the expense of a
million a year, who understood neither her laws, her language, nor her
interest, and whose capacities would scarcely have fitted them for the office
of a parish constable. If government could be trusted to such hands, it must be
some easy and simple thing indeed; and materials fit for all the purposes may
be found in every town and village in England. In contempt of our said Lord the
now King and his laws, to the evil example of all others in the like case
offending, and against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown and
dignity. Whereupon the said Attorney General of our said Lord the King, who for
our said Lord the King in this behalf, prosecuteth for our said Lord the King,
prays the consideration of the court here in the premises, and that due
process of law may be awarded against him the said Thomas Pain in this behalf,
to make him answer to our said Lord the King, touching and concerning the
premises aforesaid.

To this information the defendant has appeared, and pleaded Not Guilty, and
thereupon issue is joined.

Court of KING's BENCH, Guildhall, London, DECEMBER 18th, 1792, Before the
RIGHT HON. LORD KENYON.
SPECIAL JURY.
JOHN CAMPBELL, JOHN LIGHTFOOT, CHRISTOPHER TADDY, ROBERT OLIPHANT, CORNELIUS
DONOVAN, ROBERT ROLLESTON, JOHN LUBBOCK, RICHARD TUCKWELL, WILLIAM PORTER,
THOMAS DRUCE, ISAAC RAILTON, HENRY EVANS.
Counsel for the Crown.
The ATTORNEY GENERAL, The SOLICITOR GENERAL, Mr. BEARCROFT, Mr. BALDWIN, Mr.
WOOD, Mr. PERCIVAL. Solicitors.
Messrs. CHAMBERLAYNE and WHITL.

Counsel for the Defendant.
The Hon. THO. ERSKINE, Mr. PIGGOT, Mr. SHEPHERD, Mr. FITZGERALD, Mr. F.
VAUGHAN. Solicitor.
Mr. BONNEY.

(The information was opened by Mr. Percival.) Mr. ATTORNEY GENERAL. Gentlemen
of the Jury,

You will permit me to solicit, and for no long space of time, in the present
stage of this business, somewhat of your attention to a cause which,
considering it on its own merits only, is, in my humble judgment, a plain, a
clear, a short, and indisputable case. Were it not, Gentlemen, that certain
circumstances have rendered it a case of more expectation than ordinary, I do
assure you that I should literally have contented myself this day with
conducting myself in the manner that I did upon the last occasion that I was
called upon to address a Jury upon this sort of subject, namely, by simply
reading to you the passages which I have selected, and leaving it entirely to
your judgment. But, Gentlemen, it so happens that the accumulated mischief
which has arisen from the particular book that is now before you, and the
consequences, which every body is acquainted with, which have followed from
this publication, have rendered it necessary, perhaps, that I should say a few
words more in the opening than it would have been my intention to have done,
had it not been for those circumstances.

Gentlemen, in the first place you will permit me, without the imputation, I
think, of speaking of myself,(a very trifling subject, and always a disgusting
one to others) to obviate a rumor which I have heard, namely, that this
prosecution does not correspond with my private judgment; that has been said,
and has reached my ears from various quarters. The refutation that I shall give
to it is this: That I should think I deserved to be with disgrace expelled from
the situation with which his Majesty has honored me in your service, and that
of all my fellow subjects, had I, as far as my private judgment goes, hesitated
for one instant to bring this enormous offender, as I consider him, before a
Jury of his country.

Gentlemen, the publication in question was not the first of its kind which
this defendant sent forth into the world. This particular publication was
preceded by one upon the same subjects, and handling, in some measure, the same
topics. That publication, although extremely reprehensible, and such as,
perhaps, I was not entirely warranted in overlooking, I did overlook, upon this
principle, that it may not be fitting and prudent at all times, for a public
prosecutor to be sharp in his prosecutions, or to have it said that he is
instrumental in preventing any manner of discussion coming under the public
eye, although in his own estimation it may be very far indeed from that which
is legitimate and proper discussion. Reprehensible as that book was, extremely
so in my opinion, yet it was ushered into the world under circumstances that
led me to conceive that it would be confined to the judicious reader, and when
confined to the judicious reader, it appeared to me that such a man would
refute as he went along.

But, gentlemen, when I found that another publication was ushered into the
world still more reprehensible than the former, that in all shapes, in all
sizes, with an industry incredible; it was either totally or partially thrust
into the hands of all persons in this country, of subjects of every
description; when I found that even children's sweetmeats were wrapped up with
parts of this, and delivered into their hands, in the hope that they would read
it, when all industry was used, such as I describe to you, in order to obtrude
and force this upon that part of the public whose minds cannot be supposed to
be conversant with subjects of this sort, and who cannot therefore correct as
they go along, I thought it behoved me upon the earliest occasion, which was
the first day of the term succeeding this publication, to put a charge upon
record against its author.

Now, gentlemen, permit me to state to you what it is that I impute to this
book, and what is the intention that I impute to the writer of this book. Try
it by every test that the human mind can possibly suggest, and see whether when
tried by all the variety of those tests, you will not be satisfied in the long
run, that it does deserve that description which my duty obliges me to give of
it.

Gentlemen, in the first place I impute to it a wilful, deliberate intention to
vilify and degrade, and thereby to bring into abhorrence and contempt, the
whole constitution of the government of this country; not as introduced, that I
will never admit, but as explained and restored at the Revolution. That system
of government under which we this day live, and which if it shall be attacked
by contemptuous expressions, if by dogmatical dicta, if by ready-made
propositions, offered to the understandings of men solicitous about the nature
of their constitution, properly so, (God forbid they ever should be otherwise)
but who, at the same time, may be easily imposed upon to their own destruction,
they may be brought to have diffidence and even abhorrence (for this book goes
all that length) of that which is the salvation of the public, and every thing
which is dear to them.

I impute then to this book a deliberate design to eradicate from the minds of
the people of this country that enthusiastic love which they have hitherto had
for that constitution, and thereby to do the utmost work of mischief that any
human being can do in this society.

Gentlemen, further I impute to it that, in terms, the regal part of the
government of this country, bounded and limited as it is, is represented as an
oppressive and an abominable tyranny.

Thirdly. That the whole legislature of this country is directly an usurpation.

Again, with respect to the laws of this realm, which hitherto have been our
boast, indiscriminately and without one single exception, that they are
grounded upon this usurped authority, and are therefore in themselves null, or,
to use his own words -- that there is little or no law in this country.

Then, gentlemen, is it to be held out to a community of ten or twelve millions
of people, is it to be held out, as well to the lower as to the better informed
classes of these ten or twelve millions, that there is nothing in this society
that is binding upon their conduct, excepting such portion of religion or
morality as they may individually and respectively entertain?

Gentlemen, are we then a lawless banditti? Have we neither laws to secure our
property, our persons, or our reputations? -- Is it so that every man's arms
are unbound, and that he may do whatever he pleases in the society? -- Are we
reduced back again to that savage state of nature? I ask you the question! You,
gentlemen, know well what the answer is; but, gentlemen, are we to say, that a
man who holds this out to those who are not furnished with the means of giving
the answer which I know you, and every gentleman who hears me at this moment,
will give, is discussing a question? Can any thing add to his slander upon the
constitution; and upon the separate parts of the government, so constituted as
ours is, more than that sweeping imputation upon the whole system of law that
binds us together -- namely, that it is null and void, and that there is in
reality no such thing to be found?

Gentlemen, in the several passages which I shall read to you, I impute this to
him; also, that he uses an artifice gross to those who can observe it, but
dangerous in the extreme to those whose minds perhaps are not sufficiently
cultivated and habituated to reading to enable them to discover it: the
artifice, in order to create disgust, is neither more nor less than this -- it
is stating all the objections that can possibly be urged to monarchy,
separately and solely considered, and to pure and simple aristocracy; he never
chooses to say a single syllable with respect to those two as combined with a
democracy, forbearing also to state, and industriously keeping out of the way,
every circumstance that regards that worst of all governments, an unbalanced
democracy, which is necessarily pregnant with a democratical tyranny. This is
the gross artifice; and when you come to dissect the book in the careful manner
that I have done, I believe you and every other reader will easily detect that
artifice.

Gentlemen, to whom are the positions that are contained in this book
addressed? They are addressed, gentlemen, to the ignorant, to the credulous, to
the desperate; to the desparate all government is irksome, nothing can be so
palatable to their ears as the comfortable doctrine that there is neither law
nor government amongst us.

The ignorant and the credulous, we all know, to exist in all countries, and
perhaps exactly in proportion as their hearts are good and simple, are they an
easy prey to the crafty who have the cruelty to deceive them.

Gentlemen in judging of the malignant intention which I must impute to this
author, you will be pleased to take into your consideration the phrase and the
manner as well as the matter. The phrase I state to be insidious and artful,
the manner in many instances scoffing and contemptuous, a short argument, often
a prevalent one, with the ignorant or the credulous. With respect to the
matter, in my conscience I call it treason, though technically, according to
the laws of the country, it is not. -- for, gentlemen, balance the
inconvenience to society of that which is technically treason, and in this
country, we must not, thank God, extend it but keep it within its most narrow
and circumscribed definitions, but consider the comparative difference of the
mischief that may happen from spreading doctrines of this sort, and that which
may happen from any treason whatever.

In the case of the utmost degree of treason, even perpetrating the death of a
prince upon the throne, the law has found the means of supplying that calamity
in a manner that may save the country from any permanent injury. In many
periods of the history of this country, which you may easily recollect, it is
true that the reign of a good prince has been interrupted by violence, -- a
great evil! -- but not so great as this: the chasm is filled up instantly by
the constitution of this country, even if that last of treasons should be
committed.

But where is the power upon earth that can fill up the chasm of a constitution
that has been growing; -- not for seven hundred years, as Mr. Pain would have
you believe, from the Norman conquest but from time almost eternal, impossible
to trace; that has been growing as, from the symptoms Julius Caesar observed
when he found our ancestors nearly savages in the country, has been growing
from that period until it was consummated at the Revolution, and shone forth in
all its splendor.

In addition to this, this gentleman thinks fit even to impute to the existence
of that constitution, such as I have described it the very evils inseparable
from human society, or even from human nature itself; all these are imputed to
that scandalous, that wicked, that usurped constitution under which we, the
subjects of this country, have hitherto mistakenly conceived that we lived
happy and free.

Gentlemen, I apprehend it to be no very difficult operation of the human mind
to distinguish reasoning and well meant discussion from a deliberate design to
calumniate the law and constitution under which we live, and to withdraw men's
allegiance from that constitution; it is the operation of good sense: it is
therefore no difficult operation for a jury of the City of London, therefore:
you will be pleased to observe whether the whole of this book, I should rather
say, such part as I am at present at liberty to advert to, is not of this
description, that it is by no means calculated to discuss and to convince, but
to perform the shorter process of inflammation; not to reason upon any subject,
but to dictate; and gentleman, as I stated to you before, to dictate in such a
manner, and in such phrase, and with all such circumstances as cannot, in my
humble apprehension, leave the most remote doubt upon your minds of what was
passing in the heart of that man who composed that book.

Gentlemen, you will permit me now to say a word or two upon those passages,
which I have selected to you, first describing a little what those passages
are. I have thought it much more becoming, much more beneficial to the public,
than any other course that I could take, to select six or seven, and no more,
(not wishing to load the record unnecessarily) of those passages that go to the
very root of our constitution, that is the nature of the passages which I have
selected, and gentlemen, the first of them is in page 21, where you will find
this doctrine.

All hereditary government is in its nature tyranny, an heritable crown, or an
heritable throne, or by what other fanciful name such things may be called,
have no other significant explanation than that mankind are heritable property.
To inherit a government is to inherit the people, as if they were flocks and
herds.

Now, gentlemen, what is the tendency of this passage? "All hereditary
government is in its nature tyranny." So that no qualification whatever, not
even the subordination to the law of the country, which is the only paramount
thing that we know of in this country, can take it out of the description of
tyranny; the regal office being neither more nor less than a trust executed for
the subjects of this country; the person who fills the regal office being
understood, in this country, to be neither more nor less than the chief
executive magistrate heading the whole gradation of magistracy.

But without any qualification he states it roundly, that under all
circumstances whatever hereditary government must in its nature be tyranny;
what is that but to hold out to the people of this country that they are naught
but slaves; to be sure, if they are living under a tyranny, it is impossible to
draw any other consequence.

This is one of those short propositions that are crammed down the throat of
every man that is accessible to their arts in this country; this is one of
those propositions, which, if he believes, must have the due effect upon his
mind, of saying, the case is come when I understand* I am opressed, I can bear
it no longer.

"An heritable crown." Ours is an heritable crown, and therefore it is
comprehended in this dogma: "Or by what other fanciful name such things may be
called." Is that discussion? Contemptuous, vilifying, and degrading expressions
of that sort are applied to that which we are accustomed to look to with
reverence, namely, the representation of the whole body of magistracy and of
the law -- have no other significant explanation than that mankind are
heritable property. To inherit a government is to inherit the people, as if
they were flocks and herds.

Why, gentlemen, are the people of England to be told, without further
ceremony, that they are inherited by a King of this country, and that they are
precisely in the case of sheep and oxen? I leave you to judge if such gross,
contemptible, and abominable falsehood is delivered out in bits and scraps of
this sort, whether that does not call aloud for punishment?

Gentlemen, only look at the truth; the converse is directly the case. The King
of this country inherits an office under the law; he does not inherit persons;
we are not in a state of villenage; the direct reverse to what is here pointed
out is the truth of the matter; the King inherits an office, but as to any
inheritance of his people, none, you know, belongs to him, and I am ashamed to
say any thing more upon it.

The next is in page 47. in which this man is speaking of the Congress at
Philadelphia in 1787, which was held because the government of that country was
found to be extremely defective as at first established.

This Convention met at Philadelphia, in May 1787, of which General Washington
was elected president; he was not at that time connected with any of the
State-governments or with Congress. He delivered up his commission when the war
ended, and since then had lived a private citizen.

The Convention went deeply into all the subjects, and having, after a variety
of debate and investigation, agreed among themselves upon the several parts of
a federal Constitution, the next question was the manner of giving it authority
and practice.

What is the conclusion of that -- they certainly agreed upon an appointment of
their federal Constitution in 1787. I should have thought that a man, meaning
nothing more than history, would have been very well contented to have stated
what actually did happen upon that occasion; but, in order to discuss (as
possibly it may be called) something that formerly did pass in this country, he
chose to do it in these inflaming and contemptuous terms.

For this purpose they did not, like a cabal of courtiers, send for a Dutch
Stadtholder or a German Elector; but they referred the whole matter to the
sense and interest of the country.

Here again the revolution and the act of settlement stare us in the face, as
if the interest and the sense of the country were in no way consulted; but, on
the contrary, it was nothing more than a mere cabal of courtiers. -- Whether
that is or is not to be endured in this country, your verdict will show; but,
in order to show you how totally unnecessary this passage was, except for the
deliberate purpose of calumny; if this passage had been left out, the narration
would have been quite perfect. I will read three or four lines just to show how
perfect it would have been: -- The next question was about the manner of giving
it authority and practice. The passage beyond that which I call a libel, --
They first directed that the proposed Constitution should be published;
secondly, that each State should elect a Convention, for the purpose of taking
it into consideration, and of ratifying or rejecting it; and so the story goes
on -- but, in order to explain what I mean by a dogma thrust in, I call your
attention to this, as one of those which has no earthly connection with the
subject he was then speaking of.

Does not this passage stand insulated between the two parts of the connected
story officiously and designedly thrust in for the purposes of mischief?
Gentlemen, the artifice of that book consists also in this; the different
wicked passages that are meant to do mischief in this country, are spread
throughout it, and stuck in here and there, in a manner that in order to see
the whole malignity of it, it is necessary to have a recollection of several
preceding passages; but these passages when brought together manifestly show
the full design of the writer, and therefore extracts of it may be made to
contain the whole marrow; and at the same time that each passage, taken by
itself, will do mischief enough, any man reading them together, will see that
mischief come out much clearer than by a mere transient reading.

The next passage I have to observe upon is in page 52, and in page 52 he is
pleased to express himself in this manner: he says,

The history of the Edwards and the Henrys, and up to the commencement of the
Stuarts, exhibits as many instances of tyranny as could be acted within the
limits to which the nation had restricted it; the Stuarts endeavored to pass
those limits, and their fate is well known. In all these instances we see
nothing of a Constitution, but only of restrictions on assumed power.

Then, gentlemen, from the reign of the Edwards and the Henrys down to the
Revolution, it was a regular progression of tyranny, not a progression of
liberty but of tyranny, till the Stuarts stepped a little beyond the line in
the gradation that was going forwards, and that begot a necessity for a
revolution; but of the Edwards I should have thought, at least, he might have
spared the great founder of our jurisprudence, King Edward the First, beside
many other Princes, the glory and the boast of this country, and many of them
regarders of its freedom and Constitution; but instead of that, this author
would have the people of this country believe that up to that time it was a
progressive tyranny, and that there was nothing of a Constitution, only
restrictions on assumed power; -- so that all the power that existed at that
time was assumption and usurpation.

He thus proceeds After this another William descended from the same stock, and
claiming from the same origin, gained possession, and of the two evils, James
and William, the nation preferred what it thought the least So that the
deliverance of this country by the Prince of Orange was an evil, but the least
of the two, since from circumstances it must take one. The act called the Bill
of Rights comes here into view: What is it but a bargain which the parts of the
government made with each other to divide powers, profits, and privileges? You
shall have so much, and I will have the rest; and with respect to the nation,
it said, for your share, YOU shall have the right of petitioning. This being
the case, the Bill of Rights is more properly a BILL OF WRONGS AND OF INSULT.
As to what is called the Convention Parliament, it was a thing that made
itself, and then made the authority by which it acted; a few persons got
together, and called themselves by that name; several of them had never been
elected, and none of them for the purpose.

From the time of William a species of government arose, issuing out of this
coalition Bill of Rights, and more so since the corruption introduced at the
Hanover succession by the agency of Walpole, that can be described by no other
name than a despotic legislation.

Now, gentlemen, this is the description that this man holds out of that on
which rests the property, the lives, and liberties, and the privileges of the
people of this country. I wonder to God, gentlemen, that any British man (for
such this man certainly was, and still is) to use the words of our own Poet,
when he spoke these words, A BILL OF WRONGS, A BILL OF INSULT, they did not
"stick in his throat." What is that Bill of Rights? It can never be too often
read. I will make no comment upon it, because your own heads and hearts will
make that comment; you have a posterity to look to. Are desperate ruffians, who
are to be found in every country, thus to attack the unalienable rights and
privileges which are to descend undiminished to that posterity?

Are YOU not to take care that this shall be sacred to your posterity. Is it
not a trust in YOUR hands? It is a trust in YOUR hands as much as the execution
of the law is a trust in the hands of the crown; each has its guardians in this
community, but you are the guardians of the Bill of Rights.

Gentlemen, it is this, That the pretended power of suspending of laws, or the
execution of laws, by regal authority, without consent of parliament, is
illegal.

That the pretended power of dispensing with laws, or the execution of laws, by
the regal authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of late, is illegal.

That is the law is above all.

That levying money for, or to the use of, the Crown, by pretense of
prerogative, without grant of parliament, for longer time, or in other manner
than the same is or shall be granted, is illegal.

That it is the right of the subjects to petition the king, and all commitments
and prosecutions for such petitions are illegal.

All that you get by the Bill of Rights, according to this man's doctrine, is,
that the Commons of this country have the right of petitioning. We all know
this alludes to the case of the seven bishops; that was a gross violation of
the rights of those subjects of this country; therefore, he states, falsely and
maliciously, according to the language of the information, which is perfectly
correct in the present case, that the whole that was obtained by the subjects
of this country was the right of petitioning; whereas it is declared to be
their unalterable right, and ever to have been so, and adverts, as I before
stated, to a gross violation of it in a recent case.

That the raising or keeping a standing army within the kingdom in time of
peace, unless it be with consent of parliament, is against law.

That the subjects, which are protestants, may have arms for their defense,
suitable to their conditions, and as allowed by law.

That elections of members of parliament ought to be free.

That the freedom of speech, and debates or proceedings in parliament, ought
not to be impeached, or questioned, in any court or place out of parliament.

That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

That jurors ought to be duly impannelled and returned; and jurors which pass
upon men in trials for high treason ought to be freeholders.

That all grants and promises of fines and forfeitures of particular persons,
before conviction, are illegal and void.

And that for the redress of all grievances, and for the amendig,
strengthening, and preserving of the laws, parliaments ought to be held
frequently.

Further, gentlemen, this bill goes on to say, For the ratifying, confirming,
and establishing the said declaration, and the articles, clauses, matters, and
things, therein contained, by the force of a law made in due form, by authority
of Parliament, do pray it may be declared and enacted, that all and singular
the rights and liberties asserted and claimed in the said declaration are the
true ancient and indubitable rights and liberties of the people of this
kingdom, and so shall be esteemed, allowed, adjudged, deemed, and taken to be;
and that all and every the particulars aforesaid shall be firmly and strictly
holden and observed, as they are expressed in the said declaration, and all
officers and ministers whatsoever shall serve their majesty's and their
successors, according to the same in all times to come.

Such, gentlemen, is the Bill of Wrongs and of Insult. I shall not profane it
by saying one more word upon it.

Now, gentlemen, I would ask you, whether what is said by this man be reasoning
or discussion; or whether it is nothing else but deception, and that deception
consisting of a most abominable and complete suppression? Is there a word of
this act quoted? Has the poor mechanic, to whom this passage is addressed, who
is told that he has been wronged and insulted at the revolution, has he this
statute by him to read? Would it not have been fair, at least, to have stated
what it was? But instead of that, unsight, unseen, (to use a very vulgar
expression) this proposition is tendered to the very lowest man in this
country, namely, that the Bill of Rights is a Bill of Wrongs and of Insult.

Pass we then on to another; if you will please to make a memorandum of page
56, you will find that in the same spirit, and with the same design, this man
tells you that -- "The intention of the government of England," here comes in
another contemptuous expression ( for I rather choose to call it by this name
than the English government), appears since its political connection with
Germany to have been so completely engrossed and absorbed by foreign affairs,
and the means of raising taxes, that it seems to exist for no other purposes.

The government of the country then does not exist for the purpose of
preserving our lives and properties; but the government, I mean the
Constitution of the country, Kings, Lords, and Commons, exists for no other
purpose but to be the instruments of raising taxes. To enter into any
discussion of that, is taking up your time unnecessarily -- I only beg to draw
your attention to the dogmatical and cavalier manner in which these things are
asserted; further, he says -- Domestic concerns are neglected, and with respect
to regular law, there is scarcely such a thing.

I stand in the city of London; I am addressing myself to gentlemen eminent in
that city, whether the legislature, since the revolution, has, or not, adverted
to domestic concerns: I think I may appeal to the growing prosperity of this
country, from the moment that the night mare has been taken off its stomach,
which pressed upon it up to that moment.

We then proceed to page 63, where, after the whole Constitution of this
country has been thus treated in gross, he proceeds a little to dissect and
consider the component parts of that Constitution; and in page 63, in a dogma,
we have this:

With respect to the two Houses of which the English Parliament is composed,
they appear to be effectually influenced into one, and, as a legislature, to
have no temper of its own. The Minister, whoever he at any time may be, touches
it, as with an opium wand, and it sleeps obedience.

Now, gentlemen, here is another dogma without a single fact, without a single
argument; but it is held out to the subjects of this country, that there is no
energy or activity in either the aristocratical or democratical parts of this
Constitution, but that they are asleep, and you might just as well have statues
there; it is not merely said that it is so now, but it is in the nature of
things, says he, that it should be so.

But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two Houses, the difference
will appear so great as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there
can be no certainty of the judgment to use it. -- Wretched as the state of
representation is in England, it is manhood compared with what is called the
House of Lords, and so little is this nickname, House regarded, that the people
scarcely inquire at any time what it is doing. It appears also to be most under
influence, and the furthest removed from the general interest of the nation.

Now, gentlemen, this is again speaking in this man's contemptuous manner, at
the expense of the aristocratical part of our constitution of government; an
essentially beneficial part, whose great and permanent interest in the country
renders them a firm barrier against any encroachment. I am not to suppose that
you are so ignorant of the history of your country, as not to know the great
and brilliant characters that have sat in that House. No particular period of
time is alluded to in this passage. He surely cannot mean the present time; but
I conceive he speaks of all times, and that from the very nature of our
government it must everlastingly be so. Slander upon that very great and
illustrious part of the legislature (untrue at any period), written in this
scurrilous and contemptuous manner, is distinguished greatly indeed from any
sober discussion of, whether an aristocratical part of government is a good or
bad thing, and is calculated only to mislead and inflame.

If you look next to page 107, there you will find that two of the component
parts of the legislature having been thus disposed of, we come up to the throne
itself, and this man says very truly of himself:

Having thus GLANCED at some of the defects of the two Houses of Parliament, I
proceed to what is called the Crown, upon which I shall be very concise:

It signifies a nominal office of a million a year, the business of which
consists in receiving the money; whether the person be wise or foolish, sane or
insane, a native or a foreigner, matters not. Every minister acts upon the same
idea that Mr. Burke writes, namely, that the people must be hoodwinked, and
held in superstitious ignorance by some bugbear or other; and what is called
the Crown answers this purpose, and therefore it answers all the purposes to be
expected from (...) -- This is more than can be said of the other two branches.

The hazard to which this office is exposed in all countries, including this
among the rest, is not from any thing that can happen to the man, but from what
may happen to the nation, the danger of its coming to its senses.

Then, gentlemen, we have been insane for these seven or eight hundred years:
and I shall just dismiss this with this observation, that this insanity having
subsisted so long, I trust in God that it is incurable.

In page 116 you have this note, -- I happened to be in England at the
celebration of the centenary of the revolution of 1688. The characters of
William and Mary have always appeared to me detestable; the one seeking to
destroy his uncle, and the other her father, to get possession of power
themselves: yet as the nation was disposed to think something of that event, I
felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the whole reputation of it to a man who had
undertaken it as a job, and who, besides what he otherwise got, charged six
hundred thousand pounds for the expense of a little fleet that brought him from
Holland. -- George the First acted the same close-fisted part as William had
done, and bought the Duchy of Bremen with the money he got from England, two
hundred and fifty thousand pounds over and above his pay as King; and having
thus purchased it at the expense of England, added it to his Hanoverian
dominions for his own private profit. -- In fact, every nation that does not
govern itself, is governed as a job. England has been the prey of jobs ever
since the Revolution.

Then, gentlemen, what he calls a nation governing itself, is something
extremely different from a nation having consented from time immemorial to be
governed by a democracy, an aristocracy, and an hereditary executive supreme
magistrate; and moreover, by a law-paramount, which all are bound to obey, he
conceives, I say, that sort of government not to be a government of the people
themselves, but he denominates that sort of government a job, and not a
government.

Gentlemen, such are the passages which I have selected to you, as those that
disclose the most offensive doctrines in the book; that is, such as go
fundamentally to the overturning the government of this country. -- I beg
pardon, I have omitted one which contains more of direct invitation than any
thing I have yet stated, -- it is in page 161: it is said, the fraud, hypocrisy
and imposition of governments are now beginning to be too well understood to
promise them any long career. -- The farce of monarchy and aristocracy in all
countries is following that of chivalry, and Mr. Burke is dressing for the
funeral -- let it then pass quietly to the tomb of all other follies, and the
mourner be comforted. The time is not very distant when England will laugh at
itself for sending to Holland, Hanover, Zell, or Brunswick, for men, at the
expense of a million a year, who understand neither her laws, her language, nor
her interest, and whose capacities would scarcely have fitted them for the
office of parish constable.

This is said of William the Third -- this is said of two very illustrious
Princes of the House of Brunswick, George the First and Second, and extends to
the present Sovereign upon the throne.

If government could be trusted to such hands, it must be some easy and simple
thing indeed, and materials fit for all the purposes may be found in every town
and village in England.

The policy of the constitution of this country has ever avoided, excepting
when driven to it by melancholy necessity, to disturb the hereditary succession
to the throne; and it has wisely thought it more fitting to pursue that system,
even though a foreigner should be seated on the thronce of these realms, than
to break through it. -- This would insinuate, that the necessary defects of an
hereditary monarchy are such as outweigh the advantages attending that which I
have stated. Is that so? I would ask any man who hears me, in point of history,
whether it is not the permanent defect of elective monarchies or sovereigns,
that they seldom are men of any consideration, and for an obvious reason; most
frequently it has happened that turbulent factions, after having desolated
their country, one of them (it has so happened, at least in most instances as
far as my recollection goes) sets up a tool whom the successful faction can
themselves govern at pleasure. -- Often has it happened that such factions,
when a civil war arises, which must almost necessarily be the case in elective
monarchies, not choosing to come to the conclusion of an armed contest, have
chosen a very weak person, each in hope of strengthening his party by the time
the periodical civil war should come round. I believe, upon examination, this
will be found to be generally the case, and to have prevailed in elective
monarchies to a greater degree than any inconveniences that may have ever
arisen from the natural infirmities of princes who succeeded to their thrones
by hereditary rights, in the constitution of Great Britain; for to that, this
man alludes.

Has he stated with any sort of fairness, or has he at all stated or adverted
to the many, many remedies we have for any defect of that sort? Has he stated
the numerous councils of a King? His council of Parliament -- his council of
his Judges in matters of law -- his Privy council? Has he stated the
responsibility of all those councils? Some in point of character, some of
personable responsibility? Has he stated the responsibility of those immediate
servants who conduct his executive government? Has he stated the appointment of
regents? Has he stated all this, which is indispensibly necessary toward a
fair and honest discussion (which this book will possibly be called) of this
point of his insuperable objection to hereditary monarchy? Can this be called
any other than gross suppression and wilful mis-statement, to raise discontent
in half-informed minds?

There does come across my mind at this moment, unquestionably, one illustrious
exception to that doctrine I have stated, of men not the most capable of
government having in general been chosen in the case of elective monarchies;
and that is a man whom no indignities, no misfortunes, no disappointments, no
civil commotions, no provocations, ever forced from the full and steady
possession of a strong mind, which has always risen with elasticity under all
the pressures that I have stated; and he, though not in one sense of that word
a great Prince, yet is certainly a great Man, who will go down as such to the
latest posterity: I mean the King of Poland. Don't imagine, gentlemen, that my
adverting to this illustrious character is useless. Every gentleman who hears
knows he had a considerable part of his matured education in this country. Here
he familiarized himself with the constitution of this country. Here he became
informed of the provisions of what this man calls the Bill of Wrongs and
Insults, without disparagement to him, for I believe him to be a just and wise
prince, of great natural faculties, here it was that he saw, and could alone
learn how the regal government of a free people was conducted, and that under a
prince of the house of Brunswick.

Gentlemen, having stated thus much to you, I will now, for want of suitable
expressions, (for mine are very feeble) borrow from another; I certainly have
formed an opinion upon this subject precisely similar; to deliver it in plain
words would exhaust the utmost of my powers, but I will borrow the words of a
very able writer, who has most properly, for fear some ill impression should be
made by this book on the weaker part of mankind in America, given an answer to
this book of Mr. Pain. That distinguished gentleman, I have reason to believe,
though not the chief magistrate in that country, is the second in the executive
government of it; that is, he is second in the exercise of the regal part of
the government of that country. He takes care to confute accurately what Mr.
Pain says with respect to America; but, borrowing his words, I beg to be
understood, that this is my opinion of the work before you, and which I humbly
offer for your consideration and adoption. He says, his intention appears
evidently to be, to convince the people of Great Britain, that they have
neither liberty nor a constitution; that their only possible means to produce
those blessings to themselves, is to topple down headlong their present
government, and follow implicitly the example of the French.

Gentlemen, the next passage, which I beg to be understood as mine, I wish I
could express it as well myself, is this: -- Mr. Pain, in reply, cuts the
Gordian knot at once, declares the parliament of 1688 to have been downright
usurpers, censures them for having unwisely sent to Holland for a King, denies
the existence of a British Constitution, and invites the people of England to
overturn their present government and to erect another upon the broad basis of
national sovereignty and government by representation. As Mr. Pain has
departed altogether from the principles of the revolution, and has torn up by
the roots all reasoning from the British Constitution, by the denial of its
existence, it becomes necessary to examine his work upon the grounds which he
has chosen to assume. If we judge of the production from its apparent tendency,
we may call it an address to the English nation, attempting to prove that they
have a right to form a new Constitution; that it is expedient for them
immediately to exercise that right, and that in the formation of this
Constitution they can do no better than to imitate the model set before them by
the French national assembly. However immethodical his production is, I believe
the whole of its argumentative part may be referred to these three points: If
the subject were to affect only the British nation, we might leave them to
reason and act for themselves; but these are concerns equally important to all
mankind; and the citizens of America are called upon, from high authority, (he
alludes to a gentleman in a high situation in that country, who has published
an opinion of this book) to rally round the standard of this champion of
revolutions. I shall, therefore now proceed to examine the reasons; and so he
goes on.

Gentlemen, I would adopt, with your permission, a few more words from this
publication: -- When Mr. Pain invited the people of England to destroy their
present government, and form another constitution, he should have given them
sober reasoning, and not flippant witticisms. Whether that is or not the case
what I have read to you today will enable you to judge. He should have
explained to them the nature of the grievances by which they are oppressed, and
demonstrated the impossibility of reforming the government in its present
organization. He should have pointed out some possible method for them to act,
in their original character, without a total dissolution of civil society among
them; he should have proved what great advantages they would reap as a nation
from such a revolution, without disguising the great dangers and formidable
difficulties with which it must be attended. So much for the passages
themselves, and this interpretation, which I humbly submit to your
consideration.

The next matter upon which I shall proceed is the evidence which I propose to
adduce, and that evidence will go to show, not only the fact of this man's
being the writer of this book, by his own repeated admission, and by letters
under his own hand, but will likewise go directly to show what is his intent in
such publication, which appears I think most clearly; and over and above that I
shall produce to you a Letter, which this man was pleased to address to myself,
in which Letter he avows himself in so many words the author, and I shall prove
it to be his handwriting; and further than that, there is matter in that
letter, apparently showing the intention with which that book was written,
namely to villify this constitution, and to injure this country irretrievably.

Two other letters I shall be under the necessity of reading to you, in which
he has stated himself the author. The one is a letter to a person of the name
of Jordan, in which he expresses himself in this manner:

February 16, 1792, (that was the day on which the book was published) For your
satisfaction and my own I send you the enclosed, though I do not apprehend
there will be any occasion to use it: if in case there should, you will
immediately send a line for me, under cover, to Mr. Johnson, St. Paul's Church
Yard, who will forward it to me, upon which I shall come and answer personally
for the work; send also for Mr. Horn Took.

T.P.


The letter enclosed was this; addressed to the same man, Jordan, the
Bookseller. -- Sir, should any person, under the sanction of any kind of
authority, enquire of you respecting the author and publisher of the Rights of
Man, you will please to mention me as the author and publisher of that work,
and show to such person this letter. I will, as soon as I am acquainted with
it, appear and answer for the work personally.

Gentlemen, with respect to his letter written to me, it is in these terms.


Mr. ERSKINE. My Lord, the Attorney General states a letter in the hand writing
of Mr. Pain, which establishes that he is the author. I desire to know whether
he means to read a letter which may be the subject of a substantive and
distinct prosecution; I do not mean to dispute the publication, or even to give
him the trouble of proving the letters which he has just stated; whether the
Attorney General will think it consistent with the situation in which he is
placed, at this moment, to read a letter written at a time long subsequent to
the publication, containing, as I understand (if I am mistaken in that I
withdraw my objection) but containing distinct clear and unequivocal libellous
matter, and which I, in my address to the jury, if I am not deceived in what I
have heard, shall admit to be upon every principle of the English Law a libel.
Therefore, if that should turn out to be the case, will your lordship suffer
the mind of the jury to be entirely put aside from that matter which is the
subject of the prosecution, and to go into matter which hereafter may be, and I
cannot but suppose would be, if the defendant were within the reach of the law
of this country, the subject of a distinct and independent prosecution.


LORD KENYON. If that letter goes a jot to prove that he is the author of this
publication, I cannot reject that evidence; in prosecutions for high treason,
where overt acts are laid, you may prove overt acts not laid to prove those
that are laid; if it goes to prove him the author of the book, I am bound to
admit it.

"Mr. ATTORNEY GENERAL,

The Letter is thus:

Paris, 11th of November, 1st Year of the Republic.

Sir, as there can be no personal resentment between two strangers, I write
this letter to you, as to a man against whom I have no animosity.

You have, as Attorney General, commenced a prosecution against me as the
author of the Rights of Man. Had not my duty, in consequence of my being
elected a member of the National Convention of France, called me from England,
I should have staid to have contested the injustice of that prosecution; not
upon my own account, for I cared not about the prosecution, but to defend the
principles I had advanced in the work.

The duty I am now engaged in is of too much importance to permit me to trouble
myself about your prosecution; when I have leisure, I shall have no objection
to meet you on that ground; but, as I now stand, whether you go on with the
prosecution or whether you do not, or whether you obtain a verdict, or not, is
a matter of the most perfect indifference to me as an individual. If you obtain
one (which you are welcome to if you can get it), it cannot affect me, either
in person, property, or reputation, otherwise than to increase the latter; and
with respect to yourself, it is as consistent that you obtain a verdict against
the Man in the Moon, as against me; neither do I see how you can continue the
prosecution against me as you would have done against one of your own people,
who had absented himself because he was prosecuted; what passed at Dover,
proves that my departure from England was no secret.

My necessary absence from your country affords the opportunity of knowing
whether the prosecution was intended against Thomas Pain, or against the
Rights of the People of England to investigate systems and principles of
government; for as I cannot now be the object of the prosecution, the going on
with the prosecution will show that something else was the object, and that
something else can be no other than the People of England; for it is against
their Rights, and not against me, that a verdict or sentence can operate, if it
can operate at all. Be then so candid as to tell the Jury (if you choose to
continue the process) whom it is you are prosecuting, and on whom it is that
the verdict is to fall.

Gentlemen, I certainly will comply with this request. I am prosecuting both
him and his work; and if I succeed in this prosecution, he shall never return
to this country otherwise than in vinculis, for I will outlaw him.

But I have other reasons than those I have mentioned for writing you this
letter; and however you may choose to interpret them, they procceed from a good
heart. The time, Sir, is becoming too serious to play with Court prosecutions,
and sport with national rights. The terrible examples that have taken place
here upon men who, less than a year ago, thought themselves as secure as any
prosecuting Judge, Jury, or Attorney General, can now do in England, ought to
have some weight with men in your situation. Now gentlemen, I do not think that
Mr. Pain judges very well of mankind -- I do not think that it is a fair
conclusion of Mr. Pain, that men such as you and myself, who are quietly
living in obedience to the laws of the land which they inhabit, exercising
their several functions peaceably, and I hope with a moderate share of
reputation: I do not conceive that men called upon to think, and in the habit
of reflection, are the most likely men to be immediately thrown off the hinges
by meances and threats; and I doubt whether men exercising public functions, as
you and I do in the face of our country, could have the courage to run away.
All I can tell Mr. Pain is this -- if any of his assassins are here in London,
and there is some ground to suppose they may be, or the assassins of those with
whom he is connected; if they are here, I tell them, that I do in my conscience
think, that for a man to die of doing his duty, is just as good a thing as
dying of a raging fever, or under the tortures of the stone. Let him not think,
that not to be an incendiary is to be a coward.

He says -- That the Government of England is as great, if not the greatest
perfection of fraud and corruption, that ever took place since governments
began, is what you cannot be a stranger to; unless the constant habit of seeing
it has blinded your sense." Upon my word gentlemen, I am stone blind, I am not
sorry for it. -- But though you may not choose to see it, the people are seeing
it very fast, and the progress is beyond what you may choose to believe, or that
reason can make any other man believe, that the capacity of such a man as Mr.
Guelph, or any of his profligate sons, is necessary to the government of a
nation.

Now, gentlemen, with respect to this passage, I have this to say, it is
contemptuous, scandalous, false, cruel; -- Why Gentlemen, is Mr. Pain, in
addition to the political doctrines that he is teaching us in this country; Is
he to teach us the morality and religion, of IMPLACABILITY? Is he to teach
human creatures, whose moments of existence, depend upon the permission of a
Being, merciful, long suffering and of great goodness, that those youthful
errors from which even royalty is not exempted, are to be treasured up in a
vindictive memory, and are to receive sentence of irremissible sin at HIS
hands. Are they all to be confounded in these slanderous terms, shocking for
British ears to hear, and I am sure distressing to their hearts. He is a
barbarian, who could use such profligate expressions uncalled for by any thing
which could be the object of his letter addressed to me. If giving me pain was
his object, he has that hellish gratification. Would this man destroy that
great auxiliary of all human laws and constitutions -- "to judge of others as
we would be judged ourselves." -- This is the bill of wrongs and insults of the
christian religion. I presume it is considered as that bill of wrongs and
insults, in the heart of that man who can have the barbarity to use those
expressions and address them to me in a way by which I could not but receive
them.

Gentlemen, there is not perhaps in the world a more beneficial analogy, nor a
finer rule to judge by in public matters, than by assimilating them to what
passes in domestic life. -- A family is a small kingdom, a kingdom is a large
family suppose this to have happened in private life, judge of the good heart
of this man, who thrusts into my hands, the grateful servant of a kind and
beneficent master, and that too through the unavoidable trick of the common
post slander upon that master, and slander upon his whole offspring. Lay your
hands upon your hearts, and tell me what is your verdict with respect to his
heart -- I see it! Gentlemen, he has the audacity to say, "I speak to you as
one man ought to speak to another." Does he speak to me of those August
Personages as one man ought to speak to another? Had he spoken those words to
me personally, I will not answer for it, whether I should not have forgot the
duties of my office, and the dignity of my station, by being hurried into a
violation of that peace, the breach of which I am compelled to punish in
others. He says, And I know also, that I speak, what other people are beginning
to think. That you cannot obtain a verdict (and if you do, it will signify
nothing) without packing a Jury, and we both know that such tricks are
practiced, is what I have very good reason to believe. -- Mentiris
impudentissime. -- Gentlemen, I know of no such practice; I know, indeed, that
no such practice exists, nor can exist; I know the very contrary of this to be
true; and I know too that this Letter, containing this dangerous falsehood, was
destined for future publication; that I have no doubt of, and therefore I dwell
thus long upon it.

I have gone into coffee-houses, and places where I was unknown, on purpose to
learn the currency of opinion. Whether the sense of this nation is to be had in
some pot-houses and coffee-houses in this town of his own choosing, is a matter
I leave to your judgment. And I never yet saw any company of twelve men that
condemned the book; but I have often found a greater number than twelve
approving it; and this I think is a fair way of collecting the natural currency
of opinion. Do not then, Sir, be the instrument of drawing twelve men into a
situation that may be injurious to them afterward; injurious to them
afterward, those words speak for themselves. He proceeds thus,

"I do not speak this from policy," (what then?) "but from" (gentlemen, I will
give you a hundred guesses) BENEVOLENCE! but if you choose to go on with the
process, I make it my request that you would read this letter in Court, after
which the Judge and the Jury may do as they please. As I do not consider myself
the object of the prosecution, neither can I be affected by the issue one way
or the other, I shall, though a foreigner in your country, subscribe as much
money as any other man toward supporting the right of the nation against the
prosecution; and it is for this purpose only that I shall do it. -- THOMAS
PAIN.

So it is a subscription defense you hear.

P. S. I intended, had I staid in England, to have published the information,
with my remarks upon it, -- that would have been a decent thing -- before the
trial came on; but as I am otherwise engaged, I reserve myself till the trial
is over, when I shall reply fully to every thing you shall advance; I hope in
God he will not omit any one single word that I have uttered to day, or shall
utter in my future address to you. This conceited menace I despise, as I do
those of a nature more cutthroat.

Gentlemen, I do not think that I need to trouble you any further for the
present: according as you shall be of opinion, that the necessarily mischievous
tendency and intent of this book is that which I have taken the liberty (at
more length than I am warranted perhaps) to state to you; according as you
shall or shall not be of that opinion, so necessarily will be your verdict. I
have done my duty in bringing before a Jury an offender of this magnitude. Be
the event what it may, I have done my duty; I am satisfied with having placed
this great and flourishing community under the powerful shield of your
protection.


EVIDENCE FOR THE CROWN.
Thomas Haynes sworn [Examined by Mr. Bearcroft.] Q. Where did you get that
book?


A. At Mr. Jordan's, in Fleet Street.


Q. When?


A. In the month of February, 1792.


(It was put into Court). Thomas Chapman sworn. [Examined by Mr. Solicitor
General.] Q. What business are you?


A. A Printer


Q. Do you know the defendant, Thomas Pain?


A. I do.


Q. Upon what occasion did you become acquainted with him?


A. On the recommendation of Mr. Thomas Christie.


Q. For what purpose was he introduced to you, or you to him?


A. I was introduced to Mr. Pain, by Mr. Christie, to print some book that he
had.


Q. When was that?


A. I cannot directly say; it was in the year 1791.


Q. What book was that?


A. The First Part of the Rights of Man.


Q. Are you a publisher as well as a printer?


A. I am not; merely a printer.


Q. Did you print the First Part of the Rights of Man?


A. I did.


Q. Who was the selling bookseller of that book?


A. Mr. Jordan, of Fleet Street.


Q. Had you any intercourse with Mr. Jordan and Mr. Pain concerning that book?


A. I had?


Q. What was that intercourse relative to?


A. To the manner of publishing the book.


Q. Did Jordan in fact publish that book?


A. He did.


Q. Had you any intercourse with Mr. Pain relative to the printing this book
which I have in my hand. (The Witness looks at it.)


A. The first edition of this book I had; I don't think I printed this edition
of it. I printed the first edition of it.


Q. Is that the First or Second Part?


A. The Second Part. I printed a part of the Second Part.


Mr. Erskine. Can you swear to that very book?


A. I cannot.


Mr. Solicitor General. You say you printed part of the Second Part of the
Rights of Man?


A. Yes.


Q. What part did you print?


A. I printed as far as page 112, signature H.


Q. By signature H, you mean the letter H that is at the bottom of the page?


A. Yes.


Q. Upon whose employment did you print so much of the Second Part?


A. Mr. Paine's.


Q. Did you print the rest of the work from letter H to the conclusion of it?


A. I have the copy in my possession as far as 146, I think: the manuscript
copy.


Q. Did you print as far as 146, or stop at 112, signature H?


A. I stopped at 112; but my people had composed to page 146, which was not
printed by me.


Q. Had you any conversation with Mr. Pain relative to the printing the
remainder of the work, and if you had, what was that conversation?


A. When I had finished page 112, or sheet H, the proof sheet I, came into my
hand; upon examining sheet I, there was a part, which, in my weak judgment,
appeared of a dangerous tendency; I therefore immediately concluded in my mind
not to proceed any farther in the work; accordingly I wrote a short note to Mr.
Pain; this was about two o'clock in the afternoon, determining to send a
letter, with the remainder of the copy. I felt a degree of reluctance from the
circumstance of Mr. Paine's civilities that I had experienced as a gentleman
and an employer; and I was fearful I should not have courage in the morning to
deliver up the copy; but a circumstance occurred in the course of the day,
which enabled me to do it with satisfaction to myself. I will relate the
circumstance, if you will give me leave.


Q. Was Mr. Pain present when that circumstance happened?


A. He was: and as it may, in the eyes of the Court, exculpate me from a charge
that Mr. Pain has thought proper to bring against me, I shall esteem it a
favor of the Court if they will suffer me to mention every circumstance of that
kind. -- That very day at six o'clock Mr. Pain called upon me.


Q. Do you recollect the day?


A. I have a copy of that letter, which is dated the 17th of January, so that
he must have called upon me on the 16th. Mr. Pain called upon me, and, as was
rather unusual, at least to my knowledge, he was rather intoxicated by liquor.
He had, I believe, that day, dined with Mr. Johnson, in Saint Paul's Church
Yard. Being intoxicated he introduced a subject we have unfortunately differed
on several times; the subject of religion, a favorite subject with him when
intoxicated. I am sorry to mention these circumstances; but as it will justify
me in the eyes of the public, as part of the Appendix has done me material
injury in my profession. The subject of debate ran very high; he opposed every
thing with great virulence, till at length he came to personal abuse, very much
so, both to myself and Mrs. Chapman. An observation was made by Mrs. Chapman,
late in the evening, I believe near ten o'clock, at which Mr. Pain was
particularly offended; rising up in a great passion, he said he had not been so
personally affronted in the whole course of his life before.


Mr. Erskine. The information charges no offense like this.


Court. This is no offense, it appears only at present to be impertinent.


Mr. Erskine. I admit the publication, but I cannot admit that letter.


Mr. Solicitor General. Go on.


Chapman. Mr. Pain accordingly rose in a great passion, declaring that, as I
was a dissenter, he had a very bad opinion of dissenters in general; he
believed them all to be a pack of hypocrites, and therefore he must deal very
cautiously with them, and begged, therefore that in the morning, before I
proceeded any further in his work, we should have a settlement. I felt a degree
of pleasure in it, as it enabled me, with courage, next morning, to deliver up
his copy, which I had before determined. I sent a letter next morning,
enclosing the whole of his copy. He called upon me, and made many apologies for
what he had said: he said that it was the effect of liquor, and hoped that I
would pass it over, and proceed with the work; but being determined on the
matter, I would not upon any account.


Q. And did you state to him the reason why you would not go on with the work?


A. I did. The letter will show the reason.


Mr. Solicitor General. You have told us that Mr. Pain was your employer, so
far as you did print. Did you ever make any offers to any body to buy the copy
of the Second Part of the Rights of Man?


A. I did.


Q. To whom?


A. To Mr. Pain.


Q. When you made these offers, did he accept them or refuse them, or how did
he treat the offers?


A. I made him three separate offers in the different stages of the work; the
first, I believe, was a hundred guineas, the second five hundred, and the last
was a thousand.


Q. To these offers, what did Mr. Pain answer?


A. To the best of my recollection, he answered, that as it was his intention
to publish a small edition of his work, he wished to reserve it in his own hands


Q. Have you seen this Mr. Pain write?


A. I have.


Q. Do you think you know his hand writing?


A. I think I do.


Q. Look at that letter, (dated Feb. 16, 1792,) is that his hand writing?


A. I think it is.


Q. Look at that (dated Feb. 16, 1792,) enclosed in the above.


A. I think that is his hand writing.


Q. Look particularly at this short note, (dated April 21, 1792,) is that his
hand writing?


A. I believe it is.


Q. Here is an order directed to yourself, (dated Feb. 7, 1792,) look at that,
is that his hand writing?


A. It is.


Q. Look at that letter (dated June 29, 1792) is that Mr. Paine's hand writing?


A. I believe it is.


Q. Look at that letter (the letter to the Attorney General, dated Paris, the
11th of Nov.) is that Mr. Paine's hand writing?


A. I cannot speak with any certainty.


Q. Do you believe that to be his hand writing?


A. I am inclined to think it is.


Thomas Chapman, cross-examined by Mr. Erskine. Q. In the first place, flow
often have you seen Mr. Pain write?


A. I presume a dozen times.


Q. Did you ever look at him when he was writing, so as particularly to observe
how he formed his characters?


A. Decency would not suffer me to look particularly.


Q. I take for granted, that you did not at that time suppose you should be
called upon to prove his hand writing, and did not of course take any notice of
it. -- Did you, upon your oath, look at it with a view of saying, I will see
how this man writes in order that I may know his writing again?


A. I did not.


Q. Did you ever see any other writing than that you have described?


A. No.


Q. Then you are only inclined to believe that last letter is his hand writing?


A. Yes.


Mr. Solicitor General. Do you believe that that last letter is his hand
writing?


A. I think it is.


Mr. Erskine. Do you mean to say, that you have a firmer belief of it now than
you had a moment ago?


A. Yes.


Q. What has produced this change in your opinion?


A. By the manner of his signature.


Q. Had not you looked at his signature before?


A. It struck me that there was something particular in the manner of his
writing his signature.


Q. Then you have a firmer belief now than you had a few minutes ago? --


A. Yes.


The Letters read. Mr. Chapman, please to deliver to Mr. Jordan the remaining
sheets of the Rights of Man.

THOMAS PAIN.
Feb. 7th, 92.

Feb. 16, 1792.
For your satisfaction and my own, I send you the enclosed, though I do not
apprehend there will be any occasion to use it; if in case there should, you
will immediately send a line for me under cover, to Mr. Johnson, St. Paul's
Churchyard, who will forward it to me, upon which I shall come and answer
personally for the work. -- Send also to Mr. Horn Took.

T. P.

Mr. Jordan, No. 166, Fleet Street.

Feb. 16, 1792. SIR,
Should any person, under the sanction of any kind of authority, enquire of you
respecting the author and publisher of the Rights of Man, you will please to
mention me as the author and publisher of that work, and show to such person
this letter. I will, as soon as as I am made acquainted with it, appear and
answer for the work personally.

Your humble Servant, THOMAS PAIN.

Mr. Jordan, No. 166, Fleet Street.

April 21, 1792. Mr. JORDAN,
Please to settle the account of the sale of the pamphlets with Mr. Johnson, as
I am at present engaged in getting forward another small work for publication.

Yours, etc. THOMAS PAIN.

Mr. Jordan, No, 166, Fleet Street.

London, June 29, 1792. SIR,
I have drawn on you two drafts for one hundred and fifty pounds each, one at
seven days sight, the other at fourteen, payable to Mr. Johnson, or order, for
moneys which he has advanced on my account, and bills which are due, which
drafts please to pay, and place the same to my account.

Yours, etc. THOMAS PAIN.

Mr. Jordan, No. 166, Fleet Street.

Paris, 11th November, 1st year of the Republic. SIR,
As there can be no personal resentment between two strangers, I write this
letter to you, as to a man against whom I have no animosity.

You have, as Attorney General, commenced a prosecution against me, as the
Author of Rights of Man. Had not my duty, in consequence of my being elected a
Member of the National Convention of France, called me from England, I should
have staid to have contested the injustice of that prosecution; not upon my own
account, for I cared not about the prosecution, but to have defended the
principles I had advanced in the work.

The duty I am now engaged in is of too much importance to permit me to trouble
myself about your prosecution: when I have leisure, I shall have no objection
to meet you on that ground; but as I now stand, whether you go on with the
prosecution, or whether you do not, or whether you obtain a verdict, or not, is
a matter of the most perfect indifference to me as an individual. If you obtain
one (which you are welcome to, if you can get it) it cannot affect me either in
person, property, or reputation, otherwise than to increase the latter; and
with respect to yourself, it is as consistent that you obtain a verdict against
the Man in the Moon as against me: neither do I see how you can continue the
prosecution against me as you would have done against one of your own people
who had absented himself because he was prosecuted: what passed at Dover proves
that my departure from England was no secret.

My necessary absence from your country now, in consequence of my duty here,
affords the opportunity of knowing whether the prosecution was intended against
Thomas Pain, or against the Rights of the people of England to investigate
systems and principles of government; for as I cannot now be the object of the
prosecution, the going on with the prosecution will show that something else
was the object, and that something else can be no other than the people of
England, for it is against their rights, and not against me, that a verdict or
sentence can operate, if it can operate at all. Be then so candid as to tell
the jury (if you choose to continue the process) whom it is you are prosecuting,
and on whom it is that the verdict is to fall.

But I have other reasons than those I have mentioned for writing you this
letter; and, however you may choose to interpret them, they proceed from a good
heart. The time, Sir, is becoming too serious to play with Court prosecutions,
and sport with National Rights. The terrible examples that have taken place
here, upon men who less than a year ago thought themselves as secure as any
prosecuting Judge, Jury, or Attorney General, can now do in England, ought to
have some weight with men in your situation. That the government of England is
as great, if not the greatest, perfection of fraud and corruption that ever
took place since governments began, is what you cannot be a stranger to, unless
the constant habit of seeing it has blinded your senses; but though you may not
choose to see it, the people are seeing it very fast, and the progress is beyond
what you may choose to believe. Is it possible that you, or I can believe, or
that reason can make any other man believe, that the capacity of such a man as
Mr. Guelph, or any of his profligate sons, is necessary to the government of a
nation. I speak to you as one man ought to speak to another; and I know also,
that I speak what other people are beginning to think.

That you cannot obtain a verdict (and if you do it will signify nothing)
without packing a jury, (and we both know that such tricks are practiced) is
what I have very good reason to believe. I have gone into coffee-houses, and
places where I was unknown, on purpose to learn the currency of opinion, and I
never yet saw any company of twelve men that condemned the book; but I have
often found a greater number than twelve approving it, and this I think is a
fair way of collecting the natural currency of opinion. Do not then, Sir, be
the instrument of drawing twelve men into a situation that may be injurious to
them afterward. I do not speak this from policy, but from benevolence; but if
you choose to go on with the process, I make it my request to you that you will
read this letter in Court, after which the Judge and the Jury may do as they
please. As I do not consider myself the object of the prosecution, neither can
I be affected by the issue, one way or the other, I shall, though a foreigner
in your country, subscribe as much money as any other man toward supporting
the right of the Nation against the prosecution; and it is for this purpose
only that I shall do it.

THOMAS PAIN.

To Archd. Macdonald, Attorney General.
As I have not time to copy letters, you will excuse the corrections.

P. S. I intended, had I staid in England, to have published the information,
with my remarks upon it, before the trial came on; but, as I am otherwise
engaged, I reserve myself till the trial is over, when I shall reply fully to
every thing you shall advance.

T. P.




Andrew Milne sworn. Examined by Mr. Bearcroft. Q. I believe you lived with Mr.
Jordan?


A. Yes.


Q. When?


A. About this time twelvemonth.


Q. Did you at any time see Mr. Pain at Mr. Jordan's?


A. Yes.


Q. What was the business he came upon?


A. It was respecting money principally.


Q. Did you ever go to the printers of that book while it was in hand?


A. The Second Part I did.


Q. Did you go by the directions of anybody, and by whose directions?


A. By Mr. Paine's directions.


Q. Had you occasion to see him more than once?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you at any time get an order from him to Mr. Crowder, the printer?


A. Yes, once in particular.


Q. Was that before or after it was gone out of the hands of Chapman?


A. After.


Q. Did you ever see him at Jordan's shop, after it had been published more
than once?


A. Yes.


Q. Tell us the circumstances.


A. Respecting that note, in which he mentions Mr. Horn Took, I was in the
shop at the time Mr. Pain came with Mr. Horn Took to Mr. Jordan's, in the
evening; the conversation was in the parlour; I did not hear the conversation,
but I knew of it afterward.


Q. I don't ask you what you learned from any body else; did you learn it from
Pain?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any money paid by Jordan to Mr. Pain on account of this book?


A. Yes.


John Purdue sworn. [Examined by Mr. Wood.] Q. Are you acquainted with Mr.
Pain?


A. I was formerly.


Q. How long ago?


A. I have not seen him since he went to America.


Q. He was in the Excise?


A. He was in the Excise.


Q. Are you acquainted with his handwriting?


A. Formerly I was,


Q. Look at these letters, and say, whether you believe them to be his
handwriting?


A. I believe they all are.


(The Extracts from the Libel read, as follows.) Page 21. All hereditary
government is in its nature tyranny. An heritable Crown, or an heritable
Throne, or by what other fanciful name such things may be called, have no other
significant explanation than that mankind are heritable property. To inherit a
government, is to inherit the people, as if they were flocks and herds! Page
47. This convention met at Philadelphia in May 1787, of which General
Washington was elected president. He was not at that time connected with any of
the State-governments, or with Congress. He delivered up his commission when
the war ended, and since then had lived a private citizen.

The convention went deeply into all the subjects; and having, after a variety
of debate and investigation, agreed among themselves upon the several parts of
a federal constitution, the next question was, the manner of giving it
authority and practice.

For this purpose, they did not, like a cabal of courtiers, send for a Dutch
Stadtholder, or a German Elector; but they referred the whole matter to the
sense and interest of the country.

Page 52. The history of the Edwards and Henry's, and up to the commencement of
the Stuarts, exhibits as many instances of tyranny as could be acted within the
limits to which the nation had restricted it. The Stuarts endeavored to pass
those limits, and their fate is well known. In all those instances we see
nothing of a constitution, but only of restrictions on assumed power.

After this, another William, descended from the same stock, and claiming from
the same origin, gained possession; and of the two evils, James and William,
the nation preferred what it thought the least; since, from circumstances, it
must take one. The Act, called the Bill of Rights, comes here into view. What
is it but a bargain, which the parts of the Government made with each other to
divide powers, profits, and privileges? You shall have so much, and I will have
the rest; and with respect to the nation, it said, for your share, YOU shall
have the right of petitioning. This being the case, the Bill of Rights is more
properly a bill of wrongs, and of insult. As to what is called the Convention
Parliament, it was a thing that made itself, and then made the authority by
which it acted. A few persons got together, and called themselves by that name.
Several of them had never been elected, and none of them for the purpose.

From the time of William, a species of government arose, issuing out of this
coalition Bill of Rights; and more so, since the corruption introduced at the
Hanover succession, by the agency of Walpole; that can be described by no other
name than a despotic legislation. Though the parts may embarrass each other,
the whole has no bounds; and the only right it acknowleges out of itself is the
right of petitioning. Where then is the Constitution either that gives or that
restrains power?

It is not because a part of the government is elective, that makes it less a
despotism, if the persons so elected, possess afterward, as a parliament,
unlimited powers. Election, in this case, becomes separated from
representation, and the candidates are candidates for despotism.

Page 56. The attention of the Government of England, (for I rather choose to
call it by this name, than the English Government) appears, since its political
connection with Germany, to have been so completely engrossed and absorbed by
foreign affairs, and the means of raising taxes, that it seems to exist for no
other purposes. Domestic concerns are neglected; and with respect to regular
law, there is scarcely such a thing.

Page 63. Note. With respect to the two Houses, of which the English Parliament
is composed, they appear to be effectually influenced into one, and, as a
legislature, to have no temper of its own. The Minister, whoever he at any time
may be, touches it as with an opium wand, and it sleeps obedience.

But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two Houses, the difference
will appear so great, as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there
can be no certainty of the judgment to use it. Wretched as the state of
representation is in England, it is manhood compared with what is called the
House of Lords; and so little is this nicknamed House regarded, that the people
scarcely enquire at any time what it is doing. It appears also to be most under
influence, and the furthest removed from the general interest of the nation

Pages 107-108. Having thus glanced at some of the defects of the two Houses of
Parliament, I proceed to what is called the Crown, upon which I shall be very
concise.

It signifies a nominal office of a million sterling a year, the business of
which consists in receiving the money. Whether the person be wise or foolish,
sane or insane, a native or a foreigner, matters not. Every ministry acts upon
the same idea* that Mr. Burke writes, namely, that the people must be
hoodwinked, and held in superstitious ignorance by some bugbear or other; and
what is called the Crown answers this purpose, and therefore it answers all the
purposes to be expected from it. This is more than can be said of the other two
branches. The hazard to which this office is exposed in all countries, is not
from any thing that can happen to the man, but from what may happen to the
nation -- the danger of its coming to its senses.

Page 116. Note. I happened to be in England at the celebration of the
centenary of the revolution of 1688. The characters of William and Mary have
always appeared to me detestable; the one seeking to destroy his uncle, and the
other her father, to get possession of power themselves; yet, as the nation was
disposed to think something of that event, I felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the
whole reputation of it to a man who had undertaken it as a job, and who,
besides what he otherwise got, charged 600,000 l. for the expense of the little
fleet that brought him from Holland. George the First acted the same
close-fisted part as William had done, and bought the Duchy of Bremin with the
money he got from England, 250,000 l. over and above his pay as King; and
having thus purchased it at the expense of England, added it to his Hanoverian
dominions for his own private profit. In fact, every nation that does not
govern itself, is governed as a job. England has been the prey of jobs over
since the revolution.

Page 161. The fraud, hypocrisy, and imposition of governments, are now
beginning to be too well understood to promise them any long career. The farce
of monarchy and aristocracy, in all countries, is following that of chivalry,
and Mr. Burke is dressing for the funeral. Let it then pass quietly to the tomb
of all other follies, and the mourners be comforted.

The time is not very distant when England will laugh at itself for sending to
Holland, Hanover, Zell, or Brunswick for men, at the expense of a million a
year, who understood neither her laws, her language, nor her interest, and
whose capacities would scarcely have fitted them for the office of parish
constable. If government could be trusted to such hands, it must be some easy
and simple thing indeed, and materials fit for all the purposes may be found in
every town and village in England.

The end of the Evidence for the Crown.
The Honorable Thomas Erskine. Gentlemen of the Jury,

THE Attorney General, in that part of his address which arose from a letter,
supposed to have been written to him from France, exhibited signs of strong
sensibility and emotion. I do not, I am sure, charge him with acting a part to
seduce you; on the contrary, I am persuaded from my own feelings, and from my
acquaintance with my friend from our childhood upwards, that he expressed
himself as he felt. But, gentlemen, if he felt those painful embarrassments,
think what mine must be: he can only feel for the august Character whom he
represents in this place, as a subject for his Sovereign, too far removed by
custom, and by law, from the intercourses which generate affections, to produce
any other sentiments than those that flow from a relation common to us all. But
it will be remembered, that I stand in the same relation Mr. Erskine is
Attorney General to the Prince of Wales.
toward another Great Person, more deeply implicated by this supposed letter;
who, not restrained from the cultivation of personal attachment by those
qualifications which must always secure them, has exalted my duty of a subject
to a Prince, into a warm and honest affection between (...) and man. Thus
circumstanced, I certainly should have been glad to have had an earlier
opportunity of knowing correctly the content of this letter, and whether (which
I positively deny) it proceeded from the defendant. Coming thus suddenly upon
us, I see but too plainly the impression it has made upon you who are to try
the cause, and I feel its weight upon myself, who am to conduct it; but this
shall neither detach me from my duty, nor, added to all the other difficulties
th^^ thicken around me, enervate me (if I can hel^ (...) in the discharge of it.

Gentlemen, if the Attorney Gen^^^^ (...) founded in the commentaries he has
made to you upon this book which he prosecutes; if he is warranted by the law
of England, in repressing its circulation through these realms, from the
illegal and dangerous matters contained in it; if that suppression be, as he
avows it, and as in common sense it must be, the sole object of the
prosecution, the public has great reason to lament that this letter should have
been at all brought into the service of the cause: it is no part of the charge
upon the record; it had no existence for months after the work was composed and
published; it was not even written, if written at all, till after he had been
at Dover, in a manner insultingly expelled from the country by the influence of
government, and had become the subject of another country. It cannot,
therefore, by any fair inference, even decypher the mind of the author when he
composed his work; still less can it affect the construction of the language in
which the work itself is written. The introduction of this letter at all is,
therefore, not only a departure from the charge, but a sort of dereliction of
the object of the prosecution, which is to condemn the book: for if the
condemnation of the author is to be obtained, not by the work itself, but by
collateral matter not even existing when it was written, nor known to its
various publishers throughout the kingdom, how can a verdict upon such grounds
condemn the work, or criminate other publishers, strangers to the collateral
matter on which the conviction may be obtained? I maintain, therefore, that,
upon every principle of sound policy, as it affects the interests of the crown,
and upon every rule of justice, as it affects the author of the Rights of Man,
the letter should be wholly dismissed from your consideration.

Gentlemen, the Attorney General has thought it necessary to inform you, that a
rumor had been spread, and had reached his ears, that he only carried on the
prosecution as a public prosecutor, but without the concurrence of his own
private judgment; and therefore to add the just weight of his own character to
his public duty, and to repel what he thinks a calumny, he tells you that he
should have deserved to have been driven from society, if he had not arraigned
the work and the author before you.

Here too we stand in situations very different. I have no doubt of the
existence of such a rumor, and of its having reached his ears, because he says
so; but for the narrow circle in which any rumor, personally implicating my
learned friend's character, has extended, I might appeal to the multitudes who
surround us, and ask, which of all them, except the few connected in office
with the crown, ever heard of its existence. But with regard to myself, every
man who hears me at this moment, nay, the whole People of England, have been
witnesses to the calumnious clamor that, by every art, has been raised and
kept up against me: In every place, where business or pleasure collect the
public together, day after day my name and character have been the topics of
injurious reflection. And for what -- only for not having shrunk from the
discharge of a duty which no personal advantage recommended, and which a
thousand difficulties repelled. But, gentlemen, I have no complaint to make,
either against the printers of these libels, nor even against their authors;
the greater part of them, hurried perhaps away by honest prejudices, may have
believed they were serving their country by rendering me the object of its
suspicion and contempt; and if there have been amongst them others who have
mixed in it from personal malice and unkindness, I thank God I can forgive them
also. -- Little indeed did they know me, who thought that such proceedings
would influence my conduct: I will for ever, at all hazards, assert the
dignity, independence, and integrity of the ENGLISH BAR; without which,
impartial justice, the most valuable part of the English constitution, can have
no existence. For, from the moment that any advocate can be permitted to say,
that he will or will not stand between the crown and a subject arraigned in the
court where he daily sits to practice, from that moment the liberties of
England are at an end. If the advocate refuses to defend, from what he may
think of the charge or of the defense, he assumes the character of the judge;
nay, he assumes it before the hour of judgment; and, in proportion to his rank
and reputation, puts the heavy influence of, perhaps, a mistaken opinion into
the scale against the accused, in whose favor the benevolent principle of
English law makes all presumptions, and which commands the very Judge to be his
counsel.

Gentlemen, it is now my duty to address myself regularly and without
digression to the defense. And the first thing which presents itself in the
discussion of a judicial subject, and indeed of every other, is to state
distinctly, and with precision, what the question is, and (where prejudice and
misrepresentation have been exerted), to distinguish it accurately from what it
is not. The question then is NOT whether the constitution of our fathers, under
which we live -- under which I present myself before you, and under which alone
you have any jurisdiction to hear me, -- be or be not preferable to the
constitution of America or France, or any other human constitution. For upon
what principle can a court, constituted by the authority of any government, and
administering a positive system of law under it, pronounce a decision against
the constitution which creates its authority; or the rule of action which its
jurisdiction is to enforce? The common sense of the most uninformed person must
revolt at such an absurd supposition.

I have no difficulty, therefore, in admitting, that if by accident some or all
of you were alienated in opinion and affection from the forms and principles of
the English government, and were impressed with the value of that unmixed
representative constitution which this work recommends and inculcates, you
could not, on that account, acquit the defendant. Nay, to speak out plainly, I
freely admit, that even if you were avowed enemies to monarchy, and devoted to
republicanism, you would be nevertheless bound by your oaths, as a jury sworn
to administer English justice, to convict the author of the Rights of Man, if
it were brought home to your consciences, that he had exceeded those widely
extended bounds which the ancient wisdom and liberal policy of the English
constitution have allotted to the range of a free press. I freely concede this,
because you have no jurisdiction to judge either the author or the work, by any
rule but by the English law, which is the source of your authority. But having
made this large concession, it follows, by a consequence so inevitable as to be
invulnerable to all argument or artifice, that if, on the other hand, you
should be impressed (which I know you to be) not only with a dutiful regard,
but with an enthusiasm, for the whole form and substance of your own
government; and though you should think that this work, in its circulation
amongst classes of men unequal to political researches, may tend to alienate
opinion, still you cannot, upon these grounds, without a similar breach of
duty, convict the defendant of a libel, unless he has clearly stepped beyond
that extended range of communication which the same ancient wisdom and liberal
policy of the British constitution has allotted for the liberty of the press.

Gentlemen, I admit, with the Attorney General, that in every case where a
court has to estimate the quality of a writing, the mind and intention of the
writer must be taken into the account; the bona, or mala fides, as lawyers
express it, must be examined: for a writing may undoubtedly proceed from a
motive, and be directed to a purpose, not to be decyphered by the mere
construction of the thing written. But wherever a writing is arraigned as
seditious or slanderous, not upon its ordinary construction in language, nor
from the necessary consequences of its publication, under any circumstances and
at all times, but that the criminality springs from some extrinsic matter, not
visible upon the page itself, nor universally operative, but capable only of
being connected with it by evidence, so as to demonstrate the effect of the
publication, and the design of the publisher; such a writing, not libellous PER
SE, cannot be arraigned as the author's work is arraigned upon the record
before the court. I maintain, without the hazard of contradiction, that the law
of England positively requires, for the security of the subject, that every
charge of a libel complicated with extrinsic facts and circumstances, dehors
the writing, must appear literally upon the record, that the defendant may know
what crime he is called upon to answer, and how to stand upon his defense. What
crime is it that the defendant comes to answer for to day? what is the notice
that I, who am his counsel, have from this parchment of the crime alleged
against him? I come to defend his having written this book. The record states
nothing else: the charge of sedition in the introduction is notoriously paper
and pack-thread, and the innuendos cannot enlarge the sense, or natural
construction of the text. The record does not state any one extrinsic fact or
circumstance, to render the work criminal, at one time more than another; it
states no peculiarity of time, or season, or intention, not proveable from the
writing itself, which is the naked charge upon record. There is nothing
therefore which, upon any principle of English law, gives you any jurisdiction
beyond the construction of the work itself; and you cannot be justified in
finding it criminal because published at this time, unless it would have been a
criminal publication under any circumstances, or at any other time.

The law of England then, both in its forms and substance, being the only rule
by which the author or the work can be justified or condemned, and the charge
upon the record being the naked charge of a libel, the cause resolves itself
into a question of the deepest importance to us all, THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF
THE LIBERTY OF THE ENGLISH PRESS.

But before I enter upon it, I wish to fulfill a duty to the defendant, which,
if I do not deceive myself, is at this moment peculiarly necessary to his
impartial trial. -- If an advocate entertains sentiments injurious to the
defense he is engaged in, he is not only justified, but bound in duty, to
conceal them; so, on the other hand, if his own genuine sentiments, or any
thing connected with his character or situation, can add strength to his
professional assistance, he is bound to throw them into the scale: in
addressing myself, therefore, to gentlemen not only zealous for the honor of
English government, but visibly indignant at any attack upon its principles,
and who would, perhaps, be impatient of arguments from a suspected quarter, I
give my client the benefit of declaring, that I am, and ever have been,
attached to the genuine principles of the British government; and that, however
the court or you may reject the application, I defend him upon principles not
only consistent with its permanence and security, but, without the
establishment of which, it never could have had an existence.

The proposition which I mean to maintain as the basis of the liberty of the
press, and without which it is an empty sound, is this:

That every man, not intending to mislead and to confound, but seeking to
enlighten others with what his own reason and con^cience, however erroneously,
dictate t^ him as truth, may address himself to the universal reason of a whole
nation, either upon the subject of governments in general, or upon that of our
own particular country: that he may analyze the principles of its constitution,
point out its errors and defects, examine and publish its corruptions, warn his
fellow-citizens against their ruinous consequences, and exert his whole
faculties in pointing out the most advantageous changes in establishments which
he considers to be radically defective, or sliding from their object by abuse.
-- All this every subject of this country has a right to do, if he contemplates
only what he thinks its happiness, and but seeks to change the public mind by
the conviction which flows from reasonings dictated by conscience.

If, indeed, he writes what he does not think; if, contemplating the misery of
others, he wickedly condemns what his own understanding approves; or, even
admitting his real disgust against the government or its corruptions, if he
calumniates living magistrates, or holds out to individuals, that they have a
right to run before the public mind in their conduct; that they may oppose by
contumacy or force what private reason only disapproves; that they may disobey
the law, because their judgment condemns it; or resist the public will, because
they honestly wish to change it: he is then a criminal upon every principle of
rational policy, as well as upon the immemorial precedents of English justice;
because such a person seeks to disunite individuals from their duty to the
whole, and excites to overt acts of misconduct in a part of the community,
instead of endeavoring to change, by the impulse of reason, that universal
assent which, in this and in every country, constitutes the law for all.

I have therefore no difficulty in admitting that, if, upon an attentive
perusal of this work, it shall be found that the defendant has promulgated any
doctrines which tend to withdraw individuals from their subjection to the law
by which the whole nation consents to be governed; nay, if the direct contrary
shall not be found to be studiously inculcated -- if his book shall be found to
have warranted or excited that unfortunate criminal who appeared here yesterday
to endeavor to relieve himself from imprisonment, by the destruction of a
prison, while the law of imprisonment remained, or dictated to him the language
of defiance which ran through his whole defense -- if throughout the whole work
there shall be found any syllable or letter, which strikes at the security of
property, or which hints that any thing less than the whole nation can
constitute the law, or that the law, be it what it may, is not the inexorable
rule of action for every individual, I willingly yield him up to the justice of
the court.

Gentlemen, I say, in the name of Thomas Pain, and in his words as author of
the Rights of Man, as written in the very volume that is charged with seeking
the destruction of property,

The end of all political associations is, The preservation of the rights of
man, which rights are liberty, property, and security; that the nation is the
source of all sovereignty derived from it: the right of property being secured
and inviolable, no one ought to be deprived of it, except in cases of evident
public necessity, legally ascertained, and on condition of a previous just
indemnity.

These are undoubtedly the rights of man -- the rights for which all
governments are established -- and the only rights Mr. Pain contends for; but
which he thinks (no matter whether right or wrong) are better to be secured by
a republican constitution than by the forms of the English government. He
instructs me to admit, that, when government is once constituted, no
individuals, without rebellion, can withdraw their obedience from it -- that
all attempts to excite them to it are highly criminal, for the most obvious
reasons of policy and justice -- that nothing short of the will of a whole
people can change or affect the rule by which a nation is to be governed -- and
that no private opinion, however honestly inimical to the forms or substance of
the law, can justify resistance to its authority, while it remains in force.
The author of the Rights of Man not only admits the truth of all this doctrine,
but he consents to be convicted, and I also consent for him, unless his work
shall be found studiously and painfully to inculcate these great principles of
government which it is charged to have been written to destroy. Let me not,
therefore, be suspected to be contending, that it is lawful to write a book
pointing out defects in the English government, and exciting individuals to
destroy its sanctions, and to refuse obedience. But, on the other hand, I do
contend, that it is lawful to address the English nation on these momentous
subjects, for had it not been for this unalienable right (thanks be to God and
our fathers for establishing it), how should we have had this constitution
which we so loudly boast of? If, in the march of the human mind, no man could
have gone before the establishments of the time he lived in, how could our
establishment, by reiterated changes, have become what it is? If no man could
have awakened the public mind to errors and abuses in our government, how could
it have passed on from stage to stage, through reformation and revolution, so
as to have arrived from barbarism to such a pitch of happiness and perfection
that the Attorney General considers it as profanation to touch it any further,
or to look for any future amendment.

In this manner power has reasoned in every age -- government, in its own
estimation, has been at all times a system of perfection; but a free press has
examined and detected its errors, and the people have happily reformed them:
this freedom has alone made our government what it is, and alone can preserve
it; and therefore, under the banners of that freedom, today I stand up to
defend Thomas Pain. But how, alas! shall this task be accomplished? How may I
expect from you what human nature has not made man for the performance of? How
am I to address your reasons, or ask them to pause, amidst the torrent of
prejudice which has hurried away the public mind on the subject you are to
judge?

Was any Englishman ever so brought as a criminal before an English court of
justice? -- If I were to ask you, gentlemen of the jury, what is the choicest
fruit that grows upon the tree of English liberty, you would answer, SECURITY
UNDER THE LAW. If I were to ask the whole people of England, the return they
looked for at the hands of government, for the burdens under which they bend
to support it, I should still be answered, SECURITY UNDER THE LAW; or, in other
words, an impartial administration of justice. So sacred, therefore, has the
freedom or trial been ever held in England; so anxiously does Justice guard
against every possible bias in her path, that if the public mind has been
locally agitated upon any subject in judgment, the forum is either changed, or
the trial postponed. The circulation of any paper that brings, or which can be
supposed to bring, prejudice, or even well founded knowledge, within the reach
of a British tribunal, on the spur of an occasion, is not only highly criminal,
but defeats itself, by leading to put off the trial which its object was to
pervert. On this principle, his lordship will permit me to remind him, that on
the trial of the Dean of St. Asaph for a libel, or rather when he was brought
to trial, the circulation of books by a society favorable to his defense, was
held by the noble lord, as Chief Justice of Chester, to be a reason for not
trying the cause; although they contained no matter relative to the Dean, nor
to the object of his trial; being only extracts from ancient authors of high
reputation, on the general rights of juries to consider the innocence as well
as the guilt of the accused, yet still, as the recollection of these rights was
pressed forward with a view to affect the proceedings, to guard the principle
the proceedings were postponed.

Is the defendant then to be the only exception to these admirable provisions?
-- Is the English law to judge him, stripped of ^he armor with which its
universal justice encircles all others? -- Shall we, in the very act of judging
him for detracting from the English government, furnish him with ample matter
for just reprobation, instead of detraction? Has not his cause been prejudged
through a thousand channels? Has not the work before you been daily publicly
reviled, and his person held up to derision and reproach? Has not the public
mind been excited, by crying down the very phrase and idea of the Rights of
Man? Nay, have not associations of gentlemen, I speak it with regret, because I
am persuaded, from what I know of some of them, that they, amongst them at
least, thought they were serving the public; yet have they not, in utter
contempt and ignorance of that constitution of which they declare themselves to
be the guardians, published the grossest attacks upon the defendant? Have they
not, even while the cause has been standing here in the paper for immediate
trial, published a direct protest against the very work now before you;
advertising in the same paper, though under the general description of
seditious papers, a reward on the conviction of any person who should dare to
sell the book itself, to which their own publication was an answer? -- The
Attorney General has spoken of a forced circulation of this work; but how have
these prejudging papers been circulated? we all know how: they have been thrown
into our carriages in every street; they have met us at every turnpike; and
they lie in the areas of all our houses. To complete the triumph of prejudice,
that high tribunal, of which I have the honor to be a member, (my learned
friends know what I say to be true) has been drawn into this vortex of slander;
and some of its members, for I do not speak of the House itself, have thrown
the weight of their stations into the same scale.

By all means I maintain that this cause has been prejudged.

It may be said, that I have made no motion to put off the trial for these
causes, and that courts of themselves take no cognizance of what passes
elsewhere, without facts laid before them. Gentlemen, I know that I should have
had equal justice from that quarter, if I had brought myself within the rule.
But when should I have been better in the present aspect of things? And
therefore I only remind you of all these hardships, that you may recollect that
your judgment is to proceed upon that alone which meets you here, upon the
evidence in the cause, and not upon suggestions destructive of every principle
of justice.

Having disposed of these foreign prejudices, I hope you will as little regard
some arguments that have been offered to you in court. The letter which has
been so repeatedly pressed upon you, ought to dismiss even from your
recollection; I have already put it out of the question, as having been written
long subsequent to the book, and as being a libel on the king, which no part of
the information charges, and which may hereafter be prosecuted as a distinct
offense. I consider that letter besides, and indeed have always heard it
treated, as a forgery, contrived to injure the merits of the cause, and to
embarrass me personally in its defense. I have a right so to consider it,
because it is unsupported by any thing similar at an earlier period. The
defendant's whole deportment, previous to the publication, has been wholly
unexceptionable: he properly desired to be given up as the author of the book,
if any enquiry should take place concerning it; and he is not affected in
evidence, directly or indirectly, with any illegal or suspicious conduct; not
even with having uttered an indiscreet or taunting expression, nor with any one
matter or thing, inconsistent with the duty of the best subject in England. His
opinions indeed were adverse to our system; but I maintain that OPINION is
free, and that CONDUCT alone is amenable to the law.

Y^u are next desi^ed to judge of the author's mind and intention, by the modes
and extent of the circulation of his work. The first part of the Righ^s of Man,
Mr. Attorney General tells you, he did not prosecute, although it was in
circulation through the country for a year and a half together, because it seems
it circulated only amongst what he styles the judicious part of the public, who
possessed in their capacities and experience an antidote to the poison; but
that with regard to the second part now before you, its circulation had been
forced into every corner of society; had been printed and reprinted for
cheapness even upon whited brown paper, and had crept into the very nurseries
of children, as a wrapper for their sweetmeats.

In answer to this statement, which after all stands only upon Mr. Attorney
General's own assertion, unsupported by any kind of proof (no witness having
proved the author's personal interference with the sale), I still maintain,
that if he had the most anxiously promoted it, the question would remain
exactly the same: the question would still be^ whether at the time when Pain
composed his work, and promoted the most extensive purchase of it, he believed
or disbelieved what he had written, and whether he contemplated ^he happiness
or the misery of the English nation, to which it is addressed; and whichever of
these intentions may be evidenced to your judgments upon reading the book
itself, I confess I am utterly at a loss to comprehend how a writer can be
supposed to mean something different from what he has written, by an anxiety
(common I believe to all authors) that his work should be generally read.

Remember, I am not asking your opinions of the doctrines themselves, you have
given them already pretty visibly since I began to address you; but I shall
appeal not only to you, but to those who, without our leave, will hereafter
judge without appeal of all that we are doing to day; Whether, upon the matter
which I hasten to lay before you, you can refuse in justice to pronounce, that
from his education -- from the accidents and habits of his life -- from the
time and occasion of the publication -- from the circumstances attending it --
and from every line and letter of the work itself, and all his other writings,
before and even since, his conscience and understanding (no matter whether
erroneously or not) were deeply and solemnly impressed with the matters
contained in his book, -- that he addressed it to the reason of the nation at
large, and not to the passions of individuals, and that in the issue of its
influence, he contemplated only what appeared to him (though it may not to us)
to be the interest and happiness of England, and of the whole human race. In
drawing the one or the other of these conclusions, the book stands first in
order, and it shall now speak for itself.

Gentlemen, the whole of it is in evidence before you; the particular parts
arraigned having only been read by my consent, upon the presumption that on
retiring from the court, you would carefully compare them with the context, and
all the parts with the whole viewed together. You cannot indeed do justice
without it. The most common letter, even in the ordinary course of business,
cannot be read in a cause to prove an obligation for twenty shillings without
the whole being read, that the writer's meaning may be seen without deception.
But in a criminal charge of only four pages and a half, out of a work
containing nearly two hundred, you cannot, with even the appearance of common
justice, pronounce a judgment without the most deliberate and cautious
comparison. I observe that the noble and learned judge confirms me in this
observation. But if any given part of a work be legally explanatory of every
other part of it, the preface, a fortiori, is the most material; because the
preface is the author's own key to his writing: it is there that he takes the
reader by the hand, and introduces him to his subject: it is there that the
spirit and intention of the whole is laid before him by way of prologue. A
preface is meant by the author as a clue to ignorant or careless readers: the
author says by it, to every man who chooses to begin where he ought, look at my
plan -- attend to my distinctions -- mark the purpose and limitations of the
matter I lay before you.

Let then the calumniators of Thomas Pain now attend to his preface, where, to
leave no excuse for ignorance or misrepresentation, he expresses himself thus:

I have differed from some professional gentlemen on the subject of
prosecutions, and I since find they are falling into my opinion, which I will
here state as fully, but as concisely as I can.

I will first put a case with respect to any law, and then compare it with a
government, or with what in England is, or has been, called a constitution.

It would be an act of despotism, or what in England is called arbitrary power,
to make a law to prohibit investigating the principles, good or bad, on which
such a law, or any other, is founded.

If a law be bad, it is one thing to oppose the practice of it, but it is quite
a different thing to expose its errors, to reason on its defects, and to show
cause why it should be repealed, or why another ought to be substituted in its
place. I have always held it an opinion (making it also my practice) that it is
better to obey a bad law, making use at the same time of every argument to show
its errors and procure its repeal, than forcibly to violate it; because the
precedent of breaking a bad law might weaken the force, and lead to a
discretionary violation, of those which are good.

The case is the same with principles and forms of government, or to what are
called constitutions and the parts of which they are composed.

It is for the good of nations, and not for the emolument or aggrandisement of
particular individuals, that government ought to be established, and that
mankind are at the expense of supporting it. The defects of every government
and constitution, both as to principle and form, must, on a parity of
reasoning, be as open to discussion as the defects of a law, and it is a duty
which every man owes to society to point them out. When those defects, and the
means of remedying them are generally seen by a nation, that nation will reform
its government or its constitution in the one case, as the government repealed
or reformed the law in the other.

Gentlemen, you must undoubtedly wish to deal with every man who comes before
you in judgment, as you would be dealt by yourselves; and surely you will not
lay it down to day as a law to be binding hereafter even upon yourselves, that
if you should publish any opinion concerning the existing abuses in your
country's government, and point out to the whole public the means of amendment,
you are to be acquitted or convicted as any twelve men may happen to agree with
you in your opinions. Yet this is precisely what you are asked to do to
another: it is precisely the case before you. Mr. Pain expressly says, I obey
a law until it is repealed; obedience is not only my principle but my practice,
since my disobedience of a law from thinking it bad, might apply to justify
another man in the disobedience of a good one; and thus individuals would give
the rule for themselves, and not society for all.

Gentlemen, you will presently see that the same principle pervades the rest of
the work; and I am the more anxious to call your attention to it, however
repetition may tire you, because it unfolds the whole principle of my argument:
for, if you find a sentence in the whole book that invests any individual, or
any number of individuals, or any community short of the whole nation, with a
power of changing any part of the law or constitution, I abandon the cause --
YES, I freely abandon it, because I will not affront the majesty of a court of
justice by maintaining propositions which, even upon the surface of them, are
false. Mr. Pain, page 162 -- 168, goes on thus:

When a nation changes its opinion and habits of thinking, it is no longer to
be governed as before; but it would not only be wrong, but bad policy, to
attempt by force what ought to be accomplished by reason. Rebellion consists in
forcibly opposing the general will of a nation, whether by a party or by a
government. There ought, therefore, to be, in every nation, a method of
occasionall^ ascertaining the state of public opinion with respect to
government.

There is, therefore, no power but the voluntary will of the people that has a
right to act in any matter respecting a general reform; and, by the same right
that two persons can confer on such a subject, a thousand may. The object in
all such preliminary proceedings is, to find out what the general sense of a
nation is, and to be governed by it. If it prefer a bad or defective government
to a reform, or choose to pay ten times more taxes than there is occasion for,
it has a right so to do; and, so long as the majority do not impose conditions
on the minority different to what they impose on themselves, though there may
be much error, there is no injustice; neither will the error continue long.
Reason and discussion will soon bring things right, however wrong they may
begin. By such a process no tumult is to be apprehended. The poor, in all
countries, are naturally both peaceable and grateful in all reforms in which
their interest and happiness are included. It is only by neglecting and
rejecting them that they become tumultuous.

Gentlemen, these are the sentiments of the author of the Rights of Man; and,
whatever his opinions may be of the defects in our government, it never can
change our sentiments concerning it, if our sentiments are just; and a writing
can never be seditious in the sense of the English law, which states that the
government leans on the universal will for its support.

Gentlemen, this universal will is the best and securest title which his
Majesty and his family have to the throne of these kingdoms; and in proportion
to the wisdom of our institutions, the title must in common sense become the
stronger: so little idea, indeed, have I of any other, that in my place in
Parliament, not a week ago, I considered it as the best way of expressing my
attachment to the constitution, as established at the revolution, to declare (I
believe in the presence of the heir apparent of the crown, for whom I have the
greatest personal zeal) that his Majesty reigned in England, by choice and
consent, as the magistrate of the English people; not indeed a consent and
choice by personal election, like a King of Poland, the worst of all possible
constitutions; but by the election of a family for great national objects, in
defiance of that hereditary right, which only becomes tyranny, in the sense of
Mr. Pain, when it claims to inherit a nation, instead of governing by their
consent, and continuing for its benefit.

Gentlemen, this sentiment has the advantage of Mr. Burke's high authority, who
says with great truth, in a letter to his constituents, Too little dependence
cannot be had at this time of day on names and prejudices: the eyes of mankind
are opened; and communities must be held together by a visible and solid
interest. I believe, Gentlemen of the Jury, that the Prince of Wales will
always render this title dear to the people. The Attorney General can only tell
you what he believes of him; I can tell you what I know, and what I am bound to
declare, since this Prince may be traduced and calumniated in every part of the
kingdom, without its coming often in question, till brought in to load a
defense with matter collateral to the charge. I therefore assert what the
Attorney General can only hope, that, whenever that Prince shall come to the
throne of this country (which I hope, but by the course of nature, will never
happen), he will make the constitution of Great Britain the foundation of all
his conduct.

Having now, Gentlemen, established the author's general intention by his own
introduction, which is the best and fairest exposition, let us next look at the
occasion which gave it birth.

The Attorney General, throughout the whole course of his address to you (I
knew it would be so), has avoided the most distant notice or hint of any
circumstance having led to the appearance of the author in the political world,
after a silence of so many years; he has not even pronounced, or even glanced
at the name of Mr. Burke, but has left you to take it for granted that the
defendant volunteered this delicate and momentous subject; and that, without
being led to it by the provocation of political controversy, he had seized a
favorable moment to stigmatize, from mere malice, and against his own
confirmed opinions, the Constitu^ion of this Cou^t^y.

Gentlemen, my learned friend knows too well my respect and value for him to
suppose that I am charging him with a wilful suppression; I know him to be
incapable of it; he knew it would come from me. He will premit me, however, to
lament that it should have been left for me, at this late period of the cause,
to inform you, that, not only the work before you, but the First Part, of which
it is a natural continuation, were written avowedly, and upon the face of them,
IN ANSWER TO MR. BURKE. They were written besides under circumstances which I
shall hereafter explain, and in the course of which explanation I may have
occasion to cite a few passages from the works of that celebrated person. And I
shall speak of him with the highest respect: for, with whatever contempt he may
delight to look down upon my humble talents, however he may disparage the
principles which direct my public conduct, he shall never force me to forget
the regard which this country owes to him for the writings which he has left
upon record for the illumination of our most distant posterity. After the
gratitude which we owe to God for the divine gifts of reason and understanding,
our next thanks are due to those from the fountain of whose enlightened minds
they are fed and fructified. But pleading, as I do, the cause of freedom of
opinions, I shall not give offense by remarking that this great author has been
thought to have changed some of his; and, if Thomas Pain had not thought so, I
should not now be addressing you, because the book which is my subject would
never have been written. Who is right and who is wrong, in the contention of
doctrines, I have repeatedly disclaimed to be the question; I can only say that
Mr. Pain may be right throughout, but that Mr. Burke cannot -- Mr. Pain has
been uniform in his opinions, but Mr. Burke has not -- Mr. Burke can only be
right in part; but, should Mr. Pain be even mistaken in the whole, still I am
not removed from the principle of his defense. My defense has nothing to do
with either the concealment or rectitude of his doctrines. I admit Mr. Pain to
be a republican; you shall soon see what made him one -- I do not seek to shade
or qualify his attack upon our constitution; I put my defense on no such matter
-- he undoubtedly means to declare it to be defective in its forms, and
contaminated with abuses, which, in his judgment, will one day or other bring
on the ruin of us all: it is in vain to mince the matter; this is the scope of
his work. But still, if it contains no attack upon the King's Majesty, nor upon
any other living magistrate; if it excites to no resistance to magistracy, but,
on the contrary, if it even inculcates, as it does, obedience to government,
then, whatever may be its defects, the question continues as before, and ever
must remain an unmixed question of the liberty of the press. I therefore
considered it as no breach of professional duty, nor injurious to the cause I
am defending, to express my own admiration of the real principles of our
constitution -- a constitution which I hope never to see give way to any other
-- a constitution which has been productive of various benefits, and which will
produce many more hereafter, if we have wisdom e^ough to pluck up those weeds
that grow in the richest soils and amongst the brightest flowers. I agree with
the merchants of London, that the English government is equal to the
reformation of its own abuses; and, as an inhabitant of the city, I would have
signed their Declaration, if I had known, of my own knowledge, the facts
recited in its preamble. But abuses the English constitution unquestionably has
which call loudly for reformation, the existence of which has been the theme of
our greatest statesmen, which have too plainly formed the principles of the
defendant, and created the very conjuncture which produced his book.

Gentlemen, we all but too well remember the calamitous situation in which our
country stood but a few years ago -- a situation which no man can look back
upon without horror, nor feel himself safe from relapsing into again, while the
causes remain which produced it. The event I allude to you must know to be the
American war and the still existing causes of it, the corruptions of this
government. In those days it was not thought virtue by the patriots of England
to conceal their existence from the people; but then, as now, authority
condemned them as disaffected subjects, and defeated the ends they sought by
their promulgation.

Hear the opinion of Sir George Saville; -- not his speculative opinion
concerning the structure of our government in the abstract, but his opinion of
the settled abuses which prevailed in his own time, and which continue at this
moment. But first let me remind you who Sir George Saville was -- I fear we
shall hardly look upon his like again -- How shall I describe him to you? -- In
my own words I cannot. I was lately commended by Mr. Burke, in the House of
Commons, for strengthening my own language by an appeal to Dr. Johnson. Were
the honorable gentleman present at this moment, he would no doubt doubly
applaud my choice in resorting to his own works for the description of Sir
George Saville:

His fortune is among the largest; a fortune, which, wholly unincumb^red as it
is, without one single charge from luxury, vanity, or excess, sinks under the
benevolence of its dispenser. This private benevolence, expanding itself into
patriotism, renders his whole being the estate of the public, in which he has
not reserved a peculium for himself of profit, diversion, or relaxation. During
the session, the first in, and the last out of the House of Commons; he passes
from the senate to the camp; and, seldom seeing the seat of his ancestors, he
is always in Parliament to serve his country, or in the field to defend it.

It is impossible to ascribe to such a character any principle but patriotism,
when he expressed himself as follows:

I return to you baffled and dispirited, and I am sorry that truth obliges me
to add, with hardly a ray of hope of seeing any change in the miserable course
of public calamities.

On this melancholy day of account, in rendering up to you my trust, I deliver
to you your share of a country maimed and weakened; its treasure lavished and
misspent; its honors faded; and its conduct the laughing stock of Europe: our
nation in a manner without allies or friends, except such as we have hired to
destroy our fellow subjects, and to ravage a country, in which we once claimed
an invaluable share. I return to you some of your principal privileges
impeached and mangled. And, lastly, I leave you, as I conceive, at this hour
and moment fully, effectually, and absolutely, under the discretion and power
of a military force, which is to act without waiting for the authority of the
civil magistrates.

Some have been accused of exaggerating the public misfortunes, nay, of having
endeavored to help forward the mischief, that they might afterward raise
discontents. I am willing to hope, that neither my temper, nor my situation in
life, will be thought naturally to urge me to promote misery, discord, or
confusion, or to exult in the subversion of order, or in the ruin of property.
I have no reason to contemplate with pleasure the poverty of our country, the
increase of our debts, and of our taxes; or the decay of our commerce. -- Trust
not, however, to my report: reflect, compare, and judge for yourselves.

But, under all these disheartening circumstances, I could yet entertain a
cheerful hope, and undertake again the commission with alacrity, as well as
zeal, if I could see any effectual steps taken to remove the original couse of
the mischief -- 'Then would there be a hope.

But, till the Purity of the constituent body, and thereby that of the
representative, be restored, there is NONE.

I gladly embrace this most public opportunity of delivering my sentiments, not
only to all my constituents, but to those likewise not my constituents, whom
yet, in the large sense, I represent, and am faithfully to serve.

I look upon restoring election and representation in some degree (for I expect
no miracles) to their original purity, to be that, without which all other
efforts will be vain and ridiculous.

If something be not done, you may, indeed, retain the outward form of your
constitution, but not the power thereof.

Such were the words of that great good man, lost with those of many others of
his time, and his fame, as far as power could hurt it, put in the shade along
with them. The consequences we have all seen and felt: America, from an
obedient affectionate colony, became an independent nation; and two millions of
people, nursed in the very lap of our monarchy, became the willing subjects of
a republican constitution.

Gentlemen, in that great and calamitous conflict Mr. Burke and Mr. Pain
fought in the same field of reason together, but with very different successes.
Mr. Burke spoke to a parliament in England, such as Sir George Saville
describes it, that had no ears but for sounds that flattered its corruptions.
Mr. Pain, on the other hand, spoke TO A PEOPLE; reasoned with them, that they
were bound by no subjection to any sovereignty, further than their own benefits
connected them; and by these powerful arguments prepared the minds of the
American people for that GLORIOUS, JUST, and HAPPY revolution.

Gentlemen, I have a right to distinguish it by that appellation, because I
aver that at this moment there is as sacred a regard to property; as inviolable
a security to all the rights of individuals; lower taxes; fewer grievances;
less to deplore, and more to admire, in the constitution of America, than that
of any other country under heaven. I wish indeed to except our own, but I
cannot even do that, till it shall be purged of those abuses which, though they
obscure and deform the surface, have not as yet (thank God) destroyed the vital
parts.

Why then is Mr. Pain to be calumniated, and reviled, because out of a people
consisting of near three millions, he alone did not remain attached in opinion
to a monarchy. Remember, that all the blood which was shed in America, and to
which he was for years a melancholy and indignant witness, was shed by the
authority of the crown of Great Britain, under the influence of its parliament,
such as Sir George Saville has described it, and such as Mr. Burke himself will
be called upon by and by in more glowing colors to paint it. How then can it
be wondered at that Mr. Pain should return to this country in his heart a
republican? Was he not equally republican when he wrote Common Sense? yet that
volume has been sold without restraint or prosecution in every shop in England
ever since, and which nevertheless (I appeal to the book, which I have in
court, and which is in every body's hands) contains every one principle of
government, and every abuse in the British constitution, which is to be found
in the Rights of Man. Yet Mr. Burke himself saw no reason to be alarmed at its
publication, nor to cry down its contents, even when America, which was swayed
by it, was in arms against the crown of Great Britain. You shall hear his
opinion of it, in his letter to the sheriffs of Bristol, pages 33 and 34.

The court gazette accomplished what the abettors of independence had attempted
in vain. When that disingenuous compilation, and strange medley of railing and
flattery, was adduced, as a proof of the united sentiments of the people of
Great Britain, there was a great change throughout all America. The tide of
popular affection, which had still set toward the parent country, began
immediately to turn, and to flow with great rapidity in a contrary course. Far
from concealing these wild declarations of enmity, the author of the celebrated
pamphlet which prepared the minds of the people for independence, insists
largely on the multitude and the spirit of these addresses; and draws an
argument from them, which (if the fact were as he supposes) must be
irresistible. For I never knew a writer on the theory of government so partial
to authority, as not to allow, that the hostile mind of the rulers to their
people, did fully justify a change of government; nor can any reason whatever
be given, why one people should voluntarily yield any degree of pre-eminence to
another, but on a supposition of great affection and benevolence toward them.
Unfortunately your rulers, trusting to other things, took no notice of this
great principle of connection.

But there is a time, it seems, for all things.

Gentlemen, the consequences of this mighty revolution are too notorious to
require illustration. No audience would sit to hear (what every body has seen
and felt,) the independence of America notoriously produced, not by remote and
circuitous effect, but directly and palpably, the revolutions which now agitate
Europe, and which portend such new changes over the face of the earth. Let
governors take warning. The revolution in France was the consequence of her
incurably corrupt and profligate government. God forbid that I should be
thought to lean, by this declaration, upon her unfortunate monarch, bending,
perhaps at this moment, under afflictions which my heart sinks within me to
think of; but, when I speak with detestation of the former politics of the
French court, I fasten as little of them upon that fallen and unhappy prince,
as I impute to our gracious sovereign the corruptions of our own government. I
desire, indeed, in the distinctest manner, to be understood that I mean to
speak of his Majesty, not only with that obedience and duty which I owe to him
as a subject, but with that justice which I think is due to him from all men
who examine his conduct either in public or private life.

Gentlemen, Mr. Pain happened to be in England when the French revolution took
place and notwithstanding what he must be supposed and allowed from his history
to have felt upon such a subject, he remained wholly silent and inactive. The
people of this country too appeared to be indifferent spectators of the
animating scene. They saw, without visible emotion, despotism destroyed, and
the King of France, by his own consent, become the first magistrate of a free
people. Certainly, at least, it produced none of those effects which are so
deprecated by government at present; nor, most probably, ever would, if it had
not occurred to the celebrated person, whose name I must so often mention,
voluntarily to provoke the subject; a subject which, if dangerous to be
discussed, he should not have led to the discussion: for, surely, it is not to
be endured, that any private man is to publish a creed for a whole nation; to
tell us that we are not to think for ourselves -- to impose his own fetters
upon the human mind -- to dogmatise at discretion -- and that no man shall sit
down to answer him without being guilty of a libel. I assert, that if it be a
libel to mistake our constitution -- to support it by means that tend to
destroy it -- and to choose the most dangerous s^ason for the interference, Mr.
Burke is that libeller; but not therefore the object of a criminal prosecution:
for, whilst I am defending the motives of one man, I have neither right nor
disposition to criminate the motives of another. All I contend for, is a fact
that cannot be controverted, viz. that this officious interference was the
origin of Mr. Paine's book. I put my cause upon its being the origin of it --
the avowed origin -- as will abundantly appear from the introduction and
preface to both parts, and throughout the whole body of the work; nay, from the
very work of Mr. Burke himself, to which both of them are answers.

Gentlemen, for the history of that celebrated work, I appeal to itself.

When the French revolution had arrived at some of its early stages, a few, and
but a few, persons (not to be named when compared with the nation) took a
visible interest in these mighty events; an interest well worthy of Englishmen.
They saw a pernicious system of government, which had led to cruel desolating
wars, and had been for ages the scourge of Great Britain, giving way to a
system which seemed to promise harmony and peace amongst the nations. They saw
this with virtuous and peaceable satisfaction: And a reverend divine Dr. Price.
, eminent for his eloquence, recollecting that the issues of life are in the
hands of God, saw no profaneness in mixing the subject with public
thanksgiving; reminding the people of this country of their own glorious
deliverance in former ages. It happened, also, that a society of gentlemen,
France being then a neutral nation, and her own monarch swearing almost daily
upon her altars to maintain the new constitution, thought they infringed no law
by sending a general congratulation. Their numbers, indeed, were very
inconsiderable; so much so, that Mr. Burke, with more truth than wisdom, begins
his volume with a sarcasm upon their insignificance.

Until very lately he had never heard of such a club. It certainly never
occupied a moment of his thoughts; nor, he believed, those of any person out of
their own set.

Why then make their proceedings the subject of alarm throughout England? --
There had been no prosecution against them, nor any charge founded upon
suspicion of disaffection against any of their body. But Mr. Burke thought it
was reserved for his eloquence to whip these curs of faction to their kennels.
How he has succeeded, I appeal to all that has happened since the introduction
of his schism in the British empire, by giving to the King, whose title was
questioned by no man, a title which it is his Majesty's most solemn interest to
disclaim.

After having, in his first work, lashed Dr. Price in a strain of eloquent
irony for considering the monarchy to be elective, which he could not but know
Dr. Price, in the literal sense of election, neither did or could possibly
consider it, Mr. Burke published a second treatise; in which, after reprinting
many passages from Mr. Paine's former work, he ridicules and denies the
supposed right of the people to change their governments, in the following
words:

"The French revolution, say they," (speaking of the English societies) was the
act of the majority of the people; and if the majority of any other people, the
people of England, for instance, wish to make the same change, they have the
same right; just the same undoubtedly; that is, none at all.

And then, after speaking of the subserviency of will to duty, (in which I
agree with him,) he, in a substantive sentence, maintains the same doctrine;
thus:

The constitution of a country being once settled upon some compact, tacit or
expressed, there is no power existing of force to alter it, without the breach
of the covenant, or the consent of all the parties. Such is the nature of a
contract.

So that if reason, or even revelation itself, were now to demonstrate to us,
that our constitution was mischievous in its effects; that, to use Mr. Attorney
General's expression, we had been insane for the many centuries we have
supported it; yet that still, if the King had not forfeited his title to the
crown, nor the Lords their privileges, the universal voice of the whole people
of England could not build up a new government upon a legitimate basis.

Gentlemen, not to argue for the present against such a proposition, and
supposing it could, beyond all controversy, be maintained; for heaven's sake,
let wisdom never utter it! Let policy and prudence for ever conceal it! If you
seek the stability of the English government, rather put the book of Mr. Pain,
which calls it bad, into every hand in the kingdom, than doctrines which bid
human nature rebel even against that which is the best. -- Say to the people of
England, Look at your constitution, there it lies before you -- the work of
your pious fathers, handed down as a sacred deposit from generation to
generation, the result of wisdom and virtue, and its parts cemented together
with kindred blood. There are, indeed, a few spots upon its surface; but the
same principle which reared the structure will brush them all away: you may
keep it, or you may destroy it. -- To such an address, what would be the
answer? A chorus of the nation -- YES, WE WILL PRESERVE IT. But say to the same
nation, even of the very same constitution, It is yours, such as it is, for
better or for worse; it is strapped upon your backs, to carry it as beasts of
burden, and you have no jurisdiction to cast it off. Let this be your
position, and you instantly raise up (I appeal to every man's consciousness of
his own nature) a spirit of uneasiness and discontent. Yet it is the
controversy alone, which this useless and mischievous proposition stirred up,
that has pointed most of the passages arraigned before you, which it will be
presently my duty to explain.

But let the prudence of the argument be what it may, the argument itself is
untenable.

His Majesty undoubtedly was not elected to the throne. No man can be supposed,
in the teeth of fact, to have contended it; but did not the people of England
elect King William, and break the hereditary succession? and does not his
Majesty's title grow out of that election? It is one of the charges against the
defendant, his having denied the parliament which called the Prince of Orange
to the throne to have been a legal convention of the whole people; and is not
the very foundation of that charge, that it was such a legal convention, and
that it was intended to be so? and if it was so, did not the people then confer
the crown upon King William without any regard to hereditary right? Did they
not cut off the Prince of Wales, who stood directly in the line of succession,
and who had incurred no personal forfeiture? Did they not give their deliverer
an estate in the crown totally new and unprecedented in the law or history of
the country? And, lastly, might they not, by the same authority, have given the
royal inheritance to the family of a stranger? Mr. Justice Blackstone, in his
Commentaries, in terms, asserts that they might; and ascribes their choice of
King William, and the subsequent limitations of the crown, not to want of
jurisdiction, but to their true origin, to prudence and discretion in not
disturbing a valuable institution further than public safety and necessity
dictated.

The English government stands then on this public consent, the true root of
all governments. And I agree with Mr. Burke, that, while it is well
administered, it is not in the power of factions or libels to disturb it;
though, when ministers are in fault, they are sure to set down all disturbances
to these causes. This is most justly and eloquently exemplified in the Thoughts
on the Cause of the present Discontents, page 5 and 6.

Ministers contend that no adequate provocation has been given for so spreading
a discontent, our affairs having been conducted throughout with remarkable
temper and consummate wisdom. The wicked industry of some libellers, joined to
the intrigues of a few disappointed politic^ans, have, in their opinion, been
able to produce this unnatural ferment in the nation.

Nothing, indeed, can be more unnatural than the present convulsions of this
country, if the above account be a true one. I confess I shall assent to it
with great reluctance, and only on the compulsion of the clearest and firmest
proofs; because their account resolves itself into this short but discouraging
proposition. 'That we have a very good ministry, but that we are a very bad
people; that we set ourselves to bite the hand that feeds us; and, with a
malignant insanity, oppose the measures, and ungratefully vilify the persons of
those whose sole object is our own peace and prosperity. If a few puny
libellers, acting under a knot of factious politicians, without virtue, parts,
or character (for such they are constantly represented by these gentlemen), are
sufficient to excite this disturbance, very perverse must be the disposition of
that people, amongst whom such a disturbance can be excited by such means.

He says true: never were serious disturbances excited by such means!

But to return to the argument. -- Let us now see how the rights of the people
stand upon authority, and whether this great source of government is not
maintained by persons on whom my friend will find it hard to fasten the
character of libellers.

I shall begin with the most modern author on the subject of government -- a
gentleman, whose work lies spread out before me, as it often does for my
delight and instruction in my leisure hours. I have also, by the favor of a
friend who sits near me in court, the honor of his personal acquaintance. He
is a man, perhaps more than any other, devoted to the real constitution of the
country, as will be found throughout his valuable work; and he is a person,
besides, of great learning, which enabled him to infuse much useful knowledge
into my learned friend who introduced me to him Mr. Law, King's Counsel.
I speak of Mr. Paley, Archdeacon of Carlisle, and of his work, entitled, The
Principles of Political and Moral Philosophy, in which he investigates the
first principles of all governments -- a discussion not thought dangerous till
lately: and I hope we shall soon get rid of this ridiculous panic.

Mr. Paley professes to think of governments what the Christian religion was
thought of by its first teachers: -- 'If it be of God it will stand;' and he
puts the duties of obedience to them upon free will and moral duty. After
dissenting from Mr. Lock as to the origin of governments in compact, he says,

Wherefore, rejecting the intervention of a compact as unfounded in its
principle, and dangerous in the application, we assign for the only ground of
the subjects' obligation, THE WILL OF GOD, AS COLLECTED FROM EXPEDIENCY.

The steps by which the argument proceeds are few and direct -- 'It is the will
of God that the happiness of human life be promoted:' -- this is the first
step, and the foundation, not only of this, but of every moral conclusion.
'Civil society conduces to that end:' -- this is the second proposition. 'Civil
societies cannot be upheld, unless in each, the interest of the whole society
be binding upon every part and member of it:' -- this is the third step, and
conducts us to the conclusion, namely, -- 'That, so long as the interest of the
whole society requires it (that is, so long as the established government
cannot be resisted or changed without public inconveniency) it is the will of
God (which will universally determines our duty) that the established
government be obeyed,' -- and no longer.

But who shall judge of this? We answer, 'Every man for himself.' In
contentions between the sovereign and the subject, the parties acknowledge no
common arbitrator; and it would be absurd to commit the decision to those whose
conduct has provoked the question, and whose own interest, authority, and fate,
are immediately concerned in it. The danger of error and abuse is no objection
to the rule of expediency, because every other rule is liable to the same or
greater; and every rule that can be propounded upon the subject (like all rules
which appeal to, or bind the conscience) must, in the application, depend upon
private judgment. It may be observed, however, that it ought equally to be
accounted the exercise of a man's private judgment, whether he determines by
reasonings and conclusions of his own, or submits to be directed by the advice
of others, provided he be free to choose his guide.

He then proceeds in a manner rather inconsistent with the principles
entertained by my learned friend in his opening to you: --

No usage, law, or authority whatever, is so binding, that it need or ought to
be continued, when it may be changed with advantage to the community. The
family of the prince -- the order of succession -- the prerogative of the crown
-- the form and parts of the legislature -- together with the respective
powers, office, duration, and mutual dependency of the several parts; are all
only so many laws, mutable, like other laws, whenever expediency requires,
either by the ordinary act of the legislature, or, if the occasion deserve it,
BY THE INTERPOSITION OF THE PEOPLE.

No man can say that Mr. Paley intended to diffuse discontent by this
declaration. He must therefore be taken to think with me, that freedom and
affection, and the sense of advantages, are the best and the only supports of
government. On the same principle, he then goes on to say, -- These points are
wont to be approached with a kind of awe; they are represented to the mind as
principles of the constitution, settled by our ancestors, and being settled, to
be no more committed to innovation or debate; as foundations never to be
stirred; as the terms and conditions of the social compact, to which every
citizen of the state has engaged his fidelity, by virtue of a promise which he
cannot now recall. Such reasons have no place in our system.

Such are the sentiments of this excellent author, and there is no part of Mr.
Paine's work, from the one end of it to the other, that advances any other
proposition.

But the Attorney General will say, these are the grave speculative opinions of
a friend to the English Government, whereas Mr. Pain is its professed enemy;
what then? the principle is, that every man, wh^le he obeys the laws, is to
think for himself, and to conduct himself as he thinks. The very ends of
society exact this license, and the policy of the law, in its provisions for
its security, has tacitly sanctioned it. The real fact is, that writings
against a free and well-proportioned Government, need not be guarded against by
laws. They cannot often exist, and never with effect. The just and aweful
principles of society, are rarely brought forward, but when they are insulted
and denied, or abused in practice: Mr. Locke's Essay on Government, we owe to
Sir Robert Filmer, as we owe Mr. Paine's to Mr. Burke; and indeed, between the
arguments of Filmer and Burke, I see no essential difference; since it is not
worth disputing, whether a King exists by Di^ine right, or indissoluble Human
compact, if he exists whether we will or no: If his existence be without our
consent, and to continue without benefit, it matters not a farthing, whether
his title be from God or from Man.

That his title is from man, and from every generation of man, without regard
to the determination of former ones, hear from Mr. Lock, All m^n," say they,
(i. e. Filmer and his adherents,) are born under government, and therefore they
cannot be at liberty to begin a new one. Every one is born a subject to his
father, or his prince, and is therefore under the perpetual tie of subjection
and allegiance. It is plain, mankind never owned nor considered any such
natural subjection that they were born in, to one or to the other, that tied
them, without their own consents, to a subjection to them and their heirs.

It is true, that whatever engagements or promises any one has made for
himself, he is under the obligation of them, but cannot, by any compact
whatsoever, bind his children or posterity: for his son, when a man, being
altogether as free as the father, any act of the father can no more give away
the liberty of the son, than it can of any body else.

So much for Mr. Locke's opinion of the rights of mankind. Let us now examine
his ideas of the supposed danger of trusting them with them.

Perhaps it will be said, that the people being ignorant, and always
discontented, to lay the foundation of government in the unsteady opinion and
uncertain humor of the people, is to expose it to certain ruin: and no
government will be able long to subsist, if the people may set up a new
legislature, whenever they take offense at the old one. To this, I answer quite
the contrary: people are not so easily got out of their old forms, as some are
apt to suggest: they are hardly to be prevailed with to amend the acknowledged
faults in the frame they have been accustomed to; and if there be any original
defects, or adventitious ones introduced by time, or corruption, it is not an
easy thing to be changed, even when all the world sees there is an opportunity
for it. This slowness and aversion in the people to quit their old
constitutions, has in the many revolutions which have been seen in this
kingdom, in this and former ages, still kept us to, or, after some interval of
fruitless attempts, still brought us back again to our old legislative of king,
lords and commons: and whatever provocations have made the crown be taken from
some of our princes heads, they never carried the people so far as to place it
in another line.

Gentlemen, I wish I had strength to go on with all that is material, but I
have read enough, not only to maintain the true principles of government, but
to put to shame the narrow system of distrusting the people.

It may be said, that Mr. Lock went great lengths in his positions, to beat
down the contrary doctrine of divine right, which was then endangering the new
establishment. But that cannot be objected to David Hume, who maintains the
same doctrine; speaking of the Magna Charta in his history, vol. ii. page 88,
he says, It must be confessed, that the former articles of the great charter,
contain such mitigations and explanations of the feodal law, as are reasonable
and equitable; and that the latter involve all the chief outlines of a legal
Government, and provide for the equal distribution of justice and free
enjoyment of property; the great object for which political society was founded
by men, which the people have a perpetual and unalienable right to recall; and
which no time, nor precedent, nor statute, nor positive institution, ought to
deter them from keeping ever uppermost in their thoughts and attention.

These authorities are sufficient to rest on, yet I cannot omit Mr. Burke
himself, who is, if possible, still more distinct on the subject. Speaking not
of the ancient people of England, but of Colonies planted almost within our
memories, he says, If there be one fact in the world perfectly clear, it is
this; That the disposition of the people of America is wholly averse to any
other than a free Government" and this is indication enough to any honest
statesman, how he ought to adapt whatever power he finds in his hands to their
case. If any ask me what a free Government is, I answer, THAT IT IS WHAT THE
PEOPLE THINK SO; AND THAT THEY, AND NOT I, ARE THE NATURAL, LAWFUL, AND
COMPETENT JUDGES OF THIS MATTER. If they practically allow me a greater degree
of authority over them than is consistent with any correct ideas of perfect
freedom, I ought to thank them for so great a trust, and not to endeavor to
prove from thence, that they have reasoned amiss, and that having gone so far,
by analogy, they must here-after have no enjoyment but by my pleasure.

Gentlemen, I am sorry to feel my time considerably consumed before I am
arrived at what I conceive to be the material subject of your consideration.
For all that I have been stating now, is only to show; that there is not that
novelty in the opinions of the defendant, that should lead you to think that he
does not bona f^de entertain them, much less when connected with the history of
his life, which I therefore brought in review before you. -- But still the
great question remains unargued. Had he a right to promulgate these opinions?
Gentlemen, if he entertained them, I shall argue that he had -- And although my
arguments upon the Liberty of the Press, may not today be honored with your,
or the Court's approbation, I shall retire not at all disheartened, consoling
myself with the reflection, that a season may arrive for their reception. --
The most essential freedoms of mankind have been but slowly and gradually
received, and so very late, indeed, do some of them come to maturity, that
notwithstanding the Attorney General tells you that the very question I am now
agitating, is most peculiarly for your consideration, AS A JURY, under our
ANCIENT Constitution, yet I must remind both you and him, that your
jurisdiction to consider and deal with it at all in judgment, is but A YEAR
OLD. -- When, before that late period, I ventured to maintain this very RIGHT
OF A JURY over the question of Libel under the same ancient Constitution. (I do
not mean before my Lord, for the matter was gone to rest in the Courts, at
least long before he came to sit where he does.) But when, before a Noble and
Reverend Magistrate of the most exalted understanding, and of the most
uncorrupted integrity, to give effect to it Earl Mansfield.
, I had occasion to maintain it, he treated me, not with disregard, indeed, for
of that his nature was incapable; but he put me aside with indulgence, as you
do a child while it is lisping its prattle out of season; and if this cause had
been tried then, instead of now, the Defendant must have been instantly
convicted on the proof of the publication, whatever you might have thought of
his case. -- Yet, I have lived to see it resolved, by an almost unanimous vote
of the whole Parliament of England, that I had all along ^een in the right. If
this be not an awful lesson of caut^on concerning opinions, where are such
lessons to be read!

Gentlemen, I have insisted, at great length, upon the origin of Government
being in the consent of the people, and detailed the authorities which you have
heard upon the subject, because I consider it to be not only a support, but,
indeed, the only foundation of the Liberty of the Press. If Mr. Burke be right
in HIS principles of Government, I admit that the Press, in my sense of its
freedom, ought not to be free, nor free in any sense at all; and that all
Addresses to the people upon the subject of Government; and all speculations of
amendment, of what kind or nature soever, are illegal and criminal: -- For, if
the people have, without possible recall, delegated all their authorities, they
have no jurisdiction to act, and therefore none to think, upon such subjects;
and it is a libel to arraign Government or any of its acts, before those that
have no jurisdiction to correct them. But on the other hand, as it is a settled
rule in the Law of England, that the subject may always address a competent
jurisdiction on every matter within it, no legal argument can shake the freedom
of the Press in my sense of it, if I am supported in my doctrines concerning
the great unalienable rights of the people, to change or to reform their
Governments.

Gentlemen, it is because the Liberty of the Press resolves itself into this
great issue, that it has been in every time and country, the last liberty which
subjects have been able to wrest from power. -- Other liberties are held under
Governments, but the liberty of opinion keeps Governments themselves in due
subjection to their duties. This has produced the martyrdom of truth in every
age, and the world has only purged itself from ignorance with the innocent
blood of those who have enlightened it.

Gentlemen, my strength and time are wasted, and I can only make this
melancholy history pass like a shadow before you.

I shall begin with the grand type and example.

The universal God of Nature, -- the Savior of Mankind, -- the Fountain of all
Light, who came to pluck the world from eternal darkness, expired upon a cross
the scoff of infidel scorn; and his blessed Apostles followed him in the train
of Martyrs. When he came in the flesh, he might have come like the Mohammedan
Prophet, as a powerful Sovereign, and propagated that religion with an
unconquerable sword, which even now, after the lapse of ages, is but slowly
moving, under the influence of reason, over the face of the earth: But such a
process would have been inconsistent with his mission, which was to confound
the pride, and to establish the universal rights of men; he came therefore in
that lowly state which is represented in the Gospel, and preached his
consolations to the poor.

When the foundation of this religion was discovered to be invulnerable and
immortal, we find political power taking the church into partnership; thus
began the corruptions both of Religion and Civil Power, and, hand in hand
together, what havoc have they not made in the world; ru^ing by ignorance and
the persecution of truth; but this very persecution only hastened the revival
of letters and liberty, which was t^ destroy the one and to raise up the other.
Nay, you will find, that in the exact proportion that knowledge and learning
have been beat down and fettered, they have destroyed the Governments that
bound them. The Court of Star Chamber, the first restriction on the Press of
England, was erected in 1637. From that moment no man could legally write
without an Imprimatur from the State; but truth and freedom found their way
with greater force through secret channels, and the unhappy Charles, unwarned
by a free press, was brought in eleven years afterward to an ignominious death.

When men can freely communicate their thoughts and their sufferings, real or
imaginary, their passions spend themselves in air, like gunpowder scattered
upon the surface; but pent up by terrors, they work unseen like subter^aneous
fire, burst forth in earthquake, and destroy every thing in their course. Let
reason be opposed to reason, and argument to argument, and every good
Government will be safe.

The Usurper, Cromwell, pursued the same system of restraint in support of his
Government, and the end of it speedily followed.

At the Restoration of Charles the Second, the Star Chamber Ordinance of 1637,
was worked up into an Act of Parliament, and was ^ollowed up during that reign,
and the short one that followed it, by the most sanguinary prosecutions; but
what fact in history is more notorious, than that this blind and contemptible
policy prepared and hastened on the Revolution. At that great era these
cobwebs ^ere all brushed away: The freedom of the Press was regenerated, and
the Country, ru^ed by its affections, has since enjoyed a century of
tranquillity and glory. -- Thus I have maintained, by English History, that in
proportion as the Press has been free, English Government has been secure.

Gentlemen, I will now support the same important truth by very great
authorities. Upon a subject of this kind resort cannot be had to Law Cases. The
ancient Law of England knew nothing of such Libels; they began, and should have
ended, with the Star Chamber. What writings are slanderous of individuals, must
be looked for where these prosecutions are recorded; but upon general subjects
we must go to general writers. If, indeed, I were to refer to obscure authors,
I might be answered, that my very authorities were Libels, instead of
justifications or examples; but this cannot be said with effect of great men,
whose works are classics in our language, taught in our schools, and printed
under the eye of Government.

Gentlemen, I shall begin with the Poet Milton, a great authority in all
learning. -- It may be said, indeed, he was a Republican, but that would only
prove that Republicanism is not incompatible with virtue; it may be said too,
that the work which I cite was written against previous Licensing, which is not
contended for today. But, in my opinion, if every work is to be adjudged a
libel, which is adverse to the wishes of Government, or to the opinions of
those who may try it, the revival of a Licencer would be a security to the
public: For, if I present my book to a Magistrate appointed by law, if he
rejects it, I have only to forbear from the publication, and in the forbearance
I am safe; and he too is answerable to Law for the abuse of his authority. But,
upon the argument of today, a man must print at his peril, without any guide
to the principles of judgment, upon which his work may be afterward posecuted
and condemned. Milton's argument therefore applies, and was meant to apply, to
every interruption to writing, which, while they oppress the individual,
endanger the State.

We have them not, says Milton, that can be heard of, from any ancient state,
or polity, or church, nor by any statute left us by our ancestors, elder or
later, nor from the modern custom of any reformed city, or church abroad; but
from the most antichristian council, and the most tyrannous inquisition that
ever existed. Till then, books were ever as freely admitted into the world as
any other birth; the issue of the brain was no more sti^^ed than the issue of
the womb.

To the pure all things are pure; not only meats and drinks, but all kind of
knowledge whether good or evil; the knowledge cannot defile, nor consequently
the books, if the will and conscience be not defiled.

Bad books serve in many respects to discover, to confute, to forewarn and to
illustrate. Whereof, what better witness can we expect I should produce, than
one of your own, now sitting in parliament, the chief of learned men reputed in
this land, Mr. Seldom; whose volume of natural and national laws, proves, not
only by great authorities brought together, but by exquisite reasons and
theorems almost mathematica^ly demonstrative, that all opinions, yea errors,
known, read and collated, are of main service and assistance toward the speedy
attainment of what is truest.

Opinions and understanding are not such wares as to be monopolized and traded
in by tickets and statutes, and standards. We must not think to make a staple
commodity of all the knowledge in the land, to mark and license it like our
broad cloth and our woolpacks.

Nor is it to the common people less than a reproach; for if we be so jealous
over them that we cannot trust them with an English pamphlet, what do we but
censure them, for a giddy, vicious, and ungrounded people; in such a sick and
weak estate of faith and discretion, as to be able to take nothing down but
through the pipe of a Licenser. That this is care or love of them we cannot
pretend.

Those corruptions which it seeks to prevent, break in faster at doors which
cannot be shut.

To prevent men thinking and acting for themselves, by restraints on the press,
is like to the exploits of that gallant man, who, thought to pound up the crows
by shutting his park gate.

This obstructing violence meets for the most part with an event, utterly
opposite to the end which it drives at: instead of suppressing books, it raises
them and invests them with a reputation: the punishment of wits enhances their
authority, says the Viscount St. Albans'; and a forbidden writing is thought
to be a certain spark of truth, that flies up in the face of them who seek to
tread it out.

He then adverts to his visit to the famous Galileo, whom he found and visited
in the inquisition, for not thinking in Astronomy with the Franciscan and
Dominican Monks. And what event ought more deeply to interest and affect us.
The very laws of Nature were to bend under the rod of a Licenser; this
illustrious Astronomer ended his life within the bars of a prison, because, in
seeing the phases of Venus through his newly-invented telescope, he pronounced,
that she shone with borrowed light, and from the Sun as the center of the
universe. This was the mighty crime, the placing the Sun in the center: that
Sun which now inhabits it upon the foundation of mathematical truth, which
enables us to traverse the pathless ocean, and to carry our line and rule
amongst other worlds, which but for Galileo we had never known, perhaps even to
the recesses of an Infinite and Immortal God.

Milton then, in his most eloquent address to the parliament, puts the liberty
of the press on its true and most honorable foundation. Believe it, Lords and
Commons, they who counsel ye to such a suppressing of books, do as good as bid
you suppress yourselves; and I will soon show how.

If it be desired to know the immediate cause of all this free writing and free
speaking, there cannot be assigned a truer than your own mild, and free, and
humane Government; it is the liberty, Lords and Commons, which your own
valorous and happy counsels have purchased us; liberty which is the nurse of
all great wits: this is that which has rarefied and enlightened our spirits
like the influence of heaven; this is that which has enfranchised, enlarged
and lifted up our apprehensions, degrees above themselves. Ye cannot make us
now less capable, less knowing, less eagerly pursuing the truth, unless ye
first make yourselves, that made us so, less the lovers, less the founders of
our true liberty. We can grow ignorant again, brutish formal and slavish, as ye
found us; but you then must first become that which ye cannot be, oppressive,
arbitrary and tyrannous, as they were from whom ye have freed us. That our
hearts are now more capacious, our thoughts now more erected to the search and
expectation of greatest and exactest things, is the issue of your own virtue
propagated in us. Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely
according to conscience, above all liberties.

Gentlemen, I will now refer you to another Author, whose opinion you may think
more in point, as having lived in our own times, and as holding the highest
monarchical principles of Government. I speak of Mr. Hume, who, nevertheless,
considers, that this Liberty of the Press extends not only to abstract
speculation, but to keep the public on their guard against all the acts of
their Government.

After showing the advantages of a Monarchy to public freedom, provided it is
duly controlled and watched by the popular part of the Constitution, he says,
These principles account for the great liberty of the press in these kingdoms,
beyond what is indulged in any other Government. It is apprehended, that
arbitrary power would steal in upon us, were we not careful to prevent its
progress, and were there not an easy method of conveying the alarm from one end
of the kingdom to the other. The spirit of the people m^st frequently be
roused, in order to curb the ambition of the Court; and the dread of rousing
this spirit must be employed to prevent that ambition. Nothing is so effectual
to this purpose as the liberty of the press, by which all the learning, wit,
and genius of the nation, may be employed on the side of freedom; and every one
be animated to its defense. As long, therefore, as the republican part of our
Government can maintain itself against the monarchical, it will naturally be
careful to keep the press open, as of importance to its own preservation.

There is another authority co-temporary with the last, a splendid Speaker in
the upper House of Parliament, and who held during most of his time high
offices under the King; I speak of the Earl of Chesterfield, who thus expressed
himself in the House of Lords: -- One of the greatest blessings, my Lords, we
enjoy, is Liberty; but every good in this life has its alloy of evil --
Licentiousness is the alloy of Liberty, it is --.


Lord Kenyon. Doctor Johnson claims to pluck that feather from Lord
Chesterfield's wing; he speaks, I believe, of the eye of the political body.


Mr. Erskine. Gentlemen, I have heard it said, that Lord Chesterfield borrowed
that which I was just about to state, and which his Lordship has anticipated.


Lord Kenyon. That very speech which did Lord Chesterfield so much honor, is
supposed to have been written by Doctor Johnson.


Mr. Erskine. Gentlemen, I believe it was so, and I am much obliged to his
Lordship for giving me a far higher authority for my doctrine. For though Lord
Chesterfield was a man of great ingenuity and wit, he was undoubtedly far
inferior in learning and in monarchical opinion, to the celebrated writer to
whom my Lord has now delivered the work by his authority. Doctor Johnson then
says, One of the greatest blessings we enjoy, one of the greatest blessings a
people, my Lords, can enjoy, is Liberty; but every good in this life has its
alloy of evil: licentiousness is the alloy of liberty: it is an ebullition, an
excrescence; it is a speck upon the eye of the political body, which I can
never touch but with a gentle, with a trembling hand, lest I destroy the body,
lest I injure the eye upon which it is apt to appear.

There is such a connection between licentiousness and liberty, that it is not
easy to correct the one, without dangerously wounding the other; it is
extremely hard to distinguish the true limit between them: like a changeable
silk, we can easily see there are two different colors, but we cannot easily
discover where the one ends, or where the other begins.

I confess, I cannot help agreeing with this learned author. The danger of
touching the press is the difficulty of marking its limits. My learned friend,
who has just gone out of Court, has drawn no line, and unfolded no principle.
He has not told us, if this book is condemned, what book may be written. If I
may not write against the existence of a monarchy, and recommend a republic,
may I write against any part of tie Government? May I say that we should be
better without a House of Lords, or a House of Commons, or a Court of Chancery,
or any other given part of our establishment? Or if, as has been hinted, a work
may become libellous for stating even legal matter with sarcastic phrase, the
difficulty becomes the greater, and the liberty of the press more impossible to
define.

The same author, pursuing the subject and speaking of the fall of Roman
liberty, says, But this fort of liberty came soon after to be called
licentiousness; for we are told that Augustus, after having established his
empire, restored order in Rome by restraining licentiousness. God forbid we
should in this country have order restored, or licentiousness restrained, at so
dear a rate as the people of Rome paid for it to Augustus.

Let us consider, my Lords, that arbitrary power has seldom or never been
introduced into any country at once. It must be introduced by slow degrees, and
as it were step by step, lest the people should see its approach. The barriers
and fences of the people's liberty must be plucked up one by one, and some
plausible pretenses must be sound for removing or hoodwinking, one after
another, those sentries who are posted by the constitution of a free country,
for warning the people of their danger, When these preparatory steps are once
made, the people may then, indeed, with regret, see slavery and arbitrary power
making long strides over their land; but it will be too late to think of
preventing or avoiding the impending ruin.

The stage, my Lords, and the press, are two of our out-sentries; if we remove
them, if we hoodwink them, if we throw them in fetters, the enemy may surprise
us.

Gentlemen, this subject was still more lately put in the justest and most
forcible light by a noble person high in the Magistracy; and whose mind is not
at all tuned to the introduction of disorder by improper popular excesses; I
mean Lord Loughborough, chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas. I believe I
can answer for the correctness of my note, which I shall follow up with the
opinion of another member of the Lord's house of Parliament; the present Earl
Stanhope; or rather, I shall take Lord Stanhope first, as his Lordship
introduces the subject by adverting to this argument of Lord Loughborough's.
"If," says his Lordship, our boasted liberty of the press, were to consist only
in the liberty to write in praise of the Constitution, this is a liberty
enjoyed under many arbitrary governments. I suppose it would not be deemed
quite an unpardonable offense, even by the Empress of Russia, if any man were
to take into his head to write a panegyric upon the Russian form of Government.
Such a liberty as that might therefore properly be termed the Russian liberty
of the Press. But, the English liberty of the Press is of a very different
description: for, by the law of England, it is not prohibited to publish
speculative works upon the Constitution, whether they contain praise or
censure. -- Lord Stanhope's defense of the Libel Bill.

You see therefore, as far as the general principle goes, I am supported by the
opinion of Lord Stanhope, for otherwise the noble Lord has written a libel
himself, by exciting other people to write whatever they may think, be it good
or evil, of the constitution of the country. As to the other high authority,
Lord Loughborough, I will read what applies to this subject -- 'Every man' said
Lord Loughborough, may publish at his discretion his opinions concerning forms
and systems of Government.

If they be wise and enlightening, the world will gain by them; if they be weak
and absurd, they will be laughed at and forgotten; and, if they be bona fide,
they cannot be criminal, however erroneous. On the other hand, the purpose and
the direction may give a different turn to writings whose common construction
is harmless or even meritorious. Suppose men, assembled in disturbance of the
peace, to pull down mills or turnpikes, or to do any other mischief, and that a
mischievous person should disperse among them an excitation to the planned
mischief known to both writer and reader, To your tents, O Israel; that
publication would be criminal. But how criminal? not as a libel, not as an
abstract writing, but as an act; and the act being the crime it must be stated
as a fact extrinsic on the record: for, otherwise, a Court of Error could have
no jurisdiction but over the natural construction of the writing; nor would the
defendant have any notice of such matter at the trial, without a charge on the
Record. To give the Jury cognizance of any matter beyond the construction of
the writing, the averrment should be in the case as I have instanced, that
certain persons were, as I have described, assembled; and that the publisher,
intending to execute these persons so assembled, wrote so and so. Here the
crime is complete, and consists in an overt act of wickedness evidenced by a
writing.

In answer to all these authorities, the Attorney General may say, that, if Mr.
Pain had written his observations with the views of those high persons and
under other circumstances, he would be protected and acquitted: to which I can
only answer, that no facts or circumstances attending his work are either
charged or proved; that you have no jurisdiction whatever but over the natural
construction of the work before you, and that I am therefore brought without a
flaw in the deduction to the passages which are the particular subject of
complaint.

Gentlemen, I am not unmindful how long I have already trespassed upon your
patience; and. recollecting the nature of the human mind, and how much, for a
thousand reasons, I have to struggle against at this moment, I shall not be
disconcerted if any of you should appear anxious to retire from the pain of
hearing me farther. It has been said, that my vanity has forwarded my zeal in
this cause; but I might appeal even to the authors of those paragraphs, whether
a situation ever existed which vanity would have been fonder to fly from -- the
task of speaking against every known prepossession; with every countenance, as
it were, planted and lifted up against me. But I stand at this bar to give to a
criminal arraigned before it, the defense which the law of the country entitles
him to. If any of my arguments be indecent, or unfit for the Court to hear, the
noble Judge presides to interrupt them: If all, or any of them, are capable of
an answer, they will be answered: Or, if they be so unfounded in your own
minds, who are to judge of them as not to call for refutation, your verdict in
a moment will overthrow all that has been said -- We shall then have all
discharged our duties -- It is yours to judge, but m^ne only to address your
judgments.

When my Lord and I were Counsel for Lord George Gordon in 1781, it was not
considered by that Jury, nor imputed to us by any body, that we were contending
for the privileges of over-awing the House of Commons, or recommending the
conflagration of this city: I am doing the same duty now, which my Lord and I
then did in concert together; and, whatever may become of the cause, I expect
to be heard: conscious that no just obloquy can be, or will (in the end) be
cast upon me for having done my duty in the manner I have endeavored to
perform it.

Gentlemen, I come now to observe on the passages selected by the information;
and with regard to the first I shall dispose of it in a moment.

All Hereditary government is in its nature tyranny. An hereditable crown, or
an hereditable throne, or by what other fanciful name such things may be
called, have no other significant explanation than that mankind are hereditable
property. To inherit a government is to inherit the people, as if they were
flocks and herds.

And is it to be endured, says the Attorney General, that the people of this
country are to be told that they are driven like oxen or sheep? Certainly not I
am of opinion that a more dangerous doctrine cannot be instilled into the
people of England. But who instills such a doctrine? I deny it is instilled by
Pain. For when he maintains that hereditary monarchy inherits a people like
flocks and herds, it is clear from the context (which is ke^t out of view,)
that he is combating the proposition in Mr. Burke's book, which asserts, that
the hereditary monarchy of England is fastened upon the people of England by
indissoluble compact. Mr. Pain, on the contrary, asserts the King of England
to be the magistrate of the people, existing by their consent, which is utterly
incompatible with their being driven like herds. His argument, therefore, is
this, and it retorts on his adversary: he says, such a King as you represent
the King of England to be, inheriting the people by virtue of conquest, or of
some compact, which, having once existed, cannot be dissolved while the
original terms of it are kept, is an inheritance like flocks and herds. But I
deny that to be the King of England's title, he is the magistrate of the
people, and that title I respect. It is to your own imaginary King of England
therefore, and not to his Majesty, that your unfounded innuendos apply. It is
the Monarchs of Russia and Prussia, and all Governments fastened upon unwilling
subjects by hereditary indefeasible titles, that are stigmatized by Pain as
inheriting the people like flocks. The sentence, therefore, must either be
taken in the pure abstract, and then it is not only merely speculative, but the
application of it to our own Government fails altogether, or it must be taken
connected with the matter which constitutes the application, and then it is Mr.
Burke's King of England, and not his Majesty whose title is denied.

I pass therefore to the next passage, which appears to be an extraordinary
selection. It is taken at a leap from page 21 to page 47, and breaks in at the
words, "This convention." The sentence selected stands thus, This convention
met at Philadelphia in May 1787, of which General Washington was elected
president. He was not at that time connected with any of the state governments,
or with Congress. He delivered up his commission when the war ended, and since
then had lived a private citizen.

The Convention went deeply into all the subjects; and having after a variety
of debate and investigation, agreed among themselves upon the several parts of
a federal Constitution, the next question was, the manner of giving it
authority and practice.

For this purpose, they did not, like a cabal of courtiers, send for a Dutch
Stadtholder, or a German Elector; but they referred the whole matter to the
sense and interest of the country.

This sentence, standing thus by itself, may appear to be a mere sarcasm on
King William, upon those who effected the Revolution; and upon the Revolution
itself, without any reasoning or deduction: But when the context and sequel are
looked at and compared, it will appear to be a serious Historical comparison
between the Revolution effected in England in 1688, and the late one in America
when she established her independence; and no man can doubt that his judgment
on that comparison was sincere. But where is the Libel on the Constitution? For
whether King William was brought over here by the sincerest and justest motives
of the whole people of England, each man acting for himself, or through the
motives and agencies imputed by the defendant, it signifies not one farthing at
this time of day to the establishment itself. Blackstone warns us not to fix
our obedience or affection to the Government on the motives of our ancestors,
or the rectitude of their reasonings, but to be satisfied that it is
established. This is safe reasoning, and, for my own part, I should not be
differently affected to the Constitution of my country, which my own
understanding approved, whether angels or demons had given it birth.

Do any of you love the reformation the less because Henry the eighth was the
author of it? Or because lust and poverty, and not religion, were his motives.
He had squandered the treasures of his father, and he preferred Anne Bullen to
his Queen; these were the causes which produced it. -- What then! does that
affect the purity of our reformed religion, undermine its establishment, or
shake the King's title as Prince of the country, to the exclusion of those who
held by the religion it had abolished? Will the Attorney General affirm, that I
could be convicted of a libel for a whole volume of asperity against Henry the
Eighth, merely because he effected the reformation; and if not, why against
King William, who effected the Revolution? Where is the line to be drawn? Is
one, two, or three centuries to be the statute of limitation? But do not our
own historians detail this very cabal of courtiers, from the records of our own
country? If you will turn to Hume's history, volume the eighth, page 188, etc.
etc. you will find that he states at great length, the whole detail of
intrigues which paved the way for the Revolution, and the interested coalition
of parties which gave it effect.

But what of all this, concerning the motives of parties, which is recorded by
Hume. The question is, What is the thing brought about, -- Not HOW it was
brought about. If it stands as Blackstone argues it, upon the consent of our
ancestors, followed up by our own, no individual can withdraw his obedience. If
he dislikes the establishment, let him seek elsewhere for another; I am not
contending for uncontrouled conduct, but for freedom of opinion.

With regard to what has been stated of the Edwards and Henrys, and the other
princes under which the author can only discover "restrictions on power, but
nothing of a constitution:" surely my friend is not in earnest when he selects
that as a libel.

Pain insists, that there was no constitution under these princes, and that
English liberty was obtained from usurped power by the struggles of the people.
So SAY I. And I think it for the honor and advantage of the country that it
should be known.

Was there any freedom after the original establishment of the Normans by
conquest? Was not the MAGNA CHARTA wrested from John by open force of arms at
Runnymead? Was it not again re-enacted whilst menacing arms were in the hands
of the people? Were not it is stipulations broken through, and two and forty
times re-enacted by Parliament, upon the firm demand of the people in the
following reigns? I protest it fills me with astonishment to hear these truths
brought in question.

I was formerly called upon under the discipline of a College to maintain them,
and was rewarded for being thought to have successfully maintained that our
present Constitution was by no means a remnant of Saxon liberty, nor any other
institution of liberty, but the pure consequence of the oppression of the
Norman tenures, which spreading the spirit of freedom from one end of the
kingdom to another, enabled our brave fathers, inch by inch, not to reconquer,
but for the first time to obtain those privileges which are the unalienable
inheritance of all mankind.

But why do we speak of the Edwards and Henry's, when Hume himself expressly
says, notwithstanding all we have heard today of the antiquity of our
constitution, that our monarchy was nearly absolute till the middle of last
century. I have his book in Court, and will read it to you. It is his Essay on
the Liberty of the Press, vol. I, page 15.

All absolute Governments, and such in a great measure was England, till the
middle of the last century, notwithstanding the numerous panegyries on ANCIENT
English Liberty, must very much depend on the administration.

This is Hume's opinion; the conclusion of a grave historian from all that he
finds recorded as the materials for history: and shall it be said that Mr.
Pain is to be punished for writing today what was before written by another,
who is now a distinguished classic in the language? All the verdicts in the
world will not make that palateable to an impartial public, or to posterity.

The next passage arraigned is this: p. 56. The attention of the government of
England, (for I rather choose to call it by this name, than the English
government) appears, since it is political connection with Germany, to have been
so completely engrossed and absorbed by foreign affairs, and the means of
raising taxes, that it seems to exist for no other purposes. Domestic concerns
are neglected; and with respect to regular law, there is scarcely such a thing.

That the government of this country is, in consequence of it is connection with
the Continent, and the continental wars which it has occasioned, been
continually loaded with grievous taxes, no man can dispute; and I appeal to
your justice, whether this subject has not been, for years together, the
constant topic of unreproved declamation and grumbling?

As to what he says with regard to there hardly being such a thing as regular
law, he speaks in the abstract of the complexity of our system; but does not
arraign the administration of justice in it is practice. But with regard to
criticisms and strictures on the general system, it has been echoed over and
over again by various authors; and even from the pulpits of our country, that
the law of the land is mainly defective, devoid of regularity and precision,
and overloaded with a variety of expensive and unnecessary forms. I have a
Sermon in Court written during the American war, by a person of great eloquence
and piety, part of which I will read to you on this subject, in which he looks
forward to an exemption from the intolerable grievances of our old legal system
in the infant establishment of the New World.

It may be in the purposes of providence, on yon western s^ores, to raise the
bulwark of a purer reformation than ever Britain patronized; to sound a less
burdensome, more auspicious, stable, and incorruptible government than ever
Britain has enjoyed; and to establish there a system of law more just and
simple in it is principles, less intricate, dubious and dilatory in it is
proceedings, more mild and equitable in it is sanctions, more easy and more
certain in it is execution; wherein no man can err through ignorance of what
concerns him, or want justice through poverty or weakness, or escape it by
legal artifice, or civil privileges, or interposing power; wherein the rule of
conduct shall not be hidden or disguised in the language of principles and
customs that died with the barbarism which gave them birth; wherein hasty
formulas shall not dissipate the reverence that is due to the tribunals and
transactions of justice; wherein obsolete prescripts shall not pervert, nor
entangle, nor impede the administration of it, nor in any instance expose it to
derision or to disregard; wherein misrepresentation shall have no share in
deciding upon right and truth; and under which no man shall grow great by the
wages of chicanery, or thrive by the quarrels that are ruinous to his
employers.

This is ten times stronger than Mr. Pain; but who ever thought of prosecuting
Mr. Cappe?

In various other instances you will find defects in our jurisprudence pointed
out and lamented, and not seldom by persons called upon by their situations to
deliver the law in the seat of magistracy: therefore, the author's general
observation does not appear to be that species of attack upon the magistracy of
the country, as to fall within the description of a libel.

With respect to the two Houses of Parliament, I believe I shall be able to
show you that the very person who introduced this controversy, and who
certainly is considered by those who now administer the government, as a man
usefully devoted to maintain the constitution of the country in the present
crisis, has himself made remarks upon these Assemblies; that upon comparison
you will think more severe than those which are the subject of the Attorney
General's animadversion. The passage in Mr. Pain runs thus:

With respect to the two houses, of which the English Parliament is composed,
they appear to be effectually influenced into one, and, as a legislature, to
have no temper of it is own. The minister, whoever he at any time may be,
touches it as with an opium wand, and it sleeps obedience.

But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two houses, the difference
will appear so great, as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there
can be no certainty of the judgment to use it. Wretched as the state of
representation is in England, it is manhood compared with what is called the
house of Lords; and so little is this nicknamed house regarded, that the
people scarcely inquire at any time what it is doing. It appears also to be
most under influence, and the furthest removed from the general interest of the
nation.

The conclusion of the sentence, and which was meant by Pain as evidence of
the previous affection, the Attorney General has omitted in the information,
and in his speech, it is this: In the debate on engaging in the Russian and
Turkish war, the majority in the House of Peers in favor of it was upwards of
ninety, when in the other house, which is more than double it is numbers, the
majority was sixty-three.

The terms, however, in which Mr. Burke speaks of the House of Lords, are still
more expressive. It is something more than a century ago, since we voted the
House of Lords useless. They have now voted themselves so, and the whole hope
of reformation ( speaking of the House of Commons is cast upon us. This
sentiment, Mr. Burke not only expressed in his place in parliament, where no
man can call him to an account; but it has been since, repeatedly printed
amongst his other valuable works. And his opinion of BOTH THE HOUSES OF
PARLIAMENT, which I am about to read to you, was originally published as a
pamphlet, and applied to the settled habitual abuses of these high assemblies.
Remember, I do not use them as argumenta ad hominem, or ad invidiam against the
author, for if I did, it could be no defense of Mr. Pain. But I use them as
high authority, the work Mr. Burke's Thoughts on the cause of the present
discontents, published in 1775.
having been the just foundation of substantial and lasting reputation. Would
to God that any part of it were capable of being denied or doubted.

Against the being of parliament I am satisfied no designs have ever been
entertained since the Revolution. Every one must perceive that it is strongly
the interest of the Court to have some second cause interposed between the
ministers and the people. The gentlemen of the House of Commons have an
interest equally strong, in sustaining the part of that intermediate cause.
However they may hire out the us^f^^ct of their voices, they never will part
with the sea and inheritance. Accordingly those who have been of the most known
devotion to the will and pleasure of a court, have at the same time been most
forward in asserting an high authority in the House of Commons. When they knew
who were to use that authority, and how it was to be employed, they thought it
never could be carried too far. It must be always the wish of an
unconstitutional statesman, that an House of Commons, who are entirely
dependent upon him, should have every right of the people dependent upon their
pleasure. FOR IT WAS DISCOVERED THAT THE FORMS OF A FREE, AND THE ENDS OF AN
ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT, WERE THINGS NOT ALTOGETHER INCOMPATIBLE.

The power of the crown almost dead and rotten as Prerogative, has grown up
anew, with much more strength and far less odium, under the name of influence.
An influence which operates without noise and violence; which converts the very
antagonist into the instrument of power: which contains in itself a perpetual
principle of growth and renovation: and which the distress; and the prosperity
of the country equally tend to augment, was an admirable substitute for a
Prerogative, that being only the offspring of antiquated prejudices, had
molded in its original stamina irresi^^ible principles of decay and
dissolution. The ignorance of the people is a bottom but for a temporary
system; but the interest of active men in the state is a foundation perpetual
and infallible.

Mr. Burke therefore, in page 66, speaking of the same court party, says:

Parliament was indeed the great object of all these polities, the end at which
they aimed, as well as the INSTRUMENT by which they were to operate.

And pursuing the subject in page 70, proceeds as follows:

They who will not conform their conduct to the public good, and cannot support
it by the prerogative of the crown, have adopted a new plan. They have totally
abandoned the shattered and old-fashioned fortress of prerogative, and made a
lodgement in the strong hold of parliament itself. If they have any evil design
to which there is no ordinary legal power commensurate, they bring it into
parliament. There the whole is executed from the beginning to the end. And the
power of obtaining their object absolute: and the safety in the proceeding
perfect; no rules to confine, nor after reckonings to terrify. For parliament
cannot with any great propriety punish others for things in which they
themselves have been ACCOMPLICES. Thus its control upon the executory power is
lost; because it is made to partake in every considerable act of government,
and impeachment, that great guardian of the purity of the Constitution, is in
danger of being lost even to the idea of it.

Until this time, the opinion of the people, through the power of an Assembly,
still in some sort popular, led to the greatest honors and emoluments in the
gift of the crown. Now the principle is reversed; and the favor of the court
is the only sure way of obtaining and holding those honors which ought to be
IN THE DISPOSAL OF THE PEOPLE.

Mr. Burke, in page 100, observes with great truth, that the mischiefs he
complained of, did not at all arise from the Monarchy, but from the parliament,
and that it was the duty of the people to look to it. He says, The distempers
of monarchy were the great subjects of apprehension and redress, in the last
century; in this, the distempers of parliament.

Not the distempers of parliament in this year or the last, but in this
century, i. e. its settled habitual distemper. It is not in parliament alone
that the remedy for parliamentary disorders can be completed; and hardly
indeed can it begin there. Until a confidence in government is re-established,
the people ought to be excited to a more strict and detailed attention to the
conduct of their representatives. Standards for judging more systematically
upon their conduct ought to be settled in the meetings of counties and
corporations, and frequent and correct lists of the voters in all important
questions ought to be procured.

By such means something may be done, since it may appear who those are, that
by an indiscriminate support of all administrations, have totally ba^i^^ed all
integrity and confidence out of public proceedings; have confounded the best
men with the worst; and weakened and dissolved, instead of strengthening and
compacting the general frame of government.

I wish it was possible to read the whole of this most important volume -- but
the consequences of these truths contained in it were all eloquently summed up
by the author in his speech upon the reform of the household.

But what I confess was uppermost with me, what I bent the whole course of my
mind to, was the reduction of that corrupt influence which is itself the
perennial spring of all prodigality and disorder: which loads us more than
millions of debt; which takes away vigor from our arms, wisdom from our
councils, and every shadow of authority and credit from the most venerable
parts of our constitution.

The same important truths were held out to the whole public, upon a still
later occasion, by the person now at the head of his Majesty's councils: and so
high (as it appears) in the confidence of the nation. He. not in the abstract
like the author before you, but upon the spur of the occasion, and in the teeth
of what had been just declared in the House of Commons, came to, and acted upon
resolutions which are contained in this book. Mr. Erskine took up a book.
Resolutions pointed to the purification of a parliament, dangerously corrupted
into the very state described by Mr. Pain. Remember here too, that I impute no
censure to Mr. Pit. It was the most brilliant passage in his life, and I
should have thought his life a better one, if he had continued uniform in the
support of opinions, which it is said he has not changed, and which certainly
have had nothing to change them. But at all events, I have a right to make use
of the authority of his splendid talents and situation, not merely to protect
the defendant, but the public, and to resist the precedent, That what one man
may do in England with approbation and glory, shall conduct another man to a
pillory or a prison.

It was the abuses pointed out by the man before you, that led that Right Hon.
Gentleman to associate with many others of high rank, under the banners of the
Duke of Richmond, whose name stands at the head of the list, and to pass
various public resolutions, concerning the absolute necessity of purifying the
House of Commons; and we collect the plan from a preamble entered in the book.
Whereas the life, liberty and property of every man is or may be affected by
the law of the land in which he lives, and every man is bound to pay obedience
to the same.

And whereas, by the constitution of this kingdom the right of making laws is
vested in three estates, of King, Lords, and Commons, in parliament assembled,
and the consent of all the three said estates, comprehending the whole
community, is necessary to make laws to bind the whole community. And whereas
the House of Commons represents all the Commons of the realm, and the consent
of the House of Commons binds the consent of all the Commons of the realm, and
in all cases on which the legislature is competent to decide.

And whereas no man is, or can be actually represented who has not a vote in
the election of his representative.

And whereas it is the right of every Commoner of this realm (infants, persons
of insane mind, and criminals incapacitated by law, only excepted) to have a
vote in the election of the representative who is to give his consent to the
making of laws by which he is to be bound.

And whereas the number of persons who are suffered to vote for electing the
members of the House of Commons, do not at this time amount to one-sixth part
of the whole Commons of this realm, whereby far the greater part of the said
Commons are deprived of their right to elect their representatives; and the
consent of the majority of the whole community to the passing of laws, is given
by persons whom they have not delegated for such purposes; and the majority of
the said community, and to which the said majority have not in fact consented
by themselves or by their representatives.

And whereas the state of election of members of the House of Commons, has in
process of time so grossly deviated from its simple and natural principle of
representation and equality, that in several places, the members are returned
by the property of one man; that the smallest boroughs send as many members as
the largest counties, and that a majority of the representatives of the whole
nation are chosen by a number of votes not exceeding twelve thousand.

These with many others, were published, not as abstract, speculative writings,
but within a few days after the House of Commons had declared that no such
rights existed, and that no alteration was necessary in the representation. It
was then that they met at the Thatched House, and published their opinions and
resolutions to the country at large. -- Were any of them prosecuted for these
proceedings? Certainly not, (for they were legal proceedings.) But I desire you
as men of honor and truth, to compare all this with Mr. Paine's expression of
the Minister's touching Parliament with his opiate wand, and let equal justice
be done -- that is all I ask -- let all be punished or none -- do not let Mr.
Pain be held out to the contempt of the public upon the score of his
observations on parliament, while others are enjoying all the sweets which
attend a supposed attachment to their country, who have said the same things,
and reduced their opinions to practice.

But now every man is to be cried down for such opinions. I observed that my
learned friend significantly raised his voice in naming Mr. Horn Took, as if
to connect him with Pain, or Pain with him. This is exactly the same course
of justice; for after all he said nothing of Mr. Took. What could he have
said, but that he was a subscriber with the great names. I have read in these
proceedings which they have thought fit to desert.

Gentlemen, let others hold their opinions, and change them at their pleasure;
I shall ever maintain it to be the dearest privilege of the people of Great
Britain to watch over every thing that affects their good government, either in
the system, or in the practice: and that for this purpose the press must be
free. It has always been so, and much evil has been corrected by it. -- If
government finds itself annoyed by it, let it examine it is own conduct, and it
will find the cause, -- let it amend it, and it will find the remedy.

Gentlemen, I am no friend to sarcasms in the discussion of grave subjects, but
you must take writers according to the view of the mind at the moment; Mr.
Burke as often as any body indulges in it: -- hear his reason in his speech on
reform, for not taking away the salaries from Lords who attend upon the British
Court. "You would," said he, have the court deserted by all the nobility of the
kingdom.

Sir, the most serious mischiefs would follow from such a desertion. Kings are
naturally lovers of low company; they are so elevated above all the rest of
mankind, that they must look upon all their subjects as on a level: they are
rather apt to hate than to love their nobility, on account of the occasional
resistance to their will, which will be made by their virtue, their petulance,
or their pride. It must indeed be admitted, that many of the nobility are as
perfectly willing to act the part of flatterers, tale-bearers, parasites,
pimps, and bussoons, as any of the lowest and vilest of mankind can possibly
be. But they are not properly qualified for this object of their ambition. The
want of a regular education, and early habits, with some lurking remains of
their dignity, will never permit them to become a match for an Italian eunuch,
a mountebank, a sidler, a player, or any regular practitioner of that tribe.
The Roman Emperors, almost from the beginning, threw themselves into such
hands; and the mischief increased every day, till it is decline, and it is final
ruin. It is, therefore, of very great importance (provided the thing is not
overdone,) to contrive such an establishment as must, almost whether a prince
will or not, bring into daily and hourly offices about his person, a great
number of his first nobility; and it is rather an useful prejudice that gives
them a pride in such a servitude: though they are not much the better for a
court, a court will be much the better for them. I have therefore, not
attempted to reform any of the offices of honor about the King's person.

What is this but saying that a King is an animal so incurably addicted to low
company, as generally to bring on by it the ruin of nations; but nevertheless,
he is to be kept as a necessary evil, and his propensities bridled by
surrounding him with a parcel of miscreants still worse if possible, but better
than those he would chose for himself. -- This therefore, if taken by itself,
would be a most abominable and libellous sarcasm on Kings and Nobility: but
look at the whole speech, and you observe a great system of regulation; and no
man, I believe, ever doubted Mr. Burke's attachment to monarchy. To judge,
therefore, of any part of a writing, the whole must be read.

With the same view I mean to read to you the beginning of Harrington's Oceana:
but it is impossible to name this well known author without exposing to just
contempt and ridicule the ignorant or profligate misrepresentations which are
vomited forth upon the public, to bear down every man as desperately wicked,
who in any age or country has countenanced a Republic, for the mean purpose of
prejudging this trial.

[Mr. Erskine took up a book, but laid it down again without reading from it,
saying something to the gentleman who sat near him, in a low voice, which I did
not hear.] Is this the way to support the English constitution? Are these the
means by which Englishmen are to be taught to cherish it? I say, if the man
upon trial were stained with blood instead of ink, -- if he were covered over
with crimes which human nature would start at the naming of, the means employed
against him would not be the less disgraceful.

For this notable purpose then, Harrington, not above a week ago, was handed
out to us as a low, obscure wretch, involved in the murder of the Monarch, and
the destruction of the Monarchy, and as addressing his despicable works at the
shrine of an Usurper. Yet this very Harrington, this low blackguard, was
descended (you may see his pedigree at the Herald's Office for sixpence,) from
eight Dukes, three Marquisses, seventy Earls, twenty-seven Viscounts, and
thirty-six Barons, sixteen of whom were Knights of the Garter; a descent which
I think would save a man from disgrace in any of the circles of Germany. But
what was he besides? -- A BLOOD-STAINED RUFFIAN? Oh brutal ignorance of the
history of the Country! He was the most affectionate servant of Charles the
First, from whom he never concealed his opinions: for it is observed by Wood,
that the King greatly affected his company; but when they happened to talk of a
Commonwealth, he would scarcely endure it. -- 'I know not,' says Toland, which
most to commend; the King for trusting an honest man, though a Republican; or
Harrington for owning his principles while he served a King.

But did his opinions affect his conduct? -- Let History again answer. -- He
preserved his fidelity to his unhappy Prince to the very last, after all his
fawning courtiers had left him to his enraged subjects. He staid with him while
a prisoner in the Isle of Wight: came up by stealth to follow the fortunes of
his monarch and master; even hid himself in the boot of the coach when he was
conveyed to Windsor; and ending a^ he began, fell into his arms and fainted on
the scaffold.

After Charles's death, the Oceana was written, and, as if it were written from
justice and affection to his memory: for it breathes the same noble and
spirited regard, and asserts that it was not Charles that brought on the
destruction of the monarchy, but the feeble and ill constituted nature of
monarchy itself.

But the book was a flattery to Cromwell. -- Once more and finally let history
decide.

It was seized by the Usurper as a libel, and the way it was recovered is
remarkable. I mention it to show that Cromwell was a wise man in himself, and
knew on what governments must stand for their support.

Harrington waited on his daughter to beg for his book, and on entering her
apartment, snatched up her child and ran away. -- On her following him with
surprise and terror, he turned to her and said, I know what you feel as a
mother, feel then for me; your father has got my child: meaning the Oceana. The
Oceana was afterward restored on her petition; Cromwell answering with the
sagacity of a sound politician, Let him have his book; if my government is made
to stand, it has nothing to fear from PAPER SHOT. -- He said true. -- No good
government will ever be battered by paper shot. Montesquieu says that In a free
nation, it matters not whether individuals reason well or ill; it is sufficient
that they do reason. Truth arises from the collision, and from hence springs
liberty, which is a security from the effect of reasoning. The Attorney General
read extracts from Mr. Adams's answer to this book. Let others do like Mr.
Adams: I am not insisting upon the infallibility of Mr Paine's doctrines; if
they are erroneous, let them be answered, and truth will spring from the
collision.

A disposition in a nation to this species of controversy, is no proof of
sedition or degeneracy, but quite the reverse, as is mentioned by Milton, [I
omitted to cite the passage with the others] who in speaking of this subject,
rises into that inexpressibly sublime style of writing, wholly peculiar to
himself. He was indeed no plagiary from any thing human: he looked up for light
and expression, as he himself wonderfully describes it, by devout prayer to
that great Being, who is the source of all utterance and knowledge; and who
sends out his seraphim with the hallowed fire of his altars to touch and
purify the lips of whom he pleases. When the cheerfulness of the people, says
this mighty poet, is so sprightly up, as that it has not only wherewith to
guard well it is own freedom and safety, but to spare, and to bestow upon the
solidest and sublimest points of controversy and new invention, it betokens us
not degenerated nor drooping to a fatal decay, but casting off the old and
wrinkled skin of corruption to outlive these pangs, and wax young again,
entering the glorious ways of truth and prosperous virtue, destined to become
great and honorable in these latter ages. Methinks I see, in my mind, a noble
and puissant nation rousing herself, like a strong man after sleep, and shaking
her invincible locks; methinks I see her as an eagle muing her mighty youth,
and kindling her undazzled eyes at the full midday beam; purging and unscaling
her long abused sight at the fountain itself of heavenly radiance; while the
whole noise of timorous and flocking birds, with those also that love the
twilight, flutter about, amazed at what she means, and in their envious gabble
would prognosticate a year of sects and schisms.

Gentlemen, what Milton only saw in his mighty imagination, I see in fact; what
he expected, but which never came to pass, I see now fulfilling: methinks I see
this noble and puissant nation, not degenerated and drooping to a fatal decay,
but casting off the wrinkled skin of corruption to put on again the vigor of
her youth.

And it is, because others, as well as myself see this, that we have all this
uproar: -- France and its constitution are the mere pretenses. It is, because
Britons begin to recollect the inheritance of their own constitution, left them
by their ancestors: It is, because they are awakened to the corruptions which
have fallen upon its most valuable parts, that forsooth the nation is in danger
of being destroyed by a single pamphlet.

Gentlemen, I have marked the course of this alarm: It began with the
renovation of those exertions for the public, which the authors of the alarm
had themselves originated and deserted; and they became louder and louder when
they saw these principles avowed and supported by my admirable and excellent
friend Mr. FOX; the most eminently honest and enlightened statesman, that
history brings us acquainted with: a man whom to name is to honor, but whom in
attempting adequately to describe, I must fly to Mr. Burke, my constant refuge
when eloquence is necessary: a man, who to relieve the sufferings of the most
distant nation, put to the hazard his ease, his security, his interest, his
power, even his darling popularity for the benefit of a people whom he had
never seen. How much more then for the inhabitants of his native country: yet
this is the man who has been censured and disavowed in the manner we have
lately seen.

Gentlemen, I have but a few more words to trouble you with: I take my leave of
you with declaring, that all this freedom which I have been endeavoring to
assert, is no more than the freedom which belongs to our own inbred
constitution: I have not asked you to acquit Mr. Pain upon any new lights, or
upon any principle but the law, which you are sworn to administer: My great
object has been to inculcate, that wisdom and policy, which are the parents of
the law of Great Britain, forbid this jealous eye over her subjects; and that,
on the contrary, they cry aloud in the language of the poet, employed by Lord
Chatham on the memorable subject of America, unfortunately without effect: Be
to their faults a little blind,
Be to their virtues very kind;
Let all their thoughts be unconfined,
And clap your padlock on the mind.


Engage them by their affections, convince their reason, and they will be loyal
from the only principle that can make loyalty sincere, vigorous, or rational, a
conviction that it is their truest interest, and that their form of government
is for their common good. Constraint is the natural parent of resistance, and a
pregnant proof, that reason is not on the side of those who use it. You must
all remember, gentlemen, Lucian's pleasant story; Jupiter and a countryman were
walking together, conversing with great freedom and familiarity upon the
subject of heaven and earth. The countryman listened with attention and
acquiescence, while Jupiter strove only to convince him; but happening to hint
a doubt, Jupiter turned hastily round and threatened him with his thunder. --
"Ah! ha!" says the countryman, now Jupiter, I know that you are wrong; you're
always wrong when you appeal to your thunder.

This is the case with me -- I can reason with the people of England, but I
cannot fight against the thunder of authority.

Gentlemen, this is my defense for free opinions. With regard to myself, I am,
and ever have been, obedient and affectionate to the law: to that rule of
action, as long as I exist, I shall ever give my voice and my conduct; but I
shall ever do as I have done today, maintain the dignity of my high
profession, and perform, as I understand them, all its important duties.


[Mr. Attorney General arose immediately to reply to Mr. Erskine, when Mr.
Campbell (the foreman of the Jury) said, -- My Lord, I am authorized by the
Jury here, to inform the Attorney General, that a reply is not necessary for
them, unless the Attorney General wishes to make it, or your Lordship. -- Mr.
Attorney General sat down, and the Jury gave in their verdict, GUILTY.

ERRATUM.
Page 79, line 20 should read thus -- Is it possible that you or I can believe,
or that reason can make any other man believe.

The passage is printed correct where it occurs again, the bottom of page 94.


