LETTER ADDRESSED TO THE ADDRESSERS, ON THE LATE PROCLAMATION.

BY THOMAS PAIN, SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO CONGRESS IN THE AMERICAN
WAR, AND AUTHOR OF THE WORKS ENTITLED "COMMON SENSE," "RIGHTS OF MAN, TWO
PARTS," etc.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR H. D. SYMONDS, IN PATERNOSTER-ROW, AND THOMAS CLIO
RICKMAN, NO. 7, UPPER MARY-LE-BONE-STREET.

1792.

Entered at Stationers Hall.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.]

LETTER ADDRESSED TO THE ADDRESSERS, ON THE LATE PROCLAMATION.
COULD I have commanded circumstances with a wish, I know not of any that would
have more generally promoted the progress of knowledge, than the late
Proclamation, and the numerous rotten Borough and Corporation Addresses
thereon. They have not only served as advertisements, but they have excited a
spirit of enquiry into principles of government, and a desire to read the
RIGHTS OF MAN, in places, where that spirit and that work were before unknown.

The people of England, wearied and stunned with parties, and alternately
deceived by each, had almost resigned the prerogative of thinking. Even
curiosity had expired, and a universal langour had spread itself over the land.
The opposition was visibly no other that a contest for power, whilst the mass
of the nation stood torpidly by as the prize.

In this hopeless state of things, the First Part of RIGHT OF MAN made its
appearance. It had to combat with a strange mixture of prejudice and
indifference; it stood exposed to every species of newspaper abuse; and besides
this, it had to remove the obstructions which Mr. Burke's rude and outrageous
attack on the French Revolution had artfully raised.

But how easily does even the most illiterate reader distinguish the
spontaneous sensations of the heart, from the labored productions of the
brain. Truth, whenever it can fully appear, is a thing so naturally familiar to
the mind, that an acquaintance commences at first sight. No artificial light,
yet discovered, can display all the properties of daylight; so neither can the
best invented fiction fill the mind with every conviction which truth begets.

To overthrow Mr. Burke's fallacious work was scarcely the operation of a day.
Even the phalanx of Placemen and Pensioners, who had given the tone to the
multitude, by clamouring forth his political fame, became suddenly silent; and
the final event to himself has been, that as he rose like a rocket, he fell
like the stick.

It seldom happens, that the mind rests satisfied with the simple detection of
error or imposition. -- Once put into motion, that motion soon becomes
accelerated: where it had intended to stop, it discovers new reasons to
proceed, and renews and continues the pursuit far beyond the limits it first
prescribed to itself. -- Thus it has happened to the people of England. From a
detection of Mr. Burke's incoherent rhapsodies, and distorted facts, they began
an enquiry into first principles of Government, whilst himself, like an object
left far behind, became invisible and forgotten.

Much as the First Part of RIGHTS OF MAN impressed at its first appearance, the
progressive mind soon discovered that it did not go far enough. It detected
errors; it exposed absurdities; it shook the fabric of political superstition;
it generated new ideas; but it did not produce a regular system of principles
in the room of those which it displaced. And, if I may guess at the mind of the
Government-party, they beheld it as an unexpected gale that would soon blow
over, and they forbore, like sailors in threatening weather, to whistle, lest
they should increase the wind. Every thing, on their part, was profound silence.

When the Second Part of RIGHTS OF MAN, combining Principle and Practice, was
preparing to appear, they affected, for a while, to act with the same policy as
before; but finding their silence had no more influence in stilling the
progress of the work, than it would have in stopping the progress of time, they
changed their plan, and affected to treat it with clamorous contempt. The
Speech-making Placemen and Pensioners, and Place-expectants, in both Houses of
Parliament, the Outs as well as the Ins, represented it as a silly,
insignificant performance; as a work incapable of producing any effect; as
something, which they were sure the good sense of the people would either
despise or indignantly spurn; but such was the overstrained awkwardness with
which they harangued and encouraged each other, that in the very act of
declaring their confidence they betrayed their fears.

As most of the rotten Borough Addressers are obscured in holes and corners
throughout the country, and to whom a newspaper arrives as rarely as an
almanac, they most probably have not had the opportunity of knowing how this
part of the farce (the original prelude to all the Addresses) has been acted.
For their information, I will suspend a while the more serious purpose of my
Letter, and entertain them with two or three Speeches in the last Session of
Parliament, which will serve them for politics till Parliament meets again.

You must know, Gentlemen, that the Second Part of RIGHTS OF MAN, (the book
against which you have been presenting Addresses, though, it is most probable,
that many of you did not know it) was to have come out precisely at the time
that Parliament last met. It happened not to be published till a few days
after. But as it was very well known that the book would shortly appear, the
parliamentary Orators entered into a very cordial coalition to cry the book
down, and they began their attack by crying up the blessings of the
Constitution.

Had it been your fate to have been there, you could not but have been moved at
the heart-and-pockets-felt congratulations that passed between all the parties
on this subject of blessings; for the Outs enjoy places and pensions and
sinecures as well as the Ins, and are as devoutly attached to the firm of the
house.

One of the most conspicuous of this motley groupe is the Clerk of the Court of
King's Bench, who calls himself Lord Stormont. He is also called Justice
General of Scotland, and Keeper of Scoon (an opposition man) and he draws from
the public for these nominal offices, not less, as I am informed, than six
thousand pounds a year, and he is, most probably, at the trouble of counting
the money, and signing a receipt, to show, perhaps, that he is qualified to be
Clerk as well as Justice. He spoke as follows: See his Speech in the Morning
Chronicle of Feb. 1.


THAT we shall all be unanimous, in expressing our attachment to the
constitution of these realms I am confident. It is a subject upon which there
can be no divided opinion in this house. I do not pretend to be deep read in
the knowledge of the Constitution, but I take upon me to say, that from the
extent of my knowledge (for I have so many thousands a year for nothing) it
appears to me, that from the period of the Revolution, for it was by no means
created then, it has been, both in theory and practice, the wisest system that
ever was formed. I never was (he means he never was till now) a dealer in
political cant. My life has not been occupied in that way, but the speculations
of late years seem to have taken a turn, for which I cannot account. When I
came into public life, the political pamphlets of the time, however they might
be charged with the heat and violence of parties, were agreed in extolling the
radical beauties of the Constitution itself. I remember (he means he has
forgotton) a most captivating eulogium on its charms by Lord Bolingbroke, where
he recommends his readers to contemplate it in all its aspects, with the
assurance that it would be found more estimable the more it was seen. I do not
recollect his precise words, but I wish that men who write upon these subjects
would take this for their model, instead of the political pamphlets, which I am
told, are now in circulation, (such, I suppose, as Rights of Man) -- pamphlets
which I have not read, and whose purport I know only by report, (he means,
perhaps, by the noise they make.) This, however, I am sure, that pamphlets
tending to unsettle the public reverence for the constitution, will have very
little influence. They can do very little harm -- for (by the bye, he is no
dealer in political cant) the English are a sober-thinking people, and are more
intelligent, more solid, more steady in their opinions, than any people I ever
had the fortune to see. (This is pretty well laid on, though, for a new
beginner.) But if there should ever come a time when the propagation of those
doctrines should agitate the public mind, I am sure, for every one of your
Lordships. that no attack will be made on the constitution, from which it is
truly said that we derive all our prosperity, without raising every one of your
Lordships to its support. It will then be found that there is no difference
among us, but that we are all determined to stand or fall together, in defense
of the inestimable system -- of places and pensions.

After Stormont, on the opposition side, sat down, up rose another noble Lord!
on the ministerial side, Grenville. This man ought to be as strong in the back
as a mule, or the sire of a mule, or it would crack with the weight of places
and offices. He rose, however, without feeling any encumbrance, full master of
his weight; and thus said this noble Lord to the other noble Lord!

The patriotic and manly manner in which the noble Lord has declared his
sentiments on the subject of the constitution, demands my cordial approbation.
The noble Viscount has proved, that however we may differ on particular
measures, amidst all the jars and dissonance of parties, we are unanimous in
principle. There is a perfect and entire consent (between us) in the love and
maintenance of the constitution as happily subsisting. It must undoubtedly give
your Lordships concern, to find, that the time is come! (heigh ho!) when there
is propriety in these expressions of regard TO (O! O! O!) THE CONSTITUTION. And
that there are men (confound -- their -- po-li-tics) who disseminate doctrines
hostile to the genuine spirit of our well balanced system, (it is certainly
well balanced when both sides hold places and pensions at once.) I agree with
the noble Viscount that they have not (I hope) much success. I am convinced
that there is no danger to be apprehended from their attempts: but it is truly
important and consolatary (to us place-men, I suppose) to know, that if there
should ever arise a serious alarm, there is but one spirit, one sense, (and
that sense I presume is not common sense) and one determination in this house.
-- which undoubtedly is to hold all their places and pensions as long as they
can.

Both those speeches (excepting the parts enclosed in parentheses, which are
added for the purpose of illustration) are copied verbatim from the Morning
Chronicle of the 1st of February last; and when the situation of the speakers
is considered, the one in the opposition, and the other in the ministry, and
both of them living at the public expense, by sinecure, or nominal places and
offices, it required a very unblushing front to be able to deliver them. Can
those men seriously suppose any nation to be so completely blind as not to see
through them? Can Stormont imagine that the political cant, with which he has
larded his harangue, will conceal the craft? Does he not know that there never
was a cover large enough to hide itself? Or can Grenville believe, that his
credit with the public increases with his avarice for places?

But, if these orators will accept a service from me, in return for the
allusions they have made to the Rights of Man, I will make a speech for either
of them to deliver on the excellence of the constitution, that shall be as much
to the purpose as what they have spoken, or as Bolingbroke's captivating
encomium. Here it is.

THAT we shall all be unanimous in expressing our attachment to the
constitution, I am confident. It is, my Lords, incomprehensibly good: but the
great wonder of all is the wisdom; for it is, my Lords, the wisest system that
ever was formed.

With respect to us noble Lords, though the world does not know it, it is very
well known to us, that we have more wisdom than we know what to do with; and
what is still better, my Lords, we have it all in stock. I defy your Lordships
to prove, that a tittle of it has been used yet; and if we do but go on, my
Lords, with the frugality we have hitherto done, we shall leave to our heirs
and successors, when we go out of the world, the whole stock of wisdom,
untouched, that we brought in; and there is no doubt but they will follow our
example. This, my Lords, is one of the blessed effects of the hereditary
system; for we can never be without wisdom so long as we keep it by us, and do
not use it.

But, my Lords, as all this wisdom is hereditary property, for the sole benefit
of us and our heirs, and as it is necessary that the people should know where
to get a supply for their own use, the excellence of our constitution has
provided a King for this very purpose, and for no other. But, my Lords, I
perceive a defect to which the constitution is subject, and which I propose to
remedy by bringing a bill into Parliament for that purpose.

The constitution, my Lords, out of delicacy, I presume, has left it as a
matter of choice to a King whether he will be wise or not. It has not, I mean,
my Lords, insisted upon it as a constitutional point, which, I conceive, it
ought to have done; for I pledge myself to your Lordships to prove, and that
with true patriotic boldness, that he has no choice in the matter. The bill, my
Lords, that I shall bring in will be to declare, that the constitution,
according to the true intent and meaning thereof, does not invest the King with
this choice; our ancestors were too wise to do that; and, in order to prevent
any doubts that might otherwise arise, I shall prepare, my Lords, an enacting
clause, to fix the wisdom of Kings, by act of Parliament; and then, my Lords,
our Constitution will be the wonder of the world!

Wisdom, my Lords, is the one thing needful; but that there may be no mistake
in this matter, and that we may proceed consistently with the true wisdom of
the constitution, I shall propose a certain criterion, whereby the exact
quantity of wisdom necessary for a King may be known. [Here should be a cry of
Hear him! Hear him!]

It is recorded, my Lords, in the Statutes at Large of the Jews, a book, my
Lords, which I have not read, and whose purport I know only by report, but
perhaps the bench of Bishops can recollect something about it, that Saul gave
the most convincing proofs of royal wisdom before he was made a King, for he
was sent to seek his father's asses, and he could not find them.

Here, my Lords, we have, most happily for us, a case in point: This precedent
ought to be established by act of Parliament; and every King, before he be
crowned, should be sent to seek his father's asses, and if he cannot find them,
he shall be declared wise enough to be King, according to the true meaning of
our excellent constitution. All, therefore, my Lords, that will be necessary to
be done, by the enacting clause that I shall bring in, will be to invest the
King beforehand with the quantity of wisdom necessary for this purpose, lest
he should happen not to possess it; and this, my Lords, we can do without
making use of any of our own.

We further read, my Lords, in the said Statutes at Large of the Jews, that
Samuel, who certainly was as mad as any Man-of-Rights-Man now adays, (hear
him! hear him!) was highly displeased, and even exasperated, at the proposal of
the Jews to have a King, and he warned them against it with all that assurance
and impudence of which he was master. I have been, my Lords, at the trouble of
going all the way to Paternoster-row, to procure an extract from the printed
copy. I was told that I should meet with it there, or in Amen-corner, for I was
then going, my Lords, to rummage for it among the curiosities of the
Antiquarian Society. -- I will read the extract to your Lordships, to show how
little Samuel knew of the matter.

The extract, my Lords, is from 1 Samuel, chap. 8.

And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people, that asked of him a
King.

And he said, this will be the manner of the King that shall reign over you: he
will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be
his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots.

And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties,
and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his
instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots.

And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to
be bakers.

And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your olive-yards, even
the best of them, and give them to his servants.

And he will take tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his
officers, and to his servants.

And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest
young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

And he will take the tenth of your sheep, and ye shall be his servants.

And ye shall cry out in that day, because of your King, which ye shall have
chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you on that day.

Now, my Lords, what can we think of this man Samuel? Is there a word of truth,
or any thing like truth, in all that he has said? He pretended to be a prophet,
or a wise man, but has not the event proved him to be a fool, or an incendiary?
Look around, my Lords, and see if any thing has happened that he pretended to
foretell? Has not the most profound peace reigned throughout the world ever
since Kings were in fashion? Are not, for example, the present Kings of Europe
the most peaceable of mankind, and the Empress of Russia the very milk of human
kindness? It would not be worth having Kings, my Lords, if it were not that
they never go to war.

If we look at home, my Lords, do we not see the same things here as are seen
every where else? Are our young men taken to be horsemen, or foot soldiers, any
more than in Germany or in Prussia, or in Hanover or in Hesse? Are not our
sailors as safe at land as at sea? Are they ever dragged from their homes, like
oxen to the slaughterhouse, to serve on board ships of war? When they return
from the perils of long voyage with the merchandise of distant countries, does
not every man sit down under his own vine and his own fig tree, in perfect
security? Is the tenth of our seed taken by tax-gatherers, or is any part of it
given to the King's servants? In short, is not every thing as free from taxes
as the light from Heaven!

Ah! my Lords, do we not see the blessed effect of having Kings in every thing
we look at? Is not the G. R. or the broad R. stamped upon every thing? Even the
shoes, the gloves, and the hats that we wear, are enriched with the impression,
and all our candles blaze a burnt-offering.

Besides these blessings, my Lords, that cover us from the sole of the foot to
the crown of the head, do we not see a race of youths growing up to be Kings,
who are the very paragons of virtue? There is not one of them, my Lords, but
might be trusted with untold gold, as safely as the other. Are they not more
sober, more intelligent, more solid, more steady, and withal, more learned,
more wise, more every thing, than any youths we ever had the fortune to see.
Ah! my Lords, they are a hopeful family.

The blessed prospect of succession, which the nation has at this moment before
its eyes, is a most undeniable proof of the excellence of our constitution, and
of the blessed hereditary system; for nothing, my Lords, but a constitution
founded on the truest and purest wisdom, could admit such heaven-born and
heaven-taught characters into the government. -- Permit me now, my Lords, to
recall your attention to the libellous chapter I have just read about Kings. I
mention this, my Lords, because it is my intention to move for a bill to be
brought into Parliament to expunge that chapter from the Bible, and that the
Lord Chancellor, with the assistance of the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York,
and the Duke of Clarence, be requested to write a chapter in the room of it;
and that Mr. Burke do see that it be truly canonical, and faithfully inserted.'
-- FINIS.

If the Clerk of the Court of King's Bench should choose to be the orator of
this luminous encomium on the constitution, I hope he will get it well by heart
before he attempt to deliver it, and not to have to apologize to Parliament, as
he did in the case of Bolingbroke's encomium, for forgetting his lesson; and,
with this admonition, I leave him.

Having thus informed the Addressers of what passed at the meeting of
Parliament, I return to take up the subject at the part where I broke off in
order to introduce the preceding speeches.

I was then stating, that the first policy of the Government party was silence,
and the next, clamorous contempt; but as people generally choose to read and
judge for themselves, the work still went on, and the affectation of contempt,
like the silence that preceded it, passed for nothing.

Thus foiled in their second scheme, their evil genius, like a
will-with-a-wisp, led them to a third; when all at once, as if it had been
unfolded to them by a fortune tellers, or Mr. Dundas had discovered it by second
sight, this once harmless, insignificant book, without undergoing the
alteration of a single letter, became a most wicked and dangerous Libel. The
whole Cabinet, like a ship's crew, became alarmed; all hands were piped upon
deck, as if a conspiracy of elements was forming around them, and out came the
Proclamation and the Prosecution; and Addresses supplied the place of prayers.

Ye silly swains, thought I to myself, why do you torment yourselves thus? The
RIGHTS OF MAN is a book calmy and rationally written; why then are you so
disturbed? Did you see how little or how suspicious such conduct makes you
appear, even cunning alone, had you no other faculty, would hush you into
prudence. The plans, principles, and arguments, contained in that work, are
placed before the eyes of the nation, and of the world, in a fair, open, and
manly manner, and nothing more is necessary than to refute them. Do this, and
the whole is done; but if ye cannot, so neither can ye supress the reading, nor
convict the Author; for that Law, in the opinion of all good men, would convict
itself, that should condemn what cannot be refuted.

Having now shown the Addressers the several stages of the business, prior to
their being called upon, like Caesar in the Tyber, crying to Cassius, "help,
Cassius, or I sink!" I next come to remark on the policy of the Government, in
promoting Addresses; on the consequences naturally resulting therefrom; and on
the conduct of the persons concerned.

With respect to the policy, it evidently carries with it every mark and
feature of disguised fear. And it will hereafter be placed in the history of
extraordinary things, that a pamphlet should be produced by an individual,
unconnected with any sect or party, and not seeking to make any, and almost a
stranger in the land, that should completely frighten a whole Government, and
that in the midst of its most triumphant security. Such a circumstance cannot
fail to prove, that either the pamphlet has irresistible powers, or the
Government very extraordinary defects, or both. The Nation exhibits no signs of
fear at the Rights of Man; why then should the Government, unless the interest
of the two are really opposite to each other, and the secret is beginning to be
known? That there are two distinct classes of men in the nation, those who pay
taxes, and those who receive and live upon the taxes, is evident at first
sight; and when taxation is carried to excess, it cannot fail to disunite those
two, and something of this kind is now beginning to appear.

It is also curious to observe, amidst all the fume and bustle about
Proclamations and Addresses, kept up by a few noisy and interested men, how
little the mass of the nation seem to care about either. They appear to me, by
the indifference they show, not to believe a word the Proclamation contains;
and as to the Addresses, they travel to London with the silence of a funeral,
and having announced their arrival in the Gazette, are deposited with ashes of
their predecessors, and Mr. Dundas writes their hic jacet.

One of the best effects which the Proclamation, and its echo the Addresses
have had, has been that of exciting and spreading curiosity; and it requires
only a single reflection to discover, that the object of all curiosity is
knowledge. When the mass of the nation saw that Placemen, Bensioners, and
Borough-mongers, were the persons that stood forward to promote Addresses, it
could not fail to create suspicious that the public good was not their object;
that the character of the books, or writings, to which such persons obscurely
alluded, not daring to mention them, was directly contrary to what they
described them to be, and that it was necessary that every man, for his own
satisfaction, should exercise his proper right, and read and judge for himself.

But how will the persons who have been induced to read the Rights of Man, by
the clamor that has been raised against it, be surprised to find, that,
instead of a wicked, inflamatory work, instead of a licencious and profligate
performance, it abounds with principles of government that are uncontrovertible
-- with arguments which every reader will feel, are unanswerable -- with plans
for the increase of commerce and manufactures -- for the extinction of war --
for the education of the children of the poor -- for the comfortable support of
the aged and decayed persons of both sexes -- for the relief of the army and
navy, and, in short, for the promotion of every thing that can benefit the
moral, civil and political condition of Man.

Why, then, some calm observer will ask, why is the work prosecuted, if these
be the goodly matters it contains? I will tell thee, friend; it contains also a
plan for the reduction of Taxes, for lessening the immense expenses of
Government, for abolishing sinecure Places and Pensions; and it proposes
applying the redundant taxes, that shall be saved by these reforms, to the
purposes mentioned in the former paragraph, instead of applying them to the
support of idle and profligate Placemen and Pensioners.

Is it, then, any wonder that Placemen and Pensioners, and the whole train of
Court expectants, should become the promoters of Addresses, Proclamations, and
Prosecutions? or, is it any wonder that Corporations and rotten Boroughs, which
are attacked and exposed, both in the First and Second Parts of Rights of Man,
as unjust monopolies and public nuisances, should join in the cavalcade? Yet
these are the sources from which Addresses have sprung. Had not such persons
come forward to oppose the Rights of Man, I should have doubted the efficacy of
my own writings: but those opposers have now proved to me, that the blow was
well directed, and they have done it justice, by confessing the smart.

The principal deception in this business of Addresses has been, that the
promoters of them have not come forward in their proper characters. They have
assumed to pass themselves upon the Public, as a part of the Public bearing a
share of the burden of Taxes, and acting for the public good; whereas, they
are in general that part of it that adds to the public burden, by living on
the produce of the public taxes. They are to the public what the locusts are to
the tree: the burden would be less, and the prosperity would be greater, if
they were shaken off.

"I do not come here," said ONSLOW, at the Surry County meeting, as Lord
Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum of the county, but I come here as a plain
country gentleman. The fact is, that he came there as what he was, and as no
other, and consequently he came as one of the beings I have been describing. If
it be the character of a gentleman to be fed by the public, as a pauper is by
the parish, Onslow has a fair claim to the title; and the same description will
suit the Duke of Richmond, who led the Address at the Sussex meeting. -- He
also may set up for a gentleman.

As to the meeting in the next adjoining county, (Kent) it was a scene of
disgrace. About two hundred persons met, when a small part of them drew
privately away from the rest, and voted an Address: the consequence of which
was, that they got together by the ears, and produced a riot in the very act of
producing an Address to prevent Riots.

That the Proclamation and the Addresses have failed of their intended effect,
may be collected from the silence which the Government party itself observes.
The number of Addresses has been weekly retailed in the Gazette; but the number
of Addressers has been concealed. Several of the Addresses have been voted by
not more than ten or twelve persons; and a considerable number of them by not
more than thirty. The whole number of Addresses presented at the time of
writing this letter is three hundred and twenty, (rotten Boroughs and
Corporations included) and even admitting, on an average, one hundred
Addressers to each Address, the whole number of Addressers would be but
thirty-two thousand, and nearly three months have been taken up in procuring
this number. That the success of the Proclamation has been less than the
success of the Work it was intended to discourage, is a matter within my own
knowledge; for a greater number of the cheap edition of the First and second
Parts of RIGHT OF MAN has been sold in the space only of one month, than the
whole number of Addressers (admitting them to be thirty-two thousand) have
amounted to in three months.

It is a dangerous attempt in any Government to say to a Nation, "thou shall
not read." This is now done in Spain, and was formerly done under the old
Government of France; but it served to procure the downfall of the latter, and
is subverting that of the former; and it will have the same tendency in all
countries; because thought, by some means or other, is got abroad in the world,
and cannot be restrained, though reading may.

If Rights of Man were a book that deserved the vile description which the
promoters of the Address have given of it, why did not these men prove their
charge, and satisfy the people, by producing it, and reading it publicly? This
most certainly ought to have been done, and would also have been done, had they
believed it would have answered their purpose. But the fact is, that the book
contains truths, which those time-servers dreaded to hear, and dreaded that the
people should know; and it is now following up the Addresses in every part of
the nation, and convicting them of falsehoods.

Among the unwarrantable proceedings to which the Proclamation has given rise,
the meetings of the Justices in several of the towns and counties ought to be
noticed. Those men have assumed to re-act the farce of General Warrants, and to
suppress, by their own authority, whatever publications they please. This is an
attempt at power, equalled only by the conduct of the minor despots of the most
despotic governments in Europe, and yet those Justices affect to call England a
Free Country. But even this, perhaps, like the scheme for garrisoning the
country, by building military barracks, is necessary to awaken the country to a
sense of its Rights, and, as such, it will have a good effect.

Another part of the conduct of such Justices has been, that of threatening to
take away the licenses from taverns and public-houses, where the inhabitants of
the neighborhood associated to read and discuss the principles of Government,
and to inform each other thereon. This, again, is similiar to what is doing in
Spain and Russia; and the reflection which it cannot fail to suggest is, that
the principles and conduct of any Government must be bad, when that Government
dreads and startles at discussion, and seeks security by a prevention of
knowledge.

If the Government, or the Constitution, or by whatever name it be called, be
that miracle of perfection which the Proclamation and the Addresses have
trumpeted it forth to be, it ought to have defied discussion and investigation,
instead of dreading it. Whereas, every attempt it makes, either by
Proclamation, Prosecution, or Address, to suppress investigation, is a
confession that it feels itself unable to bear it. It is error only, and not
truth, that shrinks from enquiry. All the numerous pamphlets, and all the
newspaper falsehood and abuse, that have been published against the "RIGHTS OF
MAN," have fallen before it like pointless arrows; and, in like manner, would
any work have fallen before the Constitution, had the Constitution, as it is
called, been founded on as good political principles as those on which the
RIGHTS OF MAN is written.

It is a good Constitution for courtiers, placeman, pensioners,
borough-holders, and the leaders of Parties, and these are the men that have
been the active leaders of Addresses; but it is a bad Constitution for at least
ninety-nine parts of the nation out of an hundred, and this truth is every day
making its way.

It is bad, first, because it entails upon the nation the unnecessary expense
of supporting three forms and systems of Government at once, namely, the
monarchical, the aristocratical, and the democratical.

Secondly, because it is impossible to unite such a discordant composition by
any other means than perpetual corruption; and therefore the corruption so
loudly and so universally complained of, is no other than the natural
consequence of such an unnatural compound of Governments; and in this consists
that excellence which the numerous herd of placemen and pensioners so loudly
extol, and which, at the same time, occasions that enormous load of taxes under
which the rest of the nation groans.

Among the mass of national delusions calculated to amuse and impose upon the
multitude, the standing one has been, that of flattering them into taxes, by
calling the Government, (or as they please to express it, the English
constitution) the envy and the admiration of the world. Scarcely an Address has
been voted in which some of the speakers have not uttered this hackneyed
nonsensical falsehood.

Two Revolutions have taken place, those of America and France; and both of
them have rejected the unnatural compounded system of the English government.
America has declared against all hereditary Government, and established the
representative system of Government only. France has entirely rejected the
aristocratical part, and is now discovering the absurdity of the monarchical,
and is approaching fast to the representative system. On what ground, then, do
those men continue a declaration, respecting what they call the envy and
admiration of other nations, which the voluntary practice of such nations, as
have had the opportunity of establishing Government, contradicts and falsifies.
Will such men never confine themselves to truth? Will they be for ever the
deceivers of the people?

But I will go farther, and show, that, were Government now to begin in
England, the people could not be brought to establish the same system they now
submit to.

In speaking upon this subject (or on any other) on the pure ground of
principle, antiquity and precedent cease to be authority, and hoary-headed
error loses its effect. The reasonableness and propriety of things must be
examined abstractedly from custom and usage; and in this point of view, the
right which grows into practice today is as much a right, and as old in
principle and theory, as if it had the customary sanction of a thousand ages.
Principles have no connection with time, nor characters with names.

To say that the Government of this country is composed of King, Lords, and
Commons, is the mere phraseology of custom. It is composed of men; and whoever
the men be to whom the Government of any country is entrusted, they ought to be
the best and wisest that can be found, and if they are not so, they are not fit
for the station. A man derives no more excellence from the change of a name, or
calling him King, or calling him Lord, than I should do by changing my name
from Thomas to George, or from Pain to Guelph, I should not be a whit the more
able to write a book, because my name were altered; neither would any man, now
called a King or a Lord, have a whit the more sense than he now has, were he to
call himself Thomas Pain.

As to the word "Commons," applied as it is in England, it is a term of
degradation and reproach, and ought to be abolished. It is a term unknown in
free countries.

But to the point. -- Let us suppose that Government was now to begin in
England, and that the plan of Government, offered to the nation for its
approbation or rejection, consisted of the following parts:

First -- That some one individual should be taken from all the rest of the
nation, and to whom all the rest should swear obedience, and never be permitted
to sit down in his presence, and that they should give to him one million
sterling a year. -- That the nation should never after have power or authority
to make laws but with his express consent, and that his sons and his sons'
sons, whether wise or foolish, good men or bad, fit or unfit, should have the
same power, and also the same money annually paid to them for ever.

Secondly -- That there should be two houses of Legislators to assist in making
laws, one of which should, in the first instance, be entirely appointed by the
aforesaid person, and that their sons and their sons' sons, whether wise or
foolish, good men or bad, fit or unfit, should for ever after be hereditary
Legislators.

Thirdly -- That the other house should be chosen in the same manner as the
house, now called the House of Commons, is chosen, and should be subject to the
control of the two aforesaid hereditary Powers in all things.

It would be impossible to cram such a farago of imposition and absurdity down
the throat of this or any other nation, that were capable of reasoning upon its
rights and its interest.

They would ask, in the first place, on what ground of right, or on what
principle, such irrational and preposterous distinctions could, or ought to be
made; and what pretensions any man could have, or what services he could
render, to entitle him to a million a year? They would go farther, and revolt
at the idea of consigning their children, and their childrens' children, to the
domination of persons hereafter to be born, who might, for any thing they could
foresee, turn out to be knaves or fools; and they would finally discover, that
the project of hereditary Governors and Legislators was a treasonable
usurpation over the rights of posterity. Not only the calm dictates of reason,
and the force of natural affection, but the integrity of manly pride, would
impel men to spurn such proposals.

From the grosser absurdities of such a scheme, they would extend their
examination to the practical defects -- They would soon see that it would end
in tyranny accomplished by fraud. That in the operation of it, it would be two
to one against them, because the two parts that were to be made hereditary,
would form a common interest, and stick to each other; and that themselves and
their representatives would become no better than hewers of wood and drawers of
water for the other parts of the Government. -- Yet call one of those powers
King, the other, Lords, and the third, the Commons, and it gives the model of
what is called the English Government.

I have asserted, and have shown, both in the First and second Parts of Rights
of Man, that there is not such a thing as an English Constitution, and that the
people have yet a Constitution to form. A Constitution is a thing antecedent to
a Government; it is the act of the people creating a Government and giving it
powers, and defining the limits and exercise of the powers so given. But
whenever did the people of England, acting in their original constituent
character, by a delegation elected for the express purpose, declare and say,
We, the people of this land, do constitute and appoint this to be our system
and form of Government. The Government has assumed to constitute itself, but it
never was constituted by the people, in whom alone the right of constituting
resides.

I will here recite the preamble to the Federal Constitution of the United
States of America. I have shown in the Second Part of rights of Man, the manner
by which the Constitution was formed and afterward ratified; and to which I
refer the reader. -- The preamble is in the following words: WE, THE PEOPLE of
the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice,
insure domestic tranquillity, provide for common defense, promote the general
welfare, secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, DO
ORDAIN AND ESTABISH THIS CONSTITUTION for the United States of America.

Then follow the several articles which appoint the manner in which the several
component parts of the Government, legislative and executive, shall be elected,
and the period of their duration, and the powers they shall have: also, the
manner by which future additions, alterations, or amendments, shall be made to
the Constitution. Consequently, every improvement that can be made in the
science of Government, follows in that country as a matter of order. It is only
in Governments founded on assumption and false principles, that reasoning upon,
and investigating systems and principles of Government, and showing their
several excellencies and defects, are termed libellous and seditious. These
terms were made part of the charge brought against Lock, Hampden, and Sydney,
and will continue to be brought against all good men, so long as had government
shall continue.

The Government of this country has been ostentatiously giving challenges for
more than an hundred years past, upon what it called its own excellence and
perfection. Scarcely a King's Speech, or a Parliamentary Speech, has been
uttered, in which this glove has not been thrown, till the world has been
insulted with their challenges. But it now appears that all this was vapor and
vain boasting, or that it was intended to conceal abuses and defects, and hush
the people into taxes. I have taken the challenge up, and in behalf of the
public have shown, in a fair, open, and candid manner, both the radical and
practical defects of the system; when, lo! those champions of the Civil Lift
have fled away, and sent the Attorney General to deny the challenge, by turning
the acceptance of it into an attack, and defending their Places and Pensions by
a prosecution.

I will here drop this part of the subject, and state a few particulars
respecting the prosecution now pending, by which the Addressers will see that
they have been used as tools to the prosecuting party and their dependents. The
case is as follows:

The original edition of the First and Second Parts of RIGHTS OF MAN, having
been expensively printed (in the modern style of printing pamphlets, that they
might be bound up with Mr. Burke's Reflections on the French Revolution,) the
high price precluded the generality of people from purchasing; and many
applications were made to me from various parts of the country to print the
work in a cheaper manner. The people of Sheffield requested leave to print two
thousand copies for themselves, with which request I immediately complied. The
same request came to me from Rotherham, from Leicester, from Chester, from
several towns in Scotland; and Mr. James Mackintosh, Author of Vindicia
Gailica, brought me a request from Warwickshire, for leave to print ten
thousand copies in that country. I had already sent a cheap edition to
Scotland; and finding the applications increase, I concluded that the best
method of complying therewith, would be to print a very numerous edition in
London, under my own direction, by which means the work would be more perfect,
and the price be reduced lower than it could be by printing small editions in
the country of only a few thousands each.

The cheap edition of the First Part was begun about the middle of last April,
and from that moment, and not before, I expected a prosecution, and the event
has proved that I was not mistaken. I had then occasion to write to Mr. Thomas
Walker, of Manchester, and after informing him of my intention of giving up the
work for the purpose of general information, I informed him of what I
apprehended would be the consequence; that while the work was at a price that
precluded an extensive circulation, the Government-party, not able to
controvert the plans, arguments, and principles it contained, had chosen to
remain silent; but that I expected they would make an attempt to deprive the
mass of the nation, and especially the poor, of the right of reading, by the
pretense of prosecuting either the Author or the Publisher, or both. They chose
to begin with the Publisher.

Nearly a month, however, passed, before I had any information given me of
their intentions. I was then at Bromley, in Kent, upon which I came immediately
to town, (May 14) and went to Mr. Jordan, the publisher of the original
edition. He had that evening been served with a summons, to appear at the Court
of King's Bench on the Monday following, but for what purpose was not stated.
Supposing it to be on account of the work, I appointed a meeting with him on
the next morning, which was accordingly had, when I provided an attorney, and
took the expense of the defense on myself. But finding afterward that he
absented himself from the attorney employed, and had engaged another, and that
he had been closeted with the Solicitors of the Treasury, I left him to follow
his own choice, and he chose to plead Guilty. This he might do if he pleased;
and I make no objection against him for it. I believe that his idea by the word
Guilty, was no other than declaring himself to be the publisher, without any
regard to the merits or demerits of the work; for were it to be construed
otherwise, it would amount to the absurdity of converting a publisher into a
Jury, and his confession into a verdict upon the work itself. This would be the
highest possible refinement upon packing of Juries.

On the 21st of May, they commenced their prosecution against me, as the
Author, by leaving a summons at my lodgings in town, to appear at the Court of
King's Bench on the 8th of June following; and on the same day. (May 21) they
issued also their Proclamation. Thus the Court of St. James's, and the Court of
King's Bench, were playing into each other's hands at the same instant of time,
and the farce of Addresses brought up the rear; and this mode of proceeding is
called by the prostituted name of Law. Such a thundering rapidity, after a
ministerial dormancy of almost eighteen months, can be attributed to no other
cause than their having gained information of the forwardness of the cheap
Edition, and the dread they felt at the progressive increase of political
knowledge.

I was strongly advised by several gentlemen, as well those in the practice of
the Law, as others, to prefer a bill of indictment against the publisher of the
Proclamation, as a publication tending to influence, or rather to dictate the
verdict of a Jury on the issue of a matter then pending; but it appeared to me
much better to avail myself of the opportunity which such a precedent justified
me in using, by meeting the Proclamation and the Addresses on their own ground,
and publicly defending the Work which had been thus unwarrantable attacked and
traduced. -- And conscious as I now am, that the Work entitled RIGHTS OF MAN,
so far from being, as has been maliciously or erroneously represented, a false,
wicked, and seditious Libel, is a work abounding with unanswerable truths, with
principles of the purest morality and benevolence, and with arguments not to be
controverted -- Conscious, I say, of these things, and having no object in view
but the happiness of mankind, I have now put the matter to the best proof in my
power, by giving to the public a cheap edition of the First and Second Parts of
that Work. Let every man read and judge for himself, not only of the merits or
demerits of the Work, but of the matters therein contained, which relate to his
own interest and happiness.

If, to expose the fraud and imposition of monarchy, and every species of
hereditary government -- to lessen the oppression of taxes -- to propose plans
for the education of helpless infancy, and the comfortable support of the aged
and distressed -- to endeavor to conciliate nations to each other -- to
extirpate the horrid practice of war -- to promote universal peace,
civilization, and commerce -- and to break the chains of political
superstition, and raise degraded man to his proper rank; -- if these things be
libellous, let me live the life of a Libeller, and let the name of LIBELLER be
engraven on my tomb.

Of all the weak and ill-judged measures which fear, ignorance, or arrogance,
could suggest, the Proclamation, and the project for Addresses, are two of the
worst. They served to advertise the work which the promoters of those measures
wished to keep unknown; and in doing this, they offered violence to the
judgment of the people, by calling on them to condemn what they forbad them to
know, and they put the strength of their party to that hazardous issue that
prudence would have avoided -- The County Meeting for Middlesex was attended by
only one hundred and eighteen Addressers. They, no doubt, expected, that
thousands would slock to their standard, and clamor against the Rights of Man.
But the case most probably is, that men, in all countries, are not so blind to
their Rights and their Interest, as Governments believe.

Having thus shown the extraordinary manner in which the Government-party
commenced their attack, I proceed to offer a few observations on the
prosecution, and on the mode of trial by Special Jury.

In the first place, I have written a book; and if it cannot be refuted, it
cannot be condemned. But I do not consider the prosecution as particularly
levelled against me, but against the general right, or the right of every man,
of investigating systems and principles of Government, and showing their
several excellencies or defects. If the press be free only to flatter
Government, as Mr. Burke has done, and to cry up and extol what certain Court
sycophants are pleased to call a glorious Constitution, and not free to examine
into its errors or abuses, or whether a Constitution really exist or not, such
freedom is no other than that of Spain, Turkey, or Russia; and a Jury, in this
case, would not be a Jury to try, but an Inquisition to condemn.

I have asserted, and by fair and open argument maintained, the right of every
nation at all times, to establish such a system and form of Government for
itself as best accords with its disposition, interest, and happiness; and to
change, or alter it, as it sees occasion. Will any Jury deny to the Nation this
right? If they do, they are traitors, and their Verdict would be null and void.
And if they admit the right, the means must be admitted also; for it would be
the highest absurdity to say, that the right existed, but the means did not.
The question, then, is, What are the means by which the possession and exercise
of this National Right are to the secured? The answer will be, that of
maintaining, inviolably, the right of free investigation; for investigation
always serves to detect error, and to bring forth truth.

I have, as an individual, given my opinion upon what I believe to be not only
the best, but the true system of Government, which is the representative
system, and I have given reasons for that opinion.

First, Because, in the representative system, no office of very extraordinary
power, or extravagant pay, is attached to any individual; and consequently,
there is nothing to excite those national contentions and civil wars, with
which countries under monarchical governments, are frequently convulsed, and of
which the History of England exhibits such numerous instances.

Secondly, Because the representative is a system of Government always in
maturity; whereas monarchical government fluctuates through all the stages,
from nonage to dotage.

Thirdly, Because the representative system admits of none but men, properly
qualified, into the Government, or removes them if they prove to be otherwise.
Whereas, in the hereditary system, a nation may be encumbered with a knave or
an idiot, for a whole lifetime, and not be benefited by a successor.

Fourthly, Because there does not exist a right to establish hereditary
government, or in other words, hereditary successors, because hereditary
government always means a government yet to come, and the case always is, that
those who are to live afterward have always the same right to establish
government for themselves, as the people had who lived before them; and,
therefore, all laws attempting to establish hereditary government, are founded
on assumption and political fiction.

If these positions be truths, and I challenge any man to prove the contrary;
if they tend to instruct and enlighten mankind, and to free them from error,
oppression, and political superstition, which are the objects I have in view,
in publishing them, that Jury would commit an act of injustice to their country
and to me, if not a act of perjury, that should call them false, wicked, and
malicious.

Dragonetti, in his treatise "on Virtues and Rewards," has a paragraph worthy
of being recorded in every country in the world -- The science, (says he,) of
the politician, consists in fixing the true point of happiness and freedom.
Those men would deserve the gratitude of ages, who should discover a mode of
government that contained the greatest sum of individual happiness with the
least national expense. But if Juries are to be made use of to prohibit
enquiry, to suppress truth, and to stop the progress of knowledge, this boasted
palladium of liberty becomes the most successful instrument of tyranny.

Among the arts practiced at the Bar, and from the Bench, to impose upon the
understanding of a Jury, and obtain a Verdict where the consciences of men
could not otherwise consent, one of the most successful has been that of
calling truth a libel, and of insinuating, that the words falsely, wickedly,
and maliciously, though they are made the formidable and high sounding part of
the charge, are not matters for consideration with a Jury. For what purpose,
then, are they retained, unless it be for that of imposition and wilful
defamation?

I cannot conceive a greater violation of order, nor a more abominable insult
upon morality and upon human understanding, than to see a man sitting in the
judgment seat, affecting, by an antiquated foppery of dress, to impress the
audience with awe; then causing witnesses and Jury to be sworn to truth and
justice, himself having officially sworn the same; then causing to be read a
prosecution against a man, charging him with having wickedly and maliciously
written and published a certain false, wicked, and seditious book; and having
gone through all this with a show of solemnity, as if he saw the eye of the
Almighty darting through the roof of the building like a ray of light, turn, in
an instant, the whole into a farce, and, in order to obtain a verdict that
could not otherwise be obtained, tell the Jury that the charge of falsely,
wickedly, and seditiously, meant nothing; that truth was out of the question;
and that whether the person accused spoke truth or falsehood, or intended
virtuously or wickedly, was the same thing; and finally conclude the wretched
inquisitorial scene, by stating some antiquated precedent, equally as
abominable as that which is then acting, or giving some opinion of his own, and
falsely calling the one and the other -- Law. It was, most probably, to such a
Judge as this, that the most solemn of all reproofs was given -- The Lord will
smite thee, thou whitened wall.

I now proceed to offer some remarks on what is called a Special Jury. -- As to
what is called a Special Verdict, I shall make no other remark upon it, than
that it is in reality not a verdict. It is an attempt on the part of the Jury
to delegate, or of the Bench to obtain, the exercise of that right which is
committed to the Jury only.

With respect to Special Juries, I shall state such matters as I have been able
to collect, for I do not find any uniform opinion concerning the mode of
appointing them.

In the first place, this mode of trial is but of modern invention, and the
origin of it, as I am told, is a follows:

Formerly, when disputes arose between Merchants, and were brought before a
Court, the case was, that the nature of their commerce, and the method of
keeping Merchants accounts, not being sufficiently understood by persons out of
their own line, it became necessary to depart from the common mode of
appointing Juries, and to select such persons for a Jury whose practical
knowledge would enable them to decide upon the case. From this introduction,
Special Juries became more general; but some doubts having arisen as to their
legality, an act was passed in the 3d of Geo. II. to establish them as legal,
and also to extend them to all cases, not only between individuals, but in
cases where the Government itself should be the Prosecutor. This most probably
gave rise to the suspicion so generally entertained of packing a Jury; because,
by this act, when the crown, as it is called, is the Prosecutor, the Master of
the Crown-office, who holds his office under the Crown, is the person who
either wholly nominates, or has great power in nominating the Jury, and
therefore it has greatly the appearance of the prosecuting party selecting a
Jury.

The process is as follows:

On motion being made in Court, by either the Plaintiff or Defendant, for a
Special Jury, the Court grants it or not, at its own discretion.

If it be granted, the Solicitor of the party that applied for the Special Jury
gives notice to the Solicitor of the adverse party, and a day and hour are
appointed for them to meet at the office of the Master of the Crown-office. The
Master of the Crown-office sends to the Sheriff or his deputy, who attends with
the Sheriff's book of Freeholders. From this book, forty-eight names are taken,
and a copy thereof given to each of the parties; and on a future day notice is
again given, and the Solicitors meet a second time, and each strikes out twelve
names. The list being thus reduced from forty-eight to twenty-four, the first
twelve that appear in Court, and answer to their names, is the Special Jury for
that cause. The first operation, that of taking the forty-eight names, is
called nominating the Jury; and the reducing them to twenty-four is called
striking the Jury.

Having thus stated the general process, I come to particulars, and the first
question will be, how are the forty-eight names, out of which the Jury is to be
struck, obtained from the Sheriff's book? for herein lies the principal ground
of suspicion, with respect to what is understood by packing of Juries.

Either they must be taken by some rule agreed upon between the parties, or by
some common rule known and established beforehand, or at the discretion of
some person, who, in such a case, ought to be perfectly disinterested in the
issue, as well officially as otherwise.

In the case of Merchants, and in all cases between individuals, the Master of
the office, called the Crown-office, is officially an indifferent person, and
as such may be a proper person to act between the parties, and present them
with a list of forty-eight names, out of which each party is to strike twelve.
But the case assumes an entire different character when the Government itself
is the Prosecutor. The Master of the Crown-office is then an officer holding
his office under the Prosecutor; and it is therefore no wonder that the
suspicion of packing Juries should, in such cases, have been so prevalent.

This will apply with additional force, when the prosecution is commenced
against the Author or Publisher of such Works as treat of reforms, and of the
abolition of superfluous places and offices, etc. because in such cases every
person holding an office, subject to that suspicion, becomes interested as a
party; and the office, called the Crown-office, may, upon examination, be found
to be of this description.

I have heard it asserted, that the Master of the Crown office is to open the
Sheriff's book as it were per hazard, and take thereout forty-eight following
names, to which the word Merchant or Esquire is affixed. The former of these
are certainly proper, when the case is between Merchants, and it has reference
to the origin of the custom, and to nothing else. As to the word Esquire, every
man is an Esquire who pleases to call himself Esquire; and the sensible part of
mankind are leaving it off. But the matter for enquiry is whether there be any
existing law to direct the mode by which the forty-eight names shall be taken,
or whether the mode be merely that of custom which the office has created; or
whether the selection of the forty-eight names be wholly at the discretion and
choice of the Master of the Crown-office? One or other of the two latter
appears to be the case, because the act already mentioned, of the 3d of Geo.
II. lays down no rule or mode, nor refers to any preceding law -- but says
only, that Special Juries shall hereafter be struck, in such manner as Special
Juries have been and are usually struck.

This act appears to me to have been what is generally understood by a "deep
take in." It was fitted to the spur of the moment in which it was passed, 3d of
Geo. II when parties ran high, and it served to throw into the hands of
Walpole, who was then Minister, the management of Juries in Crown prosecutions,
by making the nomination of the forty-eight persons, from whom the Jury was to
be struck, follow the precedent established by custom between individuals, and
by this means it slipped into practice with less suspicion. Now, the manner of
obtaining Special Juries through the medium of an officer of the Government,
such for instance as a Master of the Crown-office, may be impartial in the case
of Merchants, or other individuals, but it becomes highly improper and
suspicious in cases where the Government itself is one of the parties. And it
must, upon the whole, appear a strange inconsistency, that a Government should
keep one officer to commence prosecutions, and another officer to nominate the
forty-eight persons from whom the Jury is to be struck, both of whom are
officers of the Civil List, and yet continue to call this by the pompous name
of the glorious Right of trial by Jury!

In the case of the King against Jordan, for publishing RIGHTS OF MAN, the
Attorney General moved for the appointment of a Special Jury, and the Master of
the Crown-office nominated the forty-eight persons himself, and took them from
such part of the Sheriff's book as he pleased. The trial did not come on,
occasioned by Jordan withdrawing his plea; but if it had, it might have
afforded an opportunity of discussing the subject of Special Juries; for though
such discussion might have had no effect in the Court of King's Bench, it
would, in the present disposition for enquiry, have had a considerable effect
upon the Country; and in all national reforms, this is the proper point to
begin at. Put a Country right, and it will soon put Government right. Among the
improper things acted by the Government in the case of Special Juries, on their
own motion, one has been that of treating the Jury with a dinner, and
afterward giving each Juryman two guineas, if a verdict be found for the
prosecution, and only one if otherwise; and it has been long observed, that in
London and Westminster there are persons who appear to make a trade of serving,
by being so frequently seen upon Special Juries.

Thus much for Special Juries. As to what is called a Common Jury, upon any
Government prosecution against the Author or Publisher of RIGHTS OF MAN, during
the time of the present Sheriffry, I have one question to offer, which is,
whether the present Sheriffs of London, having publicly prejudged the case, by
the part they have taken in procuring an Address from the county of Middlesex,
(however diminutive and insignificant the number of Addressers were, being only
one hundred and eighteen) are eligible or proper persons to be entrusted with
the power of returning a Jury to try the issue of any such prosecution?

But the whole matter appears, at least to me, to be worthy of a more extensive
consideration than what relates to any Jury, whether Special or Common; for the
case is, whether any part of a whole nation, locally selected as a Jury of
twelve men always is, be competent to judge and determine for the whole nation,
on any matter that relates to systems and principles of Government, and whether
it be not applying the institution of Juries to purposes for which such
institution was not intended? For example,

I have asserted, in the Work RIGHTS OF MAN, that as every man in the nation
pays taxes, so has every man a right to a share in government, and consequently
that the people of Manchester, Birmingham, Sheffield, Leeds, Hallifax, etc.
etc. have the same right as those of London. Shall then twelve men, picked out
between Temple Bar and Whitechapel, because the book happened to be first
published there, decide upon the rights of the inhabitants of those towns, or
of any other town or village in the nation?

Having thus spoken of Juries, I come next to offer a few observations on the
matter contained in the information or prosecution.

The work, RIGHTS OF MAN, consists of Part the First, and Part the Second. The
First Part the prosecutor has thought it most proper to let alone; and from the
Second Part he has selected a few short paragraphs, making in the whole not
quite two pages of the same printing as in the cheap edition. Those paragraphs
relate chiefly to certain facts, such as the Revolution of 1688, and the coming
of George the First, commonly called of the House of Hanover, or the House of
Brunswick, or some such house. The arguments, plans, and principles, contained
in the work, the prosecutor has not ventured to attack. They are beyond his
reach.

The Act which the prosecutor appears to rest most upon for the support of the
prosecution, is the Act entitled, An Act, declaring the rights and liberties
of the subject, and settling the succession of the crown, passed in the first
year of William and Mary, and more commonly known by the name of the "Bill of
Rights."

I have called this Bill A Bill of wrongs and of insult. My reasons, and also
my proofs, are as follows:

The method and principle which this Bill takes for declaring rights and
liberties, are in direct contradiction to rights and liberties; it is an
assumed attempt to take them wholly away from posterity -- for the declaration
in the said Bill is as follows:

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, do, in the name of all the
people, most humbly and faithfully submit themselves, their heirs, and
posterity for ever; that is, to William and Mary his wife, their heirs and
successors. This is a strange way of declaring rights and liberties. But the
Parliament who made this declaration in the name, and on the part, of the
people, had no authority from them for so doing -- and with respect to
posterity for ever, they had no right or authority whatever in the case. It was
assumption and usurpation. I have reasoned very extensively against the
principle of this Bill in the first part of Rights of Man; the prosecutor has
silently admitted that reasoning, and he now commences a prosecution on the
authority of the Bill, after admitting the reasoning against it.

It is also to be observed, that the declaration in this Bill, abject and
irrational as it is, had no other intentional operation than against the family
of the Stuarts, and their abettors. The idea did not then exist, that in the
space of an hundred years, posterity might discover a different and much better
system of government, and that every species of hereditary government might
fall as Popes and Monks had fallen before. This, I say, was not then thought
of, and therefore the application of the Bill, in the present case, is a new,
erroneous, and illegal application, and is the same as creating a new Bill ex
post facto.

I has ever been the craft of Courtiers, for the purpose of keeping up an
expensive and enormous Civil Lift, and a mummery of useless and antiquated
places and offices at the public expense, to be continually hanging England
upon some individual or other, called king, though the man might not have
capacity to be a parish constable. The folly and absurdity of this is appearing
more and more every day; and still those men continue to act as if no
alteration in the public opinion had taken place. They hear each other's
nonsense, and suppose the whole nation talks the same Gibberish.

Let such men cry up the House of Orange, or the House of Brunswick, if they
please. They would cry up any other house if it suited their purpose, and give
as good reasons for it. But what is this house, or that house, or any house to
a nation? For a nation to be free, it is sufficient that she wills it. Her
freedom depends wholly upon herself, and not on any house, nor on any
individual. I ask not in what light this cargo of foreign houses appears to
others, but I will say in what light it appears to me. -- It was like the trees
of the forest saying unto the bramble, come thou and reign over us.

Thus much for both their houses. I now come to speak of two other houses,
which are also put into the information, and those are, the House of Lords, and
the House of Commons. Here, I suppose, the Attorney General intends to prove me
guilty of speaking either truth or falsehood; for, according to the modern
interpretation of Libels, it does not signify which, and the only improvement
necessary to show the complete absurdity of such doctrine, would be, to
prosecute a man for uttering a most false and wicked truth.

I will quote the part I am going to give, from the office Copy, with the
Attorney General's inuendoes, enclosed in parentheses as they stand in the
information, and I hope that civil list officer will caution the Court not to
laugh when he reads them, and also to take care not to laugh himself.

The information states, that Thomas Pain being a wicked, malicious,
seditious, and evil-disposed person, has, with force and arms, and most wicked
cunning, written and published a certain false, scandalous, malicious, and
seditious libel; in one part thereof, to the tenor and effect following, that
is to say --

With respect to the two Houses, of which the English Parliament (meaning the
Parliament of this Kingdom) is composed, they appear to be effectually
influenced into one, and, as a Legislature, to have no temper of its own; The
Minister, (meaning the Minister employed by the King of this Realm, in the
administration of the Government thereof) whoever he, at any time may be,
touches IT, (meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this Kingdom) as with an
opium wand, and IT (meaning the two Houses of Parliament of this Kingdom)
sleeps obedience. -- As I am not malicious enough to disturb their repose,
though it be time they should awake, I leave the two Houses, and the Attorney
General, to the enjoyment of their dreams, and proceed to a new subject.

The Gentlemen, to whom I shall next address myself, are those who have styled
themselves Friends of the people, holding their meeting at the Freemasons'
Tavern, London.

One of the principal Members of this Society, is Mr. Gray, who, I believe, is
also one of the most independent Members in Parliament. I collect this opinion
from what Mr. Burke formerly mentioned to me, rather than from any knowledge of
my own. The occasion was as follows:

I was in England at the time the bubble broke forth about Nootka Sound; and
the day after the King's Message, as it is called, was sent to Parliament, I
wrote a note to Mr. Burke, that upon the condition the French Revolution should
not be a subject (for he was then writing the book I have since answered) I
would call on him the next day, and mention some matters I was acquainted with,
respecting that affair; for it appeared to me extraordinary, that any body of
men, calling themselves Representatives, should commit themselves so
precipitately, or, "sleep obedience," as Parliament was then doing, and run a
nation into expense, and, perhaps a war, without so much as enquiring into the
case, or the subject, of both which I had some knowledge.

When I saw Mr. Burke, and mentioned the circumstances to him, he particularly
spoke of Mr. Gray, as the fittest Member to bring such matters forward; for,
said Mr. Burke, I am not the proper person to do it, as I am in a treaty with
Mr. Pit about Mr. Hastings's trial. I hope the Attorney General will allow,
that Mr. Burke was then sleeping his obedience. -- But to return to the Society
--

I cannot bring myself to believe, that the general motive of this Society is
any thing more than that by which every former parliamentary opposition has
been governed, and by which the present is sufficiently known. Failing in their
pursuit of power and place within doors, they have now (and that not in a very
mannerly manner) endeavored to possess themselves of that ground out of doors,
which, had it not been made by others, would not have been made by them. They
appear to me to have watched, with more cunning than candor, the progress of a
certain publication, and when they saw it had excited a spirit of enquiry, and
was rapidly spreading, they stepped forward to profit by the opportunity, and
Mr. Fox then called it a Libel. In saying this, he libelled himself.
Politicians of this cast, such, I mean, as those who trim between parties, and
lie by for events, are to be found in every country, and it never yet happened
that they did not do more harm than good. They embarrass business, fritter it
to nothing, perplex the people, and the event to themselves generally is, that
they go just far enough to make enemies of the few, without going far enough to
make friends of the many.

Whoever will read the declarations of this Society, of the 25th of April, and
5th of May, will find a studied reserve upon all the points that are real
abuses. They speak not once of the extravagance of Government, of the
abominable list of unnecessary and sinecure places and pensions, of the
enormity of the Civil List, of the excess of taxes, nor of any one matter that
substantially affects the nation; and from some conversation that has passed in
that Society, it does not appear to me that it is any part of their plan, to
carry this class of reforms into practice. No Opposition Party ever did, when
it gained possession.

In making these free observations, I mean not to enter into contention with
this Society, their incivility toward me is what I should expect from
place-hunting reformers. They are welcome, however, to the ground they have
advanced upon, and I wish that every individual among them may act in the same
upright, uninfluenced, and public spirited manner that I have done. Whatever
reforms may be obtained, and by whatever means, they will be for the benefit of
others, and not of me. I have no other interest in the cause than the interest
of my heart. The part I have acted has been wholly that of a volunteer,
unconnected with party; and when I quit, it shall be as honorably as I began.

I consider the reform of Parliament, by an application to Parliament, as
proposed by the Society, to be a worn-out hackneyed subject, about which the
nation is tired, and the parties are deceiving each other. It is not a subject
that is cognizable before Parliament, because no Government has a right to
alter itself, either in whole or in part. The right, and the exercise of that
right, appertains to the nation only, and the proper mean is by a national
convention, elected for the purpose, by all the people. By this, the will of
the nation, whether to reform or not, or what the reform shall be, or how far
it shall extend, will be known, and it cannot be known by any other means.
Partial addresses, or separate associations, are not testimonies of the general
will.

It is, however, certain that the opinions of men, with respect to systems and
principles of government, are changing fast in all countries. The alteration in
England, within the space of little more than a year, is far greater than could
then have been believed, and it is daily and hourly increasing. It moves along
the country with the silence of thought. The enormous expense of Government has
provoked men to think, by making them feel; and the Proclamation has served to
increase jealousy and disgust. To prevent, therefore, those commotions which
too often and too suddenly arise from suffocated discontents, it is best that
the general WILL should have the full and free opportunity of being publicly
ascertained and known.

Wretched as the state of representation is in England, it is every day
becoming worse, because the unrepresented parts of the nation are increasing in
population and property, and the represented parts are decreasing. It is,
therefore, no ill grounded estimation to say, that as not one person in seven
is represented, at least fourteen millions of taxes, out of the seventeen
millions, are paid by the unrepresented part; for although copyholds and
leaseholds are assessed to the land tax, the holders are unrepresented. Should
then a general demur take place as to the obligation of paying taxes, on the
ground of not being represented, it is not the Representatives of rotten
Boroughs, nor Special Juries, that can decide the question. This is one of the
possible cases that ought to be foreseen, in order to prevent the
inconveniences that might arise to numerous individuals, by provoking it.

I confess I have no idea of petitioning for rights. Whatever the rights of
people are, they have a right to them, and none have a right either to withhold
them, or to grant them. Government ought to be established on such principles
of justice as to exclude the occasion of all such applications, for wherever
they appear they are virtually accusations.

I wish that Mr. Gray, since he has embarked in the business, would take the
whole of it into consideration. He will then see that the right of reforming
the state of the Representation does not reside in Parliament, and that the
only motion he could consistently make, would be, that Parliament should
recommend the election of a convention by all the people, because all pay
taxes. But whether Parliament recommended it or not, the right of the nation
would neither be lessened nor increased thereby.

As to Petitions from the unrepresented part, they ought not to be looked for.
As well might it be expected that Manchester, Sheffield, etc. should petition
the rotten Boroughs, as that they should petition the Representatives of those
Boroughs. Those two towns alone pay far more taxes than all the rotten Boroughs
put together, and it is scarcely to be expected they should pay their court
either to the Boroughs, or the Borough-mongers.

It ought also to be observed, that what is called Parliament, is composed of
two houses that have always declared against the right of each other to
interfere in any matter that related to the circumstances of either,
particularly that of election. A reform, therefore, in the representation
cannot, on the ground they have individually taken, become the subject of an
act of Parliament, because such a mode would include the interference, against
which the Commons on their part have protested; but must, as well on the ground
of formality, as on that of right, proceed from a National Convention.

Let Mr. Gray, or any other man, sit down and endeavor to put his thoughts
together, for the purpose of drawing up an application to Parliament for a
reform of Parliament, and he will soon convince himself of the folly of the
attempt. He will find that he cannot get on; that he cannot make his thoughts
join, so as to produce any effect; for whatever formality of words he may use,
they will unavoidably include two ideas directly opposed to each other; the one
in setting forth the reasons, the other in praying for the relief, and the two,
when placed together, would stand thus: -- The Representation in Parliament is
so very corrupt, that we can no longer confide in it, -- and, therefore,
confiding in the justice and wisdom of Parliament, we pray, etc. etc.

The heavy manner in which every former proposed application to Parliament has
dragged, sufficiently shows, that though the nation might not exactly see the
awkwardness of the measure, it could not clearly see its way by that mean. To
this also may be added another remark, which is, that the worse Parliament is,
the less will be the inclination to petition it. This indifference, viewed as
it ought to be, is one of the strongest censures the public can express. It is
as if they were to say, "Ye are not worth reforming."

Let any man examine the Court-Kalendar of Placemen in both Houses, and the
manner in which the Civil List operates, and he will be at no loss to account
for this indifference and want of confidence on one side, nor of the opposition
to reforms on the other.

Besides the numerous list of paid persons exhibited in the Court-Kalendar,
which so indecently stares the nation in the face, there is an unknown number
of masked Pensioners, which renders Parliament still more suspected.

Who would have supposed that Mr. Burke, holding forth as he formerly did
against secret influence, and corrupt majorities, should become a concealed
Pensioner? I will now state the case, not for the little purpose of exposing
Mr. Burke, but to show the inconsistency of any application to a body of men,
more than half of whom, as far as the nation can at present know, may be in the
same case with himself.

Toward the end of Lord North's administration, Mr. Burke brought a bill into
Parliament, generally known by the name of Mr. Burke's Reform Bill; in which,
among other things, it is enacted, That no pension, exceeding the sum of three
hundred pounds a year, shall be granted to any one person, and that the whole
amount of the pensions granted in one year shall not exceed six hundred pounds;
a list of which, together with the names of the persons to whom the same are
granted, shall be laid before Parliament in twenty days after the beginning of
each session, until the whole pension list shall be reduced to ninety thousand
pounds. A provisory clause is afterward added, That it shall be lawful for the
First Commissioner of the Treasury, to return into the Exchequer, any pension
or annuity, without a name, on his making oath that such pension or annuity is
not directly or indirectly for the benefit, use, or behoof, of any Member of
the House of Commons.

But soon after that Administration ended, and the party Mr. Burke acted with
came into power, it appears, from the circumstances I am going to relate, that
Mr. Burke became himself a Pensioner in disguise; in a similiar manner, as if a
pension had been granted in the name of John Nokes, to be privately paid to and
enjoyed by Tom Styles. The name of Edmund Burke does not appear in the original
transaction: but after the pension was obtained, Mr. Burke wanted to make the
most of it at once, by selling or mortgaging it; and the gentleman, in whose
name the pension stands, applied to one of the public offices for that purpose.
This unfortunately brought forth the name of Edmund Burke, as the real
Pensioner of 1,500l. per annum. When men trumpet forth what they call the
blessings of the Constitution, it ought to be known what sort of blessings they
allude to.

As to the Civil List, of a million a year, it is not to be supposed that any
one man can eat, drink, or consume the whole upon himself. The case is, that
above half this sum is annually apportioned among Courtiers, and Court Members,
of both Houses, in places and offices, altogether insignificant and perfectly
useless, as to every purpose of civil, rational, and manly government. For
instance,

Of what use in the science and system of Government is what is called a Lord
Chamberlain, a Master and a Mistress of the Robes, a Master of the Horse, a
Master of the Hawks, and an hundred other such things. Laws derive no
additional force, nor additional excellence, from such mummery.

In the disbursements of the Civil List for the year 1786 (which may be seen in
Sir John Sinclair's History of the Revenue) are four separate charges for this
mummery office of Chamberlain.

1st L. 38,778 17 2d 3,000 3d 24,069 19 4th 10,000 18 3 75,849 14 3

besides L. 1,119 charged for Alms.

From this sample, the rest may be guessed at. As to the Master of the Hawks,
(there are no hawks kept, and if there were, it is no reason the people should
pay the expense of feeding them, many of whom are put to it to get bread for
their children) his salary is 1,372 l. 10 s.

And besides a list of items of this kind, sufficient to fill a quire of paper,
the Pension lists alone are 107,404 l. 13 s. 4 d. which is a greater sum than
all the expenses of the federal Government in America amount to.

Among the items, there are two I had no expectation of finding, and which, in
this day of enquiry after Civil List influence, ought to be exposed. The one is
an annual payment of one thousand seven hundred pounds to the Dissenting
Ministers in England, and eight hundred pounds to those of Ireland.

This is the fact; and the distribution as I am informed, is as follows: The
whole sum of L. 1,700 is paid to one person, a dissenting Minister in London,
who divides it among eight others, and those eight among such others as they
please. The Laybody of the Dissenters, and many of their principal Ministers,
have long considered it as dishonorable, and have endeavored to prevent it,
but still it continues to be secretly paid; and as the world has sometimes seen
very fulsome Addresses from parts of that body, it may naturally be supposed
that the receivers, like Bishops and other Court-Clergy, are not idle in
promoting them. How the money is distributed in Ireland, I know not.

To recount all the secret history of the Civil List is not the intention of
this publication. It is sufficient, in this place, to expose its general
character, and the mass of influence it keeps alive. It will necessarily become
one of the objects of reform; and therefore enough is said to show that, under
its operation, no application to Parliament can be expected to succeed, nor can
consistently be made.

Such reforms will not be promoted by the Party that is in possession of those
places, nor by the Opposition who are waiting for them; and as to a mere reform
in the state of the Representation, under the idea that another Parliament,
differently elected to the present, but still a component third part of the
same system, and subject to the control of the other two parts, will abolish
those abuses, is altogether delusion; because it is not only impracticable on
the ground of formality, but is unwisely exposing another set of men to the
same corruptions that have tainted the present.

Were all the objects that require a reform accomplishable by a mere reform in
the state of the Representation, the persons who compose the present Parliament
might, with rather more propriety be asked to abolish all the abuses
themselves, than be applied to as the mere instruments of doing it by a future
Parliament. If the virtue be wanting to abolish the abuse, it is also wanting
to act as the means, and the nation must, of necessity, proceed by some other
plan.

Having thus endeavored to show what the abject condition of Parliament is,
and the impropriety of going a second time over the same ground that has before
miscarried, I come to the remaining part of the subject.

There ought to be, in the constitution of every country, a mode of referring
back, on any extraordinary occasion, to the sovereign and original constituent
power, which is the nation itself. The right of altering any part of a
Government cannot, as already observed, reside in the Government, or that
Government might make itself what it pleased.

It ought also to be taken for granted, that though a nation may feel
inconveniences, either in the excess of taxation, or in the mode of
expenditure, or in any thing else, it may not at first be sufficiently assured
in what part of its government the defect lies, or where the evil originates.
It may be supposed to be in one part, and on enquiry be found to be in another;
or partly in all. This obscurity is naturally interwoven with what are called
mixed Governments.

Be, however, the reform to be accomplished whatever it may, it can only follow
in consequence of first obtaining a full knowledge of all the causes that have
rendered such reform necessary, and every thing short of this is guess-work or
frivolous cunning. In this case, it cannot be supposed that any application to
Parliament can bring forward this knowledge. That body is itself the supposed
cause, or one of the supposed causes, of the abuses in question; and cannot be
expected, and ought not to be asked, to give evidence against itself. The
enquiry, therefore, which is of necessity the first step in the business,
cannot be entrusted to Parliament, but must be undertaken by a distinct body of
men, separated from every suspicion of corruption or influence.

Instead, then, of referring to rotten Boroughs and absurd Corporations for
Addresses, or hawking them about the country to be signed by a few dependant
^enants, the real and effectual mode would be to come at once to the point, and
to ascertain the sense of the nation by electing a National Convention. By this
method, as already observed, the general WILL, whether to reform or not, or
what the reform shall be, or how far it shall extend, will be known, and it
cannot be known by any other means. Such a body, empowered and supported by the
nation, will have authority to demand information upon all matters necessary to
be enquired into; and no Minister, nor any other person, will dare to refuse
it. It will then be seen whether seventern millions of taxes are necessary, and
for what purposes they are expended. The concealed Pensioners will then be
obliged to unmask; and the source of influence and corruption, if any such
there be, will be laid open to the nation, not for the purpose of revenge, but
of redress.

By taking this public and national ground, all objections against partial
Addresses on one side, or private associations on the other, will be done away.
THE NATION WILL DECREE ITS OWN REFORMS; and the clamor about Party and
Faction, or Ins or Outs, will become ridiculous.

The plan and organization of a Convention is easy in practice.

In the first place, the number of inhabitants in every county can be
sufficiently enough known, from the number of houses assessed to the House and
Window-light tax in each county. This will give the rule for apportioning the
number of Members to be elected to the National Convention in each of the
counties.

If the total number of inhabitants in England be seven millions, and the total
number of Members to be elected to the Convention be one thousand, the number
of Members to be elected in a county containing one hundred and fifty thousand
inhabitants will be twenty-one, and in like proportion for any other county.

As the election of a Convention must, in order to ascertain the general sense
of the nation, go on grounds different from that of Parliamentary elections,
the mode that best promises this end will have no difficulties to combat with
from absurd customs and pretended rights. The right of every man will be the
same, whether he lives in a city, a town, or a village. The custom of attaching
Rights to place, or in other words to inanimate matter, instead of to the
person, independently of place, is too absurd to make any part of a rational
argument.

As every man in the nation of the age of twenty-one years pays taxes, either
out of the property he possesses, or out of the product of his labor, which is
property to him; and is amenable in his own person to every law of the land; so
has every one the same equal right to vote, and no one part of a nation, nor
any individual, has a right to dispute the right of another. The man who should
do this ought to forfeit the exercise of his own right, for a term of years.
This would render the punishment consistent with the crime.

When a qualification to vote is regulated by years, it is placed on the
firmest possible ground, because the qualification is such as nothing but dying
before the time can take away; and the equality of Rights, as a principle, is
recognized in the act of regulating the exercise. But when Rights are placed
upon, or made dependant upon property, they are on the most precarious of all
tenures. "Riches make themselves wings, and fly away," and the rights fly with
them; and thus they become lost to the man when they would be of most value.

It is from a strange mixture of tyranny and cowardice, that exclusions have
been set up and continued. The boldness to do wrong at first, changes
afterward into cowardly craft, and at last into fear. The Representatives in
England appear now to act as if they were afraid to do right, even in part,
lest it should awaken the nation to a sense of all the wrongs it has endured.
This case serves to show that the same conduct that best constitutes the safety
of an individual, namely, a strict adherence to principle, constitutes also the
safety of a Government, and that without it safety is but an empty name. When
the rich plunder the poor of his rights, it becomes an example to the poor to
plunder the rich of his property; for the rights of the one are as much
property to him as wealth is property to the other, and the little all is as
dear as the much. It is only by setting out on just principles that men are
trained to be just to each other; and it will always be found, that when the
rich protect the rights of the poor, the poor will protect the property of the
rich. But the gaurantee, to be effectual, must be parliamentarily reciprocal.

Exclusions are not only unjust, but they frequently operate as injuriously to
the party who monopolizes, as to those who are excluded. When men seek to
exclude others from participating in the exercise of any right, they should, at
least, be assured that they can effectually perform the whole of the business
they undertake; for unless they do this, themselves will be losers by the
monopoly. This has been the case with respect to the monopolized right of
Election. The monopolizing party has not been able to keep the Parliamentary
Representation, to whom the power of taxation was entrusted, in the state it
ought to have been, and have thereby multiplied taxes upon themselves equally
with those who were excluded.

A great deal has been, and will continue to be said, about disqualifications,
arising from the commission of offenses; but were this subject urged to its
full extent, it would disqualify a great number of the present Electors,
together with their Representatives; for, of all offenses, none are more
destructive to the morals of Society than Bribery and Corruption. It is,
therefore, civility to such persons to pass this subject over, and to give them
a fair opportunity of recovering, or rather of creating character.

Every thing, in the present mode of electioneering in England, is the reverse
of what it ought to he, and the vulgarity that attends elections is no o^^er
than the natural consequence of inverting the order of the system.

In the first place, the Candidate seeks the Elector, instead of the Elector
seeking for a Representative; and the Electors are advertized as being in the
interest of the Candidate, instead of the Candidate being in the interest of
the Electors. The Candidate pays the Elector for his vote, instead of the
Nation paying the Representative for his time and attendance on public
business. The complaint for an undue election is brought by the Candidate, as
if he, and not the Electors, were the party aggrieved; and he takes on himself,
at any period of the elector, to break it up, by declining, as if the election
was in his right, and not in theirs.

The compact that was entered into at the last Westminster election between two
of the Candidates (Mr. Fox and Lord Hood) was an indecent violation of the
principles of election. The Candidates assumed, in their own persons, the
rights of the Electors; for it was only in the body of the Electors, and not at
all in the Candidates, that the right of making any such compact or compromise
could exist. But the principle of Election and Representation is so completely
done away, in every stage thereof, that inconsistency has no long^r the power
of surprising.

Neither from elections thus conducted, nor from rotten Borough Addressers, nor
from County-meetings, promoted by Placemen and Pensioners, can the sense of the
nation be known. It is still corruption appealing to itself. But a Convention
of a thousand persons, fairly elected, would bring every matter to a decided
issue.

As to County-meetings, it is only persons of leisure, or those who live near
to the place of meeting, that can attend, and the number on such occasions is
but like a drop in the bucket compared with the whole. The only consistent
service which such meetings could render, would be that of apportioning the
county into convenient districts; and when this is done, each district might,
according to its number of inhabitants, elect its quota of County Members to
the National Convention; and the vote of each Elector might be taken in the
parish where he resided, either by ballot or by voice, as he should choose to
give it.

A National Convention thus formed would bring together the sense and opinions
of every part of the nation, fairly taken. The science of Government, and the
interest of the Public, and of the several parts thereof, would then undergo an
ample and rational discussion, freed from the language of parliamentary
disguise.

But in all deliberations of this kind, though men have a right to reason with,
and endeavor to convince each other, upon any matter that respects their
common good, yet, in point of practice, the majority of opinions, when known,
forms a rule for the whole, and to this rule every good citizen practically
conforms.

Mr. Burke, as if he knew, (for every concealed Pensioner has the opportunity
of knowing) that the abuses acted under the present system, are two flagrant to
be palliated, and that the majority of opinions, whenever such abuses should be
made public, would be for a general and effectual reform, has endeavored to
preclude the event, by sturdily denying the right of a majority of a nation to
act as a whole. Let us bestow a thought upon this case.

When any matter is proposed as a subject for consultation, it necessarily
implies some mode of decision. Common consent, arising from absolute necessity,
has placed this in a majority of opinions; because without it there can be no
decision, and consequently no order. It is, perhaps, the only case in which
mankind, however various in their ideas upon other matters, can consistently be
unanimous; because it is a mode of decision derived from the primary original
right of every individual concerned; that right being first individually
excercised in giving an opinion, and whether that opinion shall arrange with
the minority or the majority, is a subsequent accidental thing that neither
increases nor diminishes the individual original right itself. Prior to any
debate, enquiry or vestigation, it is not supposed to be known on which side
the majority of opinions will fall, and therefore whilst this mode of decision
secures to every one the right of giving an opinion, it admits to every one an
equal chance in the ultimate event.

Among the matters that will present themselves to the consideration of a
National Convention, there is one, wholly of a domestic nature, but, so
marvelously loaded with confusion, as to appear, at first sight, almost
impossible to be reformed. I mean the condition of what is called Law.

But, if we examine into the cause from whence this confusion, now so much the
subject of universal complaint, is produced, not only the remedy will
immediately present itself, but with it, the means of preventing the like case
hereafter.

In the first place, the confusion has generated itself from the absurdity of
every Parliament assuming to be eternal in power, and the laws partake in a
similiar manner of this assumption. They have no period of legal or natural
expiration; and, however absurd in principle, or inconsistent in practice many
of them have become, they still are, if not especially repealed, considered as
making a part of the general mass. By this means the body of what is called
Law, is spread over a space of several hundred years, comprehending laws
obsolete, laws repugnant, laws ridiculous, and every other kind of laws
forgotten or remembered; and what renders the case still worse is, that the
confusion multiplies with the progress of time. In the time of Henry the
Fourth, a law was passed, making it felony to multiply gold or silver, or to
make use of the crust or multiplication, and this law remained two hundred and
eighty-six years upon the statute books. It was then repeated as being
ridiculous and injurious.


To bring this misshapen monster into form, and to prevent its lapsing again
into a wilderness state, only two things, and those very simple, are necessary.

The first is, to review the whole mass of laws, and to bring forward such only
as are worth retaining, and let all the rest drop; and to give to the laws so
brought forward a new era commencing from the time of such reform.

Secondly, that at the expiration of every twenty-one years, (or any other
stated period) a like review shall again be taken, and the laws found proper to
be retained, be again carried forward, commencing with that date, and the
useless laws dropped and discontinued. By this means there can be no obsolete
laws, and scarcely such a thing as laws standing in direct or equivocal
contradiction to each other, and every person will know the period of time to
which he is to look back for all the laws in being.

It is worth remarking, that whilst every other branch of science is brought
within some commodious system, and the study of it simplified by easy methods,
the laws take the contrary course, and become every year more complicated,
entangled, confused, and obscure.

Among the paragraphs which the Attorney General has taken from the Rights of
Man, and put into his information, one is, that were I have said, that with
respect to regular law, there is scarcely such a thing.

As I do not know whether the Attorney General means to show this expression to
be libellous, because it is TRUE, or because it is FALSE, I shall make no other
reply to him in this place than by remarking, that if almanac makers had not
been more judicious than lawmakers, the study of almanacks would by this time
have become as abstruse as the study of law, and we should hear of a library of
almanacks as we now do of statutes; but by the simple operation of letting the
obsolete matter drop, and carrying forward that only which is proper to be
retained, all that is necessary to be known, is found within the space of a
year, and laws also admit of being kept within some given period.

I shall here close this letter, so far as it respects the Addressers, the
Proclamation, and the Prosecution; and shall offer a few observations to the
Society stiling itself THE FRIENDS OF THE PEOPLE.

That the science of government is beginning to be better understood than in
former times, and that the age of fiction and political superstition, and of
craft and mystery is passing away, are matters which the experience of every
day proves to be true, as well in England as in other countries.

As therefore it is impossible to calculate the silent progress of opinion, and
also impossible to govern a nation after it has changed its habits of thinking,
by the craft or policy that it was governed by before; the only true method to
prevent popular discontents and commotions is, to throw, by every fair and
rational argument, all the light upon the subject that can possibly be thrown;
and, at the same time, to open the means of collecting the general sense of the
nation; and this cannot, as already observed, be done by any plan so
effectually as a National Convention. Here individual opinion will quiet itself
by having a center to rest upon.

The society already mentioned, (which is made up of men of various
descriptions, but chiefly of those called Foxites,) appears to me, either to
have taken wrong grounds from want of judgment, or to have acted with cunning
reserve. It is now amusing the people with a new phrase, namely, that of a
temperate and moderate reform, the interpretation of which is, a continuance of
the abuses as long as possible. If we cannot hold all lot us hold some.

Who are those that are frightened at reforms? Are the public afraid that their
taxes should be lessened too much? Are they afraid that sinecure places and
pensions should be abolished too fast? Are the poor afraid that their condition
should be rendered too comfortable? Is the worn-out mechanic, or the aged and
decayed tradesman, frightened at the prospect of receiving ten pounds a year
out of the surplus taxes? Is the soldier frightened at the thoughts of his
discharge, and three shillings per week during life? Is the sailor afraid that
press-warrants will be abolished? The Society mistakes the fears of
borough-mongers, placemen, and pensioners, for the fears of the people; and the
temperate and moderate Reform it talks of, is calculated to suit the condition
of the former.

Those words, "temperate and moderate," are words either of political
cowardice, or of cunning, or seduction. -- A thing, moderately good, is not so
good as it ought to be. Moderation in temper is always a virtue; but moderation
in principle is a species of vice. But who is to be the judge of what is a
temperate and moderate Reform? The Society is the representative of nobody;
neither can the unrepresented part of the nation commit this power to those in
Parliament, in whose election they had no choice; and, therefore, even upon the
ground the Society has taken, recourse must be had to a National Convention.

The objection which Mr. Fox made to Mr. Grey's proposed Motion for a
Parliamentary Reform was, that it contained no plan. -- It certainly did not.
But the plan very easily presents itself; and whilst it is fair for all
parties, it prevents the dangers that might otherwise arise from private or
popular discontent.

THOMAS PAIN.


