OBSERVATIONS ON THE COW-POX.

BY WILLIAM WOODVILLE, M. D. PHYSICIAN TO THE SMALLPOX AND INOCULATION
HOSPITALS.

LONDON, PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM PHILLIPS, GIORGI YARD, LOMBARD STREET.

1800.

TO EDWARD JENNER, M.D. F.R.S. F.L.S. etc.
SIR,
THAT the Vaccine matter, with which the inoculations have been carried on in
the Hospital, was contaminated with that of the Variolous, and that a hybrid
disease has in consequence been propagated, not only by me, but also by others,
who have been supplied with that matter, is a charge which I know to be
unfounded, and which it was my duty to refute.

The performance of this task has, however, been very painful to me, from being
unable to avoid a certain degree of recrimination, which attaches to a man, for
whom I have long entertained a friendly regard, and to whom the public is under
the great obligation of having been made acquainted with a discovery which
promises the most important benefits to society.

I am, SIR, Your obedient Servant, W. WOODVILLE.
Ely PLACE, July 1st, 1800.
I FEEL myself impelled to address the public a second time on the subject of
the inoculation for the Cow-pock, not only because an enlarged experience of it
has now enabled me to produce more decisive evidence of its advantages, but
because some remarks upon my practice of this new inoculation have lately been
made, which call upon me for an immediate reply.

I trust it will be generally acknowledged, that the observations and opinions
formerly adduced by me on this subject, are strictly impartial and
unprejudiced; also, that the facts on which they are founded, have been related
without the least reserve, and with the most scrupulous fidelity:
notwithstanding, my conclusions in respect to a point of considerable
importance have been opposed in a manner which I deem wholly unwarrantable. I
allude to the pustular eruptions which appeared on more than half the patients
first inoculated for the Cow-pock, under my direction; Dr. Jenner, in a late
publication, See his continuation of facts and observations relating to the
variolae vaccinae.
having maintained that those pustules could only proceed from variolous
matter, introduced by inoculation into the constitution along with that of the
vaccine. That objections would be made to this effect might be foreseen, and
they were accordingly anticipated in my Reports, where several facts and
arguments are brought forward to prove, that all the cases which I had
represented as cases of Cow-pox, were produced from the inoculation of the
matter of that disease, uncontaminated with any other. Having done this in a
manner which has generally been deemed satisfactory, I did not now expect that
any gentleman would publicly attempt to subvert my conclusion without first
doing me the justice to show, that the reasons on which it was founded were
defective or fallacious. Although I have been disappointed in this expectation,
yet as I have no other object in view than a discovery of the truth, I will
fully state all the reasons which the ingenious inventor of the new inoculation
has advanced in support of a contrary opinion. He first enters upon the
consideration of pustules at page 7, where he says, "When I consider the great
number of cases of casual inoculation immediately from cows, which have from
time to time presented themselves to my observation, and the many similar
instances which have been communicated to me by medical gentlemen in this
neighborhood: when I consider too, that the matter with which my inoculations
were conducted in the years 1797, 1798, and 1799, was taken from different
cows, and that in no instance any thing like a variolous pustule appeared, I
cannot feel disposed to imagine that eruptions, similar to those described by
Dr. Woodville, have ever been produced by the pure uncontaminated Cow-pox
virus: on the contrary, I do suppose that those which the Doctor speaks of
originated in the action of variolous matter which crept into the constitution
with the vaccine: and this, I presume, happened from the inoculation of a great
number of the patients with variolous matter, (some on the third, others on the
fifth day) after the vaccine had been applied; and it should be observed, that
the matter thus propagated became the source of future inoculations in the
hands of many medical gentlemen, who appeared to have been previously
unacquainted with the nature of the Cow-pox."

Were I to allow the above observations all the force which the author of them
could reasonably expect, they would still amount to no more than negative
proof, and conjectural inference against the evidence of positive facts. It
must, however, be remembered, that the Cow-pox, as casually produced by milking
infected cows, differs considerably from that which is the effect of a regular
inoculation; the local affection in the former case constantly exhibits a deep
blue color, an appearance which the inoculated disease never assumes. The Cows
also, according to Dr. Jenner's own statement, readily communicate the
infection to the persons who milk them, although such persons have undergone
the Smallpox. Medical and Physical Journal, v. i. p. 213.
Dr. Pearson, on the other hand, has informed us, that he made numerous trials
to give the vaccine disease, by inoculation, to those who had previously
received the Smallpox, but that all his attempts proved ineffectual. Therefore
any arguments wholly founded upon the strict analogy between the inoculated and
casual Cow-pox, must be considered as inconclusive.

From the manner in which Dr. Jenner has referred to the inoculations conducted
by him during the years 1797, 1798, and 1799, the reader may be led to infer,
that his experience had been sufficiently extensive to equal mine. But it
appears, from his publication in the summer of 1798, See Dr. Jenner's
Continuation of facts, etc. p. 12.
that his practice had not then extended to more than eight cases, and no
opportunity to inoculate the Cow-pox was offered to him again till he obtained
from me matter for the purpose in February 1799. With this matter, which the
Doctor now reprobates as the contaminated source of pustules, he inoculated
twenty persons, and in a letter to me at that time said, "The rise, progress,
and termination of the pustule created by this virus on the arm, was exactly
that of the true uncontaminated Cow-pox." This virus, however, which Dr. Jenner
from his own experience declared to be so perfectly pure and genuine, was taken
from the arm of an hospital patient, who had 310 pustules, all of which
suppurated. On what ground then can he say, "I cannot feel disposed to imagine
that eruptions similar to those described by Dr. Woodville, have ever been
produced by the pure uncontaminated Cow-pox virus."

As a farther evidence of the genuineness of the Cow-pox matter which I sent to
Dr. Jenner, I have the testimony of Dr. Marshall, who procured some of it from
the persons inoculated by Dr. Jenner, and in the course of five weeks extended
its effects in Gloucestershire to 107 persons, all of whom underwent the
inoculation in the most favorable manner, nor did any pustules that suppurated
appear in a single instance. Dr. Jenner, l. c. p. 19.


Dr. Jenner, in his last publication, has given a transcript of a great part of
Dr. Marshall's letter, in which the above 107 cases are stated; but he does not
represent these cases as the effect of the vaccine matter sent by me from the
Hospital; on the contrary, he professes to lay Dr. M's communication before his
readers, to show the result of the inoculation in particular with the matter
which he procured from a cow at Mr. Clark's farm, at Kentish Town. The very
striking misrepresentation here pointed out must undoubtedly have arisen from
some inadvertency, for those who are most acquainted with Dr. Jenner will, I am
sure, be the last to suspect that he would willingly disguise the truth to
serve any purpose whatever. That I have not here mistated what the Doctor has
said will appear from the following paragraph, introductory to the letter above
referred to. "One experiment, tending to elucidate the point under discussion,
I had myself an opportunity of instituting. On the supposition of its being
possible, that the Cow which ranges over the fertile meadows in the vale of
Gloucester, might generate a virus, differing in some respects in its qualities
from that produced by the animal artificially pampered for the production of
milk for the Metropolis, I procured, during my residence there in the spring,
some Cow-pock virus, from a cow at one of the London milkfarms It was taken by
Mr. Tanner, then a Student at the Veterinary College, from a Cow at Mr. Clark's
farm, at Kentish Town.
It was immediately conveyed into Gloucestershire, to Dr. Marshall, who was
then extensively engaged in the inoculation of the Cow-pox; the general result
of which, and of the inoculation in particular with this matter, I shall lay
before my readers in the following communication from the Doctor." See Dr.
Jenner's Continuation of Facts and Observations relative to the Variolae
vaccinae, p. 11.





Now it is very extraordinary, but certainly a truth, that Dr. Jenner did not
even obtain the matter from Clark's cow till after the date of Dr. M's letter,
which is said to contain an account of its effects by inoculation. Nor does Dr.
Marshall mention the matter received by him from Dr. J. till he had inoculated
423 persons, when in a postscript to the letter, giving a detail of the success
of these inoculations, he says, "I should have observed, that of the patients I
inoculated, and enumerated in my letter, one hundred and twenty-seven were
infected with the matter you sent me from the London cow. I discovered no
dissimilarity of symptoms in these cases from those which I inoculated from the
matter procured in this county: no pustules occurred, except in one or two
cases, where a single one appeared on the inoculated arm: no difference was
apparent in the local inflammation." Dr. Jenner, l. c. p. 19.


Here the whole of what Dr. Marshall has said militates most pointedly against
the opinion of Dr. Jenner, who in the above citation is plainly told, that the
effects of the matter which he conveyed to Dr. M. differed in no respect from
that which had been employed before, and which was sent from the Inoculation
Hospital.

Dr. Jenner has not only given an opinion, that the vaccine matter used by me
at the Hospital was variolated, but he has also ventured to point out how it
happened, viz. "From the inoculation of a great number of the patients with
variolous matter (some on the third, others on the fifth day) after the vaccine
had been applied." The opinion here given would have had greater influence had
the Doctor first condescended to answer the reasons I gave twelve months ago,
to show that it was unfounded: for I can hardly believe that mere conjecture on
his part will be thought of sufficient authority to disannul the facts and
arguments I had advanced.

Should all that Dr. Jenner contends for be granted, still none of his
observations can apply to those patients who had pustules, though inoculated
with matter taken immediately from the cow, and to whom no variolous matter was
applied during the whole progress of the infection. Instances of this kind the
Dr. must have read in my Reports, and must at the same time have known them to
be irreconcilable with his opinion. But I have discovered from repeated
experience, that if the matter of Cow-pox, and that of Smallpox be inserted in
the arm of a patient, even within an inch of each other, so that on the ninth
day the same efflorescence becomes common to both the local infections,
nevertheless, upon inoculating with matter taken from the Cow-pock tumor, the
genuine vaccine disease is invariably produced. And I am convinced from
experience, that the matter thus taken would not be more liable to produce
pustules, or a less favorable disease, than matter procured directly from the
cow.

I have already published several other experiments, to show that the Cow-pox
does not hybridise with the Smallpox, even when inoculation is performed with
the matter of these diseases intimately mixed together in equal quantities. Dr.
Jenner must likewise know, that his friend Dr. Marshall has communicated to him
the following fact, which corroborates this opinion: "I visited a patient with
the confluent Smallpox, and charged a lancet with some of the matter. Two days
afterward I was desired to inoculate a woman and four children with the
Cow-pox, and I inadvertently took the vaccine matter on the same lancet which
was before charged with that of Smallpox. In three days I discovered the
mistake, and fully expected that my five patients would be infected with
Smallpox; but I was agreeably surprised to find the disease to be the genuine
Cow-pox, which proceeded without deviating in any particular from my former
cases." Dr. Jenner, l. c. p. 20.


I have now, I presume, said enough to convince the reader, that Dr. Jenner's
supposition is directly incompatible with established facts; and I hope in
future he will do the Hospital matter the justice to speak of it as it
deserves. It has been employed by many medical gentlemen, both in London and in
the country, and I do not know of one instance in which it has not fully
answered the utmost expectations of the inoculator. In making this remark I do
not exclude As an additional proof I may appeal to his second publication on
the variole vaccinae, where we are informed, that with this matter he
inoculated two persons, viz. S. Jenner, three years and a half, and J. Hill,
four years old. In the former "case a few red spots appeared, which quickly
went off," but Hill had no eruption. From Hill the infection was transferred to
18 persons, on none of whom did it produce any pustules. The red spots which
appeared upon S. Jenner were then regarded by the Dr. as an evidence of the
genuineness of the vaccine disease, because he had observed similar appearances
in the casual Cow-pox. He was therefore led to suppose, that the pustules which
the vaccine matter produced in London, was occasioned by some peculiar
influence of the town air. Since that time, however, Dr. J. has adopted an
opinion, that "the Cow-pox virus assimilates the variolous," and facts, though
stubborn, must as it often happens, bend a little to favor the hypothesis.
Thus, in the Dr's last publication, he says, "In a few weeks after the Cow-pox
was introduced at the Smallpox Hospital, I was favored with some virus from
this stock. In the first instance it produced a few pustules, which did not
maturate; but in the subsequent cases none appeared." The red spots are here
changed into pustules, and appear at first, till the variolous poison is
assimilated by that of the vaccine. Again, at page 22, he says, "Some of my
correspondents have mentioned the appearance of Small pox-like eruptions at the
commencement of their inoculations; but in these cases the matter was derived
from the original stock at the Smallpox Hospital." -- But "it is the nature of
an hypothesis, when once a man has conceived it, that it assimilates every
thing to itself as proper nourishment, and from the moment of your begetting
it, it generally grows the stronger by every thing you see, hear, or
understand." -- Trist. Shandy.
Dr. Jenner, for in a letter to me the Dr. acknowledges that it had succeeded
better than any of the vaccine matter which he had tried before. I beg also to
observe, that it had a very strong claim to the Doctor's gratitude; for of the
four hundred and twenty-three inoculations brought forward by him to show the
advantages of the vaccine virus as used by Dr. Marshall, two hundred and
ninety-six were performed with the matter sent from the Hospital.

Last summer Mr. Abernethy procured at the Hospital some Cow-pock matter, which
he transmitted to the Rev. Mr. Holt, Rector of Finmere, near Buckingham: with
this matter the Rector inoculated upwards of three hundred of his parishioners,
in all of whom the disease proved mild and tractable. No variolous-like
eruptions were produced, except on two persons, who had each one hundred
pustules. See Medical and Physical Journal, vol. i. p. 401.


The Rev. Mr. Finch, who was supplied by Mr. Holt with some of this vaccine
matter, inoculated 714 persons, on none of whom did any pustules, resembling
those of the Smallpox, appear. Now as Dr. Jenner does not believe that
variolous-like pustules have ever been produced by the pure uncontaminated
Cowpock virus, he is involved in the dilemma of either relinquishing this
opinion, or of admitting that the above were not cases of genuine Cow-pox,
because in two of Mr. Holt's cases pustules occurred.

Although I differ in opinion from Dr. Jenner in not imputing the pustular
eruptions, produced in the cases at the Hospital, to any adulteration of the
vaccine matter, employed in the inoculations, yet I readily admit that they
have been and still continue to be the effect of some adventitious cause,
independent of the Cow-pox.

This will clearly appear, from the following observations, which likewise tend
to place the subject in a new light.

I had not long practiced the vaccine inoculation at the Hospital, before I was
requested to extend it into private families in the Metropolis, where I soon
discovered that the Cow-pox uniformly appeared in its mildest form, and was
never attended with eruptions. I also supplied several medical gentlemen with
the vaccine matter, which was used by them with the like result. Hence I began
to suspect that there existed some peculiar cause which rendered the patients
under the vaccine inoculation in the Hospital more liable to pustules than
others: and that this suspicion was well founded I have since, from daily
experience, been fully convinced.

At various times I procured the vaccine virus, as produced in different cows,
and with it inoculated patients in the Hospital; but the effects of all the
matter I tried were perfectly similar: and pustules proved to be not less
frequently the consequence of these trials than of those made with the matter
formerly employed.

The last matter of the vaccine poison which I introduced into the Hospital,
was obtained from Dr. Jenner, and originally taken from Clark's cow, before
noticed: with this matter I inoculated at the Hospital on the same day three
patients, on one of whom about 100 variolous-like pustules were produced. This
instance, and numerous others of the like kind which I could adduce, decidedly
prove, that where there can be no doubt entertained of the purity of the
Cow-pock matter, with which the patients in the Hospital are inoculated,
pustules will frequently be the consequence.

On the other hand I have to observe, from daily experience during the last
twelve months, that among the great numbers of children residing in various
parts of London, to whom I have transferred the Cow-pock infection, no instance
of pustules that maturated has occurred. Now as these different effects of the
disease between the patients in, and those out of the Hospital did not depend
upon any difference or alteration of the matter with which the inoculations
were performed, the only cause remaining to which the frequent occurrence of
pustules on the former can be rationally referred, is the variolated atmosphere
of the Hospital, which those patients were necessarily obliged to inspire
during the progress of the Cow-pox infection.

Did it not lead me too much into detail, I should show from many circumstances
relating to the patients in the Inoculation Hospital, that other reasons might
from thence be adduced to support the opinion here advanced.

Mr. Evans, Surgeon, at Ketley, in Shropshire, is the only person, except
myself, who has given an account of the variolous and vaccine inoculations
carried on separately in different persons at the same time, and in the same
house, so that several of his patients, while under the vaccine infection, were
exposed to the variolous effluvia. The number of those which he inoculated for
the Cow-pox amounted to sixty-eight; and it is worthy of remark, that more than
one-half of these patients had pustules. Many of Mr. Evan's patients were
inoculated with matter sent from Dr. Jenner.
It is true that the eruptions very rarely maturated; but still their frequent
occurrence would seem to show they arose from the same cause as those at the
Hospital. I suspect also, that in those places where the Smallpox is
epidemick, or very generally prevailing, the Cow-pox will be found to be
equally liable to excite pustules as in the Hospital.

During the very general and fatal prevalence of the Smallpox at a village
eight miles distant from London, more than 100 persons were inoculated under my
direction for the Cow-pox, of whom one in five had eruptions; and as these
furnish the only instances which I have experienced, out of the Hospital, of
the Cow-pox producing the variolous-like pustules, I am disposed to attribute
them to the adventitious cooperation of the variolous atmosphere, to which the
patients were exposed. I have lately been favored with some communications
from the country, which tend to confirm this opinion.
In what way the variolous miasms act in thus modifying the Cow-pox, or why
they cooperate in some and not in all cases of vaccine infection, I shall not
even venture a conjecture: the causes probably will continue as inexplicable as
those constitutional peculiarities which produce all the varieties of Smallpox.

A month had scarcely elapsed after the publication of my Reports on the
vaccine disease, before I thought it necessary to inform the public, that the
Cow-pock cases at the Hospital had become considerably milder: observing that
out of the 310 inoculations, only 39 were attended with pustules, viz. out of
the first 100, nineteen produced pustules; out of the second, 13; and out of
the last 110, only seven excited pustules. Since the above statement, which was
published in July, 1799, the new inoculation has by me, or under my immediate
direction, been extended to about 2000 persons, with none of whom did the
infection occasion a severe disorder, or excite one alarming symptom.

In the Hospital, however, the disease still continues to occasionally produce
pustules, though not more than in the proportion of three or four cases out of
100. But in my private practice of inoculation for the Cow-pox, which has been
very extensive, I have not met with one instance in which any pustules,
resembling those of the Smallpox, occurred. Hence the advantages of this
inoculation over those of that of the variolous, are (as far as relates to the
comparative severity of the disorder which they respectively excite) most
satisfactorily evinced.

In order to show that those who had undergone the Cow-pox resisted the
infection of the Smallpox, I observed in my Reports, that upwards of 400 of
the patients who had received the former disease, were afterward inoculated
for the latter, which in no instance was produced; though more than 100 of the
patients had the vaccine disease so very slightly, that it neither produced any
perceptible indisposition nor pustules. In addition to this, I can now say,
that more than 1000 of those who had undergone the new inoculation, have been
put to the same test, and that the like result has been experienced.

The above facts, added to a multiplicity of others of a similar import,
published by several professional men, clearly demonstrate, that the Cow-pox
inoculation promises most important benefits to society; and under this
conviction I congratulate the public on the great progress it is making, by
which the real value of the invention will soon become generally acknowledged,
and duly appreciated.

It was not to be expected that a disease originating in Brutes should be
recommended as a substitute for the Smallpox, and for this purpose be
transferred to the human race, without exciting much obloquy and opposition:
indeed, several of the most valuable discoveries in medicine, have met with a
similar reception; among these may be included inoculation of the Smallpox,
against which the clamor became so considerable, that it fell into disuse for
several years. To regulate the disputes which the introduction of that practice
into this country occasioned, and to direct the controversy to the true points
at issue, Dr. Jurin, then secretary to the Royal Society, judiciously stated,
that the fate of inoculation depended upon the decision of the two following
questions:

First, "Whether the distemper, given by inoculation, be an effectual security
to the patient against his having the Smallpox afterward in the natural way?

Secondly, "Whether the hazard of the inoculation be considerably less than
that of the natural Smallpox."

The application of these remarks to our inquiries into the merits of the
vaccine, compared with those of the variolous inoculation, is too obvious to
require being pointed out. Now, if by distemper in the first query we
understand that of the Cow-pox, and if in the second we add new immediately
before inoculation, and substitute inoculated for natural, I would answer both
questions in the affirmative, presuming that the facts already brought forward
on the subject, clearly decide the Cow-pock inoculation to be preferable to
that of the Smallpox.

An opinion has been propagated, and with several persons has had considerable
influence, that the power of resisting the insection of the Smallpox, which
the constitution derives from the vaccine disease, will continue only for a few
years: but this is mere conjecture, contradicted by facts of casual cases of
Cow-pox, and contrary to analogy.

We have abundant evidence to show, that the Cow-pox and Smallpox are closely
allied, and the effects of the former, by preventing the action of the latter,
seem to prove that these diseases, are in respect to a very principal point,
essentially the same: and as the change which the constitution undergoes from
the vaccine disease producing the effect abovementioned must be similar to
that occasioned by the Smallpox, why should it not be equally permanent?

In regard to the comparative mildness of the vaccine and variolous diseases,
as produced from inoculation, I have been enabled to give a very different
report from that which I published last year. The reason why several of the
Cow-pox cases then at the Hospital proved severe, like those of the inoculated
Smallpox, has already been sufficiently explained, and will, I trust, have the
effect of placing the Cow-pock inoculation in a more advantageous point of view
than my former Reports presented.

I have before observed, that of the last 2000 cases of Cow-pox under my care,
not a single alarming symptom was excited; and I may now add, that during the
last eight months I have not met with one instance of the vaccine disease,
which has not been as favorable as the mildest cases of variolous inoculation.
I have no doubt, therefore, that the inoculated Cow-pox is as much milder than
the inoculated Smallpox, as the latter disease is milder than the casual
Smallpox: nay, it seems to me from the very benign form in which the vaccine
pock has of late invariably appeared, that it may be considered as a disease
perfectly harmless in its effects. -- Indeed, upon this consideration, several
persons have been persuaded to have their children inoculated for the disease,
although they were very doubtful of the reality of its antivariolous power. For
if it proved a security to the children against the infection of the Smallpox,
the object would be attained by the safest means: if it did not, no harm would
arise from the experiment, since it was tried merely as a preliminary expedient
to the inoculation for the Smallpox. The result, however, has constantly
furnished additional evidence in favor of the new inoculation, and of course
has tended greatly to promote the adoption of it in London.

Another consideration, highly important to the community is, that as the
Cow-pox, unless from the adventitious circumstances beforementioned, very
rarely, if ever, appears with variolous-like pustules, it would seem incapable
of propagating itself by effluvia. A child who had neither undergone the
Smallpox nor Cow-pox slept every night in the same bed with its father,
mother, and brother, during the whole time the three latter were under
inoculation for the Cow-pox; yet the child did not receive the disease till
sometime afterward, in consequence of inoculation.
Hence by the substitution of the vaccine for the variolous inoculation, the
casual spreading of the Smallpox from the inoculated, a circumstance which has
greatly contributed to swell the bills of mortality for the metropolis, and of
which the public has long justly complained, is completely avoided. Nor is it
unreasonable to conclude, that if the new inoculation were to be universally
adopted, the variolous disease, in process of time, may be wholly extinguished.

In my former publication on the Cow-pox I subjoined a tabular statement of the
cases, in order to show at one view the result of each; and it was my intention
to continue this table, so as to include all the inoculations that have since
been under my direction: but as I now find such a statement could not be
comprised in less than one hundred pages, and from what has already been
observed would be rendered in a great measure useless, I trust the reader will
readily excuse its omission. I shall therefore conclude the subject with some
practical remarks.

Those who have had much experience in inoculating with the matter of the
vaccine pock, must have observed that it is more apt to fail in communicating
the infection than variolous matter, especially if it be suffered to dry upon
the lancet before it is used. This does not seem to depend upon the virus of
the former being more volatile and more easily carried off by evaporation than
that of the latter, but from its becoming more hard and less dissoluble upon
exsiccation. Care should therefore be taken to moisten it a considerable time
before it is used. When fluid matter is employed, the lancet should be held
nearly at a right angle with the skin, in order that the infectious fluid may
gravitate to the point of the instrument, which in this direction should be
made to scratch the cuticle repeatedly, until it reach the true skin, and
become tinged with blood. This method has many advantages over the common
puncture, and I have found it a more convenient and effectual mode of
performing the inoculation than any other. It may be remarked, however, that
there are persons who have never had the Smallpox, and are incapable of
receiving it by inoculation, or by any other means whatever. The proportion of
these to those liable to the disease have been differently stated by authors; I
have not found them to be more than about one in sixty; but as such persons
also resist the infection of the Cow-pox, the inoculation of the latter must
therefore sometimes fail, independently of the mode in which it is performed,
or of the matter employed.

When a considerable tumor, and an extensive redness take place at the
inoculated part within two or three days after the infectious matter has been
applied, the failure of inoculation may be considered as certain, as where
neither redness nor tumor is the consequence. This rapid and premature
advancement of the inflammation will always be sufficient to prevent the
inoculator from mistaking such cases for those of efficient inoculation. But
there are other circumstances under which I have found the inoculation to be
equally ineffectual, and which as being more likely to deceive the inoculator,
require his utmost circumspection and discrimination. I here allude to cases in
which it happens, that though the local affection does not exhibit much more
inflammation than is usual, yet neither vesicle nor pustule supervenes; and in
which, about the sixth or seventh day, it rapidly advances into an irregular
suppuration, producing a festering, or crustaceous sore. Care, however, should
be taken to distinguish this case from that in which the inoculated part
assumes a pustular form, though it continue for one or two days only, when the
same appearances follow as those above described; for I have experienced the
latter inoculation to be as effectual as where the tumor has proceeded in the
most regular manner. These observations, which I hope will be found useful to
inoculators, are drawn from a considerable number of cases, some of which
created in my mind much anxiety for the reputation of the Cow-pox. For until I
had ascertained the discriminating circumstances here pointed out, I considered
every new appearance of morbid action, which seemed to take place at the
inoculated part before the usual period at which the disease affects the
constitution, as suggesting a doubt with respect to the efficacy of the
inoculation. Hence I sometimes judged it necessary to inoculate the same
patient a second, third, and even a fourth time. Some parents, however, were
unwilling to subject their children to a repetition of the inoculation, and
could not be prevailed upon to comply without much difficulty, even where their
refusal might have been of fatal consequence. I inoculated two children of the
same family for the Cow-pox, the younger of whom was 18 months, and the elder
four years old. On the fourth day the redness of the local affection in the
elder extended to about one-third of an inch or more in diameter, and no
vesicle appeared. On the sixth day the redness of the tumor was much
increased. On the following day the tumor suppurated and produced a
superficial ulcer for two or three days, when the induration and inflammation
of the part wholly went off, and the fore healed. In the younger child the
progress of the infection was perfectly regular throughout all its stages, and
the disease was extremely mild. On the sixth day I told the parents of these
children that the elder had not received the Cow-pox, and that a second
inoculation would be necessary; at this they appeared surprised, and observed,
that the inoculation had produced more effect upon the elder than the younger
child. However, on the ninth day they suffered me to reinoculate the elder in
both arms, when each puncture produced the true vaccine pustule, and the
infection proceeded in the most regular manner.

Of mistakes, arising from ineffectual cases of the variolous inoculation, many
instances have come under my knowledge, one of which was so very remarkable
that I shall relate it here. Not more than two months ago I was desired to
attend a boy about five years old affected with the casual Smallpox, of the
most confluent kind.

I was informed by the father that his son who was then ill of the Smallpox
had been inoculated for this disease three years before by Mr. --, who was a
professional man of much experience; but as no pustules were produced from the
inoculation, he requested Mr. -- to try the effect of a second inoculation, and
this request he earnestly repeated at different times. Mr. -- however declined
it, and assured him that his child was perfectly secure against the Smallpox.
The boy was therefore suffered to play with his sister while she was under
inoculation, and from her he received the disease, of which he died. Were the
vaccine inoculation to be followed with a similar event, it is highly probable,
that without adverting to the cause, it would be brought forward as a proof
that the Cow-pox has not the power of preventing the Smallpox; and considering
that of late the new inoculation has been very generally practiced, I am
surprised that evidence against it of this description has not yet been brought
before the public.

The time at which the Cow-pox affects the constitution after the virus has
been applied, appears to be differently stated by inoculators: according to my
observations it corresponds nearly to that of the variolous inoculation:
however, it not unfrequently happens, that a rash takes place as soon as the
local action of the infectious matter becomes evident. The efflorescence at the
inoculated part which seldom supervenes before the eighth, or latter than the
eleventh day, is to be regarded as an indicacation that the whole system is
affected; and if the patient has not felt any indisposition on or before its
approach, he may be assured that there will not be any afterward. When the
efflorescence does not commence till the eleventh day, it is almost always
attended with more indisposition than when it occurs on the eighth or ninth
day. The efflorescence is more frequent in young infants than to children
advanced to three or four years of age, and the former have the efflorescence
sooner, and the disease more favorably than the latter, insomuch that by far
the greater part of them have no perceptible illness, and require no medicines.
On the other hand, in adults, the Cow-pox frequently produces headache, pain
of the limbs, and other febrile symptoms, for two or three days, which are
greatly relieved by a brisk purgative.

After the local tumor has advanced so far as to become a dry scab, a few
scattered papulous, or pustular eruptions, sometimes appear: these however are
seldom of long continuance, and the pustules rarely suppurate, but when they
do, the pus they contain is capable of producing the disease by inoculation. I
have inoculated some children for the Cow-pox, whose parents have been desirous
that two or three variolous-like pustules, should be produced, which I have
generally, though not always, been able to accomplish, by taking a little of
the vaccine matter from the inoculated part upon a needle, and with it making a
slight puncture in those parts where it was wished the pustules should appear.
This should be done about the eighth or ninth day, or when the efflorescence
commences. If recent variolous matter be used instead of the vaccine, the
effect will be the same. With regard to the appearance of pustules from the
vaccine inoculation, I shall extract the following communication by Dr.
Pearson, which clearly shows, that Dr. Jenner's opinion upon this subject is
contradicted by facts: -- "1. In a person inoculated by Dr. Jenner, in the
country, who came to town, and was under the care of Mr. Cotton," "the
eruptions bore much resemblance to the inoculated Smallpox, in number from
twelve to twenty." See Mr. Cotton's letter to Dr. Pearson. -- "2. No one has
been more active and successful than Mr. Ring; this gentleman, whose experience
I know has been very extensive, could not avoid eruptive cases, although he got
matter with great pains, from different sources." "I have," says Mr. Ring, in
his letter to Dr. Pearson, "inoculated thirty patients, with matter given to me
by Mr. Paytherus, and to him, by Jenner. One of these had about 150 pustules;
these were not distinguishable from variolous ones, by any diagnostics with
which I am acquainted. The matter was purulent; became perfectly opaque, and on
exsiccation, formed a scab as large as that left by the Smallpox." Was the
virus used in these cases pure and uncontaminated? A gentleman lately obtained
some vaccine matter from the Inoculation Hospital, which produced a full
eruption of pustules: that this was owing to some mistake, I have no doubt, but
whatever was the cause, I think it right to mention it, as an exception to what
has been before noticed.


London: Printed by Wm. Phillips, George Yard, Lombard Street.


