AN ACCOUNT Of the SUCCESS of Inoculating the Smallpox; In a LETTER to Dr.
WILLIAM WHITAKER.

By THO. NETTLETON, M. D.

LONDON: Printed by S. PALMER, for J. BATLEY, at the Dove in Paternoster Row.
1722.

( Price 4 d.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
ALL Persons concerned in the Practice of Inoculating the Smallpox, are
desired to keep a Register of the Name, Age and Habitation of every Person
inoculated, the Manner of the Operation, the Days of sickening and of the
Eruption, the Sort of Smallpox that is produced, and the Event.

Where the true Smallpox is not produced by Inoculation, it will be of Use to
take particular Notice, whether the Patient had any other Kind of Eruption,
what Symptoms preceded or attended it, whether the Incisions inflamed and run,
and for what Time their Running continued.

In Case any Person shall happen to die after Inoculation, either in the Course
of the Smallpox, or after they are gone off, it is desired that a particular
Relation of the Case may be made, and attested, if it be judged necessary, by
the nearest Relations of the Party deceased, or by other credible Persons, that
were Witnesses to the Fact.

They are entreated to send these Accounts, or an Extract from them,
comprehending all Persons inoculated from the Beginning to the End of the Years
1727 and 1728 to Dr. Scheuchzer, M. D. and F. R. S. at Sir Hans Sloane's, Bart.
in Great Russel Street by Bloomsbury-Square, some Time in January, or at
farthest in February next, that so the Result of them may be published early in
the Spring.

Nov. 8. 1728.
SIR,
HAVING too often found, with no small Grief and Trouble, how little the
Assistance of Art can avail in many Cases of the Smallpox, I was induced to
try the Method of Incision or Inoculation, which came so well recommended by
several Physicians from Turkey, and which had also been lately practiced at
London. This I thought was sufficient to justify the Attempt; and what Success
it has met with, I have here sent, according to your Desire, a faithful
Account of, and of every thing that has been done or observed here relating to
that Affair, that might be worth your Notice.

IT was in December last that I first began to put this Method in practice, and
finding it to succeed beyond my Expectation in the first Instance, I was
encouraged to repeat it upon some others; and afterward several seeing with
how much Ease these got through the Distemper, were desirous to have the same
done to themselves, or to their Children; so that there are now upwards of
Forty here, who have received the Smallpox by Inoculation, who are all,
through God's Blessing, in very good Health.

WHAT was done by way of Preparation, was chiefly Purging with Rhubarb, for
Children, and sometimes Vomiting, very rarely Bleeding; though that may be
sometimes necessary; and many have had no Preparation at all: But I always
found, as far as I was able to judge, that those whose Bodies were prepared,
especially by Vomiting, had more favorable Symptoms than others in the same
Circumstances where that was omitted.

THE Method which I always took in the Operation, was to make two Incisions,
one in the Arm, and another in the opposite Leg; I believe it is not very
material whether the Incisions be large or small, but I commonly found that
when they were made pretty large (in grown Persons of an Inch in Length,
proportionably less in Children, and so deep as to cut through the Skin in the
middle of the Incision) the Quantity of Matter discharged afterward at those
places, was greater; and the more plentiful that Discharge, the more easy the
rest of the Symptoms generally are; and they are also by this means the best
secured from any ill Consequence afterward.

AT first I collected some of the Matter from the Pustules of one who had the
Smallpox of the natural sort, into a Shell or a Viol, and infused two or three
Drops of it into the Wound; but finding it sometimes to be very troublesome and
difficult to get any Quantity of the Matter; and observing also that the least
imaginable will be sufficient for the purpose, I generally take small Pledgetts
of Cotton, and ripping the Pustules when they are ripe with the Point of a
Lancet, roll the Pledgetts over them till they have imbibed some of the
Moisture; I put one of these upon each Wound, covering them with any common
Plaster 'till the next Day, when I commonly take away both the Cotton and the
Plaster, leaving the Wound to itself, only covering it with a slight Linen
Roller to defend it from the Air. I have sometimes rubbed the Pledgett only once
over the Wound, without binding it on, which I found to answer the End as well;
and from some other Observations I have made, I have been surpised to see the
Smallpox produced this way, when I was very well assured, the Quantity of
Matter received into the Vessels could not amount to the Hundredth Part of a
Grain.

THE Persons inoculated have not been confined to any Regimen, only to keep
themselves moderately warm; and those who were grown up to live very temperate
and regular, to keep their Minds easy and composed, and to use proper Means to
drive away all Fear and Concern. Some have been obliged, from the time of the
Inoculation, to abstain from Flesh, and all strong Liquors; but I found
afterward that the Eruption did not proceed so well, when they were obliged to
live too low; perhaps, in warmer Climates, where they are not so much
accustomed to live upon Flesh, such Abstinence may be necessary; but here I
find it best to let them cat and drink as usual, though something more sparingly,
'till the Fever begins to rise, and then, but not before, we enjoin such a
Regimen as is usual in like Cases.

THE first thing that occurred after the Incision, was the Inflammation of the
Wounds, which commonly happened about the fourth Day, when they began to appear
very red round about, and to grow a little sore and painful; in about two Days
more they began to digest and run; in some they begin to run sooner, and the
Quantity discharged is much greater than in others. I generally found, that in
those who discharged most this way, the Fever was more slight, and the
Smallpox fewer; though I have known some do very well, when these Places have
only appeared very red, but have not run at all, as it usually happens when the
Incision is made so superficial as not to cut through the Skin.

ABOUT the seventh Day, the Symptoms of the Fever begin to come on, which are
the very same that we always observe in the Smallpox of the distinct Kind in
the natural Way; a quick Pulse, great Heat and Thirst, Pain in the Head and
Back, and about the Region of the Stomach, Vomiting, Dosedness, Startings, and
sometimes Convulsions. All were not seized with these Symptoms, nor in the same
Degree or Continuance; some began on the seventh Day, and continued ill without
any Remission 'till after the eleventh; many not 'till the eighth or ninth Day;
and the Fever in these was more moderate, with great Intermissions; but some
have scarce had any Illness at all: During all this time the Places of Incision
continued to be very sore, and swell very much, so as to appear large and deep,
and to discharge a great deal of Matter.

ON the tenth Day the Smallpox most commonly did appear, sometimes on the
ninth, and sometimes not 'till the eleventh; but I never found that any
Difference of Age, Constitution, or any other Cause, ever made them vary above
one Day from the tenth. The Number was very different, in some not above ten or
twenty, most frequently from fifty to two Hundred, and some had more than could
well be numbered, but never of the Confluent sort: Their Appearance was the same
with those of the distinct Kind; they commonly come out very round and florid,
and many times rise as large as any I have observed of the natural sort, going
off with a yellow Crust or Scab, as usual; though it sometimes happens,
especially when the Sores discharge a very great Quantity of Matter, that they
are both few in Number, and do not rise to any Bulk; but having made their
Appearance for four or five Days, they waste insensibly away.

AFTER the Smallpox comes out, the feverish Symptoms gradually abate; and when
the Eruption is completed they usually cease, without any second Fever, or any
farther Trouble in any respect.

WHILE the Pustules were rising, and for some time after they were gone, the
Sores continued to swell, and to run very much; the longer they did so, the
better; but they never failed to heal up, without any Trouble, after a certain
Time.

I very rarely saw occasion for any Medicines in the course of the Distemper,
only sometimes, when the Symptoms run very high, I gave a gentle Anodyne, to be
repeated as Occasion should require; and once or twice I thought it necessary
to Blister. After the Smallpox is gone, they have always been Purged twice or
thrice, and sometimes let Blood, which is all that has been usually done.

IT has happened in one Instance or two, that the Symptoms in the Distemper
have been worse than usual; and some few, after the Smallpox were gone off,
have been subject to other Indispositions; of all which I shall give you a
particular Account.

THE first that was inoculated, Tho. Thorp's Son of Hallifax.
a Boy about a Year and half old, began to be ill on the eighth Day, and had a
brisk Fever for about two Days; when the Pustules began to appear, they were
but few in Number, and rose very large; the Child was soon well, and continued
so for about three Weeks, when being carried out, and kept a long time in the
cold, he fell into a feverish Disorder, accompanied with a Cough, and was ill
for four or five Days; after that time it went off, and he has ever since been
in very good Health.

THE second was a Girl of two Years old, Jer. Turner's Daughter.
in a Family where they had formerly buried their Children successively of the
Smallpox, and this they feared might undergo the same Fate. The Fever came on
about the seventh Day, and she continued very ill 'till the tenth; on which Day
about Noon she had a strong convulsive Fit; toward Evening the Pustules
appeared, and the Child grew better; and though she had more in Number than
usual, yet she grew well as soon as they were fully come out, and has continued
so ever since.

THE eighth and ninth were in a Family where they had four Children, none of
whom had had the Smallpox. Mr. John Sympson's Children.
I was called to the eldest, who was seized in the common way with the most
Malignant sort I ever saw, attended with the worst Symptoms that could be; so
that he died on the fourth Day, all full of Purple and Livid Spots. The Parents
were very desirous that any Means might be used to preserve the rest; but here
I was in great Doubt and Perplexity what Part to act. I knew very well, that if
I should venture to make the Incision, whatever should happen would be charged
upon that; and it was not improbable but some of them might have already taken
the Infection; in which case it was very uncertain what the Event might be. On
the other hand, if it was omitted, I thought it probable they might all dye,
the Contagion which was got amongst 'em being of such a destructive Nature:
Wherefore I was willing to run the risque of my Reputation, rather than that
the Children should all perish. They were therefore all three Inoculated the
Day before the eldest died, after having told the Parents that I could not
answer for the Consequence, in case they had already caught the Infection;
which would be known if any of them fell ill before the seventh Day. According
as we feared, one of them began on the second Day, much after the same manner
with the eldest; and the Smallpox came out on the third Day, or rather an
universal Redness all over the Skin, interspersed with many purple Spots. There
were none of these Spots near the Places of Incision, which began to swell a
little (as usual) about the fourth Day, and the Smallpox did rise a little
more about those places than elsewhere; but Nature was too much oppressed with
the Violence of the Distemper; and though she continued longer than her Brother,
and was not Delirious as he was, yet she dyed on the seventh Day. I did not
reckon this Child in the Number of those who received the Smallpox by
Inoculation; for I thought there was sufficient reason to conclude that she had
taken the Infection before; but of this we must leave all Persons to judge as
they please; I only give you a Relation of Facts The other two continued well
'till the eighth Day, when they both fell ill together; the Smallpox came out
on the tenth, of a very good Sort, though more in Number than some others had;
and they both got very easily through the Distemper without any Indisposition
since. It was observable that the Elder of these Children two days before the
Eruption, had many red Spots which appeared upon him, very much like those of
the other two Children, which changed in them to Purples afterward; which the
Mother was very much concerned at, fearing they would prove the same in this:
But when the Smallpox came out, these Spots grew gradually less, and at last
quite disappeared. The other Child had been very subject to Convulsions for a
long time when young, and it was afflicted with the same very much from the
time that the Fever came on 'till the Smallpox appeared.

THE twenty seventh, was a married Gentlewoman aged about twenty six, who got
very well through the Distemper, but about a Week after, was seized with a very
great Coldness and Shivering, which were followed by a Burning-heat, with a
violent Pain and disorder in her Head, which continued for several Hours: She
had about two Years ago an intermitting Fever, which I took this to be a
Paroxism of, and expected its return; but she felt no more of it, and has ever
since continued in good Health.

OF her two Sons who were both Inoculated about the same time, the Younger got
through the Distemper with a great deal of Ease; the Smallpox being few, and the
Symptoms very slight: But the Elder (a Boy about five Years old) fared quite
otherwise. The Symptoms before the Eruption were more than usually severe,
especially the Vomitting; the Pustules appeared at the usual time, but more
numerous than ordinary; and when the Eruption was finished, the Fever did not
cease as it has done in every instance but this: On the fifth day after he was
seized, the swelling of his Face began, which was followed by a Pain and
Swelling in his Throat, and a Salivation, which continuing 'till the cleventh
day, were succeeded by a swelling in his Hands and Feet, the usual Symptoms of
the Distinct sort when they are very full; and though there appeared some little
Signs of Malignity, yet he got through the Distemper without any Danger, but with
much more Pain and Trouble than any of the rest have endured. After the
Smallpox were gone off, we found a hard Swelling upon his Shoulder, which
disabled him for some time from moving his Arm; but by the use of some common
Applications, that is in a great measure gone. In this Family, the only Child
they had before these, dyed of the Smallpox, of a very malignant Sort; and
this Boy was of an ill Habit of Body, and has had many dangerous Illnesses.

THE twenty third was a Girl about nine Months old: Mr. Is. Hansoo's Daughter.
In this Child, about a Fortnight after she was well of the Smallpox, the
Mother discovered that one of her Thighs was a little swelled, which was
painful to her for some time, and made her unwilling to move that Part: Some of
the Inguinal Glands were also swelled; but these went off in a few Days, there
only remaining a Hardness above the Knee, which also disappeared in a short
time, without coming to Suppuration.

THE thirty seventh was a Girl, Mr. Jo. Haigh's Daughter.
six Years of Age; she got very easily through the Distemper; but before the
Smallpox were gone, we found a small Tumor upon the Muscles of the Loins,
which ripened very speedily, and was opened and healed up in a very short time.
Her Sister, a young Woman about eighteen, had also a Swelling of the same Kind
in her Leg, but it lay something deeper, and gave her a great deal of Pain for
three or four Days; afterward it dischar'd a great Quantity of Matter, and was
healed without any farther Trouble.

ALL the rest, excepting these I have mentioned, got very well through the
Distemper, without any manner of Trouble, or Hazard, or any ill Consequence
afterward. Whether those slight Indispositions which some have been subject to
afterward, were owing to the Incision, I have not been able to judge; but I
presume, what they have endured in the course of the Distemper, and what has
followed after, is not to be put in the Balance with what is undergone in the
common way, by those who are thought to come off very well: And if this Method
were more generally practiced, it is probable some Means would be found out to
prevent even these subsequent Disorders, which are no more frequent, nor near
so bad as those which follow the natural Sort.

IN two Instances the Inoculation had no Effect; the Reaof which in Michacel
Bland's Daughter.
one was, because the Child had the Smallpox before; in the Wm. Clark's Son.
other, the Matter was taken whenthe Pustules were withered, and almost gone,
and that little Moisture which they contained, I suppose, had lost its Virtue:
The Boy to whom it was made use of was no way affected, the Places of Incision
did not at all Inflame and swell, as usual, nor did any Pustules appear, but
about a Fortnight after, he was seized with the Distemper in the common way,
and did very well.

SOME of those who have been Inoculated that are grown up, have afterward
attended others in the Smallpox; and it has often happened, that in Families
where some Children have been Inoculated, others have been afterward seized in
the common way; and they have laid together in the same Bed all the time; but
we never found that ever any had the Distemper twice; neither is there any
reason to suppose it possible, there being no Difference that can be observed
betwixt the Natural and the Artificial Sort, (if we may be allowed to call them
so) but only that the latter have commonly fewer. There is one Observation
which I have made, (though I would not yet lay any creat Stress upon it;) that in
Families where any have been Inoculated, those who were afterward seized,
never had an ill Sort of Smallpox, but always recovered very well.

THUS, Sir, I have given you a short and plain Account of what has occurred to
me, concerning this Method of Inoculation. It Is not any Pains or Care I have
taken in writing this Letter, will make it acceptable to you; for I am sensible
it is deficient in every Respect, but a faithful History of Matters of Fact. I
could have Inoculated a much greater Number than I have done, if I would have
pressed it; but I only took such as desired it of themselves; being cautious of
persuading any body to it; because I had no Authority hereabouts to support me.
I know not whether I shall have an Opportunity of doing much more this way at
present, the Smallpox being in a great measure gone from this Town and
Country; but I have already seen so much of it, that I should never be afraid
of its Success.

THERE is only one thing more which I am obliged to mention, and which I would
rather have passed over in silence, and that is, the vigorous Opposition it has
met with from many honest well-meaning Persons, who cannot but fancy it is an
unlawful and unwarrantable Practice: They have gained a great Majority on their
Side here, as well as in other Places where it has been practiced; I only wish,
that as they act upon a Principle of Conscience, they would have been less busy
in raising and spreading false and groundless Reports, whereby this Matter has
been much misrepresented, and many entertaining a wrong Notion of it, have
been deterred from making use of this Method for themselves or their Children,
who have since unhappily been taken off by the Smallpox. But when this Affair
it set in a true Light, and found to be always safe and effectual, I believe
all the Objections raised against it will fall of course. It would be of the
greatest moment, that the World should know more fully what you think of it in
Town, and how you have found it to succeed. It Is commonly objected here, that
it is not approved of in London; but if those Gentlemen who have justly gained
the greatest Honor and Reputation in our Profession, should, by finding it
successful, see Cause to declare publicly in its Favor, that would be the
greatest Means to forward it in the Country, and soon reconcile People to a
Method, which I believe has no where been put in practice with any other Aim,
than to do some Service to Mankind; for which reason I doubt not but these
Lines, though writ in haste, will be acceptable to you, from,

Sir, Your sincere Friend, and humble Servant, THO. NETTLETON.
Hallifax, Apr. 3. 1^22:

