A NEW ESSAY ON THE SMALLPOX.

Price Sixpence.

A NEW ESSAY ON THE SMALLPOX. WITH A View to preserve This NATION from the
Infection of that Distemper.

Humbly addressed to the LEGISLATURE, the PHYSICIANS, and Inhabitants of
GREAT BRITAIN.

By ***** **** M. D.

Magna voluisse sat est.
Salus Populi suprema Lex.
LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCCXXV.

A NEW ESSAY ON THE SMALLPOX.
EVery Person is sensible, how fatal the Disease I insist on, has been these
late Years; and perhaps there is not a Family in the Kingdom, that laments not
the Spoils of it; which is sufficient to justify every honest Attempt, to free
the Public from such a Calamity.

I shall not enter into the Dispute about Inoculation, which is now on the
Carpet; by reason what I have in my Views, is the superseding any Occasion for
that Operation; which, if it could be obtained, must, on many Accounts, be
preferred to the general Practice of it; and render it more safe in the few
Instances, wherein, after all, it may be esteemed proper.

In order to introduce this Proposal, I think it necessary to observe what gave
me the first Hint, and is the real Foundation of it; viz. That the Distemper it
self is both of a Foreign Extract, and of a late Origin. There are some Parts
of the World entirely unacquainted with it at this Day; and we are assured, one
Quarter of it (viz. America) was so, till the Spaniards subdued it; when, by
the Infection of a Negro, this cruel Disease spread it self among the Natives,
and has now almost extirpated great and populous Clans.

The old Greek and Latin Physicians had no Idea of this Disorder; For we have
the first Descriptions of it from the Arabian Writers. I confess, we read of
Eruptions in Fevers; and have Reason to think these obtained in ancient Time. I
know not whether what we term the Chicken-Pox, may not be a proper critical
Secretion of some Humors in Children; for they often affect them, without any
previous Contagion, and are attended with no ill Consequence. But the Moors and
Arabs (who, every Person knows, by their sordid, nasty way of Living, in a hot
Climate, have turned common Fevers into Plagues;) have perhaps, in the same
manner, given that malignant, contagious Efficacy, to those Mild and Natural
Pustules.

From this Account of the Case, it must evidently follow, that the Distemper I
now treat of, is One Species of a Plague; and therefore both may, and ought, in
the same Manner, to be extirpated from the Nation.

The late Experiments of Inoculating it, confirm this Account; and, at the same
Time, sufficiently demonstrate, how small a Seed, less than the Hundredth Part
of a Grain, will produce a very plentiful Crop. It Is true, this may differ very
much, in regard of the Soil; which is a Consideration, in Favor of a Practice,
that allows us a convenient Opportunity to prepare the Body, and to adjust both
the Quantity and Situation of the Particles, that are thrown into it. But why
should we generally cultivate after this manner an Eastern Plant, that has
made such dreadful Havoc among us? Especially since there is so much Reason to
question, whether we could promise our selves that Success, if it were
universally in Use: For, the Contagion must increase in Proportion to the
Subjects; whereas, on the other hand, when the Disease has left us, the few
who (on the Account of Traveling, or Physic) may have leave to go through the
Operation, will run less Hazard in it.

I confess, there will be a Difficulty in overcoming popular Prejudices, in
Favor of these Disorders. They esteem them sent of God, for the Sins of
Mankind; which is a pious Account of all our Afflictions. But when this
Representation discourages the proper Endeavors to remove them; it has
generally been esteemed, in other Cases, a criminal Abuse of the Doctrine. This
is perfectly the Case in Turkey; where, for that Reason, their great Towns are
no more free from the Plague, than ours are from the Smallpox. But I have the
Pleasure to observe, that the Articles of the Church of England prudently
caution us against this Construction of the Sentence of Predestinanation;
which, for Curious and Carnal Persons to have before their Eyes, is there said
to be, a great Downfall. But I leave the Management of this Argument to our
Divines.

When our People are well reconciled to the Religion of the Thing, there can,
perhaps, be nothing more easy or safe, than to deliver us from the Infection.
For, the Substance of my Proposal is but, in short, To take the Method, that
was insisted on as necessary to deliver us from the Plague, if it had been
imported among us; as we apprehended it might, from Marseilles.

The Thing is then so far done, that I have Reason to hope, and say, A few
Generations hence would enquire, what Sort of Distemper their Ancestors
intended, by the Name of the Smallpox? And when so great an Advantage may be
procured by it; there can be nothing unkind, or difficult, only in obliging the
Attendants and Physicians, where the Smallpox are, to perform a Sort of
Quarantain; to bury the Furniture, and purify the Houses; which is all that
will be required, and to which they will have sufficient Inducement to consent,
if the Loss they sustain by it, is but supported by the Public. I know not
whether an Office of Insurance might not be established for that Purpose: But
this will be the Care of the Legislature, if our Physicians do but come into
the Scheme: They are the only Persons that will suffer, in a profitable Branch
of their Practice. But whatever some impudent Quacks may have in their View, I
have the Assurance to say, The Gentlemen of the Faculty, upon the Principles of
the New Philosophy, and the best Experience, will esteem this Proposal worthy
their Consideration. They know very well, that when the Eruption is completed,
and the putrid Particles have fixed on the Lungs, and vital Parts, the Event
must be left to Nature; for there is little Room for the Exercise of the best
Skill: And upon that Account, they must be pleased with an Expedient, that will
secure their Art from the Trials, that are vain in themselves, and often fatal
to their Reputation. As for the Scandal of our Profession, the Men who have no
Comfort but in Filth and Ordure, and are only Caterers for the Worms; I am not
ashamed to confess, I have showed no regard to their mercenary Ends.

It is to the very Learned and Worthy-Body, I submit this Proposal; who will, I
am persuaded, at least honorably treat a Plan, that is formed upon the
Practice of some of the Ancient Physicians, the Fathers and first Ornaments of
this Science; who did not only consult particular Cases, but delivered whole
Nations at once from Plagues. If the Method I have suggested appears to them as
well calculated for this Purpose, as it is honestly designed; I have no Reason
to doubt the Approbation of Persons of such a generous and genteel Education,
and whose Business is the Health of the People.

I know, the Fate of this Scheme will depend on their Representation of it; and
therefore, by reason The Royal College of Physicians are best qualified to
direct the Execution, I have not presumed to offer the particular Rules that
must be observed, and that will require the Sanction of the Legislature: It is
what, I do not doubt, they will favor their Country with, if this Proposal is
so happy as to come recommended by them.

His Most Sacred Majesty, whom God long preserve; and Their Royal Highnesses,
though they are now in no pain for the Princes, the young Hopes and Joys of these
Realms; They have too much Regard for their People, not to encourage every
Thing that may make them Happy and Healthful.

And I hope our Nobility and Gentry will esteem it too much a common Interest,
to neglect this Proposal, if there is a Prospect (as, I think, there is a very
good one) in this Way of being secure from this Distemper, and, at the same
Time, from a Train of Evils and Ulcers, that generally attend the worst Sort of
it. For why should we cherish the cruel Brood of Africa or Asia in our Bowels,
that have made those frightful Ravages among us, and entail this Poison on our
Posterity, that was, perhaps, the Import of our Holy Wars in former Days?

How great must be the Happiness to observe the new Scenes arise, when a
noisome Plague shall cease to change our Countenances, and send us away, or to
make us a Terror to our selves and others! How desirable would it be, no more
(unless by the special Commission of Heaven) to feel any of the Fury of it,
filling our Graves, or spoiling our Features? We should not then so frequently
meet the dismal Scars, and indelible Characters, it has left on almost every
Face: But Britain, no longer inhabited by these Sort of Picts, would become
Fair Albion once again.

Then, to use the sacred Style, may our Sons be as Plants grown up in their
Youth; they will always carry their first Bloom; and our Daughters as
Corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace; or, in our Language,
more smooth and sparkling than the best-wrought Marble. Then would all the
Domestic Virtues flourish: The Beautiful Mothers, secure of the Affection of
their Husbands, would convey the healthy Treasure to their Offspring: The
Ladies would shine in our Assemblies; and the Gentlemen soften, under their
Influence, into every Virtue. Let future Ages tell the rest with Joy!

Full of this Project, I cannot forbear imaging to my self the Acknowledgments
of a whole Island; and every Person in it, contributing to make my Life easy
and happy, who have in this Proposal studied to make theirs so.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHen I wrote this Scheme, I was very sensible of some considerable Objections,
which a Learned Gentleman, who is a Glory to the Profession, did me the Honor
to make to it: As, That the Seeds of the Smallpox are almost in every House,
which has made it the Disease of the Country. But how much soever they are
naturalized to the Soil, and have diffused themselves in it; I have Reason to
hope, Care and Industry might surmount this Difficulty. For, the Particles
appear, by their slow Operation, not to have that Life and Action, which those
have which constitute the Plague: If every House, therefore, in Great Britain
(that is suspected) would but submit to such a Purification as the Inspired
Lawgiver (I had almost said Physician) prescribed in another Species of a
Plague, Levit. xiii. 47, 48, etc. and xiv. 33, etc. we might observe the happy
Effects of it, not only in destroying the Vegetation of the Seeds of this
Distemper, but of some others, which subsist in Rags and Dirt. In general, it
must render the Nation more clean and healthful: And why should not a Divine
Law, as far as it relates immediately to Health, lay us under a Moral
Obligation now, where there is any Parity in the Case, as I apprehend in the
present? Our Critics may observe with Pleasure, the Arabian Physicians apply
to the Smallpox some of the Terms which occur in the Arabic Version of these
Chapters. If it is said, The Priests were to execute the Sacred Order; it is,
because They were the Ancient Physicians. But it is not my Business here to
consider the typical Use of it.

I apprehend it will be urged, That after all this Care, when they are
extirpated in one Place, they may possibly break out in another. It is what may
be expected for some Time, and will only require a more constant Attendance on
this Distemper through the whole Island: In which this Advantage will probably
be gained; That whenever it does sprout in any Quarter, there will be the
greatest Reason to expect, where the Soil is not too favorable, (if I may be
allowed to pursue a Figure that will best explain it to the common Reader) it
will be a weak and tender Shoot, which we may easily weed out, and not one rank
Crop upon another, as we sometimes experience now.

As for the Time that will be required to accomplish all this; it cannot be
supposed I should presume to determine it: For, our Physicians know, it was
several Years before we were rid of the last Plague. It is sufficient, that the
Affair is of so much Consequence, that the Children who are yet unborn demand
our Attention to it.

The greatest Objection is from the Prejudices of the People; who are inclined
to think every Abridgment of their Liberty, though it is for their Advantage,
inhuman and barbarous. But in this Instance, I know not how it is; Persons of
Quality and Fortune, and very many of the Populace, are almost come into this
Practice of themselves, from their own Observations and Reasonings upon the
Head. The Husband and Wife, we have seen content to live apart for a Time; or,
if they are determined against it, they might perhaps be indulged to perform
the Quarantain together.

The Jews, as stiff-neck'd and rebellious a People as they are represented in
the Holy Writings, had so much regard to their Health, as to submit to a much
severer Regimen. For there is a vast Difference between a Separation from
Society for a few Days, which is all this Scheme requires; and theirs, which in
some Cases continued for Life.

I cannot doubt, the Worthy and Learned College of Physicians, if they came into
the Proposal, would take care to direct the Execution of it, to a general
Satisfaction: And upon this Account, if the Legislature made them a Sort of
Office of Insurance; the Contributions they would receive from the whole
Nation, and the Voluntary Benefactions of very many, to whose Families this
Distemper has been fatal, would, I Am persuaded, render them very capable of
discharging that Service, by their Agents, with great Applause. I might suggest
the Pleasure they must have by that Correspondence this would establish, to
observe the State of Diseases and Physic through the whole Nation, and to
direct the Practice of it in this Instance: Which last is a Consideration of
too much Weight, not to be offered to the Public: For, if any Thing can, it
must reconcile every Person to this Proposal; That He, and his Relations, though
they are the meanest of the People, (among whom this Distemper generally
lodges) will have proper Medicines and Attendance, and become the Care of the
most Learned Body of Physicians in the World.

FINIS.

