A TREATISE OF THE GRAVEL and STONE, SHOWING, I. Their Nature, Causes,
Difference, and Symptoms. II. The Method of Curing them. III. How to Ease and
Remove the Fits when present. And, IV. To prevent them for the Future.


WITH Their proper Remedies prescribed; and easily to be prepared, by the
Patients themselves.

Written, in compassion to those who are unhappily Afflicted with these
Torturous Diseases, by a late learned and Eminent Physicain of the College,
from his many Years practical Observations and Experience, in these Cures.

And is allowed by every one of the many Physicians of Note that have perused
it, (and must, by the whole Faculty of Physic) to be the most rational
Discourse, on the Gravel and Stone, ever written; and the Method and Medicines
for their Relief and Cure, the most Safe and Efficacious, that can be advised
to.

LONDON Printed for J. TORBUCK, in Clare-Court near Drury Lane; and E. TORBUCK,
at the Half Moon, in Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. MDCCXXXVIII. Price 1 s.

THE PREFACE.
THE Person, who Publishes this short Discourse, and Directions, having
Experienced, for several Years last past, in his own Practice, both as a
Physician and Surgeon, the great, and indeed wonderful Effects of the Methods
and Medicines, herein laid down and Prescribed, for the Ease and Cure of the
Gravel and Stone, thought it a Duty incumbent upon him, to make the same known
as much as possible, for the universal Benefit of Mankind; that those who
unhappily labor under the Severity of these cruel Diseases, and have not heard
of the Remedies, and may at any Time stand in need of the Assistance that will
be afforded by them, may have it in their Power, wherever they may chance to
be, (so they have but the Book in their Pockets) of applying them, and that
either prepared by themselves, or having them prepared by an Apothecary.

The whole of what is here Written, is, with some variations, and small
additions, taken from the Works of no less a Man, than the late Worthy Sir
Richard Blackmore, Knt. Doctor of Physic, and Fellow of the Royal College of
Physicians, in London, and in his Time, Physician in Ordinary to his late
Majesty King William, by saying of which, it is enough without any Encomium of
mine, or any ones else, as to his Learning, consummate Knowledge, and long
Experience, in the Cure of Diseases in general, as well as of these in
particular* his Fame therein, as well as his Integrity, Humanity, and
compassionate Regar^ to his afflicted and distressed Patients, being
sufficiently known in London.

All therefore that I shall say, is, that every Patient, under the Torture of
these merciless Diseases, will not fail (I speak by repeated Experience) to
find Relief and a Cure, if they but make timely and distinct Application of the
Remedies, and live up to the easy Rules and Directions, so plainly and
faithfully, without any reserve, herein laid down and explained: And as they
are Medicines, not prescribed at random, or at a venture, but upon the
judicious and sedate Consideration of the Author, in a regular Way, grounded
upon Reason and low Experience, and which the Doctor had ever found Successful,
when he had been called to the Relief of Patients in these deplorable
Distresses, they are the more to be regarded, and particularly so, as they in
every Circumstance, have corresponded with the Opinions of the best of
Physicians, and by consequence must stand approved, by the whole Faculty of
Physic.

And though the Doctor seems to explode the possibility of Dissolving the Stone,
yet he has confined his Opinion to those only of them, that are hard and
compact, those of them that are porus, light, and friable, he admits may he
dissolved, or at leastwise crumbled, or divided into small Fragments or Parts,
so as to be rendered passable, and has herein also Prescribed such Remedies,
which he has long experienced to have done it.

Physicians, I well know, very much differ as to the possibility of Dissolving
the Stone, many of them affirming it has been done, without any distinction of
hard or soft, and may be daily done, and have recited the Cases of many
Patient^ cured thereby; nor are there wanting as many, who as flatly deny the
possibility thereof: For the first, I have now before me, the Works of several
Authors of good Credit, and the Cases of diverse Patients, in confirmation of
their Assertions; and in particular, one of the said Authors, lately famed
therein, says, that though the Dissolution of the Stone, by Medicines, has been
for a long Time exploded as impracticable, yet I must confess, says he, I never
could come into that Notion: I always was of Opinion, says he, that no
Distemper was Incurable, and that only our Ignorance of the Causes, made some
more difficult to handle than others: But that if we could see into the
original Spring of the most obstinate and stubborn Maladies, we should find
them as tractable, and easy to Cure, as those that lie more obvious to our
view: And I persuade myself, continues he, that if the Positions I have,
advanced, in defense of a Dissolution of the Stone, be brought to the Test of
Reason, the Arguments will be unanswerable, and that though some may object
against the most evident Matters of Fact, yet no Arguments are strong against
Demonstration.

And in confidence of these his Sentiments, and proofs of his Assertions, he
names several Cases, where there has been a manifest Dissolution, by several
Prescriptions he gives, and one of them in particular, which he says, he has
more than ordinary experienced successful, and recommends it as a most
Sovereign Lithontriptick, and believes, that a more powerful Dissolvent, is not
yet known to Mortals.

But of these I shall say more in a Second Part, which I purpose in no long
Time, GOD willing, to make public, according as I have noted, at the End of
this First Part.

I. Of the Nature, Causes, Difference, and Symptoms of the Gravel and Stone.
THE Disease of the Stone, either in the Kidneys or the Bladder, and that of
the Gout, which are nearly related, are two of the most cruel and inexorable
Tyrants that persecute the Race of Mankind: So great is their Violence, and so
unextinguished their Fury, that they afflict the unhappy Patients with such
frequent and insufferable Tortures, as make Life an undesirable Possession, and
rather a Burden too hard to bear, than a State of Satisfaction and Enjoyment.
And had not the All-wise Divine Author, planted in our Nature, so strong an
Aversion to Death and Dissolution, it is highly probable that many, grown
utterly impatient of undergoing such a Weight of Misery, would lay Hands upon
themselves, and soon put an End to their Calamities and their Lives together,
the Grievance or the first to much over-balancing the Pleasure of the last.
Some, it is true, of these forlorn Creatures, have endeavored to ease
themselves by adventuring on these tragical Expedients, and, no doubt,
Multi^udes more wou^d follow their Example, did not a Principle of Religion
among Christians, and a powerful Instinct of Self-Preservation among all Men,
control their Impatience, and prevent Self-execution: Nor is it a Wond^r they
should prefer the Shades and Tranquillity or the Grave, to the Heats and
Inquietudes of such acute Diseases.

But it must be allowed, that of this Pair so near y allied, the Stone and the
Gout, the first is the most terrible, and distinguished for its Fierceness and
Cruelty. This Lictor and Minister of Death, inflicts, above all others, the
sharpest and most insufferable Tortures: What a melancholy Scene! What a moving
Spectacle of mortal Nature is it, to see the unhappy Patient extended on the
Rack, groaning and crying out in Agonies of Distress and unspeakable Torment:
Ever Night is half spent, he wishes for Day; when Day appears, he longs for
Night; Distracted with his Sufferings, he lies wakeful, counting the Hours, any
one of which, when protracted and multiplied by raging Misery, seems a numerous
Train, so sluggish and unprogressive does Time grow under grievous Sufferings.
He changes his Pillow, but not his Pain; new-makes his Bed, but keeps his old
Inquietudes, and though he often turns from Side to Side, he never leaves his
Agonies behind: They, hapless State! know no Cessation or Interruption: If they
sometimes remit and abate their Violence, they soon recover their Strength,
rekindle their Rage, and insult the Patient with as great Fury as before. It
must therefore be a commendable Action, and becoming an Aesculapian worthy to
endeavor, with all his Might, to repel or disable this Plague that so much
infests Mankind; and therefore accordingly I have undertaken to assist those
who have already attacked this Pest with Skill and Vigor: For this is not the
Work of a single Aggressor, but as in hunting down a Forest Beast, or that
enormous Bird the Ostrich, many Champions unite their Power, armed with various
Instruments of Death, Cutlasses, Lances, Hooks, and Javelins, that with
different Weapons and mutual Assistance they may subdue the Enemy, or at least
oblige him to retreat; so, as a ready Auxiliary, I bring my Forces, such as
they are, to join those of abler Combatants, in order to quell this formidable
Enemy, at least to diminish his Strength and restrain his Fury.

As to the Nature of the Disease, there are scarce any Part of the Body
privileged from breeding Stones in their larger Cavities, or more minute
Interstices, which are, in some measure diversified, according to the Nature of
the Bowels or Organs where they are produced. They are found sometimes in the
external Muscles of the Body, as well as in the Lungs, the Stomach, the Liver,
the Gall- Bladder, the Bowels or Contents of the Abdomen, as well as in the
Tongue, the Brain, and even the Blood it self: For several credible Authors
have affirmed, that upon opening a Vein, small Stones, together with the
spouting Blood have rushed into the Receiver. In all which Nest, the petrifying
Principles, meeting and embracing each other, produce a single Stone, or a
Quarry of them But this Discourse is confined to the Stone in the Kidneys, and
that in the Bladder, which in this Dissertation I shall consider as the same,
and not as the Disease of a distinct Species When it is formed and settled in
either Kidney, it is accompanied with various Symptoms according as it is large
or small, smooth or rugged, fixed or loose, closely or slightly coherent, i. e.
hard and solid, or friable and porous.

Of the minute Stone, that is, the Grit and Gravel, formed of sandy Rudiments
in the Kidneys or Bladder, which however are perfect Stones, there are three
Sorts distinguished by their Color, that is, White, Yellow, and Red. White is
the native Complexion of these little Bodies, Atoms indeed, in respect of those
of the largest Dimension, as are the Sands on the Shore, when compared with the
Rock at whose Feet they lie: These primitive Stones are, however, so close and
unporous, that the Cohesion of their Parts, are not to be unclasped and
dissolved, but with great Difficulty, insomuch that they imitate the Hardness
of the Diamond, and will polish Glass, like the Dust of that Jewel, as
celebrated Authors assert; and it facilitates our Belief of the indissoluble
Structure of this Grit, when we reflect on the like Quality in that called
Hourglass Sand, which is found, by Experience, to be less porous, or more
solid than Flint; and therefore the Operators in Glass have laid aside the
first, and now employ the last, as Materials for their finest Works. But these
minute white Stones, cannot, as I conceive, give nephritick Pains, or a Fit of
the Stone, unless a Collection or Congeries of them, are involved or united by
some adventitious, mucous, slimy, or other anomalous Matter, so as to form a
Moles or Bulk, large enough to obstruct the Mouths or Channels of the Urinary
Passages, and that, it is true, may sometimes happen; but, generally speaking,
since the minute pale Stones are so smooth and small, that they may enter with
Ease the Orifices of the Urinary Aquaeducts, and passing through those
Conveyances, may, without creating Pain or Trouble, be excluded with the common
Stream; and though there should be a great Quantity of that small incoherent
Sand, it may, however, without Difficulty, flow through the Ureters into the
Bladder with the serous Current, and together with it be discharged.

As to the Yellow Gravel, it is evident that the minute Particles that compose
it, are stained with that Color, by the alkalizate or lixivial Salts of the
Urine, which abounds with such Contents: And this Mixture in the small Yellow
Stones, is the Reason why they are less solid, and more dissoluble than the
White of a purer Composition; which is likewise observed, and from the same
Reason, in the Stones generated in the Receptacle of the Gall, whose Parts have
not that strict Connection and close Structure as the White.

The Red Gravel receives that Complexion, from being infected with a little
Drop of Blood issuing from some lacerated Vein where the Gravel lay.

All these, if they are ragged and uneven, may, by pricking, vellicating, or
wounding the tender Membranes that include them, cause either duller and
heavier, or more acute Pains, according as they are armed with more or less
pointed Angles whilst they lie in the Pelvis or Basin of the Kidneys, and there
roused and disturbed by the Motion of the Body on Foot or Horseback, rub upon
and fret the neighboring Membranes; and so nephritick Sufferings may arise
from Gravel, which consists in real and perfect Stones, as before observed,
though called Sand, or a friable, gritty Matter, by Reason of their small
Dimension. This is the first nephritick Symptom before a larger Stone is
formed, which, however, is vexatious, and often attended not only with Pain,
but much Inquietude, Sickness of the Stomach, and a general Disorder of the
whole Economy, while the sandy Atoms, that lie heaped up in the Kidneys, are
worked and agitated by the Motion of the Back or Loins, irritate and gaul their
Membranes of exquisite Sense during their Confinement in those Lodgings.

It ought to be observed, that there are often sound in the Urine of Persons in
good Health, or at least not much distempered, a Red Gravel or Sand, that
sticks to the Sides of the Urinal or Chamber Pot that receives it; but this is
not the genuine Gravel, that causes nephritick Sufferings, but the Production
of the Blood in Persons of a scorbutic Disposition, or a warm Temperament, and
is distinguished from the true Gravel in this, that the last falls down,
immediately after the Urine is rendered, to the Bottom of the Receiver, whereas
the spurious Kind does not break off from its Mixture and Union with the Urine,
till after some Hours standing in that Vessel, when it is at length loosed from
its Embraces, precipitated and thrust down by the Cold of the Air, and
afterward, if the Urine be gradually heated again, it will recover its former
Connection with it, which is not the Case of the genuine nephritick Gravel:
Besides, there is often observed in Persons of such a Constitution, a thin
Substance floating on the Surface of their Urine, imitating melted Fat or
Grease, but when it is skimmed off, and dried upon a Paper placed in the Sun,
it discovers it self to consist of gritty saline Concretions, united together
by some viscous or slimy Bonds.

If the Stones are of a larger Size than those called Sand or Gravel, they
affect Humane Bodies with yet more painful and afflictive Symptoms, and
supposing that their Figure is unequal, and varied with many Angles; then their
Points, especially upon bodily Motion, vex and vellicate the Repositories where
they are nested, and as so many sharp Thorns in the Sides of the Pelvis,
continually grieve, prick, or wound their Membranes; whence arises the frequent
Discharge of bloody Urine, a common Symptom of this cruel Disease, which, if
fresh, and newly let out of the Veins, gives the Urine a red Color, and the
Blood is discernable to the Sight; but if it has lain, for some Time,
extravasate in the Bladder, or if but a few Drops stay in that manner in the
Kidneys, by turning to grumous and coagulated Clots, they impart a dark and
blackish Tincture to the Urine, not unlike to that of Coffee; this is a Symptom
likewise that often accompanies this Distemper: It is true also, that pale
limpid Water sometimes attends the Paroxysms of the Stone, like that observed
in Convulsive, Hypocondriacal, and Hysteric Passions, and from the same Cause,
that is, the Spasmodick Disorder or Contraction of the System of the Nerves
during the Fit.

Another Symptom, that accompanies the Stones last described, is great Sickness
of the S^omach, Nausea, and frequent Vomitings, or Strainings to Vomit; for
while the Fibers in the Kidneys are grieved, and lacerated by the rough Stone
or Stones bred and confined there, the Suffering is propagated to the Stomach
by a Consent of Parts, or Communication of Nerves, from one of those Bowels to
the other; and this is so distinguishing a Symptom of this Disease in the
Kidneys, that other Symptoms without this, are not sufficient to induce the
Physician to pronounce the Distemper the Stone.

If the Stone in the Kidneys be some Degree larger, and likewise jagged, it
creates unsufferable Pains, while it remains in the Pelvi^ or Basin of the
Kidneys, grating and lacerating the enclosing Membrane, or while if strives
through the Ureters, and wounds the Fibers as they make their Way.

When the Stone formed in the Kidneys is grown yet larger, and so
disproportioned to the Mouth of the Ureter, that it cannot enter, even though
its Superficies is smooth and equal, it will obstruct the Orifice of that Tube,
while it attempts to pass into it, or will stick in the Channel of it; and
while it continues fixed there, as it stops the Current of the Water through
the Pipe, so it creates exqusite and enormous Misery, by distending the
sensible Membranes; and if it be unequal and ragged, it will produce the most
afflictive Tortures, till it is protrude^ by Art or Nature through the Ureter,
and excluded into the Bladder. This happens as often as the Stone grows to a
greater Size than is suitable to the Inlet and Passage of that Tube: And the
Effect is the same if the Stone, though not of a disproportinate Bulk to pass
the Ureter, should however lie across the Orifice, for then it will obstruct
the Descent of the Urine, and create great Disorder, till it find a proper
Position, and its Figure is adapted to the Inlet, and then it enters and is at
last discharged.

After the Stone has made its Passage through the Ureters for some Years, by
stretching and enlarging the Road so often, it becomes capacious enough to
receive much larger Stones than the first, and to let them through into the
Bladder; so that the Cavity of the Ureter, through which they have passed so
long, is by Degrees sometimes extended to a Finger's Breadth, as unquestionable
Authors assure us. The Stone of the Kidneys is likewise considered as loose or
fixed; if as loose and floating, or not adherent to any part of that Bowel, but
is always attempting to pass the Ureters to the Bladder, it produces the
painful Symptoms before described; but if it is fixed, it then Nests itself and
settles in the Substance of the Kidneys, where it grows by Accretion of Parts,
and spreads ^ike branching Coral through the Body of the Kidney; and while it
lodges there in this quiet and inactive State, the Patient may sometimes feel
Heaviness, or a Weight in the Back, which however is but an inconsiderable
Suffering; and some in this Condition have felt no Symptom at all, and dyed of
other Distempers; and when they were, after Death, dissected by the S^rgeon, a
considerable Stone has been discovered, propagated through the Kidney, of which
however the Patient never complained.

And this was the Case, as I have been informed of the late Lord Mohun's
Father, who being opened after he dyed of a Wound received in a Duel, a large
Stone was discovered spreading through the Kidney, of which notwithstanding in
his Life Time he was entirely unconscious. I likewise knew an eminent Divine,
of a very Lean and Unmuscular Constitution, who told me in Conversation, that
suspecting he had a Stone in the Kidneys, tried one Night in Bed, if he could
not feel it, and by pressing his Loins, much emaciated with his long Fingers,
he assured me he felt the Stone, and then, said h^, I reflected it must be a
large one propagated through that Bowel, and therefore that no Medicinal
Methods should be attempted to break it, lest the Fragments falling into the
Pelvis, should stop the Passage of the Ureters, and create great Fits of the
Stone; upon this, said he, I f^ll asleep, and during many Years, thought of it
no more, till of late some Incident, which he named, and I have forgotten,
brought again to his Mind this Observation, and when he (some Years afterward)
Died and was Dissected, a large Stone was found in his Kidney, which though he
felt, as said before, yet lying undisturbed and quiet in its Nest, it gave him
little Uneasiness.

The Stone we are discoursing of is either lighter or heavier, or which is the
same thing, more porus and friable, or more close and solid. The Particles that
compose the first, hang together by a slight Connection, which is easily broken
and dissolved, like Flocks of frozen Snow, the Sides of a Sponge, or the
unsolid and porus Substance of the Pumice-Stone, and these by any internal or
external Violence, or milder Motion, are often separated and crumbled into
Parts, that drop into the Ureters and pass into the Bladder, to be discharged,
and these Fragments, like the small sandy and gritty Stones spoken of before,
produce the same troublesome Effects.

I have accounted for the Stones, that owe their Production to the Kidneys, and
shall now pursue their Progress and follow their Course to the Bladder. When
the Stone generated in the Urinary Strainer is discharged by the Ureter into
the common Receiver, it too often happens, that it acquires so large a
Dimension, that the Outlet of the Bladder is not wide enough to let it through,
and therefore of Necessity it must remain imprisoned there, where by the
Accession of new petrifying Particles, and gritty Matter continually descending
from the Kidneys, and adhering to it, its Size is gradually augmented, till it
is yet more incapable of being excluded, where if it is loose and floating, it
produces many grievous Symptoms; for though it be only smooth and equal, and so
does not lacerate the Bladder, yet it will often, as it plays against the Neck
of it, and attempts to pass through, stop the Mouth of the Aquaeduct, that
conveys away the Urine, and by so doing, produces very great Torment, while the
Bladder is excessively distended, and unable to discharge the enclosed Deluge;
and if the Stone be uneven and rugged, it will by goading and wounding the
encompassing Membranes, create exquisite Pain and bloody Urine, and by long
repeated Cruelties of this Kind, it frequently forms an Ulcer in the lacerated
Part, which is discovered by the Secretion of putrid Matter mingled with the
Urine; for when it has stood some Hours, a pale slimy Sediment is precipitated
to the Bottom of the Receiver, like the Excrement of the Nose, or the Whites of
Eggs, and is distinguished, from the like Matter that descends to the Bladder,
from an Ulcer in the Kidneys, by the Odor, which is strong and faetid, if the
purulent Mat^er comes from an Ulcer in the Bladder, but that derived from one
in the Kidneys has no such offensive Smell, as said above. And the Case is the
same when an Ulcer arises in the Kidneys or the Neck of the Bladder, not from
the Stone but from other Causes, such as produce Ulcers in the Lungs, in the
Intestines, or other internal Parts, that is, the Impurities and incongruous
Particles, which by Reason of their disproportionate Size and Figure, cannot
slide through the strait Passages of the Glands, but stick in them, till more
of the like Nature entangled there, increase the Obstruction and swell the
Parts, whence by Degrees they are inflamed, putrify, and by their Disruption,
form an Ulcer; and when this Disease is produced in the Kidneys or the Bladder,
the putrid Contents issuing from them, and together with the Urine excluded
into the Receiver, show themselves, as I have said, by their viscous and ropy
Quality, and are diversified by their faetid or inoffensive Smell: And it
should be observed, that their mucous and slimy Nature, distinguishes these
Contents from others, that proceed from a scorbutic or unhealthful Habit of
Body, when much white, mealy, and light Matter appears in the Sediment, and
which being without Connection, upon shaking the Glass will rise and float
incoherent in the Urine, but unslimy, as well as without Faetor: This
therefore, as I have said, does not proceed from any internal Ulcer, but is a
Defect arising from some irregular and depraved State of the Blood, that
communicates with its Serum such Matter to the Kidneys.

The Suppression of Urine, occasioned by a Stone too large to pass the Urethra,
is not attended with Sickness and Vomiting, as when a Stone sticks in its
Passage through the Ureters, there being no Communication of Nerves between the
Bladder and the Stomach, to convey the Sensations from one to the other. But
exquisite and grievous Pains however attend it from the Distention of the
Bladder, as I have said, and sometimes a smaller Stone, that has entered the
Mouth of the Urethra, yet being too great to slide through, stops near the
Entrance, or in the Middle, and creates a total Suppression of Urine, as well
as great Torment.

I have now accounted for the Nature, Properties, and Symptoms of this Disease,
and have likewise in carrying on my Discourse, intermixed an Ennumeration of
its various Kinds, discriminated by the Receptacles, where the Stone is
contained, or by its different Color or various Shape and Figure; and now I
shall proceed to search into the Causes of it.

The remote, antecedent Cause of the Stone, is a defect in the digestive
Faculty of the Stomach, or that of the Blood, or nervous Juices, whence such
Impurities and feculent Portions remain, as produce the Coagulations and
Concrescencies, that become the Foundation of the Stone, whose Rudiments and
primitive Materials, consist in a close Combination of a volatile in a
superior, and acid Salt in an inferior Proportion. That these two are the
petrifying Principles, is known by Experience, that shows us that this is the
Effect of Acids and Alkalies meeting together; as for Example, Juice of Lemon,
and Salt of Tartar; Let it be supposed then, that from the inordinate and
depraved Concoctions before-named, such hard Coalitions, slimy Coagulations, or
cretaceous Confederacies should be left behind, and it is easy to conceive how,
when yet more hardened and prepared in the Blood, they may by the Power of the
urinous Salts in the Kidneys, be soon converted into gritty, sandy Atoms,
which, clustring together, and cohering, form at length a Stone of the lowest
Size; that by the daily Accession of new similar Particles, acquires a far
greater Dimension in the Kidneys, and yet a greater after its Descent from that
Bowel to the Bladder; for while it is detained, from being too large to be
excluded, it has more Room to receive Augmentation, whilst constantly fed by
the sandy Rivulets, that empty themselves through the Outlets of the Ureters
into that Cistern, where it grows by such Accretion, till sometimes it becomes
exceeding large: Thus petrified Fossils and Flints in the Earth, as well as
rotten, Sticks and Pieces of Wood turned to Stone, owe their Growth, as well as
Production, to lapidescent or stony Particles, that continually accede to, and
st^^ctly embrace the former collected Materials; But as to the intrinsic
Nature of ^he Stone bred in living Creatures, and those last named, that is,
Minerals and Vegetables, there is a vast Difference; for the greatest Part of
the first are formed of volatile Salts, or Animal Alkalies, but the other are
not composed of any such Ingredients. It is truly remarked, that those who are
obnoxious to the Stone, are generally of a hot Constitution, as it is likewise
observed of gouty Patients, by which means their Blood is more inclined to
breed cretaceous, hard, and gritty Combinations, which by a certain Degree of
Heat, are soon advanced into proper Materials for the Gout and Stone, Diseases
so nearly related, that they are easily convertible into each other. But of
these Subjects I have discoursed at large in my Treatise of the Gout, to which
I refer the Reader.

When the Seeds or Principles of the Stone, that is, the viscous, tough or
sandy Concretions, not to be dissolved and separated from the Blood, bearing
however a Figure and Dimension proper to enter the papillary Glands, the
Strainers in the Kidneys, they are there yet more indurated, and acquire a
gritty and sabulous Constitution; though even in the Blood itself, before the
Serum is separated from it by the secretory Glands, small Stones are often
formed, as they are in all the Parts of the Body, as before observed.

It is remarkable that those Countries, that lie upon the River Rhine and the
Northern Parts of France, who drink a thin, sharp, pale Wine, which is more
replenished with Tarcar than other Fruits of the Vine, concocted by a hotter
Sun, are most obnoxious to the Stone in the Kidneys: For such Wines convey to
the Blood in great Plenty, a Sort of petrifying Fluid, whose redundant acid
Particles, before their Nature is changed to an Alkali by the active Princ^ples
of the Blood, meeting and combining with the volatile Salts there, the Result
is a hard and tartarous Production, easily formed into a Stone.

The voluptuous Life of those that eat and drink deliciously every Day, cannot
but administer to the Blood, the Seeds and Principles of the Stone, in
Constitutions disposed and prepared for that Distemper: For these costly and
luxurious Meats and Drinks, excessively and constantly ingested, being unequal
to the digest ve Power of the Stomach, fill it with a Load of Crudities and
unconcocted Foods; which transmitted by the Ministry of the lacteal Passages to
the Veins, communicate to the Blood, not only great Plenty of noxious
Impurities, but likewise a rich Chyle, abundant in volatile Salts, with such a
Proportion of Acids, as are apt to create this Distemper.

A sedentary and inactive Life, especially when the Persons are of a vigorous
and hot Complexion, much promotes the Production of the Stone; for while the
Blood runs lazy and unagitated in its Channels, for want of due Labor and
Exercise of the Limbs to push on its Streams with due Celerity, it is easy to
conceive how the crude and impure Parts run into various Concrescencies and
Coagulations. On the contrary, when due Activity, either by the Labor of the
Hands, or by riding, or other Exercises of the Body, the Motion of the Blood is
accelerated, it is obvious to apprehend, that by the Rencounters and mutual
Collisions of the Parts dashing and rubbing upon each other, they are broken,
divided and attenuated, till they become so minute and so well mixed, that the
tough, slimy, and yet harder Combinations are unlocked and dissolved, by which
means the Seeds and Rudiments of the Stone are prevented, and the Cause
removed: And therefore in this Case, as in the Gout, the sedentary Lawyer; the
over-thoughtful Person; the hard Student; and the inactive, indolent, and
voluptuous Gentleman, are obnoxious to this grievous Distemper, as are likewise
Men of covetous Tempers; while the laborious Husbandman, and Mechanic, the
daily Traveller, and indefatigable Sportsman, are seldom attacked and tortured
by it: For these keep the Body in a Healthful State, while their repeated
Exercise helps their digestive Faculties to do their Duty, and refine the
Blood, by a constant Expulsion of inordinate and incongruous Humors.

II. The Method of Curing the Gravel and Stone.
FIRST, of the lowest Degree of this Disease, that is, the small Sand-like
Gri^t, either White, Red, or Yellow, which though very minute, yet are true
Stones, and distinct from the scorbutic Red Matter, that does not separate and
fall down from the Urine, till after some Hours standing, and then is
precipitated by the Impression of the Cold from the Ambient Air, as above
described. The Cure of this Distemper, consists in the carrying off the
sabulous and sandy Atoms, and preventing the Generation of more, and so cutting
off the Supplies, that use to fill the Room of the forther, that are discharged
with the Urine: And it is highly necessary to attempt this, lest otherwise the
small Stones, continuing undisturbed, should unite and adhere to each other,
and receiving gradual Augmentation, from new Particles daily arriving, should
grow to a Stone of great Bulk, and become incapable of passing the Ureters, or
at least without great Difficulty and Pain; and when they slide through and
drop into the Bladder, should contract there a large Size as before described.
For it is highly probable, that the Stone is very seldom originally generated
in that Receptacle, and that all, or at least the far greatest Part found
there, descend thither from the Kidneys, and receive their Increase from the
sandy and gritty Supplies, transmitted to it through the Ureters. It has
therefore been an unhappy Neglect, committed by some Patients, that though they
have long perceived a considerable Quatity of Gravel discharged with their
Urine, and have felt the Trouble and Uneasiness of it in their Kidneys, have
however, taken little Care to clear them of these gritty Materials, and prevent
the breeding of more; from which Omission, at length, Stones of a bigger Bulk,
always painful and often fatal, have been produced.

It is therefore evidently the Interest of all Persons, when they observe that
a Quantity of such Sand and Gravel, the Rudiments and Mother of bigger Stones,
is excluded with the Urine from the Bladder, to endeavor, by proper Means, to
free the Kidneys from these noxious Inhabitants, and prevent the Generation of
new Supplies; and in the first Place, it is requisite to convey away the
Gravel, that is already bred, for which Purpose the following Method is most
efficacious.

First Purgatives.

Take over Night, going to Bed, of Elixir Salutis, three Spoonfuls; and the
next Morning, drink a Quart or three Pints of purging Mineral Waters, such as
those of Epsom, Dulledge, Acton, Northal, etc. And at Night going to Bed,

Take of Milk-Water, two Ounces; compound Water of Horseradish, half an Ounce;
twelve Drops of liquid Laudanum, and three Drachms of Diacodium; make it a
Draught: repeat both Medicines every other Day and Night, for three Times.

After an Interval of three Weeks do the same, and sooner, if the Symptoms of
the Gravel call for it.

Or, Drink alone, two Quarts of such purging Waters several Days, and then rest.

The Reason why these Waters are very beneficial for the Purpose intended, is,
that a considerable Part of them pass by Urine, and in their Passage through
the Kidneys, wash away in their Current the Sand and Gravel, and suffer them
not to lodge there, till they grow to a Stone of a large Size: And it is the
same in respect of the Bladder; for the same Flood that rushes down through the
Ureters, carries off the Gritt from the Receiver, and expels it with the Urine.

Diuretics, to be employed in the Intervals of purging, for the same Purpose,
are such as follow.

Take of Roots of Chervil, Stone Parsley, Eringo, Fennel, Sorrel, each half an
Ounce; of Seeds of Burdock, Anise, and sweet Fennel, each a Dram; of Juniper
Berries, three Drachms; boil these Ingredients, in three Pints of Spring Water,
to a Quart; add to it, a Dram of purified Nitre; strain it, and add a Pint of
Rhenish Wine: Drink a Quarter of a Pint Morning and Evening.

Or, Take Millepedes alive and washed, fifty, bruise them in a Mortar, with a
Quarter of a Pint of Rhenish Wine, and four Ounces of compound Horseradish
Water; make a strong Expression for a Draught, to be taken twice a Day.

But the most effectual Diuretic for carrying off Gravel, and clearing the
Parts afflicted with it, are mineral unpurging Waters, such as those of the
Bath, Tunbridge, the Spaw, and other Chalybeate Springs: For these, rushing
with a plentiful Tide through the urinary Organs where the Gravel is lodged as
well as generated, disturbs its several Nests, and rolls along in its Stream,
the Sand-beds it meets in its Way, till at length they are discharged in the
Urine. But this is not the only Advantage, that attends the drinking copiously
Chalybeate Waters; for besides this, it very much contributes the laying the
Axe to the Root of the Disease, and preventing the Generation of such
petrifying Seeds, as shall be shown afterward. There are other diuretic
Remedies useful in this Distemper; as a Mixture of Water, French Brandy, and
Juice of Lemon, called Punch, if made small, and not intoxicating, though taken
in a considerable Quantity. Juice or Syrup of Lemons; Syrup of Marshmallows;
and fresh Oil of Sweet Almonds; of each an equal Portion, mixed and beat
together, with as much Sugar as is sufficient to give them a Consistency, taken
to a Spoonful or two often in a Day, is very beneficial; so is a Spoonful or
two of compound Juniper-Water of Cologne, or Holland, drank now and then in a
Glass of White Wind; add to these Remedies, the exercise of the Body, by riding
sometimes on a hard trotting Horse, sometimes by hurrying in a Coach over paved
Stones, or other rugged and uneven Ground, (if the Patient can bear it) which
by the repeated working and Concussion of the Back, move and dislodge the
Gravel in the Kidneys, and force it thence into the Bladder, whence it is
excluded with the Water.

Now to prevent the Production of little Stones or Gravel, all those Remedies
are required as most effectual, that have an operative Virtue, to loose and
disengage all viscous and tough Coagulations, and dissolve the Cohesion and
Structure of cretaceous and gritty Coalitions, whence small Stones and Gravel
are created, some in the Blood, and others in the urinary Strainers. This is
indeed a Matter of the greatest Importance in this Case; for if this is
effected, the formidable and pernicious Disease will be crushed in Embrio, and
not suffered to arrive at a mature State. I shall therefore set down the
Medicines, endowed with the greatest Force, for procuring this End.

It is easy to see that those Remedies, that restore the Blood when depraved,
to its native Temperament, and keep it in that just and salutary Constitution,
which specifially belongs to this Animal Fluid, are in general to be chosen;
and in this Case in particular, those are to be insisted on, that are most
capable of disjoyning and separating the associated, viscous, and sandy
Particles, that conspire to the Formation of a Stone, and so to attenuate and
refine them, that they may easily incorporate with the Blood, and produce an
uniform and equal Mixture.

And for this Purpose, Chalybe^te Medicines, prepared by Art or Nature, are the
most preferable: And since Patients afflicted with this Disease, are commonly
of a hotter Constitution than others, those Preparations that have the least
Sulphur left in their Composition, are most beneficial to them; such as the
Salt of Steel, or the Tincture of it in Wine: But above all, mineral Waters,
impregnated with Steel in Embrio, are in this Case most celebrated, which not
only dilute and attemper the Blood, and carry off in their Current the sandy
and petrifying Materials, as before explained, but likewise by their active
Virtue, animate, ferment, and exalt the Blood, break the Cohesion of the knotty
and cretaceous Seeds of the Stone, and by wresting the Particles from each
others Embraces, prevent the engendering of this Disease, by the Confederacy of
such Impurities. So that these salutary Springs, are not only highly useful in
freeing the Veins from immiscible and hurtful Matter, cleansing the Urinary
Channels, and rolling away in their Flood, the Gravel lodged in the Cavities,
through which their Waters make their Way, but they likewise very much
contribute to the Recovery of a just Crasis, or Constitution of Blood, by
destroying the Principles and Rudiments of this Disease, 'ere yet they combine
in a Stone of large Size, and reach a mature State, which they effect in the
Manner described.

But if hard and gravelly Materials, associate and unite in the Kidneys, by a
slight Structure, and are rather entangled one with another, and hang together
like a piece of Sponge, Hoar-Frost, or a Flake of Snow, than strictly cohere,
whence they become very porus and friable; or if when more closely complicated
and connected, they grow to a greater Bulk, and create great Pain either in the
Kidneys or the Ureters, by grating the Membranes with their unequal and ragged
Figure in their Passage, or by their too large and disproportionate Size, stop
at the Entrance, or in their Way through these Tubes, in such Cases, the proper
Remedies do remove them from the Kidneys, and oblige them to pass the Uteters
into the Bladder, are such as these.

III. How to remove a Fit of the GRAVEL, or STONE.
Take three or four Spoonfuls of Elixir Salutis, or of the Tincture or Infusion
of Sena and Rhubarb and Anniseeds, over Night, and a Quart of purging
Mineral-Water the next Morning, and the Night following take this Draught,

Of Milk-Water, two Ounces; of compound Horse-radish-Water, three Drachms; of
crude Opium colated, a Grain and half; Syrup of Marshmallows, half an Ounce;
make it a Draught: And if the Stone or Gravel, be not removed, but the Fit
continues, take the next Morning, two Quarts of the same purging Waters, either
Epsom, Dulledge, Acton, etc. and the Night following, the same composing
Draught, and so the next Morning and Night, for three Times, during the Fit;
and if notwithstanding, the Paroxysm is still prolonged, then let the Patient
take the following Draught, going to Bed, every Night, if the Pains are
violent, or otherwise every other Night.

Take of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, and Ounce; of the pectoral Decoction, a Quarter
of a Pint; of Syrup of Meconium, ten Drachms; make a Draught.

Take also such oily and diuretic Medicines as follow.

Take of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, and Linseed, drawn without Fire, each an Ounce;
of Syrup of Lemons and Marshmallows, each ten Drachms; of Saffron, a Scruple;
of fine Sugar, as much as is sufficient; let it all be well mixed in a marble
Mortar, and made a Linctus. Let the Patient take a Spoonful or two often in a
Day and Night.

Small Punch likewise, especially if made with Spaw-Water, is useful to push on
the Stone, or Gravel, when either of them sticks in the Ureters, and to clear
the Kidneys of the Beds of Sand collected there.

Juniper-Water, especially that of Cologne, or Holland, and the diuretic
Apozem, above set down, are beneficial.

To be more particular, let the Patient in the Paroxysm, that eludes the Force
of the forementioned Remedies, take the following.

Take of Flowers of Camomile, two Handfuls; Roots of Marshmallows, six
Drachms; of wild Carrot-Seed, half an Ounce; of Venice Turpentine, dissolved
with the White of an Egg, three Drachms; of the Electuary of Hiera cum Agarick,
six Drachms; make it a Clyster.

Or, Take of the common emollient Decoction, twelve Ounces; adding to the
Ingredients Juniper Berries, six Drachms; Seeds of the wild Carrot, three
Drachms; dissolve in it of Lenitive Electuary, ten Drachms; use it for a
Clyster.

Let one of these Clysters be given every Day, for three or four Times.

For easing the Paroxysm, it will likewise be very Advantageous, for the
Patient to sit up to the Waste, in a Bath of Lukewarm Water, and repeat it two
or three Times, or in a medicated Bath, which may be made thus.

Take of the Leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, each
three Handfuls; Flowers of Camomile, Melilot, and Elder, each two Handfuls;
Tops of Camomile, two Handfuls; Juniper Berries, six Ounces; of Linseed, and
Fenugreek-Seed, each two Ounces; boil all in a sufficient Quantity of
Spring Water, and let the Patient sit in it Lukewarm, up to the Waste, in a
Bathing Tub.

In this Case also, there are vast Varieties of Remedies, prescribed by
celebrated Authors, as Fomentations, Liniments, Plasters, etc. to be
externally applied, which notwithstanding, are little availing for removing a
Fit of the Stone, or Gravel: The most effectual, are certainly the Use of
purging Mineral Waters, three or four Times, and tak^ng at Night, after their
Operation, a Grain and half of Opium, as beforementioned, or an equivalent
Quantity of liquid Laudanum, that is, about thirty Drops.

But in Case that Method should not succeed, the next most valuable Medicines
are Pills made of Venice-Turpentine, or rather Chios, taken to the Quantity of
a Scruple, alone, or mixed with an equal Part of Rhubarb.

Or, Thus, -- Take of Venice, or Chios-Turpentine, four Scruples; of Rhubarb, a
Dram; of Salt of Tartar, half a Dram; Cinnamon, half a Scruple; of
Balsamic Syrap, as much as will make a Mass, to be formed into Pills of
ordinary Size; take four every other Day, at Bed Time.

For the same End, Emulsions are conducive, such as these,

Of Sweet-Almonds blanched, number fifteen; of Seeds of Melons, Pumpions,
Violets, each two Drachms; bruise them together in a marble Mortar, pouring on
them, gradually, a Quart of Barley-Water; strain it for use; drink often of it,
a Quarter of a Pint, or six Ounces, Day or Night.

Or, Take of Seeds of Violets, three Drachms; of Seeds of Pumpions, Melons,
white Poppies, each two Drachms; eight blanched Sweet-Almonds; bruise them
together in a Mortar, and pour upon them, Milk-Water, and Corn Poppy-Water,
each a Pint, strain it, and make it an Emulsion to be drank as the others

Oily Medicines, are likewise very useful, as they envelop and soften the acid
and acrimonious Juices, and promote the Expulsion of the Stone, as thus,

Take two Spoonfuls of Linseed-Oil, newly drawn, without Fire, twice a Day.

Or, Take new Oil of Sweet-Almonds, and Linseed-Oil, drawn without Fire, each
an Ounce; of Syrup of Marshmallows, and Violets, of each six Drachms; of Syrup
of Lemons, half an Ounce; of Saffron, rubbd fine, half a Scruple; mix them well
to make a Linctus: Take a Spoonful often, shaking it well.

Or, Take an Ounce of fresh Oil of Sweet-Almonds, in a Quarter of a Pint of the
Decoction for the Syrup of Marshmallows, and repeat it frequently.

Riding in a Coach, or on Horseback, in rough unequal Ground, or our paved
Streets, conduces much to the Discharge of the Stone, or Gravel, when either
one or the other sticks in the Ureter, or Pelvis, if the Patient can endure it.

And while these Remedies are made Use of, opiate Medicines must be given,
mingled with them, or alone, to abate the spasmodick Contraction of the tender
Membran^s, and give Ease to the disordered and afflicted Spirits, that they
being lulled to Rest and Quiet, may cease their convulsive Grasps, and the mean
Time the Stone, or Gravel, solicited by city smooth Remedies, slippery and
gentle Diuretics, may slide through the Ureters, and drop, ^r pass, into the
Bladder without Resistance.

Take of crude Opium, dissolved and s^rained, a Grain and half, or two Grain;
of the pectoral Decoction, a Qua^ter of a Pint; Syrup of Lemons, three Drachms;
make it a Draught, to be taken at Night, or at any Time when the Pain is
violent, and repeat it as the Symptoms shall require.

Or, Take of Cinnabar of Antimony, half a Scruple; Crabbs-Eyes and Coral, of
each six Grains; Laudanum Opiatum, a Grain and half; make it a Powder, to be
taken at the Draught now prescribed.

If the Patient is disposed to Vomiting, or straining to Vomit, let him take
two Spoonfuls of the following Mixture, and repeat it four or five times, once
in four Hours.

Take of Mint-Water, or Barley Cinnamon Water, two Ounces; of Juice of Lemons,
two Ounces; of Salt of Wormwood, a Dram and half; of Laudanum, a Grain and
half; make a Mixture.

For easing the Pain, and facilitating the Passage of the Stone, or Gravel,
various diuretic Remedies are recommended, by eminent Physicians, the
following Decoction of Forrestus, is for this Purpose, much cried up.

Take of Seeds of Mallows, Marshmallows, each two Drachms and half; of fat
lenten Figgs, cut and sliced, number nine; Sebestens in number seven; boil
these Ingredients in three Quarts of Water, to three Pints: This soft and
slippery Decoction, like that for making Syrup of Marshmallows, or the
pectoral Decoction, in the London Dispensatory, may be improved by other
diurclick Ingredients, (viz.) Seeds of Burdock, Roots of Fennel, Violets,
Eringo, wild Carrots, Juniper Berries, etc.

In a Fit of the Stone likewise, the Decoction of the Flowers of Camomile, is
much applauded by some worthy Physicians; and that of the Water-Lilly; and if
some Drops of sweet Spirit of Salt, or Vitriol, were added to each Draught of
such diuretic Apozems, their Force would be still improved.

IV. To preserve from, or prevent the return of Fits of the Stone, or Gravel,
when the Paroxysms cease.
GENTLE Purgatives of Sena, Rhubarb, Elixir Salutis, etc. taken once in a Month
or six Weeks, are beneficial, as they cleanse the Stomach, and their appending
Roads from their Impurities, and the crude and unconcocted Remains of the Foods
ingested; but the best Way is frequently to use purging Mineral Waters; and in
the Intervals, diuretic and alterative Remedies, should be taken, such as
these that follow.

Take of the Pulp of candied Citron-Peel, and of the Root of Marshmallows,
each an Ounce; of Species Dialthaeae, and Diatragacanth frigid, each a Dram
and half; of Crabbs-Eyes, two Drachms; of the Seeds of Purslain, and white
Poppies, each a Dram; of the Fruit of Alkakengi, two Scruples; of Gumm
Arabic, two Drachms; Syrup of Marshmallows, as much as will make an Electuary;
take the Quantity of a large Nutmeg, or small Chestnut, twice a Day, Drinking
after it, a Quarter of a Pint of the Decoction for the Syrup of Marshmallows.

But for cleansing the Kidneys, and carrying off the Sand and gritty
Concrescences, lest by daily Augmentation, they should at last form a larger
Stone, slippery and oily Remedies, and Turpentine, such as mentioned above,
Whey, and above all, unpurging Mineral Waters of all Kinds, but chiefly the
Chaybeate, such as Tunbridge, must be relied upon; or the Islington Waters,
called New-Tunbridge. Millepedes, are also a good Diuretic in this Case: But I
have above treated on this Subject, where I have discoursed on the Gravel, and
small sandy Concretions, which are the minutest real Stones, and the Seeds and
Rudiments, that by their Consluence and Coherence, produce those of a greater
Dimension, and to that Discourse I refer the Reader; for the true Method of
preserving the Patient from the Return of his Paroxysms, is to prevent the
Generation of such fabulous Materials, out of which the Stone is made, or to
carry them off before they have formed such large Bodies.

It is very useful in a Paroxysm of the Stone, to go into a Bath of
Spring Water moderately warm, which by stopping Sweat and Perspiration, and
soothing the Spirits, relaxing and dilating the Fibers, promotes Urine, and
therefore the Protrusion and Expulsion of the Stones, that hang or stick in the
Ureters which after they have acquired a considerable Magnitude, will
notwithstanding strive and make their Way for a while through th^^^ Tubes,
which are much stretched and enlarged by being the beaten Road for Stones to
pa^^ from the Kidneys to the Bladder; yet at lengt^ they increase to such a
Size, that when they have entered the Orifice of the Ureter, a^^ are incapable
of proceeding farther, they plug up the Passage, and stop the Current of the
Urine; and if afterward another Stone of such a disproportionate Size, should
fall from the Kidney into the Mouth of the other Tube, a total Suppression of
Urine and Death in a short Time, that is, in ten or eleven Days, are the
Consequence; for a total and destructive Stoppage of the Urine, cannot arise
from the Obstruction of one Ureter; for Nature that has framed so many double
Organs for other Functions, two Eyes, two Ears, two Jugular Veins, two Lobes of
the Lungs, etc. that if one of these Instruments should be lost or become
defective, the other, at least in a great Measure, might perform the Office of
both; so it has evidently for the more certain and effectual Secretion of the
Urine, provided a pair of Conveyances, one in each Kidney, that if one be
entirely disabled and stopped up, the other may do double Duty, and discharge
the Portion of Serum, that used to run through the other Aquaeduct. It is
therefore evident to a Demonstration, that no total Suppression of the Urine
can happen, where both the Ureters are not entirely stopped; and it is hard to
conceive how at any Time two Stones should at once fall down, one from each
Kidney, and stop in the same Instant, each of those Organs of Separation: If
therefore a full Stoppage of Water happens, and neither of the Ureters was
before that Time obstructed, it is most agreeable to Reason, that we should
assign another Cause of that Event, that is, a paralytick Impotence of the
secretory small Tubes and papillary Glands, which strain the Serum from the
Blood, through the Kidneys and Ureters, into the Bladder; for if these
secretory Tubes by a Paralysis affecting the Spirits residing in them, quite
lose their Tension and falling flat together close up their Foramina, or
Passages, no Serum can be longer separated from the Blood, or conveyed into the
Receptacle of the Urine; and this will prove as effectual and adaequate a Cause
of a total Obstruction of Urine, as if both the Ureters were completely stopped
by the falling of two Stones of disproportionate Size into their Mouths. And
this was the Case of an illustrious Person, one of the first Rank of the
English Nobility, who having for several Years been afflicted with the Gout,
one Day felt a severe Pain in one of his Shoulders, which after some Time
ceased to afflict him; but he had not been long at Ease, when the Flow of his
Urine was entirely interrupted, and continued so to the eleventh Day, when the
noble Patient expired, notwithstanding all the Means and Methods that his
Physicians, of whom I had the Honor to be one, could direct for his Recovery.
Upon opening the dead Body there appeared, when the K^dneys were divided, some
small Stones in the Pelvis, and others entangled in the Fibers or Strings of
the Kidneys, but no Stone in the Mouth or Channel of either Ureter; so nothing
can be more certain, nor more obvious to the meanest Capacity than this, that
the Stone could not be the Cause of hindering the Water from descending into the
Bladder, no Stone being found in the Ureters, nor in the Kidneys, of a Size
capable of stopping the Tubes before-named; and had there been bred in the
Kidneys, any Stones of a sufficient Bigness, to have completely stopped the
Ureters, yet it must be supposed, as before suggested, that two Stones of such
a Magnitude fell at the same Instant, one into the Orifice of each Ureter, else
a total Suppression of Urine could not have followed; and this must be supposed
scarce ever to have happened, and is but barely possible. But de facio, there
were no such Stoppage found in either Ureter. Yet notwithstanding one of the
Physicians declared his Opinion, and obstinately persevered in it, that the
Suppression of Urine, of which the Patient dyed, proceeded from the Stone in
The Kidneys.

These are the best preservatory Means against the Return of this formidable
Disease, since the true and effectual Way, as mentioned above, is either to
enable the active Principles of the Blood to keep the Mass in such an equal,
regular, and just Mixture, and to refine and exalt it to such an healthful
State, as may prevent the Generation of hard and gritty Concrescences, that as
they are the Foundation of the Stone, so they administer Materials for the
Superstructure; and for procuring this End, the Remedies already enumerated are
most availing, in as much as they animate and enliven the Spirits, refine and
elevate the Mass of Blood, and dissolve and sever cretaceous or sandy
Coalitions, by maintaining its Circulation with a due Celerity. To these may be
added such Medicines as subdue the acid and acrimonious Quality of the Juices,
by blunting and smoothing their sharp Points and Angles, such as Coral,
Crabbs-Eyes, Crabbs-Claws, Oyster-shells, and other testaceous, absorbing and
correcting Powders, given with Asses-Milk, or mixed with other Ingredients in
Pius or Electuaries; and likewise those, that are proper to assist the
digestive Faculty of the Stomach, to concoct the Foods and Liquors it receives,
into a wholesome well-laboured and duly mixed Mass of Chyle, that the
unconcocted and faeculent Parts, the first Seeds and Principles which by their
Union and Coacervation produce the Stone, may be prevented.

The Forms of such Medicines that promote Digestion in the Stomach, are such as
these.

Take of Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of candied Citron Peel, or the outward
yellow Rind of the Orange, each an Ounce; of Coral, Crabbs-Eyes, and Pearl,
each a Dram; of candied Nutmegs, a Dram and half; of Salt of Wormwood and
Tartar, each two Scruples; of compound Powder of Wake-Robin, and the Leaves of
Chamaepitys, each a Dram and half; of the Syrup from candied Nutmeg, as much
as will make an Electuary. Take the quantity of a large Nutmeg, every Morning
and Evening, drinking after it, a Glass of Wormwood-wine, or the Infusion of
the Root of Gentian, or Twenty Drops of the Tincture of Gentian in a Glass of
White Wind.

Or, Take of the Tops of Roman Wormwood, and the lesser Centaury, each half a
Pugil; of the Root of Gentian, and Virginian Snake-root, each a Dram; of
Cardamom Seeds, two Scruples; of Coriander Seeds, two Drachms and half; of Salt
of Tartar a Dram; infuse all in a sufficient Quantity of Spring Water to a
Quart; strain it, and add to it, of compound Wormwood, and compound Gentian
Water, each an Ounce and half; take a Quarter of a Pint each Morning fasting,
and also in the Afternoon, about three Hours after Dinner.

Sometimes Take of Elixir Propriet at is tartarised, five and twenty, or thirty
Drops in a Glass of Mountain White Wind, twice a Day, viz. at about Eleven and
Four.

Besides these Remedies, moderate Exercise, pure and well ventilated Air,
Regularity and Temperance, in Eating and Drinking, must be carefully observed,
without which the best Methods of Physic may be unavailing.

As to those Medicines called by the Greek Physicians Lithontriptica, that is,
such as break and dissolve the Stone, either in the Kidneys or Bladder, and to
which many Empiricks have pretended, assuring us that they gradually wear and
crumble it away, and reduce it to such minute Fragments, that they easily pass
the Ureters into the Bladder, and with the same ease slide through, and are
excluded thence together with the Urine: I acknowledge I am incapable of
conceiving how a Medicine ingested by the Mouth can produce this Effect. It is
true, that the celebrated Carthaginian General Hannibal, as Historians report,
found means by Vinegar, or some invented sharp and acid Liquor, to dissolve the
Alpine Rocks, and so to eat his Way through those Mountains into Italy. But if
any Patient, afflicted with the Stone, should swallow a proper Quantity of this
powerful Fluid, were it to be had, or any other of like Virtue, since it must
first undergo a great Alteration by the Ferment and digestive Faculty of the
Stomach, and then a farther by mixing with the bilious Humors descending from
the Gallbladder, and afterward with the acid Juices issuing from the
Pancreas, and then another by passing the lacteal Strainers, and mingling its
Stores with the Lympha brought by numerous Water-Pipes into the common
Receptacles; then another by its Admission into the Veins, where during
repeated Circulations with great Celerity, the Parts by innumerable Attritions,
Reverberations, and Glances from their violent ^^shing and beating one upon
another, receive Comminution, and are attenuated, exalted, and smoothed, till
they acquire a refined volatile State; and at last of all, since they must
receive another Alteration by entering and passing the urinary Strainers in the
Kidneys: Let, I say, all these Changes be contemplated, and will not, do you
think, the Medicine ingested be unedged and disarmed of its sharp Points and
Angles, and lose all its dissolving or Stone-cutting Quality? For no a cid
Juices, not Vinegar itself, continue acid after they have mingled and
circulated with the Blood, and have felt for some Time, the digestive Power of
its active Principles.

Those bold Persons therefore that pretend to be Masters of Remedies, which
given by the Mouth, will break or dissolve the Stone in the Kidneys, or the
Bladder, impose upon Mankind, not only because the Medicine loses its peculiar
Qualities, by undergoing such a Variety of Changes and Alterations, as have
been enumerated, but likewise by mingling and being diluted with above Twenty
Pound of Blood, (for few Men have less) and frequently running its Circuit with
it, by which means it becomes quite another Thing, before it reaches the Stone
it was designed to dissolve or crumble to pieces.

It must be observed, that as abovementioned, there are some porus, light, and
friable Stones, whose Constructure is so slight, that they will by a little
Shock or Collision, crumble, and be divided into small Fragments, while the
Parts of others so strictly cohere, that they are scarcely capable of
Separation; and it is of these harder and more solid Stones that I speak, when
I say they cannot be broken, or cut in pieces, by Remedies given at the Mouth,
but they defy the Edge of the keenest Lithontriptick Weapon in all the Arsenals
of Greece.

When therefore Stones or Gravel are at any Time removed from the Kidneys, and
excluded with the Urine, it is not by Virtue of any Stone-breaking Medicine,
acting upon them, but by the Operation of its diuretic Quality, exciting a
great Separation of Serum, which rushing in a swift Current through the
Kidneys, washes away in its Streams the Gravel and Stones lodged there, that by
their proportionate Magnitude are capable of passing the Ureters, as a sudden
Storm or sharp Shower of Rain, rolls down the Streets in its Torrent, the Sand
and loose Stones, as well as other promiscuous Impurities to be carried off by
the common Drain: Though it is very probable that sometimes this Flood of
Serum, transmitted from the Veins by its immoderate Quantity, as well as the
Strength of its Tide, in its Passage through the Kidneys, may likewise
disunite, and shatter to Pieces some smaller friable Stones, whose Parts hang
together by a very slight Connection.

But if Nature or Art can afford any Medicines, that are capable of breaking a
hard large Stone in the Bladder, the most probable Way of making them
effectual, would be to inject them directly into the Bladder; for then, having
undergone none of those various Alterations above enumerated, which those
Remedies must do that are taken by the Mouth, they would exert their
Stone-dissolving Virtue, if they have any, entire and undiminished, and would
have the great Advantage of acting upon it by immediate Contact, by which means
the Stone in the Bladder, if it could be effected by Medicines, would be wasted
and moulder away. But Experience shows that this is not found practicable; for
were such a Medicine discovered, it would prevent the Tortures and Misery of
many unhappy Patients, and make the useful Art of Cutting for the Stone
unnecessary, of which I shall speak afterward.

When large Stones are bred in the Kidneys, or such as cannot pass, but with
great Pain and Difficulty, all forcing diuretic Medicines must, be forborne,
and only such as are smooth, oily, and slippery should be employed; lest such
as powerfully provoke Urine, should disturb and push forward the bigger, that
lay quiet in the Kidneys, into the Ureters, where they will either stop at the
Entrance, or stick in the Passage, and by that Means either shut up the Mouth,
or create a violent Fit of Pain, together with bloody Urine, if their Surface
be rough and ragged; and therefore in such Cases, slimy, soft, and mucilaginous
Remedies, are chiefly to be depended on, to promote the slipping of the Stone
into the Bladder: And if active Diuretics, have been employed in vain to push
on the Stone, which often happens in a violent Paroxysm, opiate Medicines of
good Force should be given, that the Fibers of the enclosing Membranes, whilst
stimulated by the Torture of the Stone, and urged by the Medicine designed to
expel it, being eased and lulled by their narcotick Virtue, may cease to
contract themselves and clasp the Stone so closely, and by dilating and
relaxing themselves while at Ease, may make Way for it to slide through into
the Bladder. But if the Stone in the Kidneys is large, solid, and branches
through their Substance, no Means at all should be used for its Cure; for if
^here are any Remedies that have Power to break and dislodge its Fragments,
which I believe, as I have said, there are not, what would that be, but to send
them down to stop the Ureters, or to give unsufferable Torments, by sticking in
their Channels!

As to the Stone in the Bladder, which, as said above, is no more than a Stone
first bred in the Kidney, and thence conveyed through the Ureters; where it
receives its oblong Figure, into the Bladder, and gains there such a Magnitude,
that it becomes incapable of being expelled with the Urine, being fed and
augmented continually with new Gritt and sandy Materials washed from the
Kidneys and falling down into the Bladder; when it first descends into that
Receptacle, and its Size does not exceed a due Proportion, while it floats in
the Urine, it often plays, aims, and offers at the Orifice of the Urethra, but
its Figure or Position not being accommodated to it, cannot pass through that
urinary Channel; and then it not only creates great Uneasiness, by lying cross
its Mouth, but likewise often by interrupting the Streams of Urine, and
sometimes by totally obstructing the Passage. When the Gravel, or Stone, or
Stones, are yet small enough to enter and pass the Urethr^, to facilitate their
Discharge, the Veins should be filled with such diuretic Liquors, as I have
before set down, that they may communicate a constant Flow of Urine to the
Bladder, which being commonly kept full, will be the more apt to eject the
Stone, together with the Flood that distends it. But if it grows so great, that
it becomes unable to make its Way, by Reason of its disproportionate Size, it
will be daily augmented by the Accretion or Addition of new Gritt or Gravel,
carried from the Kidneys, through the Ureters, by the Streams of Urine, as Sand
and small Stones, are rolled along from a rising Ground, by Rills of Water,
that flow down its Sides. Now these Sands or minute Concretions, as I have
explained above, are the Seeds, or Mother of the Stone, that is, the Principles
or first Materials, that combine for the Formation of it in the Kidneys, and
afterward to its Augmentation in the Bladder; and to hinder its increasing
there to a great Magnitude, those Remedies are to be used which were enumerated
before, for cutting off the Generation of Gravel, and such sandy and fabulous
Combinations; to which I refer the Reader.

But if through Neglect, or the Inability of Methods and Medicines to prevent
the breeding of Sand and Gravel in the Kidneys, which washed away by the Urine
into the Bladder, constantly feed and amplify the Stones confined there, which
grow not like Animals and Vegetables, by Nourishment admitted by the Mouth or
the Root, and conveyed and distributed to the outward Parts from the inward,
but by the daily Access, Accumulation, and Adhesion, of hard, sandy Particles
to the Surface of the Stone; if, I say, the Stone, by the Arrival and
Complication of new petrifying Principles, becomes large and ponderous, and
being attended with a terrible Train of Symptoms, that render the Patient a
great Object of Compassion, while Death is more eligible than Life, and no
effectual Means can be suggested, how it may be cut, dissolved, or crumbled to
pieces, as I have before demonstrated, all that can be done by Medicine, is to
quiet or reduce the enormous Pains and Torments, inflicted by this cruel
Disease; and for the effecting of this, only crude Opium, or its Preparations,
the Gift of Divine Benignity to mitigate the Tortures, and alleviate the
extreme Miseries of Mankind, can be depended on. This is the Patient's Refuge,
and the only Consolation to allay his Agonies, and restrain the Rage of his
Sufferings. And therefore in this Case, let him take the following Pills.

Take of Saffron, beat small, three Grains; of Extract of Gentian, six Grains;
of crude Opium dissolved and strained, a Grain and half; Balsamic Syrup,
enough to make it into Pills, for one Dose, to be taken in violent Pains, and
repeated when the Force of the first is worn off, if the Torments continue.

But if the Quantity of Opium prescribed, is not sufficient to remove the Pain,
it may gradually be increased, by adding a Quarter of a Grain; and if that
likewise should be ineffectual, add half a Grain, and so on, till the Patient
has found what is the just Quantity that will relieve him, and when he has
taken his Measure, and settled the Proportion, he will be obliged to take it as
often as his Agonies shall make it absolutely necessary. All smooth, soft, and
slippery Meats and Drinks, as well as Medicines must be chosen; for those of an
opposite Nature will irritate and enrage the Paroxysm, especially if an Ulcer
attends the Stone, which is an incurable Disease: And as Ulcers produced either
in the Kidneys, or the Neck of the Bladder, from other Causes besides the
Stone, elude the Force of all Remedies, which is likewise the Case of all other
internal Ulcers in the Lungs, Liver, etc. so those, that arise from the
Fretting and Laceration of the Membranes in the Kidneys or the Bladder, by
Stones of a rough and ragged Superficies, can never be healed, at least while
the Stone continuing there, is always wearing and wounding the Part where it
lodges: And therefore all that can be done, is to drink plentifully of smooth,
and soft Liquors, besides taking slippery and oily Remedies, that may
constantly dilute and wash away the ulcerous Matter, lest gathering together in
too great a Quantity, it should stop the Passage of the Urine; which
Obstruction is sometimes so great, that the Surgeon's Hand is necessarily
required to pass his Catheter into the Bladder, for the Relief of the Patient,
through which the imprisoned Urine may flow freely out; and the Patient is
obliged to fly to this Refuge for Ease, as often as Clysters and other
Medicines ingested by the Mouth are ineffectual. The soft and smooth Liquors
that may assist the Patient, by diluting the corrupt Matter, and making it fit
to flow, are Mead, or other Liquors made of Honey; also Decoctions of Barley,
Liquorish, Marshmallows, dried Figgs, and Raisins of the Sun, stoned; or
rather, the following Apozem.

Take of Flowers of Mallows, an handful; of Root of Marshmallows, half an
Ounce; of sweet Fennel-Root, an Ounce; of Leaves of Violet, Parietaria, each a
Pugil; of Anise and Carraway Seeds, each a Dram and half; boil all in three
Pints of Spring Water, to a Quart, strain it, and add of Syrup of
Marshmallows, three Ounces; and six Drachms of the Tincture of Saffron, made
with Treacle-Water; drink half a Pint, or six Ounces of it, three Times a Day.

The smoothest and softest Spring Water, should be chosen for common Drink,
such as that of Bristol, or any other, that rises from Chalk-Hills: A good
Draught likewise of White Wind, and new Ale, [mind this] now and then repeated,
is useful to dislodge and carry off the noxious and impure Matter, issuing from
an Ulcer in the Kidneys or Bladder; and the Sediment of each of them is
distinguished by their slimy, glutinous and ropy Quality, from the white, mealy
and light Contents, found often in the Urine, from scorbutic Causes, as above
suggested, that by shaking the Glass, will presently rise and float in the
Bosom of it, which however has no weight, nor viscous, nor gritty Quality, but
swims in pale, discontinued, and incoherent Matter, communicated to the Urine
from the Blood, abounding with such Impurities. And they are discriminated from
one another, by a faetid and offensive Smell, proper to the Matter discharged
from an Ulcer in the Bladder, and contracted from long mixing with the Urine,
which is not found in those slimy Contents that flow down from the Kidneys, and
are excluded with the serous Streams, as I have above explained.

After all, when notwithstanding the due Care and Observance of the best Rules
to prevent it, the Stone in the Bladder grows very large, and the Pains are
greater than Humane Patience can bear, the last Refuge from this dreadful
Tormentor, is manual Operation, when Incision is made into the Bladder, and the
Stone extracted through the Wound. So strong is the Principle of
Self-Preservation, and so terrible the Idea and Apprehension of Death, that to
continue a little longer in Being, Men submit, not only to a great Variety of
lingering Sufferings and Calamities, but likewise to the acutest Fains, or
which their yiedling to this Method of curing the Stone, is a most convincing
Evidence.

Though the Cutting for the Stone is a painful Operation, and attended with the
Hazard of Life, yet many Patients have been relieved by it, and continued well
after it for many Years, especially those, that were Cut in their Youth. Yet it
must be acknowledged, that many also have miscarried, either from the Nature of
the Stone, their ill Habit of Body, the Unskilfulness of the Operator, or his
want or sufficient knowledge in Surgery to heal the Wound. And this Misfortune
often happens likewise from the Patient's deferring the Operation too long, out
of an Abhorrence of the Violence of the Cure, or from flattering Hopes that the
Disease will not arise to that Extremity, and torment them with such
insufferable Symptoms. It is therefore the Interest of Persons afflicted with
it, to undergo the Operation, by which the Stone is extracted, when as yet it
is of a moderate Size, and therefore more Easily to be drawn through the Wound,
and before their Strength is exhausted by long Sufferings, and repeated
Paroxysms of Torture, and before the Ulcer that is often formed by it, becomes
deep and inveterate; and then, while their Vigor is unwasted, and their
Constitution otherwise hail, and the Stone not of an extraordinary Magnitude,
the Operation is likely to be successful: And if these Rules were observed, the
Lives of many of these unhappy Patients might be saved, that are lost for want
of a timely Submission to this Method of Cure.

When the Stone, lapsed from the Kidneys into the Bladder, are not augmented
there to that Proportion, as makes them incapable of entering into the Mouth of
the Urethra, yet sometimes after it has entered, it is however too large to
make its Way through that Aquaeduct, and therefore stops in the Road, where it
not only creates great Pain, but likewise obstructs the Current of the Water,
till at length there is no Remedy left but the Surgeon's Art, who in this Case
easily relieves the Sufferer, by cutting upon the Stone where he feels it
lodged, and thrusting it forth through the Orifice of the Wound: And this is
the most practicable and least dangerous Instance of Cutting for the Stone.

As for Cutting into the Bladder, and extracting the Stone thence, various
Methods have been invented, of which a distinct and accurate History is not the
Business of this Dissertation: It is enough for me in this Place to mention the
most Practicable and safest Way, and this, as I am informed, is that of cutting
into the Bladder, in the Region above the Os Pubis, lately brought into Use.
Whether there occur any dark and obscure Hints of this Practice in ancient or
modern Authors, or whether the first Invention does Honor to the ingenious
Surgeon Mr. Douglass, it is certain, that either as Reviver or Inventor of this
new Method, he has deseryed well of Mankind, and merited the Thanks and Esteem
of all the Faculty, since all Ways of performing this Operation known before,
were accompanied with more difficulty, more suffering, and greater Hazard of
Life.

Before the Patient consents to undergo this Method of Cure, great Care and
Caution should be used, that the Operator may be sure himself, and so able to
satisfy the Patient, that there is a Stone in the Bladder, the Cause of all his
painful Symptoms, and fit to be extracted. For there have been other Diseases
of the Bladder, that have so perfectly imitated the Stone in all its Symptoms,
and have imposed upon Surgeons, eminent in their Art, who after strict Search
have pronounced the Case to be the Stone, yet when they have cut the Patient to
relieve him, no Stone has been found, and upon opening the dead Body, either a
Fungus, or some Excrescency, grown to a great Bigness in the Neck of the
Bladder, or some other Disease, or Error of Nature in the Bladder, appeared to
be the only Cause of all the Nephretick-like Symptoms, that afflicted the
Patient: And therefore, I say, the Undertaker, before he attempts the
Operation, ought with the greatest Deliberation, and most careful Scrutiny, to
get the fullest Conviction in himself, of the real Existence of the Stone in
the Place he expects to find it.

FINIS.
Note, When I first began with this little Piece, I designed to have ended it,
with something relating to the Dissolution of the Stone, in the Kidneys and
Bladder, but when I came to read over the various Authors, pro and con, upon
the Subject thereof, and saw the Necessity there would be of Transcribing the
Methods, and reciting the Cases, where it had, and where it had not been
practicable, I found it would swell it to a bigness, beyond what I intended it;
and besides, I having at this present, two Patients, one with a Stone in the
left Kidney, and the other in the Bladder, under my Directions, in order to a
Dissolution, by the same Means and Methods, others have assured me, they have
succeeded in, I was willing to wait a while, (as it cannot but be a Work of some
Time) to see the Event thereof, before I did it, though I hope now it will not be
long, and then I shall, I believe, be able (and I am sure, gladly willing) to
communicate the Success, and show how and by what Means the same was brought
about, for the Service of my Fellow Creatures, I intending to publish them,
with the others I have named, as a Second Part, to make this First Part
complete.


