ARUNDEL.

BY THE AUTHOR OF THE OBSERVER.

VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

ARUNDEL.
LETTER LI. Lady Louisa G. to Lady Jane S.
I HAVE kept faith with my father, and given Sir George Revel another hearing.
He has just left me.

I believe the silly man thought to dazzle me by the finery of his person, for
he was most sumptuously dressed; that timidity and embarassment, which a real
lover would have felt in his predicament, he did not even affect, for he
approached me with a gay complacent air, and in a kind of raillying tone opened
the conversation, as follows: --

I hope, Lady Louisa, I have now the honor to approach you in a more favorable
moment, than when we last met at the Opera; I flatter myself I am indebted to
your voluntary good will for this happiness, and that I am not too presumptuous
in supposing your sentiments have changed in my favor.

I must own to you I felt my heart rise against him for the manner even more
than the matter of this speech, and I had so strong a propensity to humble his
self-assurance, as well as to shorten a disagreeable conversation, that I
immediately replied to him in these words:

Sir George Revel, if you want that generous indignation which naturally
revolts from every favor that is extorted from the bestower, I am sorry to
discover that the only valuable attribute, which belongs to pride, is that
which you do not possess.

I perceive, Madam, by this sample of your severity, that whatever pride I may
be possessed of, I shall have occasion for it all; some pride I must of
necessity have had, or I could never have aspired to address the finest woman
in the world, with a spirit the most implacable.

Suppose then you was to waste no more time upon that implacable spirit; for
though you may not be inclined to consult my repose, yet it is to be presumed
you have some consideration for your own.

All the consideration in life for both, my adorable Lady Louisa: for yours in
the first place, to whose enjoyments I am prepared to dedicate every thing that
fortune can purchase or pleasure bestow; to my own in the second degree,
because you are all that I desire on earth, and without you I must be miserable.

You are master of my time, Sir George; I must hear whatever you are pleased to
say.

Yes, Madam, you took a very early opportunity of telling me this interview was
extorted from you; you did not suffer me to indulge the hope that you had been
assenting to it: you let me know betimes that I am not the object of your
present inclinations, and your eyes directed me to find out my rival; but so
mean a rival is not worth my notice; whilst I am looking up to Lady Louisa I
cannot pay attention to the worm that is crawling in the dust; I must believe
that my devotion and assiduities will in the end prevail, and as no inferior
beauty can satisfy my ambition, whilst I have fortune and pretensions to aspire
to your Ladyship, I shall persevere in spite of all repulses to adore you.

You have again taken upon you, without any license, to point out an imaginary
rival, which, as a creature merely of your own brain, you have my free leave to
describe as you please; but believe me, Sir George Revel, it is very possible
for me to decline the honor of your addresses, and yet be without the plea of
any other attachment.

Ah! Madam, I am under no difficulty to account for your prejudices against me;
I know how apt we are to contract the habits and opinions of those we live
with; I cannot forget that your Ladyship has a mother, who dismissed me from
her doors; I can recollect whom she employed in that honorable office, and I
must not wonder if the mother's favorite is the daughter's passion.

Your insinuations, I now replied, savor so strongly of a purposed insult,
that they would warrant me in an immediate disavowal of any further intercourse
or conversation with you; but the character of my mother is not to be glanced
at even in the slightest manner, without a full investigation of the falsehoods
upon which you ground those insinuations.

Falsehoods do you call them! is it not notorious to all the world --?

What, I demanded, what is notorious to all the world?

The partiality of Lady G. to her creature Arundel.

I now rose from my seat, and, whilst my heart swelled with indignation -- I
will not consent, said I, to hold any further discourse with the defamer of my
mother; and as it is for her sake only that I have endured this interview, so I
now protest that until you have atoned to her, until I see her in this very
house, restored to her family, and hear from her own lips that she is heartily
and sincerely reconciled to you, and joins her authority with my father's for
compelling me to another conference, (which I think will not hastily happen) no
force nor persuasion, not a thousand deaths, if it were possible to suffer
them, shall prevail with me to commit myself to your company any more.

With these words I abruptly left him to his meditations, and retiring to my
chamber, gave a vent to my full heart; and, having in part discharged the
burden by the relief of tears, I resort to this consolatory task, and pour
forth the sorrows of my soul into the ear of a friend.

Farewell.
LETTER LII. Arundel to Charles Mortlake.
I AM setting out for Arundel-house, from which I shall write to you, and give
you an account of the works going on at the Parsonage.

As I know you have full occupation for the present at Cambridge, and must have
some time to prepare yourself and take leave of your friends, I wish you not to
think of coming into Kent, till you hear from me that things are in some state
of readiness for your reception.

Alas, my dear Charles, I blush when I recollect the vain and idle hope, which
like a cloud has shrunk from my embrace: the postscript of my last letter, if
you have it to refer to, will explain to you what I mean. That vision did not
appear at Lady Treville's; there was no angel form for my sight, no angel voice
for my ear; the phantom, which in my dream I saw, which with my hands I
handled, and which in my imagination I caressed, whilst tears of love and
tenderness fell from her melting eyes, is vanished into air.

Nor is this all; -- such things might pass away, and yet hope might be left
behind; instead of which, despair supplies her place; for I hear with horror
that the assassin of my peace has been permitted to renew his visits.

The demons of Ambition, Avarice and Revenge have seized the father's heart,
and he is driving an ingenuous mind upon the precipice of ruin; a noble nature
will be sacrificed by the sentence of an arbitrary parent.

My heart bleeds with sorrow. -- Why should I disguise the truth? -- It burns
with indignation.

Shall I repent of the chastisement, which I gave Lord G.? I disdain such
meanness. I will rather glory in the share I had, when the temple of this Dagon
was tumbled to the ground, though my hopes are crushed beneath its ruins in the
fall.

I will resort to the country, and there I will strive to solace an aching
heart by the placid occupation of embellishing a beautiful spot, in which it
has been my happy chance to plant a virtuous and beloved friend.

Farewell.
LETTER LIII. Lady Jane S. to Lady Louisa G.
THOU art made for love, my sweet Louisa, and love is made for thee, and still
you make bad work between you. What are you puzzling about? Do not you see that
Arundel doats upon you? Do not you know that you dote upon him? What do you
want to know more? Shall fathers and mothers, and aunts and cousins, sit in
council upon my affections? Will they bear the misery of my disappointment?
Shall they direct the motions of my heart? You have compromised with your
father, so would not I: you have promised not to communicate with the man you
love, so would not I: you have consented to receive the stale addresses of the
man you abhor; I would not do it, if it was to save the whole species.

How much to be preferred is my pride and my poverty, before your wealth and
your humility!

Thank Heaven, Scotland is still the land of matrimonial liberty. I love my
brother -- my God, how I love him! He is my last support in life, my best, my
only friend; but was he to attempt to check the tide of my affections, he might
as well turn the current of the winds, stem the flow of the ocean, or beat back
the emanation of the sun, and whelm the world in darkness by the breath of his
mouth.

That Sir George Revel is my aversion; I never saw him, but no matter; it is
enough for me that he had the cowardly principle to draw his sword upon an
unarmed man: had he the wealth of the world, and all the outward graces that
ever centered in the human form, I would whistle him down the wind. Though I am
a beggar, recollect I am a beggar ennobled by the blood of Scottish kings: I Will
marry honor in rags, but I Will have no commerce with a miscreant, though in a
robe of state.

I much doubt, my dear Louisa, if at this moment I have a fair Scottish pound,
which I can truly call my own, and independantly command to bestow where I
will; the clothes that cover and the meal that feeds me, are my brother's; but
as I share his purse, I share his blood; I will do no wrong to either, nor
shall any one do wrong to me. I can defend my own honor, I am competent also to
make my own choice: my hero will support me with his life, but he will never
think of overruling me by his will.

Arundel is a noble fellow; the man, who feared not to provoke the father
whilst he admired the daughter, is a man to my heart's content, and I know no
authority, which nature has given to a parent, that can oblige me to adopt his
resentments, when they spring from meanness, or prevent me from admiring that
principle, which is founded in honor.

Your Arundel is the nephew of my Arundel, of that glorious creature, who
perhaps at this moment is bleeding in his country's service, and, with my
gallant hero by his side, vollying the British thunder on our enemies, and has
he not an hereditary claim upon my heart? Ah! my dear Louisa, had you my spirit
of rebellion added to your propensity to the tender passion, all this
combustion would have been avoided, and one resolute step strait forwards would
have saved thousands, which you have now to take through crooked paths and
round-about roads before you shall arrive weary and jaded at the end of your
journey.

If Love assails me, which he has not yet thought fit to do to any serious
porpose, I will make a short battle of it; he shall not waste my strength with
maneuvers, for I will put the affair to issue at once. It Is to this resolution
I am now indebted for having brought a love-suit to its conclusion, which might
else have been as tedious as a suit in Chancery; for my gentleman was one of
those prudential, worldly-minded dealers, who wait for better times, and look
so closely to what is called the main chance, as to let all other chances go by
them without thinking them worth attention. I am speaking of Sir Adam Crichton,
whom you remember dancing after me all last winter in London, and a pretty
dance I led him. Fortune threw him in my way again at Edinborough: and being a
person, whom few women could look upon with indifference, I confess I was not
displeased to find him renew his addresses with more ardor than at the first.

Many days had not passed in this manner, when Sir Adam took his opportunity of
making certain honorable proposals to me, declaring, in all due phrase and
emphasis proper to a lover, that his fate depended on my answer, he could not
survive a refusal; the happiness of his life, nay, his very life itself, was in
this moment to be decided, he trembled for the issue, yet he flattered himself
I was too noble to have encouraged him to hope, only to plunge him in
disappointment and despair. Whilst this rhapsody was going on he kept his eyes
fixed upon me, and as I was certainly not displeased to see so handsome a lover
at my feet, he no sooner perceived the impression he had made on a soft silly
heart, which never learnt to play the hypocrite, than catching me in his arms,
as if already in possession of his prize, he rapturously exclaimed -- My life,
my soul! Oh let me hope that smile consents! Oh suffer your transported lover
thus to welcome the auspicious omen, thus to seal our happy union with a fond
embrace! --

A thought now struck me (naturally enough, you will say, as my lover was a
Scottish man) that in the midst of these raptures he might possibly be in a
mistake as to his own disinterestedness; for, as a vulgar error had gone out in
our country, that I was to inherit my aunt Selkirk's fortune, it was not
impossible but this worthy gentleman might have fallen into the trap, which one
or two of his predecessors had stumbled over in time past, and therefore I
thought it best to make a clear field before we proceeded to further action, by
removing all such stumbling blocks out of his way.

A few words sufficed to assure him that I was to all intents and purposes a
complete beggar, and until Jupiter sent another golden shower from the skies,
likely so to remain to the end of my days. As Sir Adam was a wise and prudent
man in the main, though his ideas had been a little subtilized just now by the
heat of his imagination, I believe he would have been heartily glad to have
dispensed with all the raptures of his late embrace, had he even clasped the
goddess Venus in his arms; and though it was life or death with him but a
minute before, whilst my aunt Selkirk was behind the curtain, yet now it was
pretty clear there were some things dearer to him than life itself; and if I
had not smiled quite so tenderly upon him, he would have struggled hard to
survive the disappointment of his hopes: in short, at that moment I much doubt
if he would not rather have taken my aunt Selkirk herself in his arms, for the
next embrace, than poor needy Lady Jane.

Figure to yourself some greedy contractor, in the very moment of driving his
bargain with the minister for the plunder of the public, presented by that
minister with an order for refunding the peculations he had amassed, and you
may form some idea of Sir Adam's countenance at this instant.

I must take some credit to myself for resisting a certain malicious impulse,
which tempted me to indulge a little raillery at his expense; but charity
prevailed over contempt, and, as I saw enough to convince me I was in company
with a very sordid fellow, methought the sooner I was rid of such society the
better.

I suspect, my good Sir Adam, said I, we are both in a mistake just now; you in
supposing me not so poor as I really am, I in believing you more disinterested
than in fact you are: let us therefore content ourselves with the discovery we
have mutually made of each other's disposition: I am satisfied you could have
liked me, if it had been your interest so to do; you are satisfied I could have
liked you, if you had not preferred your interest. Thus then the account stands
between us -- You have offered marriage, and taken an embrace by way of earnest
and in pledge of faith: take your offer back again, I release you from it; and
as for the embrace, much good may it do you, let it pass! my aunt Selkirk is in
the fault of that; therefore you may return it to her the first time you meet,
or to any other rich old dowager like her, whose money-bags may tempt you to
bestow it on their owner. -- Exit Sir Adam: he is off, good man! My life! my
soul! my idol! -- all those charming words are vanished into air, and your poor
solitary Jane remains like her poor solitary tree -- To wail the winter of her
hopes. Apropos to that tree; my dear Louisa, would you believe that in my visit
to it this evening, as the sun was setting under the western mountains, I
encountered a slip-shod Sybil under its branches in the very act of meagre
inspiration, chaunting out the following doleful ditty to the tune of Rosline
Castle. I took the words from her mouth, and as you are well acquainted with
the strain, I send you the Sybil's ditty, which you may apply to the tune,
supposing the first stanza to be my question, and the last your answer to it;
observing only that the two last lines of each stanza are to be repeated in the
strain.

I.
What means this languor? tell me why
Thy bosom draws this heaving sigh;
Art thou deserted or betrayed?
Say, who can wrong thee, gentle maid!
Is thy love absent or unkind?
What anguish racks Louisa's mind?
II.
If you would know what prompts this sigh,
Enquire of Time, and bid him fly;
Bid him stretch all his pinions out
To bring the lagging hours about;
And when with the dear youth I Am blessed,
Then let Time stop and take his rest.
Farewell.
LETTER LIVE. Lady Louisa G. to the Countess of G.
ALAS, my dearest mother, to what extremities have I been driven since our last
unhappy parting!

My father, though divested of his office, and no longer courting parliamentary
support, is not divested of his partiality for Sir George Revel: he resents my
behavior to him in a very high degree, and has again broke out into the
bitterest invectives against you and Mr. Arundel, for being in a combination
against him, and even hinted (with indignation I repeat it to you), that you
engaged Mr. Arundel in a preconcerted quarrel with Sir George, that by
dispatching him out of the way you might make an opening for your favorite, as
he calls that gentleman, to carry on a design, which he pretends to believe you
had formed of marrying him to me.

Inveterate against him for the speech he made in parliament, of which the town
yet rings with applause, he keeps no measures in his resentment, but throws out
certain insinuations, which no one, who had not bidden farewell to truth and
delicacy, could have suggested, and which with just abhorrence I forbear to
mention.

In conclusion, he drove me to the painful alternative, either to admit Sir
George Revel to renew his addresses, or to be excluded from any farther
correspondence or communication with you. I submitted to receive the visits of
that odious man again, for this is temporizing only; -- but if I would consent
to his proposals, and close with the full wishes of my deluded father, then I
might effect a reconciliation in my family, then I might restore a banished
mother to her home, his arms should be open to receive you, and all be peace
and harmony again.

The self-fame day presented me with the sight of my unwelcome visitor Sir
George: abject as he is to sue to me, who had before discarded him, still he
could not so keep down his proud spirit as tamely to endure the slights I put
upon him. At last he gave a loose to his audacious tongue, charging me with
having attached my heart to some more happy rival, and presuming to say I had
contracted that attachment by copying your Ladyship in your prepossession for a
certain favorite, plainly pointing at Mr. Arundel.

This insolent insinuation stung me to the quick, and, whilst my blood boiled
with indignation, I declared to him no force should prevail over me to admit
the man into my presence, who dared to revile the character of my mother. It
was on your account, I plainly told him, that I then suffered his visit, and
until he had completely atoned to you for his calumnious insinuation, till I
saw you again reinstated in your family, and received from your lips an
assurance of reconciliation, I would never see him more, whatever I might
undergo from the displeasure of my father.

With this denunciation I abruptly left him; and here the matter rests at
present.

And now, my beloved, my indulgent mother, what remains but that I open all my
heart to you? Amidst all the falsehoods this calumniator uttered, still I must
acknowledge he is fatally too right in one conjecture. -- Ah! Madam, it is my
hard fate to love and to despair: a secret passion preys upon my heart, my
health sinks under it. Would you know the real source of all those strange
vicissitudes, those incoherencies, by which my spirits have been agitated for
some time past, date your account of them from the very hour in which I first
encountered the all-conquering eyes of Arundel.

You know him well; you with cooler observation have more nearly contemplated
the perfection of his character, the charms of his person. I am the victim of a
hopeless passion, and lost without redemption. If necessity did not now extort
it from me, it had still remained a secret even from you; but as I foresee you
will be applied to by Sir George Revel very speedily, not improbably by my
father himself, it would be unjust not to apprize you of the real situation of
my heart; at the same time it would be ungenerous to convey a wish that you
should sacrifice a moment, that is now the crisis of your reconciliation, to
any unavailing efforts in my desperate cause. No, my dearest mother, make your
peace with my father, and leave me to struggle with my fate.

The breach between him and Arundel is now become incurable: no circumstances
can ever move him to espouse the cause of one so hostile, so obnoxious, one
whom he has offended, and by whom he is offended beyond reparation. At the same
time, no passion however strong, no treatment however severe, shall drive me
upon clandestine, desperate measures, which, though the precedents, already
numerous, were multiplied by numbers more, I never will resort to.

Return therefore in peace, and be once more in the bosom of your family: I
will gladly pay the ransom for your deliverance, and shall glory in my
sufferings. If I must be made the victim of compulsion, if my father,
obstinately bent upon his purpose, will drag me to the altar, he shall shortly
after have the task of carrying me to the grave.

Farewell.
LETTER LV. The Countess of G. to Lady Louisa G.
RENT with ten thousand agonizing sensations, a mother's bleeding heart blesses
and bids adieu to her beloved child.

May that protecting Being, to whose throne my supplications shall ascend in
your behalf, direct and graciously support you in this dangerous crisis! I can
no longer help you; the only duty I can now perform is to remove a
stumbling block from your path; the only offering I can make is to bless and to
pray for you.

Yet before I totally resign the duties of a parent, and secede from a world
which I renounce, to an asylum where I shall be sheltered from the malice and
even from the remembrance of my oppressors, I leave with you my solemn
exhortation and protest against your marriage with that worthless Revel.

Mark me, Louisa! if ever you consent to yield your hand to him, and stamp your
conscience with a lie before the altar of your God, expect the vengeance you
deserve!

Was your father now before me, I should not hold back a tittle of the truth
which I utter: judge then if we can reunite; judge if our meeting would not
blow these flames into a fiercer heat, and own with me it is the wisest,
kindest measure I can take in this extremity, to avoid an interview by
concealing myself in some foreign country from his search.

And now it only remains, as the last maternal duty which is left me, to speak
to you of Arundel.

Ah! why would you conceal from me your passion for the most engaging, the most
amiable of men? Alas, my child, why would you not confide to me the very first
emotions he created in your heart? But let that pass! late as your confession
is, I thank you for it from my soul, and with the same sincerity of heart I
seal your choice with my most absolute consent, and sanctify it with my ardent
prayers for its success.

In his virtue you will find a guide, in his courage a protector, in his arms a
blessing: to him I bequeath you; he alone deserves you; with him you will be
happy.

More I might add; much more would not exhaust the topic; but let this suffice!

Farewell.
LETTER LVI. Arundel to the Countess of G.
Arundel-house.
WERE I to follow the impulse of my heart upon the receipt of your most
flattering letter, the person not the pen of Arundel would have the happy
office of expressing to you my sensibility of your goodness, and giving vent to
a devoted heart, that overflows with gratitude; frown not, most exalted of your
sex, if I presume to add -- with affection.

Let me recollect what I was, till you condescended to regard me with kindness,
to foster me by your compassion, to transplant me into the soil, where I have
flourished by your favor: Consider me in the next place, as I now am, a man who
by nature am endowed with the warmest feelings of the heart, by gratitude
inspired with every ardent emotion, whilst I am only meditating on your bounty,
how then shall I command myself, when present with you? When I shall see your
eyes suffused with tears, and the purest bosom in creation laboring with
sighs, will not my spirit be in arms to avenge those wrongs that have provoked
your sorrows? Had nature formed me of less penetrable stuff, or not compounded
you with every tender grace, with every soft expressive character of female
loveliness, I might control my temper, though I pitied your afflictions: as it
is, my desperation might only aggravate your sufferings, and the resentment of
your Lord, that I have now drawn upon myself alone, might then be directed with
accumulated malice against you.

There is such venom in some hearts against you, and so ready are they to seize
the smallest opening for giving vent to it, that I declare to you I scarce dare
to turn my eyes, much less my steps, toward that quarter of the country where
you inhabit: the poison is prepared, an opportunity is only wanting to
administer it.

Having stated this, I remain at your command. Danger is only terrible to me as
it affects you. If you, who are armed in innocence, set it at defiance, I, who
am all devotion, hold every thing but your commands beneath my notice.

Farewell.
LETTER LVII. The Countess af G. to Arundel.
YES, Arundel, I adopt your counsel; my eyes are open to my danger and we meet
no more.

Though my affection for you, (why should I not own what you must have
discovered?) yes, let me say, though my affection for you were inconsiderate
enough to brave all consequences, yet I cannot bear the thought of sacrificing
you; and that self-denial, which perhaps is insufficient for my own
preservation, for yours becomes unconquerable.

I conjure you by all that is sacred to man not to stir a step toward me this
day; tomorrow I shall be out of your reach: my abode will not be known to you,
nor to my family; it will not be in England.

Start not at this measure, for it is a necessary one; you will see all my
motives and admit the justice of them, when I disclose to you a secret, which
is of the last importance both to your peace of mind and to my own -- Louisa
loves you. -- Now, Arundel, have I not reason for what I do? That I may yield
up every wish of my heart, and transfer them all entire and unperverted to the
happiness of my child, and to the completion of her future union with the
object of her love, I retire to secret solitude and healing meditation.

If I did not know Louisa's worth, I could not bring myself to form a wish that
she may be yours; but believe me, Arundel,for I declare it to you in the
fullness and sincerity of my heart, a nobler nature is not to be found en
earth: she is generous in the best sense of the word, of a clear and candid
spirit, pure in principle, but alive to all the tender passions to excess: I
speak to you without reserve; there is your only danger, it is there you must
apply your strictest guard; to you I consign a trust, you (if Heaven grants my
prayer) will fill that place, which hard necessity now forces me to recede from.

In this and all things else I rely upon your honor, faithfulness and
discretion; if I recover my tranquillity in the retirement to which I am going,
you shall hear from me again, if not, farewell for ever.

LETTER LVIII. The Earl to the Countess of G.
LADY Louisa having consented to restore peace and harmony to her family by
yielding to a renewal of Sir George Revel's addresses, with a reference to your
Ladyship for your voice and acquiescence in the matter, nothing is now wanting
to put that most desirable match in train but your concurrence and advice; you
have it therefore now in your power in the same instant to establish your
daughter in a most enviable situation, open my arms to welcome you once more
into the hearts of your family, and for ever annihilate all differences between
us.

As there have been some unlucky misunderstandings between you and Sir George
Revel, which ought now to be put an end to, that gentleman proposes waiting
upon you in person, as a mark of his respect, and I will not doubt of your
receiving his compliment in such a manner, as shall lay the foundation of a
lasting cordiality between you for the time to come.

G.

LETTER LIX. The Countess to ths Earl of G.
THE conditions of my consenting to Louisa's union with Sir George Revel would
be very tempting, if I were not satisfied that her happiness would thereby be
sacrificed to our reconciliation: in this persuasion, I will never selfishly
yield that consent, which is to make her miserable, but on the contrary do in
the most solemn manner protest against the match.

L. G.

LETTER LX. Sir George Revel to the Earl of G.
SOME business having occurred, which may probably detain me a day or two from
town, I beg leave to report to your Lordship the event of my expedition into
Kent.

On my arrival at the house which Lady G. had inhabited, I was informed by a
servant, that she had just left it to return no more: I desired to know to what
place she had removed; he could not tell where his Lady was gone, he had been
paid his wages and was discharged. Perceiving he was a clownish country fellow,
I offered him money if he would inform me of the truth; he persisted in the
same answer: I asked him who accompanied his Lady on her journey; a
maidservant was in the post-chaise with her, and one man attended on
horseback; nobody else was of the party. Did he know any body who could inform
me where she was gone, as I had business of importance; he knew nobody who
could give me that information; he was sure none of his fellow servants had
been in the secret, else he should have known it from them: upon recollection,
he said perhaps the gentleman, for whom he had a letter, might be able to tell:
upon asking the name of the gentleman for whom he had the letter, he said it
was Arundel, and that he had the letter then in his charge, which he was
ordered to carry to Arundel-house and deliver with his own hands.

A thought then struck me to ask him if he knew the person of Mr. Arundel, and
the fellow saying he did not, I thought it an allowable fraud in such a case to
tell him, that was very true, else he would have known he was now speaking to
that very person, for I was Mr. Arundel and had come purposely to enquire for
the letter, which I was in expectation of; upon which I slipped a few pieces
into his hand and got possession of the letter.

As there seems some mystery in this correspondence with your Lady and Mr.
Arundel, knowing the terms your Lordship is upon with that ungrateful
gentleman, I hope I shall not incur your displeasure by the means I took for
intercepting a letter, which may very possibly explain some particulars you may
wish to be informed of, and at least discover where it is she has removed to: I
now enclose it to your Lordship, sealed and entire as I received it, that you
may open it or not as you see fit.

It does not become me to be officious in matters of family concern, and I hope
your Lordship will believe I am the last person to offend your delicacy in that
respect; but I cannot avoid a remark upon the time, which Mr. Arundel chose for
going into the country, neither is it to be overlooked that her Ladyship chose
a residence within a few miles of this gentleman's house: Is it to be supposed
that he is not in the secret of this sudden measure, which had it been the
measure of any other person than of Lady G. I should take the liberty to call
an absolute elopement? But if I could have doubted of his knowledge of the
scheme from the respect which I am inclined to bear to every member of your
Lordship's family, I could not now have persisted in my incredulity since the
discourse I have held with Lady G.'s servant, and the facts which he has
related to me with such an air of natural simplicity, as will not suffer me to
doubt of his veracity.

If Lady G. has written confidentially and explicitly to your Lordship, all
things may be well, and for that reason I forbear to trouble you with the
deposition of this domestic evidence for the present; but if this is not done
to your satisfaction, I should presume it will be proper to enquire into facts,
and hear the man himself; for which purpose I shall keep him in my hands, till
I am further informed of your pleasure.

Farewell.
LETTER LXI. The Earl of G. to Sir George Revel.
NOTHING could be more fortunate than your intercepting that letter, which has
revealed a plot of the darkest and most diabolical nature: I entreat of you to
come to me directly, that we may consult how to traverse this insidious
proceeding; I shall reserve the letter for our meeting, let it suffice for the
present when I inform you, with no less indignation than horror, that our very
worst conjectures are too fully verified, and that my cast-off Secretary has
been conspiring with my cast-off wife to seduce the affections of my daughter,
and violate the honor of my family by mixing my blood with that of a fellow,
whom I detest above every thing that walks the earth.

Farewell.
LETTER LXII. Arundel to Charles Mortlake.
AN event has taken place so distressing to my mind, that it has incapacitated
me for writing to you till this moment. Lady G. who had retired to a small
house in this neighborhood, where she lived in solitude ever since her
separation, is gone suddenly out of England, without communicating to any of
her friends what place she purposes to fix upon for her retreat. Let your mind
form no conjectures upon this step, but such as shall put the purest of all
possible constructions upon her ingenuous and noble conduct: she is a sainted
being, and it would be a sin unpardonable to attaint her character. The
overbearing temper of her husband, the just abhorrence which she entertains for
Sir George Revel, and the protest she has solemnly made against her daughter's
union with that wretch, whom Lord G. adopts with so much eagerness, are amongst
the chief reasons for her secession: wherever she shall go, whilst virtue is
the care of Heaven, she must experience its peculiar protection.

The pleasing employment I have found at the Parsonage, in preparing it for
your reception, has been a happy resource at this time, when my spirits have
been heavily oppressed. I flatter myself you will find it a very comfortable
abode, when the works which I have set a going are completed: as your
predecessor left behind him an admirable collection of books, well chosen and
in fine condition, I have agreed to purchase them of his heir, and a proper
person is now making a catalogue and valuation of them. I shall take the
liberty however to reverse the order of your apartments and promote them to
better quarters; for which purpose I am converting the best parlour into a
library, and by some alterations and additions shall make it a spacious and
very pleasant room, for its windows command the river, Arundel-house and park,
a beautiful view of the country bounded by a very bold and lofty horizon. The
variety of cultivation under your eye, the hop-grounds, apple-orchards, arable,
meadow and wood lands, and the charming river glittering through the landscape,
make it quite enchanting. On the north side of your house stands the church,
which through a vista of evergreens by which it is encompassed presents its
venerable tower to your view; the rest of the edifice is concealed: to the
south your garden falls off by an easy declivity to the river, and your library
windows enjoy this aspect. As you tell me you have taken a course of lectures
at our physic-gardens, I shall hope you will be a florist, and here you will
find both soil and sun to set your genius at work; I hope you will find
something in hand that will serve for a beginning, for I have turned my uncle's
head gardener and some laborers into the vineyard, with full powers to do all
that the time will allow, you must complete and shape the whole. I have been
lucky enough to get you a very excellent fellow to manage every thing without
doors, and take care of your glebe and stock of all sorts; all the living
creatures, cows, pigs and poultry, which your predecessor died possessed of, have
a kind of claim to the tenure, and I have accordingly continued them in their
rights without disturbing one of them.

Your parishoners will be ready to receive you with cordial respect; I have had
the principal farmers with me and heard them discourse on the subject of their
tithes, which they are in hopes you will not make any advance upon; this you
know is always the first object in their thoughts, and the only string that can
disturb the harmony of your connection with them; though I could safely pledge
myself for the liberality of your sentiments, yet in this particular I thought
it best to be silent, that the whole merit might be your own and not seem to
spring from my influence with you in their favor. We have had a cricket-match
in the park, which my uncle dedicates to their amusement, and sets apart a
particular fine spot for the purpose; I flatter myself you will not regret that
this spot is exactly in the eye of your windows, as I think a more cheerful
spectacle cannot be seen in nature, than a set of athletic youths all in
action, surrounded by a ring of spectators, animated with the sports and
shouting their applause at every turn and incident of the game.

As you are a brother Westminster and a waterman of course, I shall send down a
fouroared cutter from our friend Roberts to navigate the silver Medway, and I
promise myself many parties with you upon this delicious river: I have it in
meditation to get my uncle John to purchase me a sailing yacht, when he comes
home, as we can row up to Rochester and embark from thence upon expeditions to
see the fleet, and run through the Downs to Spithead and the Isle of Wight.
What a delightful excursion would it be to run down to his ship, when it comes
in, and perhaps congratulate him and his brave crew upon the capture of some
stout Spaniard or Frenchman anchored under his victorious stern: Heaven grant
it may be so! If victory is the meed of valor, woe to the enemy on whose ribs
his thunder shall be poured.

Rejoice with me, my dear Charles! of a certainty my wish was breathed with a
prophetic spirit. I have an express this moment with an account of his having
engaged two Spanish men of war with his single line of battle ship, supported
by the young Earl of S. in a forty-four gun frigate, and after an obstinate
fight having captured them both, with an immense treasure in bullion on board
from the Havannah; one of these was an eighty gun ship, which fell to his
share, the other a sixty, armed en flute, and this was taken by the frigate. I
have no letters, but the General ordered the Gazette Extraordinary to be sent
to me by express. It is a glorious account, and what compleats my joy is, that
they are come in to St. Helen's safe with their prizes in tow, and both
commanders as it should seem in health and unhurt; The carnage on board the
Spaniards is very great, and both captains are said to be mortally wounded: my
uncle has lost his first; lieutenant, and above two hundred men killed and
wounded. His letter, over which I have wept and smiled by turns, is a model of
the old-fashioned sea style, very laconic and modest toward himself, but
rapturous in praise of his own brave people, and the behavior of his gallant
comrade; he speaks handsomely of his enemy, and concludes with a very manly
lamentation for the loss of his lieutenant and men, who had the honor, as his
own words express it, to perish gloriously. -- But why need I retail this to
you, when the Gazette will be in your hands before this letter reaches them.

I shall set out for London immediately, and in truth there is no time to be
lost, for I have a very bad account of the poor General, and this, with other
matters, which weigh heavy on my heart, sadly damps my joy.

Before I close my letter let me tell you, that I could wish you would put
yourself in motion for this place as soon as is convenient to you, for though
your own house may not be fit for you on account of the workmen who are in it,
you will find an apartment ready prepared for your reception at Arundel-house,
from whence you will not have more than half a mile's walk to your own; and as
I cannot make any longer stay on the spot, your eye will be very necessary to
superintend what is going forward.

I need not remind you to write to me immediately on your arrival. My chaise is
at the door.

Farewell.
LETTER LXIII. Lady Louisa G. to Lady Jane S.
ALL joy to my beloved friend! Your gallant brother has acquired both fame and
fortune under the auspices of Captain Arundel. What happy star is this, that
seems to shine with such peculiar favor on that illustrious name! The nephew
triumphs in eloquence, the uncle conquers in arms. All London is in a tumult of
joy; the same bonfires, which blaze for the victory, usher in the auspicious
commencement of a new Administration: the overthrow is complete, the whole
cabinet is dissolved, and not a wreck left behind; my father does not fall
alone; this is his only consolation.

I take for granted you will now come out of Scotland to embrace and welcome
your beloved hero. I hear prodigious accounts of the treasure captured in the
Spanish prizes. The breaches time has made in the fortune of your ancient house
will be now repaired, and the old castle itself feel a renovation of its
pristine splendour. Above all things it delights me to reflect upon the
mortification, which your mercenary lover will experience. Wretch, who puts no
value on the treasures of the mind, whose callous heart, not the charms of the
most lovely form can touch! let him dig for happiness in the bowels of the
earth, let him ransack the veins of the mine for the virtues of the heart. Mean
as he is, I shall not wonder if he has the audacity to renew his addresses to
you.

I thank the poetic sybil for her song; it sooths my melancholy; I hope soon to
meet her transformed into a young and blooming muse: I will then salute her
with the tune of Rosline Castle to her own pathetic words.

My poor mother is gone suddenly from her house in Kent, and left England --
Alas! I know not whither she has turned her exiled steps. All is mysterious and
sad. Sir George Revel, vainly hoping to make his peace, set out in search of
her, but came too late; she had departed that morning. I believe he is still in
the neighborhood; something is on foot between him and my father, but what I
know not: a cloud is gathering; time will develope its contents; I shall meet
it with firmness.

Farewell.
LETTER LXIV. The Earl of G. to Sir George Revel.
IT is clear to me, me dear Sir George, that this letter you intercepted is
only one of a number, that have passed between Arundel and my wife to the same
wicked and insidious purposes: the prejudices their cabal has produced in my
daughter's mind are too stubborn to give way to gentle efforts; these have been
tried to no purpose, and it is now time to take more lively measures for
bringing her to a sense of her own happiness as well as of her duty to me.

I say to you in confidence, that my suspicions of Arundel go to all possible
lengths: I believe he has been a traitor to me and the seducer of my wife's
honor: What else could be the purport of that secret correspondence, which was
carried on to the very moment of Lady G.'s flight out of England? What could
provoke her to that flight, except to pursue her scandalous commerce with more
security in a foreign kingdom? Why does she conceal the place of her
destination from her whole family? Arundel, and only Arundel, is privy to it,
and thus the virulence of his nature will be gratified with a double revenge,
having corrupted my wife he will possess himself of my daughter -- Vengeance
seize the villain! such injuries are too deep: Oh, that my age, my rank and
condition in life were not such as tie up my hands against taking personal
revenge upon such a traitor.

The curse of it is, that this letter, which you have stopped, discloses nothing
of their connection, which can criminate him with my wife. I insert a copy of
it for your perusal.

To Francis Arundel, Esquire.
I am this instant setting out, but cannot depart without bidding you farewell.

Avail yourself with discretion of the intelligence I have imparted to you with
respect to Louisa: Do not provoke Lord G. to further resentment; conciliate, if
it be possible, a nature, which, though hard, I hope is not impenetrable.

Above all things, I conjure you, avoid embarassments with Sir George Revel; a
spirit, so inflated by prosperity and pride, can ill brook disappointment.

Farewell.

This is the letter; a delicate method her Ladyship takes of teaching him to
cajole her husband: how you stand with her is pretty clear, and duly
considerate she seems to be of the safety of her favorite. What would I not
give for the sight of that intelligence which respects Louisa! This plainly
points to you the tenor of their correspondence. Where is that servant, from
whom you got the letter? He might be a very useful man; if we could fix strong
circumstances of guilt upon Arundel, it is not in the nature of things, that
Louisa could think of him but with loathing and abhorrence. If you can work the
truth out of that fellow, I shall not shrink from it: be the consequences what
they may, I am for fathoming this foul business to the very dregs.

I have told Louisa nothing of the intercepted letter, nor shall I till I have
further communication with you.

Farewell.
LETTER LXV. Sir George Revel to the Earl of G.
THE servant you are so desirous of examining, is now in my hands. He is a
stubborn, unwilling informer, but I am more ready to believe he speaks the
truth, from the pains it requires to extort it from him. Alas! my Lord, it is a
very black affair; consult your heart a second time, and consider well before
you call upon me for the facts. If you will follow my advice, you will remain
in voluntary ignorance.

Farewell.
LETTER LXVI. The Earl of G. to Sir George Revel.
HAVE I not already told you that I am prepared to meet the worst? Why will you
dally with my patience, as if I wanted resolution, or still harbored an
unmanly weakness for a guilty wife. Let me hear the fellow's deposition.

Farewell.
LETTER LXVII. Sir George Revel to the Earl of G.
BY a confession with difficulty obtained from Lady G.'s servant it appears,
that an assignation was made, and a meeting had in consequence within a certain
grove at the bottom of her garden, where there is a small pleasure-house,
conveniently equipt for the purpose. The person of Mr. Arundel, though he had
attempted to disguise it, was known to her ladyship's London servant, and from
her my informer was certified as to his identity; that he did actually come to
the place appointed, was admitted to your Lady in the pleasure-house, and was
there alone with her for the space of an hour, to these facts he was himself a
witness. It seems her Ladyship gave hush-money to her woman, who was privy to
the assignation, and she betrayed it (as is the common practice of such gentry)
to this fellow, who was her lover and no doubt in her good graces.

And is it now possible the delicacy of Lady Louisa's nature shall not revolt
with horror from the seducer of a mother's virtue?

I am aware this charge cannot be imparted to her without its coming to the
knowledge of Mr. Arundel; her Ladyship will probably put that out of question;
but let the guilty tremble; I fear not his resentment; my part in the business
I am ready to avow; as the investigator of truth, I am fearless as to
consequences; in the character of your Lordship's friend, and in hope of being
honored with a still nearer name, I am not only prepared, but forward to face
the worst of dangers, that can result from the rage and desperation of a
detected villain. Let him face me point to point; other arguments I have held
with him, others I will hold no more; the war of words is not my war; in
defending and proving by the logic of the schools I am not expert; I have not
lived with gownsmen; the sword has been my study; it was once my profession;
the more accursed he, who drove me out of that profession!

In three several affairs at home and abroad I have come off untouched, and as
many times left my antagonist on the ground. So let it be with Arundel! To that
fate I devote him.

Farewell.
P. S. As you may possibly require to see this man, and receive his deposition
from his mouth, I have taken all possible pains to retain him for that purpose;
but the fellow, fearful of the revenge, which Mr. Arundel or his friends might
take means to execute against him, would not be persuaded to utter a word, till
I promised him his free liberty upon declaring the truth: of that he has
availed himself, and is out of my reach.



LETTER LXVIII. The Earl of G. to Sir George Revel.
HOW shall I express my thanks to you for developing this dark and infamous
affair? At length the horrid truth comes out; and the world, which with its
usual misjudging malignity has hitherto stamped my behavior to Lady G. with the
false character of cruelty, will now of force acknowledge the justice of my
resentment, and at the same time admire the mildness of it, if once the infamy
of that woman becomes public: but whether I should carry the matter to that
length or not, is with me a very serious question. I have had too much
experience of the world's way of judging in these affairs, not to be aware that
the husband always makes a very contemptible figure on the occasion. People are
very willing to find excuses in his conduct for the offending party, and with
this view take great pains to scrape together all the dirty stories they can
collect on the score of retaliation: in the mean time the broad shame stares
him in the face and every body hoots the cuckold as he passes.

Now this is a degree of ignominy, which I cannot stand, neither is it to be
presumed that I can have so strictly squared my actions by the rule of moral
purity, as to say that no breach of nuptial fidelity has occurred on my part;
this falls to the lot of few men to boast of, and some things, I am sensible,
have passed with me of too public a nature to be controverted. Lady G. to do
her justice, has been a very discreet and prudent woman, this affair only
excepted; she has been altogether so quiet and unofficious in her high station,
that she has made no enemies, and many friends: on the contrary, I have been
long held up to the public in an unpopular point of view, and am now recently
stripped of that power and place which would else be some protection to me;
stripped by the very hands of that political phenomenon, who is the author of my
shame, and the object of the world's unbounded flattery, who at this very
moment is conspicuously the favorite of fame and fortune. Is there an instance
upon record of any young man starting forth on a sudden into such a career,
such an unexpected display of talents as to distance all our most admired and
best established orators upon his very first essay in the house? Of force I
must confess there is no such instance. I protest to you, my dear Sir George
(with bitterness of heart I speak it), it was his hand that first shook our
fabric to the foundation; and now, mark his indignant spirit! he refuses
office, he resists any share of the spoil, (Destruction seize his pride!) he
glories in his independance, and in the revolution of a few months, emerging
from the obscurity of a college, becomes the man of the people, and the fine
gentleman of the age: all this while Fortune showers down upon him her favors
without ceasing: Sir Francis Arundel is now dying, and his son by a chance blow
is removed out of the course of succession, that this nephew may inherit the
family estate: his other uncle goes out upon a cruise, and the same happy
chance throws a prize into his teeth, that is the richest capture of the war:
in short, the very winds conspire to waft wealth and prosperity into his arms.
And now if I were to bring my appeal against his treachery before the public,
prejudice would cry me down, and whilst a few moralizing sentimentalists shook
their heads at the account and silently condemned him, the bulk of mankind
would take part with him, and all the fashionable world would speak scornfully
of me, and call him a very fine fellow for the gallantry of the deed.

These are amongst the consequences which I foresee would ensue, if we were to
make the affair public; and therefore as the secret is known only to you, with
you I would wish it to rest for the present at least, and until I am compelled
to draw it forth in my own defense.

But as there is nothing which I more ardently desire than to have the honor of
calling you my son-in-law, nor any thing on this side hell which I so hate and
abhor as this violator of my honor, this incendiary, who has abused the
protection of my house for the traitorous purpose of seducing the affections of
my only child, there is no step I would not take to frustrate his evil
intentions, and promote your honorable, ones.

On my part there can be no repugnance to expose this infamous transaction to
Louisa; but, as I must thereby commit you, I cannot take upon my conscience the
consequences that may follow; so that at all events I shall wait till I have
the honor of seeing you: then if it is done, it must be your own act, or (which
is the same thing) I must communicate it at your special desire. Though I have
all possible confidence in your courage and skill, yet I am apt to think the
fellow you will have to deal with does not want that spirit, which will push
him upon extremities; at least he has those at his elbow who will prompt him to
it; for Captain Arundel and the Earl of S. are now in the same house with him.

I am afflitted, I confess, but not surprised. -- I must regret the conditions
by which the informer got his release. Had he been forthcoming, the onus
probandi would have laid on him, you would have been clear of all
responsibility; by his secession the affair becomes personal. I beseech you, my
dear Sir George, let not your zeal for my honor carry you beyond the bounds of
prudence; weigh the matter well: I shall not let a syllable transpire till we
meet.

Farewell.
LETTER LXIX. Charles Mortlake to Arundel.
I TAKE the first opportunity of informing you, that I arrived at Arundel-house
last night, and found a very comfortable reception from the good old
housekeeper, who fulfilled your orders very faithfully and took great care of
me.

I think it a grand and venerable mansion; and with the park and grounds about
it I am quite in raptures. This morning betimes I took my walk to the
parsonage, or rather to the rural palace, which your lavish generosity is
preparing for a very humble and unsuitable possessor. In the name of wonder, my
dear Arundel, what do you take me for? If I were as great as Thomas a Becket I
might make bold to live in it, but being only plain Charles Mortlake, I am
ashamed to look it in the face. In truth I cannot conceive that any parson will
be fit to inhabit it, unless one of the blood royal shall in future time take
orders and turn parish priest under your patronage. Your master-workman showed
me the plan he was upon, and asked me if I had any additions to make to it; I
was then standing in the library, like Abon Hassan in the Caliph's apartment,
doubting whether I was awake or in a dream, when the question rousing me from
my reverie, I stared the man full in the face -- Additions, Sir, cried I, I
presume you mean retrenchments. -- Pardon me, Sir, replied he, unless you have
any improvements to propose, we must exactly pursue Mr. Arundel's directions.
-- Be it so, I answered, execute his orders -- and immediately I turned into
the garden, attracted by the most enchanting view that ever met my eyes: -- a
noble river rolled at my feet; beyond it the country took a gradual ascent,
expanding its various beauties in all the pride and wantonness of nature: but
what enraptured me most was to find it was not inanimate nature, not simply
groves, lawns, or river, I was to feed my sight with, but a prospect warm and
alive with human habitations, farms and cottages interspersed; a scene glowing
with rural happiness, a landscape for the heart no less than for the eye. -- I
stood and gazed -- the contemplation overpowered me; the torrent of thy bounty
rushed upon my soul; it was the resistless impulse of gratitude, and the tears
flowed from my eyes. This is the gift of Arundel, I cried -- Deus nobis haec
otia fecit.

At this instant I was accosted by a venerable old man with silver locks, who
was superintending a set of laborers employed in beautifying and dressing the
charming spot I was upon: I readily understood he was your uncle's gardener;
but instead of talking to me about the works he was engaged in, with joy
painted in his countenance he immediately broke forth -- Oh Sir! we have this
instant got the news, the glorious news; and we hope you will give us leave to
set the bells a-ringing in honor of Captain John's victory. By all means, my
good friend, by all means, I replied; and let the people break off work, and be
merry; and to make them so, take this money in my purse; let the whole village
have a holiday: the heart that is not warmed on such an occasion is not the
heart of an Englishman. -- Sir, replied he, Reverend Sir, I beg your pardon;
pray you be not offended at my boldness; you are an honorable gentleman, and a
generous; but how should you not, seeing you are the friend of our young
master? -- But indeed, Sir, I must beg leave to return your money; his Honor
has sent us down wherewithal to make a day of it: there is meat to be dressed
and beer to be drank, enough for all the neighborhood: I pray you, Sir, let me
not affront you, nor get anger of my master. -- Be satisfied, my good friend, I
replied, I will not intrude upon the generosity of your master; he is my
patron, let him be yours also, and let no other name have a share in the
festivity of this day but the name of Arundel. -- I beg your pardon, Sir,
replied the veteran, we shall make bold to drink a health to our new rector,
and shall not forget your bounty, though we dare not accept it. -- Having said
this, he gave a signal to his men; down at once fell spades, houghs, and
pickaxes, away flew the whole bevy at a word; in the same moment out burst the
hive from the house-door, carpenters, bricklayers, and laborers; the bells
began their peal, six in number, and to my great joy very musical; the people
shouted in chorus, Long live the brave Captain Arundel! And all the noble
family, cried the old gardener. -- Amen! echoed my heart; Amen, it now
re-echoes again.

LETTER LXX. Arundel to Charles Mortlake.
I AM delighted to hear of your holiday at Arundel. Yesterday in the forenoon,
as I was walking to the Admiralty upon enquiry after my uncle, just as I was
entering the court, a large old tumbril of a coach with six horses and three
postilions was driving to the gate; two sailors were seated on the box, in
scarlet jackets, and upon the roof two more in flowered cotton waistcoats with
long silk handkerchiefs round their necks, loose and fluttering in the wind. I
made one of a multitude, which soon collected round the gate, and immediately
heard a cry of Captain Arundel for ever! echoed by three cheers from the
fellows aloft.

My heart bounded with joy and I darted through the throng to the coach-door,
which no sooner opened, than out bolted my uncle John, and in an instant I
sprung into the hero's arms. With rapture I beheld him safe, sound, and in
health; he was accompanied by the young Earl of S. (the Captain of his brave
frigate), an old seaman with a wrapper round his head, and two noble boys in
midshipmen's uniform. As soon as we got into the hall, which was a work of some
time, my uncle presented me to Lord S. crying out to me, Here, Frank, I present
you to a noble officer, who is an honor to the navy of Britain; -- then turning
to Lord S. he added, My Lord, I beg you will love this boy for my sake. We
embraced, and if Lord S. felt the same emotions as I did, our friendship is
established for life. My uncle then demanded if Sir Francis was alive and well?
Alive, I told him he was, but little more: he shook his head, and cried, The
worse luck, repeating it more than once. -- I told him in few words my
situation with Sir Francis, sinking however the catastrophe of my cousin. --
This seemed to please him much, and he said, If you are upon such terms, all is
well! Go home and leave us to do our business here; tell my brother I shall
come to dinner and bring my friend Lord S. with me: these youngsters must scout
away to their fathers and mothers, naming two noble families, which it seems
they belonged to.

Immediately I left the place, and hastening back to Grosvenor square, informed
my uncle of my happy rencontre. The gallant old General, though in a very
feeble state, would be carried into the eating-parlour to receive his visitors
at dinnertime; and thanks be to God! one day of true enjoyment was added to
his life; for his senses seemed to brighten with the pleasure, and we passed
some hours together of so superior a sort, that even sickness and infirmity
could not dash his joys.

He insisted with my uncle, that both himself and Lord S. should take up their
lodging in his house; this was readily accepted by him, and at last agreed to
by his Lordship also; and this morning I attended upon them both to the King's
levee, where I was witness to the very gracious reception which my sovereign
gave to these deserving officers. My uncle John, whose athletic figure is more
formed for the quarter deck than the court, attracted every body's eyes, and,
considering it was a first performance, acquitted himself to admiration. You
must picture to yourself a rough and martial figure above six feet high, his
head bald to the crown, and a few gray curling locks in his neck, with a deep
cut across his forehead, over which he wears a black patch; and to this you
must affix a face, which defies the winds of heaven, let them visit it as
roughly as they may; and such is my uncle John; a majestic figure on his proper
element, but rather uncouth in a courtly circle. When the royal hand was
stretched out for the customary ceremonial, the zealous hero fell on his knees,
and seizing it with more good will than grace, saluted it with a smack, not
quite so loud as the morning gun, yet smart enough to surprise the delicate
nerves of the well-bred personages there assembled. I confess it rather
startled me, but seeing it received with a smile of so much condescension and
benevolence, I was the better reconciled to the unusual cordiality, which
accompanied the performance. In the dialogue of the scene, the hero's modesty
was no less conspicuous than his ardor had been in the action of it; that
countenance, which the enemies of his country could not compel to change its
hue, now colored at the gracious praises of his sovereign, and was overspread
with blushes, that would not have disgraced the maiden cheek, when first
presented to the salute of majesty; and my ears tingled whilst I heard him
utter these words, in reply to the many gracious speeches that had been made to
him: -- Sir, your Majesty's goodness over-rates my small deserts; the humblest
of your subjects has no honor to boast of, but the honor of commanding a ship's
company in perfect discipline, and bravely officered; and I had been the most
abject of beings, if the gallant support I received from the Earl of S. my
noble colleague, had not inspired me to emulate his valor, and jointly exert
myself in the service of the most gracious sovereign on earth. -- I did not
lose the look with which this was received; it was more than words could have
uttered, it would have repaid the triumphs of a Rodney or the discoveries of a
Cook.

It was now in turn for the brave Earl of S. to receive those praises, which
the father of his people and the patron of merit knows so well to bestow. I
never saw a finer person than this young nobleman, fashioned as if he had lived
all his days in a court, yet with all the manliness that marks the hero, he
seems formed for conquests over both the sexes: he is of the noblest blood in
Scotland, though the fortune of his house, by a variety of events in time past,
has been so impaired as to leave him a very scanty inheritance for the support
of his dignity. He has served under my uncle from the time he went first to
sea, and seems to bear him all the duty and affection of a son; he was promoted
to a sloop for his gallantry in boarding an enemy's ship, when he was my
uncle's first lieutenant, and this cruize was the first he had taken in the
capacity of post-captain; the rich capture he has now made will restore the
splendour of his family, and furnish him the means of generosity to an only
sister, to whom he is most affectionately devoted: he talks of her in raptures,
and seems to rejoice in his good fortune only as he may share it with her. Lady
Jane S. is now on her road out of Scotland and he expects her hourly; Sir
Francis tells me she is a most lovely girl, the very image of his Lordship,
and, what endears her to me more than all, the friend of my adored Louisa.

Insolent! -- to dare to call her my Louisa; and yet, believe me, I would not
barter the hope that now brightens in my prospect for all the treasures of the
world. -- Hear me only and then judge.

Last night Lord S. and I went to Lady Treville's: my good uncle John, having
performed his court ceremonies to his heart's content, was so exhilarated on
the occasion, and made such frequent libations to his Majesty's health, to the
navy of Old England, and a string of sea-toasts, which he is humorously expert
in, together with all the manual accompaniments thereunto belonging, that
though he could not drive my Lord and me beyond the verge of sobriety, he
fairly pushed us to the utmost edge of it, so that I went to the good old
Lady's animated at least, if not elevated; and finding a party assembled
according to custom for a little concert, whom should my eyes encounter, ready
seated at the harpsichord, but the Cecilia, the saint of harmony and my soul's
idol, my divine Louisa? A lover's sight has the rapidity of lightning; my eyes
instantaneously caught her charming form, and every other object became
invisible to me. -- Oh Charles, Charles! such a glowing blush mounted in her
cheeks, such a gleam of sunshine darted from her eyes, and I saw my silent
welcome in a smile of so much sweetness, (let me not boast too much if I
presume to say) of so much love, that I was transported out of myself: wild as
I was and out of all government of discretion, I flew to the enchanting object
of my adoration with an enthusiasm, that obeyed no forms, and should certainly
have dropped upon my knee at her feet, if she had not been more quick to foresee
and prevent my design, than I was to execute it -- Mr. Arundel! she cried, in
that tone of alarm, which to the ear of sensibility communicates a volume in a
word: it was enough; I recollected myself in the instant, and her glove having
fallen from her lap, or more probably she having designedly dropped it, the
attitude I had devoted to other purposes was very aptly applied to a more
ordinary act of common politeness. Enough however had passed to throw her into
a confusion, that whilst it made me blush for what she suffered, perfectly
enchanted me with the lovely manner of it. -- Oh Charles, there was a magic in
it, that was irrresistibly charming; she rallied me with such eyes, she
recovered herself with so much exquisite address, and intuitively discovering
all that was passing in my mind, and no less quick in discerning the elevation
of my spirits, with an archness in her look and tittering at the same time, she
said to me half aloud -- You have been dining, Mr. Arundel! -- Then addressing
herself to Lord S. she added -- I think your Lordship kissed hands today. --
Yes, Madam, said he, and I expected to have seen Arundel repeat the ceremony
tonight. -- To so fair a sovereign, I replied, the adoration of the heart is
the fitter service, and I stand corrected. -- Well, well, returned she, if you
are a loyal subject, let me have a proof of your obedience by taking up your
instrument at the word of command and gratifying this good company with the
sound of it. Upon the word I flew to my post, the charmer of all ears as well
as eyes selected the very song, she first performed at Spring Grove, and
whispering me as she arranged it on her desk, said, This song is become a great
favorite with me; I hope you will not like it the less for being an old
acquaintance; -- but harkye, Mr. Arundel, added she, do not leave me in the
passages, for I am so fluttered I scarce know how to attempt it. -- By Heaven!
I murmured in her ear, by Heaven you are an angel, you have the beauty of an
angel and the forbearance of one, or you would order me out of the room. -- No,
no, she answered, we cannot part from you; you have a plea for your good
spirits; I give you joy of your happiness, you cannot possess more than I wish
you. -- But hush! -- not another word; so begin.

If I was ever vain enough to approve of my own performance, it was at this
moment; I supported her till I found she had the full command of her voice, and
then I only gave such occasional aids as added to its brilliancy: nothing could
exceed the style in which she sung; every body was charmed, every ear was
feasted, every eye seemed to gaze upon her with delight; it was a circle of
friends in perfect good humor with each other -- of harmony in every sense of
the word; not a glance of envy, not a scowl of jealousy to cloud the sunshine
of the soul; I never knew a moment of such heartfelt rapture.

When the song was over, Lady Louisa beckoned Lord S. to her, and with a smile,
in which benevolence and beauty contended for the pre-eminence, told him she
had a little ballad written by a Scottish muse, a dear friend of his and here is,
adapted also to a Scottish tune, which she would give him for the sake of the
author; and then turning to me bade me take up my violin and make out an
extemporary accompaniment to the old air of Rosline Castle; she then began a
little plaintive ballad, which Lady Jane S. had written, beginning with the
words -- What means this languor? tell me why
Thy bosom draws this heaving sigh --
Which, though she addressed to Maria, I have a shrewd suspicion was a
substitution of her own in place of Louisa. I filled up an accompaniment as
well as I could impromptu, and when the words were concluded went on with
variations upon the motiva, as the musicians call it, which in the flow of
spirits I then felt came spontaneously, and with so free a fancy as well as
execution, that I really believe I acquitted myself very tolerably; but whether
it deserved praise or not, the good humor of the audience bestowed it, and the
lovely Louisa putting two enchanting hands together, which, if their delicacy
could have provoked applause, meant to bestow it, I was so bewitched with the
sweet sight of it, that I could no longer resist the impulse, but gently
enclosing the beauteous captives within mine, I again released them with an
ardent kiss.

Summer never showered fresher roses on the vale of Sharan, than this saucy
action spread upon her cheeks, nay, Charles, her very bosom took the dye and
glittered through the gauze that shaded it. -- Upon my word! she said -- and
smiled a heavenly smile -- Sacred be the impression upon my lips for ever!
never shall they violate the purity of that celestial touch, whilst they can
utter breath: I stand in wonder at myself whilst I reflect upon the deed; I
think the world could not have bribed me to attempt it at any preceding moment
of my life: I was certainly beside myself.

A sudden tremor seized me, fearing I had offended; but, oh my dear Charles,
she cheared me with such a look, how was it that I did not run delirious at the
sight of it? My hand shakes, my very brain turns, as I reflect upon it. -- I
will remove this enchantress out of your sight. -- The scene presses to its
exit; Lady Treville had stepped up to her, and in a whisper, which was meant for
me to overhear, said, My dear Lady Louisa, you and your chaperon, Mrs.
Courtenhall, must do me the honor to sup; I shall ask nobody but Lord S. and
perhaps this scraper, but that will be accordingly as he behaves. It shall be
quite a private party. -- Ten thousand thanks to my good Lady Treville, replied
Lady Louisa; I need not say how happy it would make me, but it is impossible: I
am absent from home upon sufferance, and perhaps, added she, turning her
intelligent and soft eyes upon me, I have already too far trespassed upon a
forbidden pleasure; I must be gone this instant. -- These words were uttered
with a sigh, which opened all my fate upon me and dashed my joys at once into
sadness.

Desperate however against all appearances, I followed her out of the room, and
offered my hand to conduct her down the stairs; she accepted it most
complacently, nay, she even seemed to have expected it, and instead of speaking
to her servants, turned with me into the eating parlour, which opened to the
hall. Ah Lady Louisa! said I as we entered, I am shocked to think that I am the
interdicted object, which expels you from society; suffer me, I beseech you,
this instant to leave the house. -- Not for the world, she replied; but,
without wasting more words upon a subject, which I must not enlarge upon,
permit me to ask you if you have seen my mother, for I understand you have been
in her neighborhood. -- I told her I had not. -- Could I tell where she was
gone? -- I assured her I could not; I understood it was out of England, but I
could form no guess at the place; and I was sorry to perceive by her question
that it was equally a secret from her. -- It is indeed, she replied, and as you
cannot give me information, I despair of it by any other channel, for I confess
to you I supposed you was in correspondence with her. -- There was something in
her manner of saying this, that determined me to be explicit as to the letters
I had received from Lady G. as well as with respect to the other particulars
she had enquired into; I therefore said -- Upon my honor, Lady Louisa, I am
totally without a guess where that excellent lady, whose situation is so
painful to my mind, has thought fit to retire to; I thought it due to the
respect and gratitude I bear her to write to her before my coming into the
country, distantly to sound her inclinations, if a visit might be acceptable to
her; this drew a short but very gracious answer from her Ladyship, in which she
seemed to allow of it; but upon my arrival at Arundel-house, I thought it an
attention, which I owed to the peculiarity of her situation, to write a second
time, submitting it to her discretion to reconsider of the proposal; and I
trust the real motives for my hesitation need not be justified to you, but that
they speak for themselves. -- To this she assented with a nod, and I then
concluded by telling her I had received an answer to this note, in which Lady
G. acquiesced in the propriety of those motives, and informed me that she was
going out of England without telling me where. -- I am glad you have told me
this, she replied, because I think it not impossible I shall hear the story
differently stated, and I am determined to believe nothing to the contrary of
what you have told me; and now, concluded she, I am afraid I must take leave of
you. Oh, Lady Louisa, I exclaimed, and at the same time pressed her unresisting
hand, may I hope I have not offended you? -- Heavens, Mr. Arundel, offended me!
where was your observation, if you could suspect it? -- I know you are all
goodness, condescension, gentleness; but the sudden joy of seeing you was too
much for me; you conquer every sense at once; you are mistress over every
heart. -- And yet there is but one, Mr. Arundel, on which I wish to leave a
lasting impression. -- The look she gave me pointed the application, I had been
insensible could I have missed it; again I pressed my lips upon her hand, and
with faultering voice replied -- Am I too presumptuous, Lady Louisa, when I say
your image is indelibly imprinted on my heart? when I aspire to tell the most
exalted of her sex, that I dote upon you to distraction? yes, Madam, hopeless
as I am, unapproachable though you are, an angel moving in a sphere above my
reach, still I will adore you, still my prayers shall follow you, and my
devoted heart, though fated to despair, persist to love till the hand of death
shall stop its motion. -- As I was pronouncing these words I felt a tear drop
upon my hand, when directing my eyes to the fount from which it fell, I saw her
beauteous countenance surrendered to the tenderest and fondest emotions; as she
stood in a posture inclining toward me, I expected she would fall, and was
prepared to catch her in my arms; but a sudden recollection seemed to awaken
her, and casting her eyes upon Mrs. Courtenhall, who was waiting in the room,
Mr. Arundel, she said, if you really feel the love which you express, you need
not yield to the despair you seem to apprehend; I never studied to disguise my
feelings, and you cannot fail to have discovered them; interpret them therefore
in the way most acceptable to yourself, and believe me incapable of
dissimulation. On this you may depend, that though I will never take a step in
direct disobedience to a father's authority, I will not sacrifice my happiness
in life to a compliance with his partiality for any man, whom my heart cannot
approve.

So saying, she turned hastily away, and seeing me about to follow her to the
door, she bade me stay where I was till she was gone, and taking hold of Mrs.
Courtenhall's arm hastened out of the room, bestowing on me a look at parting,
that said Farewell in a language, that no eyes can speak so eloquently as hers.

I rejoined the company up stairs, who were too delicate to make the least
remark upon my absence, and after a little more music our party dispersed,
leaving nobody but Lord S. and myself with Lady Treville, who was just telling
his Lordship, that she hoped his sister would accept of an apartment in her
house upon her arrival in town, and that she had written a letter for that
purpose to be given to her at Hatfield, where she would change horses; when our
attention being called off by a rapping at the door, whilst we were protesting
against the admission of so unseasonable a visitor, who should enter the room
but Lady Jane herself? Instantly she flew into her brother's arms, who ran to
her with equal transport -- My Archibald, my hero, she exclaimed, thus may we
ever meet! thus may I ever glory in my brother! -- I marked her countenance, it
was illuminated with joy, the fires that sparkled in her eyes would not admit a
tear to quench them; she was the very model of a Roman sister, congratulating a
beloved brother on his triumph: -- again she clasped him in her arms and cried
-- Well done, my Archibald! well done; And all this victory gained without a
wound? thank Heaven! that honor I can well away with. -- She now addressed
herself to Lady Treville in a style of politeness that quite charmed me; for
this young lady, Charles, has a peculiar grace in all she does, which I cannot
well describe to you: when Lady Treville presented me to her, she received me
with a most sweet, yet penetrating look, which seemed to tell me she was no
stranger to my ambitious love. Though she had scarce allowed herself to rest
upon her journey, she would not own to any fatigue, and after we had supped her
spirits were so gay and fresh, and she had so many enquiries to make about the
action, so many civil things to say to the lady of the house, and talked in so
delightful a style of my adored Louisa, whilst she archly contrived to draw out
my whole heart upon the subject, that the minutes posted so fast away upon the
wings of joy, that time was totally forgotten by all but our good old hostess,
who was best acquainted with it, and had most reason to remember it; at length
she brought us to a proper sense of Lady Jane's repose, and with an air of
motherly authority, in her lively good-humoured manner, cried out -- Be gone,
young men, to your quarters; be gone this moment: though Lady Jane is a
goddess, she cannot live without sleep.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXI. Arundel to Charles Mortlake.
THIS morning at six o'clock my bounteous benefactor closed his eyes for ever:
Sir Francis Arundel is no more: death, whom he had so often braved in the
field, stole upon him unawares in his sleep, and extinguished him without a
groan. Few are the days I have lived with him and known him, many and vast are
the obligations I owe him. He has been a dying man ever since the fatal event,
which bereft him of his son; the happy day he passed with my uncle John on his
arrival was the last enjoyment he had of his senses, and except the time he
accompanied me to the House of Commons, he has never been out of his doors
since I have been with him.

As his corpse must be interred in the family vault at Arundel, I shall come
down to attend the funeral; and, that all things may be in proper order for
that solemnity, I intend to leave town tomorrow, and shall be accompanied by
my uncle John: you will be so good to inform the housekeeper of this, that she
may provide accordingly and expect us by dinnertime.

As soon as the funeral is over, Lord S. has promised to come down to us, and
if we can prevail upon Lady Treville to accompany Lady Jane, (which I do not
despair of) they will be of the party; should that take place, you will have an
opportunity of seeing old age and youth in their most amiable characters: guard
your heart well, for if it is as open to love as it is to friendship and
benevolence, farewell to its tranquillity, if you come within the glance of
Lady Jane's bright eyes.

Adieu.
LETTER LXXII. Lady Jane S. to Lady Louisa G.
WAS it not a most obliging act of Lady Treville to come with me hither, by
which I was enabled to accompany my brother, and enjoy the society of some of
the most amiable people living, in one of the most delightful scenes?

I am greatly struck with the natural beauties of this place, and though the
mansion is ancient, yet it is in a stately style, and the principal apartments
are really very fine.

The funeral was over before our arrival, and the worthy General now sleeps
with his ancestors; his corpse was attended to the vault by the heir and
Captain Arundel, and the service performed by Mr. Mortlake, the new rector of
this parish and the bosom friend of his patron: Mr. Arundel's father, now Sir
Joseph, declined being present either at the funeral, or at the opening of the
will; I suspect he is a very unpleasant kind of being^ Captain John informs me,
that the estate is a good nine thousand a year in land, and he thinks the ready
money cannot be less than twenty thousand pounds to the heir, when all legacies
are paid -- and if you add to this, said he, the pickings of my old carcass,
when the fates have disposed of it, Frank will be a warm fellow.

I have told my dear Louisa how much I was pleased with the man of her heart at
our first meeting; I now find there is no less to love than to admire in him.
Do you know, Louisa, that Lord S. and I agree in thinking him extremely like
you? Can I speak in higher commendation of his person, than when I protest to
you, I am not conscious that I flatter him? I must believe you are destined for
each other. Oh, that my dear Louisa was here with us! my poor head will be
quite turned by the attentions, which are paid me; think only what a contrast
to the dreary solitude of my native castle! Here am I Queen regent of an
empire, which I trust is destined to a fitter as well as fairer sovereign;
every face I meet reflects the smile of benevolence upon me: Is it not the very
quintessence of human happiness to be centered in the hearts of those we love,
to be embosomed in the society of the Virtues?

As Sir Francis had a well-regulated family of servants, and lived in a style
very suitable to his fortune, our friend has very little trouble with his
domestic arrangements; the works he is carrying on at the Parsonage House seem
to be his principal occupation at present, and for the present he turns a deaf
ear to all projects for the embellishment of his own domain. -- It is the first
object with me, (he said this morning, as we were walking in the park) to make
Mortlake happy in his situation; as for this old mansion and its premises, I
will do nothing more than keep it in its present good repair, till the time may
come that I may consult a better taste than my own for the improvement of it.
Then pausing for a few moments, with a sigh he exclaimed -- But what are these
presumptuous hopes, which I indulge? Ah, Lady Jane, I delude myself; I do but
walk in a vain shadow: all the favors of fortune are but lost upon me; I cannot
enjoy them; Was ever man so courted by prosperity? See how happiness solicits
me! Look at those heroes! -- here he pointed to his uncle and my brother, who
were walking together arm in arm toward the river -- How am I honored in
calling one uncle, and the other friend? Carry your eye up to that house, which
hangs over the river they are going to: Is it not a charming spot? and how
ought I to be blessed in the friend which possesses it! What a delightful
sensation do I feel when I contemplate that habitation, and say within myself,
in that asylum I have placed the friend of my heart, the gentlest, kindest,
best of human beings! Oh, Lady Jane, if ever there was a faultless creature,
Mortlake is the man. -- This methinks is blessing enough for any one person's
share in life; but, as if fortune would never be weary of her favors to me, she
has added to her other gifts the happiness and honor, which I am this moment
enjoying with a friend as amiable as she is noble, in whose heart I do not
despair at humble distance to participate with my Louisa herself -- I give you
his own flattering words, my dear, though I ought to blush for my assurance.
Shall I proceed? stand aside, vanity! and I will -- Yes, Lady Jane, he
continued, you have a woman's feelings, and an angel's pity, you can understand
and commiserate the inquietudes of a heart so empassioned as mine is; you can
suffer me to talk of my soul's idol, you can hear me with patience, and can
allow for the extravagancies of a discourse, which observes no order -- but I
will restrain myself, he added, let us join your brother.

He and the old Captain were at that instant very busily employed upon the
launch of a new boat, just arrived from London: these heroes, who had so lately
triumphed over the flag of Spain, were stripped to their shirts and occupied in
the humble office of tallowing the bottom of a wherry; and so ardent were they
both in their task, that I doubt if the very odor of their work was not
grateful to their nostrils: a country fellow was standing by them, gaping with
surprise, but totally out of employment. As the weather is supremely fine, we
propose to go upon the Medway this evening, and under such command, I should
not tremble to encounter Scylla and Charybdis in all their poetical terrors.

Mortlake was standing on the opposite bank, upon a terrace in his garden which
butts against the river: at the end of this terrace there is a landing-place,
where a little boat, which serves to ferry him over the water, was moored to
the shore; and as we approached, we heard the old Captain roaring out to the
Doctor, as he calls him, to push his boat across the stream, and take the lady
on board, for that I was coming to visit him. Upon this summons he came over;
whereupon Arundel and I stepped into the boat, and though our worthy ferryman
seemed to me to acquit himself very expertly, yet this old son of the ocean
kept jibing and jeering at him, in his sea language, every inch of the way,
standing all the while in his shirt, with the sleeves tucked up to his elbows,
no hat upon his head, and his bald pate shining in the sun, a tremendous gash
across his forehead plaistered over with a huge black patch, and of so gigantic
a form, that it is no wonder he is terrible to his enemies, when I declare even
I, who dote upon him, could not survey his figure without trembling. Mr.
Mortlake, who delights in his humor, kept up the water language with a great
deal of pleasantry, till he landed us at the foot of the stairs which lead to
his terrace: here, in stepping out of the boat, which was rather unsteady, my
foot slipped, and I should certainly have had a very ugly fall upon the edge of
the boat backwards, if Mortlake had not with great address caught me in his
arms. My dear brother, whose eyes were upon me, gave a loud shriek; but when he
saw me safe, he called out to my preserver -- Well handled, my brave fellow!
keep hold of what you have got; you deserve her for your pains. -- Whether it was
this raillery of my brother's, or the alarm of my danger, or what else I know
not, but he had no sooner set me on my feet, than the color went from his
cheeks, his whole frame trembled, and if he had not squatted down upon the
steps, I think verily he would have fainted. I confess to you I was very much
touched with his sensibility, and so was Arundel. -- Lord S. ran down to the
riverside, and cried out, -- My dear Mortlake, I hope you are not hurt. -- By
this time he was recovering, and having assured my brother that no harm had
befallen either of us, we walked up the garden lawn to the house. We entered
the library by a glass door, and in my life I was never so enchanted with the
elegant simplicity and proportion of a room before. By the preparations for the
books, it should seem the collection is considerable, and I am told they are
very well selected; in short, they are worthy both of the giver and receiver.
Nobody can bestow with such a grace as Arundel; nobody can apply them to better
purpose than Mortlake. We went over the house, and I am charmed with every part
of it; the bed-rooms, a dressing room and drawing room, are yet unfurnished,
and Mr. Arundel said, he had drawn me thither on purpose to avail himself of my
taste in the choice of the papers and cottons, of which he laid before me a
variety of patterns. Help us out, I beseech you, Lady Jane, said he, for we
college drones are but sorry judges in these matters.

Whilst I sat down to examine a large parcel of these samples, one of the
workmen called Mr. Arundel out of the room; and how it was I know not, but I
confess to you, my dear Louisa, I felt a little queerish just now, finding
myself alone with a very handsome and a very young man, in the awkward office
of choosing beds and curtains, whilst he was folding and unfolding and hovering
about me; so I fairly threw the work aside for the time, and told him I would
wait till Mr. Arundel returned. Mortlake, whose sensibility nothing can escape,
and who perhaps had not quite recovered his former agitation, now blushed like
scarlet, and I have no doubt I looked silly enough, for I confess my brother's
words, though probably spoken in mere pleasantry, without meaning, had put my
heart into no small flutter. In this situation we both stood silent for a time,
and irresolute what to say or do next. On these occasions a woman generally is
the first to find her tongue, and I began to talk of the escape I had had, and
to thank him for his care and protection of me, which I was afraid had
occasioned him some pain or hurt, which he did not own to. -- He assured me
that he felt no pain but what arose from my danger, and even the apprehension
of any harm befalling me, was more than he could bear. -- But we must not trust
you to the boat any more, added he, and I will desire Arundel to send for his
carriage to take you home by the road. I had now recovered from my
embarassment, and calling him back as he was going out of the room, declared
against the carriage, telling him we should never hear an end of the old
Captain's raillery, if we gave the cause up so cowardly: besides, added I, it
would betray a want of confidence in my conductor, which would be very
ungrateful in me to do. It Is your conductor, replied he, who wants confidence
in himself, when he has such a treasure in his charge. -- Nay, answered I, but
what will my brother say to that, if you desert a station which he commanded
you to keep; will not there be something like mutiny in that? -- Ah Madam, he
replied, if Lord S. promotes me to an honor so infinitely above my merits, how
ought an humble man to act in such a case? -- I dare say, said I, Lord S. is
too good a judge of merit, not to know that humility is one of the surest marks
which belong to it. -- Mr. Arundel now returned, and put a stop to a
conversation that was growing rather serious. We now passed a few minutes
longer in the house, took a walk round the garden, and repassing the river,
found a carriage in waiting for us on the park side and so returned to the
house together.

Immediately on my arrival, a servant gave me the following letter, which
completely verifies your prediction.

I venture to inform the most adorable of women, that her ever faithful and
most devoted admirer is waiting within a few paces of the house, in anxious
hope that he may be permitted to repeat his vows, and pour out his full heart
at her feet. Admit me, most angelic Lady Jane, to your presence; let my eyes
once more behold that object, on which my heart doats to distraction, and from
which his affections have never strayed even for a moment, when hard necessity
compelled it to suspend its hope: that necessity, so lamented by your faithful
lover, is now removed, not by any change in your fortune (though even that I
rejoice in), but by a better disposition of my own affairs; and I am now more
impatient than ever to declare myself,

Most beloved of my soul, Your ever faithful and most fondly devoted, ADAM
CRICHTON.


As soon as I had read this curious epistle, I took my brother aside, and
relating to him what had passed between Sir Adam and me at Edenborough, gave
him the letter. Having perused it, he cried out -- The devil take the assurance
of this fellow! he deserves to be exposed for his meanness; but, however, send
him his answer and dismiss him: and let it be explicit enough to silence him
for the time to come; for some of our countrymen, Jane, are not easily put by
from their point.

I sat down immediately, and wrote the following short answer:

Lady Jane S. presents her compliments to Sir Adam Crichton, and begs leave to
decline the honor of any further correspondence with him upon the subject,
which his letter alludes to.


This I dispatched by his servant, and hoped to hear no more of my lover; when
behold, in less than the space of half an hour, a servant announced him to Mr.
Arundel, who seemed much surprised at the name of a visitor, to whom he was a
perfect stranger; but as there was no hesitation to be made, in point of
politeness, about receiving him, orders were given to show Sir Adam Crichton
into the room. Lord S. had just time to whisper a few words to Mr. Arundel,
when the gentleman made his entrance into the room where we were all assembled;
the old Captain and Mortlake being just then engaged at the backgammon table,
and paying little attention to what was going forward. As soon as Sir Adam had
made his apologies to Mr. Arundel, which he performed with a great deal of
civil circumlocution, he asked leave to speak with me alone; upon which my
brother demanded, if he had not had an answer from Lady Jane already? he
acknowledged to have received a short note; but hoped I would yet indulge him
with an opportunity of explaining himself. Upon this Arundel and Mortlake rose
up, and were preparing to leave the room; but as I was resolute against any
conversation with him, I requested them to stay, for that Sir Adam and I had no
private business whatever. Lord S. now addressed him in a serious tone as
follows: -- Sir Adam Crichton, you have heard my sister's resolution; and
therefore I must on her behalf insist upon it, that you do not press her with
another word upon the subject: upon these conditions, if you choose to honor us
with your company, I think I may answer for my friend Mr. Arundel, that all
civilities will be paid to Sir Adam Crichton in his house. -- Certainly, if Sir
Adam will do me that honor, said Mr. Arundel, yet coolly enough. -- The old
Captain, who did not understand a word of all this, was bawling out to Mortlake
to resume his game at backgammon; but in vain, I never saw so restless a
creature, he was in all parts of the room by turns, and never quiet in any.
Observing this, the Commander grew out of patience, and being totally in the
dark, and not over quick at seeing into the causes and reasons of things,
vociferated still louder, crying out, Come, come, Doctor, bear a hand; where
the plague art capering to? What the dickens is all this to thee? Don't run
away from the game, when I have a gammon in my tables?

During this a perfect silence had reigned in our quarter, whilst Sir Adam's
eyes had gone a progress round the room, sometimes looking inquisitively at my
brother, then piteously at me, then enviously at Arundel, honoring me, as I
believe, with a suspicion that he had spied out a rival; and very naturally
concluding, from the superiority he there beheld, that his cause must be
hopeless, he rose at length from his chair without uttering a word, made a very
awkward bow and departed.

Mr. Arundel followed him to the hall door, performing all the rights of
hospitality with great politeness, when the Baronet as he was parting took
courage and said -- I perceive, Sir, you are the happy man; to which your
friend made reply -- I am indeed, Sir, every body must be happy in the society
of Lady Jane S. -- There Is a declaration for you? Ah my poor forsaken Louisa!
are you not heartbroken with jealousy?

Well! Lady Jane, said Arundel as he returned to us with a smile upon his
countenance, your lover has made a notable discovery amongst us, he has found
out the happy man, who has thrust him out of your heart. -- Happy man indeed! I
replied, and who may he be? -- Look about you, said he, your lover is in the
room. -- Is he so? cried the gallant veteran in a voice of thunder, and
starting from his seat very gallantly seized hold of my hand, saying, Then I
claim her for my prize, and if any man is bold enough to dispute it with me,
let him come on; I will burn, sink, and destroy him in an hurry. -- Ah Lady
Jane! Lady Jane! it is in vain to disguise it; I saw the tender looks you gave
me, when I was in the elegant employ of tallowing the boat's bottom: come,
confess, was not that the favorable moment? I knew you could not stand this
bald pate and black patch. Harkye, Doctor, put in the banns, and splice your
bellropes, for we will have a merry peal.

The old man's raillery saved some certain embarassments that were visible
amongst us, and thus ended the adventure of Sir Adam Crichton.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXIII. Lady Jane S. to Lady Louisa G.
I HAVE had a lecture from Lady Treville this morning: Do you know, my dear
Jane, says she, that you are making poor Mortlake most completely in love with
you? now this I must chide you for, because, take notice, though it may be
sport to you, it is death to him.

But perhaps I do not mean to let him die.

Then what do you mean, you giddy creature?

Any thing rather than incur your displeasure and give you just occasion for
chiding me; which, if I was capable of playing the coquette with so excellent a
creature, I should richly deserve.

The Lord be good unto me! my dear girl, why, he is a parson.

Very true; and Sir Adam Crichton is a Baronet, and I am an Earl's daughter,
and yet I can despise the man of money and admire the man of merit.

Well to be sure this is mighty fine and romantic, but you are jesting with me
all this while.

Pardon me, my dear Lady, you have taken the very way to make me serious; for
if you are founded in your observation, and I have really made the impression
upon Mortlake's heart which you suspect, I have not that trivial mind to revolt
from his profession, or slight a virtuous man because devoted to the service of
his God. Shall the color of a man's clothes, or the cut of his hair disgust my
vanity, and decide against a character, in which every perfection of heart and
head, every excellence of mind and person apparently unite? If I am to consult
my eye, where can it rest upon a finer person than Mortlake's? if I am to be
guided by my judgment, can it direct me to a worthier choice?

But a parson's wife, my dear -- Only think of Lady Jane S. young, noble,
blooming, beauteous, the admiration of the whole town, the pattern of all
elegance and the soul of all societies -- a parson's wife.

And why not? If Lady Jane prefers tranquillity to dissipation, solid happiness
to fleeting pleasures; if Lady Jane prefers the blessings of the poor to the
admiration of the town; Lady Jane will not regret that she is no longer the
soul of those societies, which her soul cannot approve; and though she does not
mean to lessen her attentions to elegance, yet as a pattern of it she would not
wish to be distinguished, whilst there are so many nobler patterns for her
emulation.

But your family, my dear child, your noble, I may say, your royal blood! --
then above all, the Earl your brother! he will now expect to establish you in
some great connection; you saw with what indignity he spurned at the alliance
of Sir Adam Crichton; what will he say to that of Mortlake?

You mistake my brother's motives for treating Sir Adam's proposals with
contempt; the man, not his alliance, is contemptible: my brother will not seek
out matches of interest or ambition for me; he is too honorable to wish to
enslave my affections, and he knows my spirit too well to attempt it; the
authority he holds with me is of my giving, not of his exacting; it springs
from the love I bear him, from the opinion I entertain of his judgment and the
reverence I pay to his virtues; but neither he, nor any creature living or that
ever did live, shall prescribe to me in that important choice, which is to
decide the happiness or misery of my future days; much less will I be swayed
from my judgment by the despicable pride of family, the sordid lure of
interest, or silly cry of fashion, which looks no further than the surface of
the man, and cannot see the light of the soul, if the body be habited in black.

Now then we are agreed, concluded the old lady; I have played a little
harmless artifice upon you, and have touched methinks upon every point that
could probe the feelings of a woman of distinction, circumstanced as you are.
Had I found you tender in any part, and shrinking from the touch, I had
trembled for your danger; but you have even bettered my very best opinion, and
are more than ever dear to me. -- And now, changing her tone and countenance in
a moment, she began to railly me about the simplicity of my dress, which she
said was all subtlety and contrivance, that I might not awe a modest lover by
appearances -- and there in truth she was not out of her guess -- I am sure,
she said, this white linen surplice and vestal hood, with all their chaste
accompaniments are levelled at the parsonage; but you are mistaken, child, in
their effect; instead of hiding they enhance your charms; Lady Jane in her
court dress is only a fine woman, in this saint-like habit she is something
more, and though a heathen priest in the spirit of enthusiasm might prevail
upon himself to sacrifice you as a victim at the altar, no Christian priest
will ever venture to approach so spiritualized a being with the carnal ideas of
love. My life upon it, the humble Mortlake will not dare to approach you any
otherwise than on his knees. -- And if he does approach me on his knees, my
dear lady, I replied, he will not find me so spiritualized as you seem to make
me: I have hitherto kept love at a distance, or at best played with him as a
child with her kitten; when Sir Adam knelt at my feet I could have gone on with
my needle and not pricked my fingers; I could have counted the buttons upon his
coat, or numbered every curl in his hair, he might have molded my hand between
his till he was weary without putting my pulse out of its pace; but oh Heavens!
if a finger of this charming fellow does but touch my glove, it sets my heart
into a flutter, and when he caught me in his arms as I was falling into the
river, how did I wish he would have taken my brother at his word and held me
there for life!

Heyday, heyday! she cried, stark staring mad already; why this is next kin to
love at first sight. -- Well, well, such things may have been, but they are too
long past for me to remember them. However since it is so, you have no time to
throw away, choose your papers and your printed cottons, and set the upholsterer
to work as fast you can, before he has done his job, you will be ready for
yours, or I am mistaken. -- But come, my dear, let us go down to breakfast;
too much love upon an empty stomach is not good for the constitution.

This learned dialogue had kept our tongues so long in motion, that when we
came into the breakfast room we found the gentlemen waiting for us, and were
saluted by the old Captain with a whistle to the tune of the boatswain, when he
pipes all hands to the mess. As I was about to seat myself at the table where I
was to officiate, Mortlake ran with a chair for me, though a man with more
observation and less zeal might easily have found out there was no want of it;
I am afraid I had already sat down, but you know a lady may have a preference
for such a trifle as an odd chair, and so to make short of a trifle, I quitted
my own and took his. Immediately my wicked brother cried out -- Mortlake, there
is promotion for you, Jane has shifted her flag, and you have nothing to do but
take post by succession. -- I can only say he did not avail himself of the
hint; but having full employment in combating my own embarassment I cannot give
any account how Mortlake disposed of his.

After breakfast my brother drew me out into the garden, and during our walk we
had the following conversation:

I flatter myself, my dear Jane, now you have discarded your unworthy lover you
mean to supply the vacancy in your heart with one more deserving.

Ah, brother! love you know is like death, the necessary end, it will come when
it will come.

And have you no hints and intimations of his approach at present?

Humph! that is a trapping question methinks; do you spy out any such?

Why to say the truth I suspect you have a little inclination to cross the
water.

Aye, but you see I stumbled in the passage.

True, but it was only to fall into a young man's arms; it was so that William
the Norman stumbled upon English ground at his landing, but remember it was a
lucky omen, for he conquered and took possession of the soil he fell on.

And did you mean to make a case in point, when you bid my preserver keep
possession of what he had saved?

Upon my honor, Jane, if you can see your happiness in humble life, my pride
will never stand in the way of it; so you can but dwell with content, whether
it is in a palace or a parsonage I shall equally rejoice. -- Perhaps I should
not have said quite so much awhile ago, but since I have now fortune sufficient
to make you affluent with the man of your choice, be his condition what it may,
if that man's mind and person, if his temper, understanding and manners are
altogether such as you approve, and love attracts your heart to his, I should
be base in the extreme were I to interpose a wish in bar of your affections:
no, my dear sister, let me rather prompt you to pursue your passion, when it
leads to an object so deserving; nobility can never degrade itself by an
alliance with virtue.

There spoke my brother! I exclaimed, and at the same time clasped him in my
arms -- this it is to possess the soul of a hero. But now deal freely with me,
my dear Archibald, I added; and as my heart is open, all its warmth and all its
weakness as well known to you as the features of my face, have you seen any
thing in me, have you discovered any thing in Mortlake, which seems to threaten
future discontent between us? Have you any alarm for our happiness? What is
there in myself to correct, what in him to disapprove and guard myself against?

I will answer you sincerely; and for yourself first -- If I did not know you
as I do, I might suppose your character was ill adapted to the sober line of
life, in which he moves; I might suppose your high and ardent spirit, your
vivacity and brilliant talents, your elegance of manners, mind and person, were
qualities that never could submit to a retired and humble destination; but I
know you better; I have seen you in the solitude of Fergus Castle, in the
melancholy duty of an attendant on a dying grandmother, lost to the world and
to herself; I have seen you patiently enduring the restraints of poverty, and
according yourself to the narrowest system of frugality without a murmur; I
know you have no pride but that of principle, no contempt but of vice and
meanness, and though you have understanding, figure and address to grace the
highest rank in life, vivacity to give them a display and passions to impel
them into action, yet I know your mind is so strong fortified with reason and
your soul so firmly anchored in religion, that I have had not the smallest
doubt of your security.

As for Mortlake; though I want no other test of his merit than the friendship
which Arundel entertains for him, and though my education does not enable me to
form any judgment of an understanding and knowledge so superior to what I can
boast of, yet of his heart I flatter myself I am entitled to speak, of his
candor, modesty, benevolence, sweetness of temper I cannot fail to be a judge,
for they are as conspicuous as the light, evident as truth itself: his manners
are of the purest sort, and though not such as fashion adopts, yet are they
what the finest gentleman might make the model of his practice. Though his
spirit is gentle, it is as highly empassioned and as warm, my sweet Jane, even
as your own: his soul is all benevolence, his religion is philanthropy, active,
liberal, tolerating, untainted by hypocrisy, and not clouded by gloom, but
lively, gay and social. As to his external, I can only say that a sweeter
countenance and a finer person I have no where seen; of that you must; judge
for yourself, and if your eyes speak the language of your heart, which I cannot
doubt of, they have told him in pretty plain terms what an interest he has
there. With respect to all the essentials of domestic happiness, this most
beautiful spot in which Arundel has placed him, the elegant and comfortable
habitation he has provided for him, the decent income he derives from his
living, the little paternal property he enjoys, and your portion of that
treasure, which is only valuable to me as I can share it with you, will put you
so completely at your ease in point of fortune, that I foresee nothing that can
add to the happy prospect in your view, but an event, which I hope Providence
will bring to pass, the union of your charming and beloved friend with the only
man living who deserves her.

That indeed, I eagerly observed, would be a consummation of my bliss; that
would make me supremely happy, and surely we may presume that Heaven, which
formed them for each other, will complete its own designs by uniting them: then
indeed, when friend is joined to friend, from the terrace of my little garden
with a joy unallayed by envy I shall survey the neighboring mansion, where my
Louisa dwells with her beloved Arundel: United in the bonds of harmony with
such a family how serene will be my life! blessed in the affections of my
husband, my understanding enlarged by his instructions, and my heart animated
by his virtues, think with what transport I shall meet my heroic brother
returning from his wars with conquest, having finished his career of glory, and
welcome him into the arms of peace, Weaving fresh laurels for his honored brow.

Here we were stopped in our dialogue by an elegant and graceful form, habited in
deep mourning, who approached without observing us; he was engaged in
contemplating a miniature pourtrait, which he held in his hand, and on which
his eyes were most lovingly fixed. -- Need I say it was Arundel? Need I add that
the object of his contemplation was the copy of the fairest face in the
creation, the gift of my Louisa to her faithful Jane, and her loan to this
enamoured lover? Could I withhold from him this friendly solace of his
meditations, this reflection of an image imprinted on his heart? I trust you
will not think I have misused your favor by imparting it to him. -- Ah, Lady
Jane, he cried, this was a daring painter -- How could he look upon those eyes
and live? He then shut the shagreen case, in which the picture is enclosed, and
returned it to me, saying -- I believe I have got this book by heart. -- I hope
you will soon have the original in possession, replied my brother, you may then
pursue your studies according to The publisher presumes his Lordship alluded to
the following passage: Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
Horace's instruction both by night and by day. -- Oh heavenly hope, replied
Arundel, on which my imagination dwells, how kindly you console me! but when I
ask myself on what foundation it is built, how like the baseless fabric of a
vision does it then appear! though I am well assured that Lady Louisa will
neither be persuaded nor compelled into a marriage with Sir George Revel, yet
how can I flatter myself that any future time or circumstance can reconcile the
hostile mind of Lord G. to me? He has not the gift of forgiveness, nor I the
art of hypocrisy, where then is my hope? -- Cannot you answer that query, said
my brother to me. -- In my own case, I replied, I could readily answer it, in
my friend's I cannot; the seeds of rebellion so rank in my nature, in her pure
mind take no root; filial obedience in her is a principle she cannot violate,
nay I am persuaded she would sacrifice the happiness of her life, or even life
itself, rather than transgress a duty, which she regards as interdictory
against her own inclinations, though she may not admit it to be compulsory upon
them. -- I conceive, said Arundel, you have very correctly understood her rule
of acting, and I will as correctly conform to it, be the event as fatal to my
happiness as I fear it will be; if I could persuade her to an act, with which
her gentle mind would reproach her, it is what the world would not bribe me to
attempt; no, I must submit, I am neither capable of perverting her filial
piety, nor of conciliating her father's rooted animosity. At the same time I
know my pretensions; it is no vanity in me to say, for it is no merit of my own
which enables me to say it, that if hereditary honors pass for any thing, the
name of Arundel may stand upon the line with any name in Europe; weigh it, it
is as heavy, conjure with it, it will raise a spirit as soon as Bourbon or
Nassau. The fortune I inherit by the bounty of the deceased, though not to be
compared with Sir George Revel's, is such however as the parent of no lady
could object to; for as it is, without adverting to other contingencies, it
more than trebles the estate, which will devolve upon Lady Louisa with the
barony, that in failure of a son and heir goes to her; the rest of his
Lordship's estate is in close entail upon the male heir: add to this, that the
generosity of my uncle John has opened other mines upon me, which might tempt
Lord G. if avarice were his ruling passion, to stifle his resentment and wave
all objections against me; but I will neither consent to take the prize out of
the victor's generous hand, who earned it, nor will I so insult Lord G. as to
suppose he can be bribed by any offers, however splendid, to relax from his
hostility.

Oh my Louisa! what a man this is! though nature cast him in a mould to strike
our eyes with admiration at the very instant of beholding him, yet she has
endowed his mind with something so superior to external grace, that every hour
increases our esteem and love; for my part I perfectly venerate him as a kind
of being of a higher order; I love him, trust him, converse with him without
any of that timid reserve or holding back, so natural to the shyness of our
sex; such is the delicacy of his nature, that when alone with him, I seem in
company with my Louisa; I tender myself to him as a partner in his private
meditations, because I can perceive it sooths his mind to talk with me of his
and my Louisa; taken from you in presence, not in heart, he finds relief in
conversation, which he knows full well can never weary me, nor need we dread
the languor of repetition, when you are the subject, in whom we can still find
new charms, new virtues to admire and praise, without exhausting the supply
that feeds us with variety.

Here I must break off, as we are now going upon the river in the new wherry,
which our sea Captains have put into perfect trim: the afternoon is charming;
our commanders are waiting at the place of embarkation; I hear the voice of
Lady Treville summoning me to the party in the gayest and most exhilarating
tone; she stands on the lawn under my window arm in arm with Arundel, Mortlake
is waiting unengaged, and casts up a wishful look, in which, amidst the modest
diffidence that characters his face, I can discern a faint and glimmering
expectation, the embryo of a hope that I shall destine him to the same friendly
and familiar office. -- Yes, Mortlake, thou shall have thy hope, my arm shall
be supported upon thine, nor one alone, but both are ready to enfold thee; my
conscious heart acknowledges it cannot bestow a joy on thee greater, than that
which it receives by giving.

Farewell! -- I fly to him with such impatience, that if he has eyes he must
discover me: Ah me! he has discovered me; -- I have given him a smile of
assignation, that has transported him: I am betrayed! -- no matter, I cannot
counterfeit, nor would I, if I could.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXIV. Lady Louisa G. to Lady Jane S.
ALAS! that mine should be the destiny to blast the happiness of those I love,
to put to hazard, perhaps, (Oh horror beyond thought!) to destroy a life far
dearer to me than my own.

Arundel has been represented to me as the vilest of men, must I add! as the
seducer, the violator of my mother's honor. The circumstances, reported to me
by my father, originate from Sir George Revel, and are simply these: --

A note from my mother to Arundel, written at the instant of her departure, was
intercepted by Sir George Revel on the spot, who arrived at her house just
after she had left it, and found means to get this letter out of the servant's
hands, who was entrusted to deliver it.

This letter I saw in her own handwriting, and read it myself -- It is little
else than a short adieu; she wishes him not to aggravate Lord G.; she conjures
him to avoid fresh dissensions with Sir George Revel, but she plainly hints at
intelligence heretofore imparted to him by herself with respect to me -- This
is the whole of it, and this alone would have been an attack, I could easily
enough have put by in silence, had it not been followed by other circumstances,
fabricated by the very father of lies, the author of all mischief; for that
wretch, Sir George Revel, pretends he has a deposition of the servant, from
whom he got the letter, charging my guiltless mother with a criminal
assignation, and meeting with Arundel in a certain building within a grove,
adjoining to her garden, and asserting that of this meeting he was an
eyewitness.

Such is my persuasion of the purity and honor of the parties concerned, that
had I no other grounds for disbelieving this abominable and malicious fiction,
I could not harbor a suspicion to their prejudice; but when I call to mind the
zeal with which she recommends my union with Arundel, and the prayers she
offers up for its success, is it in nature to suppose this accusation can be
true? Is there a parent living so devoid of conscience? If to the disgrace of
human nature such a monster does exist, it cannot be my mother. Another
circumstance there is, which stamps the horrid tale with falsehood; the
informer has disappeared, and as the whole charge rests upon the hearsay
evidence and veracity of Sir George Revel, who does not deny that he connived
at the fellow's escape by promise previously engaged, we are left to conclude
that either no such informer exists, and the entire story is a malicious
fabrication of Sir George's, or else that there is such gross and palpable
subornation in the case, that the fugitive, conscious of his perjury, dares not
abide the scrutiny, nor meet the accused face to face.

But all this while, glaring as these circumstances are, my father credits, or
pretends to credit, the tale, and the reputation of my innocent mother is to be
blasted through the world, whenever he thinks fit to appeal to it, and divert
the public odium from himself to her. Can this be suffered? rather let me ask,
Can it be prevented otherwise than by appealing to Arundel? And yet what
horrors agonize my heart, when I reflect upon the danger of that measure! Alas,
my friend, this disappointed, desperate man thirsts for his blood; my fatal
preference dooms him to the assassin's sword; I am the murderer of Arundel.

This is the diabolical plot, which that wretch has been hatching in his
journey into Kent; Heaven forbid I should say my father is an accomplice in it,
truth compels me to own that he is the willing dupe of it. To what purpose then
should I be silent toward you, or you toward Arundel? for if it comes not to
his ears through my channel, it will through my father, who affects to credit
it; it will be charged upon him by that monster, who avows it and provokes me
to reveal it.

Were any one but myself the reporter of it to Arundel, how would he be assured
of my entire rejection and abhorrence of the falsehood? Silence might give him
a suspicion that I was base enough to doubt, whereas I am prepared to give him
full, complete and unequivocal proof of confidence, by making common cause with
him, and throwing myself resolutely into the arms of the very man whom they
accuse: yes, Arundel, be this my refutation of the charge! thus let me defend
the slandered character of an innocent parent! No other cause could justify me
to myself for such a step, but this makes disobedience virtue; in the defense
of innocence my spirit rises to a pitch, that emulates even thy heroism, my
beloved Jane!

Can the daughter wed with the corrupter of the mother? this is their language.
My nature shudders at the thought -- Be this the test then of my confidence in
Arundel! I will stake my soul upon his truth: Can I depose more strongly to his
innocence? Oaths may be given for purposes, friends have been perjured for
friends; but who ever drew such horrors on their head, as I now invoke on mine
upon the issue of this falsehood? Glaring as hell itself must be the lie, that
I would at such peril refute.

Exert yourself for a friend, whose heart is rent with agonies; consult your
noble brother; devise some means for preventing the effusion of blood, dearer
than that which flows from my afflicted heart; say to Arundel that I am ready
to escape with him to that asylum of fond fugitives, which till now I never
dreamt of resorting to: let him not delay a moment, but come in secrecy to
London; our marriage will stamp the lie upon Sir George; there needs no more to
blast his story. Arundel as my husband has answered his accuser fully; there
can be then no appeal to the sword; the world will hoot the villain as he
passes; he will stand upon perpetual record a liar confuted and confessed.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXV. Lady Jane S. to Lady Louisa G.
I HAVE no words, that can express to you my indignation against that monster
Revel, my feelings for the injured Arundel, or the just encomiums which are due
to your heroic, generous conduct.

To the letter I enclose let me refer you for the grateful sentiments of a man,
whose whole soul is yours: it seems to me as if he did not feel the venom of
the accusation, so transported is he with the proof of your acquittal of him,
of your confidence -- Oh, generous Louisa -- of your unshaken love.

If ever truth and honor inhabited the human heart, it is in Arundel's they
dwell, unspotted, uncontaminated.

My gallant brother perfectly adores you: his noble blood is all on fire; and
though he is my dearest hope on earth, I am proud to lend him to the cause of
Arundel: I see him inlist in his service without a sigh, and I glory in the
zeal and ardor of his friendship.

They are gone forth -- let me adjure you by the most earnest entreaties not to
torture your too feeling, anxious thoughts, with imaginary terrors; be patient,
stifle all enquiries whither they are gone, and what they are about; put up
your prayers to the Avenger of all wickedness; confide in him and he will bring
it to pass.

I have a packet of papers sealed up and committed to me by Arundel, which, if
occasion requires, I am bidden to deliver into your hands.

It is at the joint request of all parties that I remain here under the
protection of Lady Treville, who kindly consents to stay with me; Captain
Arundel, with Mr. Mortlake, now make up the relics of our late happy family.

It was on the consideration of my abiding here that the veteran consented to
remain behind. His admiration of his beloved Lady Louisa rises to enthusiasm;
he raves as loudly in your praises, as in the execrations which he vents
against the wretch who has disturbed our peace; on him he pours a torrent of
contempt, expressed in such an unintelligible, ridiculous medley of sea
phrases, that it is scarce possible to keep my countenance, though the few
ideas to be collected from them are not always of the cleanliest sort.

Mortlake, the mildest of all Heaven's creatures, is for ever occupied in
qualifying his fury, or consoling my anxiety: his pious and pacific nature
argues thus -- An honest man will never want the means of detecting falsehood
and exposing a liar, without resorting to those violent measures, which wear
the complexion of revenge rather than of justice. If I hold up a villain to the
world's contempt, it is all the punishment a villain can receive on earth; but
if I call him our, and put my cause to the arbitration of the sword, and if he
boldly answers to the call, I set a varnish on his crimes to screen him from
contempt, and the world, whilst it acknowledges his resolution in the contest,
forgets or pardons the guilt that puts it into action.

These are arguments which Captain Arundel would just as well comprehend if
they were delivered in the Hebrew language; and accordingly he answers them, as
he would an enemy at sea, who hailed him in an unknown tongue -- from the mouth
of his guns. These again are as unintelligible to the pacific controverter of
his opinions; for, being uttered in a language not to be found either amongst
the living or the dead, they cannot reach the intellects of Mortlake, who
modestly retreats in silence from the field, and leaves it to the louder
disputant to spend his fury in the desert air.

For my part, though I have all the feelings of my sex about me, I would not
wish these generous friends to act but as they do; for whilst I must in
conscience admit the truth of Mortlake's argument, I cannot bring my heart to
disapprove of Arundel's spirit.

May Heaven watch over them and you! My more than ever dear Louisa, farewell.

LETTER LXXVI. Arundel to Lady Louisa G. enclosed in the above.
THAT the same assassin, who attempted my life, should now attempt my
reputation, I can well believe; and perhaps, if the malicious falsehood had
been only aimed at me, contempt had been its proper refutation; but when a
crime of the blackest dye is fabricated by a villain, for the purpose of fixing
it upon the spotless character of a defenseless absent Lady, and the husband of
that Lady is so grossly credulous, or else so wilfully cruel, as to give his
sanction to the tale, can I, her only advocate, desert her cause? Will even thy
arms, generous Louisa, shelter me from disgrace? Can cowardice find an asylum
even in Paradise itself?

The informer, if such a person exists, who pretends to have been an
eyewitness of a meeting, which before God I solemnly declare never did take
place, must be called for, and confronted: in that case Sir George Revel will
be no otherwise responsible than for the fidelity of his report, and for an
explanation of his motives in stopping the letter, an action despicable and
mean upon the face of it. But if Sir George will not, or cannot, produce his
informer, the charge rests upon assertion, and can only be answered by
assertion; for where the person calumniated cannot confute the calumny by
proving the negative, nothing more seems to be in his power but to give it the
flattest and fullest contradiction.

And now what language can I employ to give expression to my gratitude for your
unequalled generosity? With what devotion I adore and love you, my life and not
my lips must prove. That you are confident and that I am conscious of my
innocence, is a reflection that will arm me against all dangers; but the world
has its demands upon me still; the honor of your injured mother, my own, and
(what is dearer than my own) your honor, my adored Louisa, calls upon me to
stand forth in its defense and vindication. Let that happiness, which you
generously tender to me as present and immediate, be my future prize and
reward, when truth shall have triumphed over falsehood, when the defamer of
virtue shall have received his merited chastisement, and when it shall be in no
one's power to say that I clandestinely took refuge in those arms, whose
earthly bliss, like that of Heaven itself, is only to be earned by
perseverance, sufferings and trials.

Farewell, thou all that is amiable and excellent! Heaven only knows how dear
thou art to

ARUNDEL.

LETTER LXXVII. Arundel to Captain John Arundel.
OUR noble friend, Lord S. has had two fruitless interviews with Sir George
Revel. He will not, nay I am persuaded he cannot, produce the informer; he is
himself the author and contriver of the calumny.

As for the intercepted letter, it is so secondary a matter, that Lord S. no
longer dwelt upon it, than served to represent the meanness of the transaction.

It was demanded of Sir George, if he would accompany my friend to the house of
Lord G. recapitulate the charge in his presence, as he pretends to have heard
it from the mouth of the informer, meet the evidence which Lord S. was provided
with for refuting the falsehood of the charge, and upon that proof acknowledge
himself to have been misinformed and deceived. -- He would accede to no one
particular of this proposition; he abided in his belief, he retraced no one
item of what he had said, he would not produce the informer, he repented not of
having intercepted the letter, but repented only of having ever in time past
made an apology to a man, whom it would have been a merit to have sent out of
the world, before he had committed such crimes as render him unfit to remain in
it.

You, my dear uncle, whose heart is the seat of honor, can readily suggest to
your own thoughts the alternative which must follow. My noble friend has
fulfilled this part of his commission as ably and as honorably as he had done
the former part of it. A few days absence from England will set us upon ground,
from which not even the royal authority can interdict us. The name of Arundel
was not committed to me to be disgraced in my keeping; nor shall the malice,
envy, falsehood of this wretch escape my vengeance: the vindication of a lady's
character, whom cruelty has exiled and malice defamed, the refutation of a most
infamous attack upon my honor, and through me upon yourself, upon the memory of
my deceased benefactor, upon all who wear, or ever did wear, the name of
Arundel, are now at issue; and if the weight of wrongs like these, if the
justice of a cause like mine, cannot edge my sword and animate my heart, what
can? They do, my gallant uncle, doubt it not; fear not for me; your own blood
beats in my veins; I have your heroic image in my mind's eye, and I depart
secure of conquest.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXVIII. Sir George Revel to the Earl of G.
I AM just landed at Oftend upon a little tour of pleasure, where I am to have
the honor of meeting a certain friend of yours on the confines of the Austrian
territory, to settle a small matter in dispute between us, that cannot so
conveniently be adjusted upon English ground.

I do not forget an apostrophe in one of your Lordship's letters to me, whereby
you lament your disability by age and rank from taking personal vengeance upon
Arundel: from that moment I adopted your revenge, and, having once given him a
taste of my sword, I mean now to give him a full meal of it.

Sir John Macarthy More, an officer in the Emperor's service and my approved
good friend, attends me on this trip; a better man, whether as second or
principal, never stepped into a field. The young Earl of S. accompanies Arundel;
and, in spite of all his blushing honors fresh upon him, let him look well to
himself; he will not have to deal with Spaniards in this business, nor will he
have barricades to screen him.

The gentlemen are gone forward to their rendezvous, and have left a note to
say they shall have nobody in their suit but a surgeon and valet de chamber. I
shall send Sir John before me to mark out the ground and agree upon
preliminaries with the noble Earl.

The sword is to be our weapon -- happy choice for me! His Scottish Lordship
was nationally precise in measuring our respective weapons: if a workman is to
be known by his tools, I must confess that my antagonist sent me a respectable
sample of his art; it should be the instrument of a master: but where can this
academic have studied that noble science in its best school? Conceited pedant!
he little knows with whom he has to deal: he rushes desperate on his own
destruction; few hours and short remain for him ere he shall be food for worms.

When next I write to you, this upstart favorite of fortune, this emancipated
dependant, who arraigns your Lordship in the senate, forces you from the helm
of the state, seduces your revolted wife, and even shakes the allegiance of
your wavering daughter, shall be no more. -- So much for Arundel!

Farewell.
LETTER LXXIX. Arundel to Captain John Arundel.
IT is as I predicted; justice has struck the blow: the affair is over, and
Sir George Revel, desperately wounded in two places, can scarce be said to
survive.

The spot our seconds made choice of for our meeting was about a mile from the
Austrian barrier, in the center of a small grove, not above a hundred paces
from the road-side, where we left our carriages in waiting, with a servant in
each, none but our respective seconds and surgeons accompanying us to the
ground.

It was between five and six in the morning when Lord S. and myself arrived
upon the ground; and in less than a quarter of an hour Sir George appeared,
with his friend in the Austrian uniform, and a foreign regimental surgeon.

When we were within a few paces of each other he stopped, and I took off my hat
to him, which he returned in like manner with his, throwing it, however, behind
him to some distance at the same time. Seeing him do this, I took for granted
he was getting himself ready to set to without loss of time, and thereupon
began to strip myself to a linen waistcoat; when addressing me by my name, he
cried out -- Hold a moment with your leave; I desire the true grounds of my
quarrel with you may be understood: you are a rash, presumptuous young man; and
it is to chastise your arrogance in aspiring to be my rival with Lady Louisa,
that I come hither: as for your connection with Lady G. I have no concern with
that but as it serves to give you an interest with her daughter; and to
convince you that I scorn to draw my sword in the support of an untruth, I now
tell you, that the deposition of the footman is a fiction.

As soon as he said this, I called upon my friend Lord S. to take notice of his
words and remember them. I speak them for that very purpose, replied he; his
Lordship is welcome to make what use of them he sees fit: I take away no lady's
reputation; I disdain it.

Certify what you now say, and give it me under your hand, I exclaimed, and I
am satisfied.

No, Sir, answered he, it is for the vindication of my own character, it is for
the honor of truth, I say this, not for your satisfaction: I have made one
apology too many already, and you shall never have another from me: I am not
come so far to make a childish business of it; I am determined to correct your
insolence, and assert my own superior claim to Lady Louisa; slight measures
will not serve me: your temerity has chosen a weapon I am master of; that, and
only that, shall now decide upon our lives and our pretensions.

Having so said, he threw off his coat and waistcoat, and both drawing our
swords at the same instant, we advanced upon each other as men determined to
conquer or to die.

He did himself no more than justice i^ what he said; he was indeed a master of
his weapon, and, having some advantage of the higher ground, pressed upon me so
fiercely, and at the same time kept so strong a guard, that I found it
necessary to give back for a while, and wait his onset on the defensive. In
this way I continued to foil him so frequently, that he began to lose his
temper; which Sir John Macarthy More observing, called to him to fight more
coolly; for which he was taken up pretty smartly by my friend the Earl of S.
who warned him to be silent. At this moment, with a vehement oath, he made a
home-thrust at my breast, which I contrived to pass over my shoulder, and in
the instant pushed my sword through his body, closing in upon him with the same
motion: he reeled with the blow, and in falling caught hold with his left hand
and pulled me to the ground upon him: I held fast of his right wrist, so that
he could not use his sword, which he struggled to recover from my gripe. In the
same moment I heard the clashing of swords over my back as I laid upon the body
of my antagonist, and found our seconds were engaged; I sprung upon my legs,
and quitting hold of Sir George, whom I believed to be expiring, extricated my
sword from his body, and rushed between them. His surgeon now ran up to him,
thinking him to be dying; but he raising himself nimbly on his legs, called out
to him to be gone, and I had by this time parted our seconds: Sir George Revel
once more attacked me with the fury of a desperate man in his last moments; his
countenance was horrible, he yelled with agony and fought like one that was
frantic, whilst the blood spouted from his wound; still there was discretion in
his madness, for his art had not deserted him to the last, and his attack for a
short time was more dangerous than ever: I commanded myself so far as to spare
him upon two or three openings, for I wished not to give him another wound; but
self-preservation put me upon other measures, and coming suddenly within his
guard I lodged my point in his right breast, passing it clear through the flesh
of his sword arm and pinning it as it were to his ribs; his weapon dropped from
his hand, and he fell backwards on the ground at his length, crying out, he was
killed.

His second ran to him and supported him till the surgeon came up: he
discharged greatly from the mouth, and then closing his eyes fell back and as I
thought in that moment expired. I entreated, I implored Sir John not to think
of renewing any disagreement with my friend, and that more blood might not be
spilt upon a quarrel that, by the evidence of the dying man, which he himself
had heard him deliver, might have been atoned for without these fatal
consequences. I called upon Mr. L * * *, my surgeon, and requested him to give
his assistance to the dying man; this he very readily complied with, and the
foreign surgeon soon discovering how much more expert he was than himself,
resigned the chief part of the work to him, and acted rather as an assistant
than principal, applauding him in very high terms all the while. The operation
was indeed like magic; the sluices were staunched, the wounds were bound up,
and a reviving cordial was administered almost at the same instant: the wounded
man opened his eyes, and gave signs of coming to his senses. -- I conjure you,
Sir, cried Mr. L. on your life do not attempt to speak, or stir; be perfectly
quiet, and I am not out of hope to save you.

My chaise let down at the back and had conveniences to serve as a litter,
which my friendly surgeon had contrived for me in London: on the mattrass we
laid Sir George Revel, and so conveyed him through the little grove to the
chaise in waiting, our valets assisting us in carrying him. Whilst this was in
operation we discovered a good deal of blood on the sleeve of Lord S.'s right
arm, and upon examination found it proceeded from a slight puncture in the
flesh. This also my surgeon dressed upon the spot; and now Sir John Macarthy
More, perceiving that his sword had wounded him in the scuffle, gallantly cried
out -- The great God forbid that I should draw blood from the veins of a
British officer whilst I have life: give me your hand, my sweet boy, and may
you live to fight your country's battles and conquer like a brave fellow as you
are; for by my faith and soul you have enemies enough and to spare (the devil
fire them all) without my turning against you. -- Lord S. readily shook hands
with him, and thus to my great satisfaction a reconciliation took place between
them.

When we had placed Sir George Revel in the chaise, we had two miles to the
next village, and the surgeons seemed to think it doubtful if he could bear the
carriage so far. There was a house within sight, at the bottom of one of the
avenues in the grove, where we fought, which by its situation and appearance
seemed to belong to the owner of the place, and as it was so near at hand Mr.
L. advised us to apply for admission there, as no time was to be lost. Sir John
Macarthy More immediately mounted one of our servants horses, and in a few
minutes returned to tell us, that he had succeeded in obtaining a reception for
the wounded gentleman and his surgeons, but that the lady of the house
recommended it to me and my second to get within the barrier as fast as we
could.

As Sir George's danger was so pressing and his surgeon very anxiously
solicited the assistance of Mr. L. I consented to release him upon his assuring
me that no harm could befall Lord S. whose wound was perfectly safe and would
want no dressing till the next morning, when at farthest he would not fail to
be with us; having appointed therefore our place of meeting in the town of --,
Lord S. and I drove off in Sir George Revel's chaise, leaving him in mine to
the care of the surgeons and his friend Sir John, who slowly proceeded with him
down the avenue toward the house.

Being now safely lodged at Ostend, and by the blessing of Providence unhurt,
except by my anxiety for Sir George, I send this to you by express, hoping that
it will set your mind entirely at rest, especially as I can assure you Lord S.
is in no manner of danger from the wound in his arm, which though slight
prevents him for the present from using his pen: we shall wait the event of a
day or two, and then set out for England.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXX. The Earl of S. to the Earl of G.
THOUGH I write with difficulty, having a slight wound in my right arm, I
gladly make the effort, to inform your Lordship, that Sir George Revel, before
he entered into action with Mr. Arundel, declared in my hearing voluntarily and
explicitly, that the information he pretended to have received from Lady G.'s
footman, respecting an interview between her Ladyship and Mr. Arundel, was a
fiction.

This declaration I myself heard, and though the hopeless situation of Sir
George Revel affords little chance of his living to repeat it, I pledge my
sacred honor to your Lordship that I am a witness to its being made; for the
truth of which I may appeal not only to the party accused, but to Sir John
Macarthy More, who was present as Sir George's second, and Mr. L. who
accompanied my friend as his surgeon, and whose character and integrity are
well known to your Lordship.

Justice has decided for Arundel, who has conquered without a wound.

LETTER LXXXI. Lady Jane S. to Lady Louisa G.
I SEND you a copy of Arundel's letter to his uncle, which will inform you of
the successful termination of an affair, that has, I hope, been kept secret
from you till the receipt of this.

What a dreadful punishment has fallen on the head of that injurious, desperate
man, Sir George Revel! Society will have nothing to regret at his death, and
yet I cannot help wishing for his recovery, if it were only in consideration of
Arundel, who no doubt will be greatly pained at sending an unprepared,
impenitent being out of the world.

How will your heart alternately be filled with terrors and with transports,
whilst you read this narrative! Amidst its feelings for your own beloved hero,
I persuade myself you will feel a sympathetic emotion of pity and applause for
mine also, whose generous blood has flowed in the service of his friend.

I am sure there is a passage in the enclosed, that will give you peculiar
satisfaction; I allude to the acknowledgment, which that unhappy wretch made
before he began the combat: this I think will be admitted by Lord G. himself as
decisive for the exculpation of your injured mother, and if there is nothing
strikes you in the narrative as improper for your father's eye, which I presume
there is not, you will have a fair opportunity of vindicating a parent's
character, and doing justice to an innocent man at the same time; but of this
you are the best judge, and no doubt will govern yourself as time and season
may accord with circumstances.

It is now sunshine and fair weather once again in our little circle: the brave
old seaman has strove to put a good countenance upon the time since his
nephew's absence, but in spite of all his blustering many a deep sigh found its
way, and a heavy cloud upon his brow betrayed the inward sadness of his soul:
the joy of his heart now overflows at his eyes, and he is for ever conning over
his nephew's letter: he has got a company of the farmers together in the
steward's parlour, and is at this moment sitting in a cloud of tobacco,
carousing over a huge bowl of punch and entertaining them with sea stories and
adventures, whilst the house echoes with their jollity.

Not so Mortlake; his pious transports are directed to the supreme Dispenser of
all blessings, and the joy he feels on Arundel's safety is tinctured with a
strong concern for his responsibility on Sir George Revel's account, whose
lamentable situation he deeply commiserates.

Every day, every hour the character of this extraordinary young man rises in
my esteem. -- But I repress the volubility of my pen, and wait till the happy
intelligence of your health and peace of mind put the spring in motion.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXXII. Lady Louisa G. to Lady Jane S.
STRONG indeed must be your nerves, my dear Jane, to copy such a narrative as
you have enclosed to me; mine yet tremble with horror at the perusal of it.

What a savage animal is man! how ferocious in his wrath! how bloody in his
resentments! how terrible even in his death!

I am haunted by a spectre horrible to look upon: I see the figure of Revel
gashed with wounds and besmeared with blood; his countenance is deformed with
rage; he stares frightfully upon me, and his dying yells ring in my ears. On
the other hand I see Arundel, like a commissioned angel in the act to punish,
striking him to the earth; benevolence beams from his eyes, he gives the blow
of justice with reluctance, and drops a tear of pity on his fallen foe.

What I have suffered in the dreadful interim since the receipt of Arundel's
letter enclosed in yours, words cannot utter: my agonies were such as to alarm
and melt my father's heart; his care of me has been tender in the extreme; he
endeavored to delude me out of my apprehensions, but in vain, the oppression
that weighed down his own spirits was too visible to escape my notice; it
sufficiently informed me what was passing in his own mind; the dreadful
business in operation hung upon his conscience: in his heart I am sure he
acquitted my mother even before the confession of Sir George Revel put her
innocence out of doubt.

You will start when I tell you, that in the anguish of my soul I disguised not
any of its most secret affections, but avowed my love for Arundel openly and
without reserve in his hearing -- and he heard it not with patience only, but
with pity, with complacence -- I devoted myself by the most solemn vows to
melancholy, to despair, to death itself, if Arundel survived not the impending
conflict. I exposed to my father's sight the letter I had received from him,
and I made no scruple to declare the offer I had desperately tendered him of a
clandestine marriage: the horror which my father felt at this proposal was
converted into admiration, when he perused the letter, wherein Arundel so
honorably declines the offer. -- This man, cried he, compels me to admire him.
-- These words were as a signal to my eager spirit to break forth; the torrent
of my passion forced its way; I wept, entreated, threw myself before his feet
upon my knees, and called aloud on Heaven for its protection to Arundel, for
its vengeance upon his murderer. -- In this instant arrived a letter from your
brother to my father, which announced the completion of my prayers; the cause
of justice was triumphant, innocence was rescued from danger, guilt devoted to
death; Heaven's hand was visible; my grateful heart was overpowered by the
vouchsafement, it paused in reverence of the awful presence; I sunk upon the
floor and fainted in the effort of adoration.

And now, my Jane, do you demand of me if I sympathize with you in pity and
applause of your heroic brother? Oh! from my soul I love him. -- May victory
attend him ever! May same crown him with laurels, fortune enrich him with
spoils! and for the generous blood he shed for Arundel, it is as dear to me as
the drops that fell from my sad heart, the fountain of my life is not more
precious.

Dear to me also is that other thunderbolt of war, that boisterous son of the
ocean, brave old uncle John; nature has made him of precious materials, though
of rough workmanship; in ancient time, I am told, our sea officers were in
general such as Captain Arundel is now; the modern class, of which your noble
Archibald is a bright example, are more courtly and no less courageous.

As for that piece of human excellence, who, being your Mortlake, is mine also,
he seems born to put complainers out of countenance and show the world how pure
a man may be. That you have gained a treasure in his heart I can well believe,
that he will meet a blessing in your arms I am perfectly assured: how the world
may think fit to comment upon your choice will little concern you, when you
have turned your back upon its vain and foolish opinions; if I thought that
choice would be less happy for its being humble, I should think you had made a
sacrifice to the passion of the moment, but I know your nature is superior to
ambition, envy, avarice and every sordid propensity; I join with your beloved
Earl in every trait and description of your character, and subscribe my warmest
wishes to his for your speedy union. Yours is a spirit of activity and fire,
it does not deal in delay; convinced of his love for you (and how indeed should
that be doubted?) you must dissipate his timid diffidence, and condescend to
copy the example of a spirit far less heroic than your own, that of your poor
trembling Louisa, whom fear made bold, and love inspired with resolution to
offer her free heart to Arundel. You are now as it were alone with Mortlake,
every hour you have him in your eye, opportunity courts you, and the time is
your own: are, there no sequestered walks, no shady groves, No haunts
propitious to the voice of love? Sure they would spring spontaneously where
Arundel inhabits. Where is the spot, in which you met him honoring my poor
resemblance with his flattering contemplation? that spot must surely be
auspicious to a lover; at least for friendship's sake, if not for love's,
select it, so may we date our happiness from the same individual lot of earth.
-- Oh Jane! should that be so, should Heaven consent to bless me also with the
object of my soul's fond affection, I will pay that turf a tribute of my
gratitude, I will ornament it with an edifice, and, as my love almost amounts
to idolatry, I will indulge its superstition with a temple, where the Orphean
hand of Romney shall make the very walls alive, and by the animating touches of
his creative pencil consecrate the fabric to Immortality.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXXIII. Lady Jane S. to Lady Louisa G.
BEGIN your temple without loss of time: Mortlake and I have consecrated the
spot to love, and nothing is wanting for the ceremony of laying the
foundation-stone but the presence of the patroness.

Let us rear our fane according to the chaste simplicity of ancient Greece; let
us keep the established orders to the purity of their text, without any modern
interpolations, and, to make them correspond to the characters of the happy
pair, whose union they record, let the manly solidity of the Doric support the
female elegance of the Ionic.

Give your favorite painter an ample and unbroken area for the display of his
genius; and, as the temple is to be sacred to connubial love, let him take the
fable of Psyche and her various labors for his subject, consummating the whole
with a magnificent composition of the wedding ceremony. Remember I bargain for
a dome, as well for the painter's lights, as for the solemnity of the edifice;
and in a sacristy apart from the fane let me have the pourtrait of my Louisa,
simple, unadorned, Caecilia-like, breathing harmony and inspiring love. I
recollect some lines addressed to the celebrated artist we are speaking of, by
a husband as instructions for the pourtrait of his wife, which, till Arundel
supplies you with better, may serve the present purpose, with the simple
transposition of a name -- Remney, thy chastest tints select to trace
The matron beauties of Louisa's face,
Dip thy bright pencil in caerulean dies,
And animate the canvass with her eyes;
Paint, if thou can, my kiss upon her cheek,
Give her a voice and bid the pourtrait speak;
Catch her dear image from a husband's heart,
And draw her pure and faultless as thy art.
To confess the truth to you, I had once begun to think that there was no such
thing as love in my nature: I had been often flattered by young men and
sometimes pleased, but I never liked any one well enough to suffer pain for his
sake; no admirer ever broke my rest by night, or spoiled one meal in the day by
over-occupation of my thoughts: now Mortlake on the contrary absolutely starved
me into a liking for him; a wild cat would have been tamed by the discipline he
gave me; I should have died of mere inanition in a few days, if I had not made
him sensible of my case: but how to do this has been the task; for the creature
has none of that forward intuition, which many of our fashionable sparks have
in such prematurity, that they pretend to spy out a lady's malady before she
sickens: he is so humble, so diffident of his own skill, that I despaired of
making him even understand the symptoms; how then, my dear Louisa, could I
expect a cure?

Some days went over my head before I could fairly talk down this same empty
title of mine, which stood like a proud porter at the door of his lips and
never let a word make its passage, that did not pay the tax which form and
ceremony exact: at last with much pains and labor I got a tack to my title,
and he began occasionally to say -- Dear Lady Jane: on that hint I spoke, and I
kept more than pace with his familiarity by repaying him with -- My dear Mr.
Mortlake.

I had a kind of commission going on at the parsonage, and we held frequent
councils there in affairs of taste; we rambled together all over the garden,
though it was not always to superintend the works that we went thither;
sometimes the boat, instead of carrying us across the stream, wafted us down to
new scenes, where the prospect tempted us to moor our vessel and make
excursions into the country; here our talk became tender and confidential; we
interchanged the stories of our lives, which, though not marked with
extraordinary incidents, drew our hearts nearer to each other, and began to
throw reserve aside: wherever shade and solitude invited us to a temporary
repose, I was commodiously weary and we sat down together to rest ourselves:
nature has a thousand modest methods of explaining herself in these interesting
situations; the veriest novice in love will fall upon them instinctively, and
there wants no comment to the language of the eyes: certain it is we lost no
ground by these baiting-places, and it is my opinion we should have made a
tedious journey of it without them.

I am now coming to the consecrated spot, where your future temple is to arise;
there is a hanging grove, which flanks the current of the silver Medway; here
the bank is steep and lofty, and there is a kind of rough alcove shaped out of
the cliff, wherein is a matted bench, which some of Arundel's predecessors have
maliciously embowered with flowering shrubs, which so invitingly surround it as
to make it a perfect love-trap. From this very seat your Arundel, I make no
doubt, was returning, when we surprised him within a few yards of it, though we
did not at that time discover it; but as he has not yet put up a board in the
suburban style to warn unwary intruders against men-traps and pits, which the
foot of curiosity may fall into, poor Mortlake and myself, as any other
undesigning souls might have done, wandered heedlessly into the midst of it,
thinking no harm, and behold there we were caught! The river glided silently at
our feet, the breeze wafted odours and the birds chaunted their own festive
hymeneals around us.

This is a delicious retreat, said Mortlake, you seem weary with your walk; the
sun is hot, will you rest yourself in this shady seat? -- I saw my danger, but
I am of a family, you know, not much given to fear, so I accepted the
challenge, and entered in nothing doubting: I sat down on the matted bench,
whilst Mortlake respectfully continued on his feet; 'twas an awkward
arrangement, and methought we did not converse with ease in our different
attitudes; it was selfish withal, so I invited him to sit down beside me; now
this spiteful bench was rather stinted in its measure for two sitters, unless
they were very close friends indeed; in making room for him we were tumbled
together I know not how, and I saw his cheeks suffused with blushes: to divert
his embarassment, and perhaps in some degree to relieve my own, I began with an
affected air of indifference to start a conversation about his affairs at the
parsonage; they seemed to have slipped his memory, I am not sure he just then
knew whereabouts the parsonage stood: I talked about the disposal of the
furniture, which he had referred to my taste, and began to fit the chambers one
by one; I might as well have talked to him of the chambers of King Solomon, his
ideas could not stir a step beyond the matted bench.

Why you are lost, my friend, cried I; What are you meditating upon? He sighed
and turned his eyes fondly upon me. I had my answer without the cost of a word.
Ah, Mortlake, said I, you have something at your heart, which you will not
confide to me. -- It is not fit I should, he replied: send me for ever from
your sight, but pity me and forgive. -- He was silent; his agitation affected
me, it communicated itself to my heart, I could not speak to him: he rose from
his seat, and seemed hesitating if he should not leave me; I gave him a look,
'twas not a discouraging one, and he sat down once more by my side -- You do
not treat me with your natural sincerity, I said, you do not hold me worthy of
your thoughts. -- Ah, Madam, he replied, the thoughts I entertain of your
Ladyship are such as my tongue cannot find words expressive enough to give
utterance to; I know too well my own unworthiness to discourse on such a
subject, and I respect your delicacy too much to attempt it; meditation,
however, is a privilege the humblest of mankind may enjoy, and though my looks
may too visibly betray what passes in my heart, yet I hope you will not think I
transgress against respect, whilst I adore at humble distance and abstain from
words.

If you only flatter me with your eyes, I answered, such flattery will not be
serious to either of us; but if your heart approves of me, I trust you do not
think me proud, mercenary or ambitious. Of these bad qualities I hope I have
acquitted myself in part at least, to your conviction, for Sir Adam Crichton is
extremely rich, and I am very poor; he is noble withal as far as birth can
ennoble him: Do you think then my ambition aspires yet higher? You think
rightly; it aspires to character, to understanding, to the true affections of a
virtuous heart, on which I may repose my happiness; and that once found, what
is the world to me? -- Loveliest and best of all Heaven's works! he rapturously
exclaimed, and dropping on his knee clasped both my hands in his; Oh pardon me,
he cried, I know not what I do; my passion is my master; you are too noble to
despise an humble creature at your feet, who doats upon you even to
distraction. -- Here his voice faultered, his head dropped upon my knees, he hid
his face between my hands and I felt the tears gushing from his eyes. -- Rise,
rise! said I, and meet a heart as fond, as tender as your own. -- Oh Heaven! he
exclaimed, and falling into my arms, which were opened to enfold him, we sealed
our faith with an embrace, which love inspired and honor sanctified. -- Yes, my
Louisa, these were joys indeed; even now I feel the throbbing tumult at my
heart; Silence and Solitude, the friends of Love, were all around us;
Dissimulation, Avarice, Ambition dared not to profane the hallowed spot. Come
then, come hither with thine Arundel, here interchange your vows, and on the
twice-consecrated ground erect the altar of connubial Love!

And now have I not obeyed the instructions in your last interesting letter?
Your commands have precipitated my advances; but let me tell you with what joy
I see your prospect brighten, as your father relents; the courage, truth and
generosity of Arundel must triumph at last; may your next meeting be speedy and
propitious! Should a happy reconciliation take place, of which I have some
joyous presentiments, call to mind our mutual engagement to be present at each
other's marriage; fulfill your promise, if it be possible, and grace your humble
friend upon her nuptials: if form will not allow of your being Arundel's guest,
we have an apartment at the parsonage, which I flatter myself you would not be
displeased with. Am I quite romantic to build any hopes upon this wished-for
favor? Heaven grant I may be speedily called upon to repay it! Your destiny, my
lovely friend, will then devote you to a station, splendid as affluence can
make it, where you will have room to exercise the generous virtues you possess:
it would afford me unspeakable delight to have you take a view of these
enhanting scenes, which long to hail you as their mistress. Oh! that your
father would indeed relent. How happy we might be! we should then live within
the horizon of each other's prospect, you, as becomes you, in a lofty palace,
we in a private mansion, decorated by your bounty, and reflecting cheerfulness
and grateful smiles upon our benefactors.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXXIV. Arundel to Charles Mortlake.
London.
THOUGH Lord S. will be the bearer of this, who will give you the particulars
of what has passed since the date of my last letter to my uncle, I cannot
excuse myself from writing to you, as it is probable I may be detained in town
some days to come, and I have something more to say than can well be conveyed
by word of mouth.

My return to England was retarded by the anxious desire I had to wait the
event of Sir George Revel's wounds: I thought his case without hope, but I have
now left him in a promising way to find his cure from the hand of time and the
great skill of Mr. L. who has consented to stay with him some time longer.

By one of the most extraordinary incidents chance ever produced (if indeed it
ought to be ascribed to chance) it so happened that the house in the wood, to
which he was conveyed from the ground we engaged on, was the very house, to
which that virtuous exile Lady G. had retired. I have not seen her nor had any
correspondence with her by letter, but I learn from Sir John Macarthy More,
that an old lady, the widow of a certain Baron Polberg, who was an intimate of
her father's, is the present owner of that house and a small estate, which lies
about it: with this lady she has kept up an occasional correspondence and done
her many friendly offices since the death of the Baron; to this retirement she
betook herself in her distress, and with this old lady she boards, living in
the strictest privacy, and totally sequestered from all other society.

When Sir George Revel was brought in wounded and expiring, she generously
exerted herself for his relief, and, superior to all motives of resentment,
furnished him with every thing her care and assiduity could contribute toward
his comfort and accommodation. It is to the credit of human nature that Sir
George was not insensible to these acts of benignity, and in token of his
repentance seized the first moments in his power for dictating a full
recantation of the charge he had laid against her; this he addressed to Lady
Louisa, and transmitted to me by the hands of Sir John Macarthy More,
accompanied with a note, of which the following is a copy.

Sir George Revel transmits to Mr. Arundel a paper addressed to Lady Louisa G.
which he desires him to peruse for his own satisfaction before he presents it
to that lady; he hopes this acknowledgment, with the pain and danger he is now
suffering, will atone for all injuries.


With this packet Sir John delivered me a verbal message from Lady G. desiring
me to hasten my return to England, and assuring me every thing in her power
should be done for the recovery of Sir George Revel; having made a suitable
reply to this message, and written an answer to Sir George's note, Lord S. and
I set out on our return.

Upon our arrival in London Lord S. was so good as to call upon Lord G. to
explain to him the purport of the paper I was charged with from Sir George
Revel, and to know from his Lordship if I was to have the honor of delivering
this paper to Lady Louisa with my own hands, or not. Lord G. said he could
hardly suppose a visit in his house would be very agreeable to me: to which my
friend replied, that as the whole of a very infamous proceeding against me
jointly with Lady G. was now laid open, to his Lordship's full and perfect
satisfaction, he must take the liberty to remark, it was but reasonable for me
to expect some such acknowledgment on his part, might assure me of his
suspicions being done away, and quiet my mind on a subject, which had exposed
me to so much unmerited danger and disturbance. Lord G. very readily admitted
that such an acknowledgment was due to me, and that if I required it as an act
of justice, as such he could have no objection to comply with it; but he
doubted if Lady Louisa was well enough to leave her chamber. An hour was then
appointed for my coming, and Lord S. returned to me with this report.

I was punctual to the time, and was immediately admitted to his Lordship; who
received me courteously, but with a good deal of embarassment in his manner. He
was alone, and apologized for Lady Louisa, who was too ill to leave her
chamber. I delivered Sir George Revel's packet into his hands, telling him it
had been sent to me under a flying seal, and showing him Sir George's note,
wherein he desires me to peruse it, and deliver it to its address. He was
pleased to say, that such a deposition to the truth could not fail to be
considered by him as a full and complete exculpation of the parties, whom that
unhappy man had so unjustly accused. It was a foul transaction, of which he
should say the less, as the guilty person had so dearly atoned for it. With
respect to his Lady's conduct, he confessed that her hasty escape out of
England, and the secrecy she observed on that occasion, had been staggering
circumstances in his opinion; and he owned it put his credulity to some stretch
to believe that the choice of a spot so near her residence, and the conveying
the wounded man to the very house itself, were merely the effects of chance. --
In answer to this, I assured his Lordship in the most solemn manner, that I was
never once consulted in the choice of the ground, which was pointed out to Lord
S. by Sir George's second, who was a foreign officer, and well acquainted with
the country; that for my own part, I had not the most distant guess at the
place Lady G. had chosen for her residence, before this event happened; and
that neither myself, nor Lord S. on my behalf, had ever seen Lady G. entered
her house, or corresponded with her, since my leaving England till the present
moment; and though the incident he alluded to was indeed a very extraordinary
one, yet I must observe to his Lordship, that Providence oftentimes takes means
as extraordinary for the vindication of innocence and the detection of guilt.
In this light I regarded the meeting of Sir George Revel and his much-injured
Lady, whose humanity, extending itself even to her worst enemy in his distress,
wrought a happy change in that enemy's heart, by turning it to repentance, and
drawing forth a confession most seasonable for her justification and his
Lordship's repose. Sensible that no one, who had so abused your confidence, I
added, could with any face aspire to your Lordship's alliance, Sir George Revel
has very properly understood his situation, by withdrawing all pretensions to
Lady Louisa, which is the purport of the letter I have had the honor to deliver
to you.

Mr. Arundel, he replied, whatever terms you and I may be upon now or
hereafter, yet on this occasion I desire you will once for all receive my full
and unreserved declaration, that I give perfect credit to your veracity and
honor; and I rejoice withal that you are returned in safety and unhurt. -- For
this I thanked him, and declared myself perfectly satisfied. -- He then
demanded if I was leaving town; and upon my saying I had some business at the
Admiralty on my uncle's account, which might detain me a day or two, he was
pleased to answer, that he was glad of it, and hoped it was a promotion to a
flag, which his gallant services so richly merited. This was also very
courteous on his part, and I expressed my sensibility for his kind expressions,
informing him that I had strong reason to believe that promotion would take
place.

Lord G. now took up the packet I had delivered to him, and observed, that as
I had apprized him of the contents, the matter did not so press but that I
might make my own opportunity for giving them in person to Lady Louisa; and to
confess the truth, says he, I have used a little deceit in not informing her of
this meeting, fearing that her spirits were not in a proper state to undergo
the agitation it would give her: I will therefore inform her of your arrival,
and she shall let you know when she is prepared to expect you.

I requested him not to return Sir George's letter to me, but to give it to
Lady Louisa in my absence, as it would be a more delicate time for her to
peruse it at her leisure; and I gave him my most grateful thanks for the
confidence he reposed in me, by allowing me to hope for the happiness of paying
my respects to Lady Louisa in person.

He very handsomely replied, that he did not think he should ever repent of any
confidence he reposed in me, having received so strong a proof of my very
honorable conduct toward his daughter, in an affair which she had confided to
him, and for which he held himself very seriously indebted to me.

I stared with astonishment at these words, which seemed so evidently to apply
to a certain proposal I thought myself bound to decline, but which I could not
have believed Lady Louisa would have had the resolution to disclose to her
father; and I own I augured very inauspiciously from her so doing; but the
behavior of Lord G. was either very artificial, or most extremely encouraging,
for we parted with smiles of complacency, and a promise on his side that I
should very soon hear from Lady Louisa when she would receive my visit.

What can this mysterious behavior portend? What am I to expect from this
visit, sanctioned as it is by the authority of her father? Has my declining
her proposal been so misunderstood in its motives, as to have excited her
resentment against me, and brought her to despise me for my want of spirit?
That would be hard indeed; I ought not so to judge of her; and yet how else can
I account for her disclosing it to her father, but as a peace offering on her
part, and a thorough renunciation of me for ever? Oh! Charles, my heart is
tortured by suspense: I am in agony till my fate is decided.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXXV. Sir George Revel to Lady Louisa G.
PROVIDENCE having so directed it, that I should owe the little hopes I have of
life to the humanity of the person whom I have most cruelly injured, I eagerly
embrace the first return of my senses to exonerate a guilty conscience, by
confessing to your Ladyship, that the stories which you have heard reported
from the evidence of Lady G.'s servant, are falsehoods, fabricated for the
disingenuous purpose of detaching your affections from my late antagonist Mr.
Arundel, to whose innocence this acknowledgment is no less due than to your
noble and virtuous parent.

This declaration is entirely voluntary, and I freely made it on the field
before we began the duel, which has justly proved so fatal to me. Mr. Arundel
would then have acquitted me, if I would have consented to what I am now doing;
but jealousy and resentment had hardened my heart against a rival happier and
more worthy than myself, and my passion would not suffer me to listen to the
plea of justice: presuming on my skill, I meditated to destroy him, but the
hand of Heaven turned my purpose against myself.

I now lie expiring, as I believe, on the bed which your mother's charity
affords me, with one wound through my body and two others in my breast and arm,
the agony of which is not half so racking as those remorseful horrors that
afflict my mind. Tortured in my exit out of this world, and trembling for my
entrance into the next, those horrors would be insupportable, had not the same
injured excellence, whose hand reaches the cordial to my lips, administered the
like cordial to my soul, by assuring me of her forgiveness.

Lest it should be suspected by any one that Mr. Arundel had a hand in
appointing me to this spot, as knowing it to be the place of Lady G.'s
residence, I do solemnly assure you, that he had no voice in the appointment,
and that the place of our meeting was pitched upon by my second Sir John
Macarthy More, from his knowledge of the spot, and acceded to by the Earl of S.
on the behalf of Mr. Arundel, without any privity or suggestion on his part.

If what seems so impossible to my expectations, should nevertheless come to
pass, and by the favor of Heaven I should in course of time recover from this
deplorable situation, it will be long before I shall revisit England. Many
years must elapse and long absence from the scene of my disgrace must
intervene, before the wounds of my mind can be healed after these in my body
have found their cure: banish from your memory therefore the very name of
Revel, and give your father my Lord G. to understand that the defamer of his
wife is too sensible of his own demerit, whatever he may think of it, ever to
aspire to be the husband of his daughter; and though the ungenerous wound I
once gave Arundel is, I trust, atoned for by these I have received from him,
yet the injury I have attempted to do him in your thoughts, and the justice due
to a virtuous and elevated character, compel me in conscience to declare, that
the man whom I had devoted to death, as being loved by you, is of all men
living the only one who truly merits that most happy distinction.

I dictate this to my friend Sir John Macarthy More, and sign it with my own
hand in presence of your noble mother and Mr. L. who is known to you; a very
honorable man, to whose skill and humanity I am infinitely indebted: they are
privy to the contents, and will witness the authenticity of them. Sir John will
carry it to Mr. Arundel, who is now at --, and has remained there ever since
our affair, without one visit to this house. To him it will be communicated,
and by him as I hope delivered into your hands. -- May Heaven in him reward and
bless you!

Farewell for ever.
LETTER LXXXVI. Lady Jane S. to Lady Louisa G.
I SHALL now give my dear Louisa the conclusion of my life, character and
behavior; then recommend myself to your prayers and prepare for execution.

My brother came down to Arundel-house this day before dinner. If I was writing
a novel and not a history, I would give you a pathetic description of our
meeting and embraces, in which I would float my page with a flood of tears,
that should almost threaten a second deluge.

Though my lover and I had come to a perfect understanding with each other, I
had reserved myself for the arrival of my brother, without letting the old
Captain into the secret; and as for his discovering it by the virtue of his own
sagacity in love affairs, there was not a chance on the tables; I never saw a
creature so commodiously blind, deaf and incurious in my days.

Some sisters, in my dependant situation, would have been in a fine puzzle how
to break a matter of this sort to some brothers, on whom their dependence
rested; but I had no such difficulties to encounter with mine, and if I had,
still I should have taken no other method than I did, which was naturally to
tell him in a very few words that Mortlake and I had agreed upon a marriage.

Very well, said my brother, you have done right to please yourself; and upon
my soul, Jane, I give you credit for a good eye; for I don't know a finer young
fellow in all England.

Pooh! replied I, don't be ridiculous; do you think I choose by the eye? -- No,
no, returned he, Mortlake is a very honest, worthy lad withal, and one I shall
be proud to call my brother-in-law. May I die, if I think you could have chosen
better in the three kingdoms; so there is an end of that; the next thing is to
set you up in the world with something to live comfortably upon, and we must go
to the Spanish dollars for that; the Dons, many thanks to 'em, have provided
you with a dower.

Hold there, my dear generous brother, I replied, you and I shall not agree
upon that bargain; I must not forget, if you do, that the Earl of S. will
require more to maintain him than the parson's wife, and such I intend to be to
all intents and purposes. -- But the brats, said he, must have something to
maintain them, and there'll be no scarcity of them, Jane; I cannot carry them
all out to sea with me. -- Well, replied I, the girls cannot be poorer than
their mother was, and if the boys are but as brave as their uncle, they will
fight through the world I warrant 'em. -- Aye, and conquer it too I hope, he
cried, before they have done with it: but all this is nothing to the purpose; I
shall say no more to you upon this subject; brother Mortlake and I will settle
that affair between ourselves. You have nothing to do but marry as fast as you
can, for Captain Arundel and I shall be brushing out again very speedily, and I
would fain see my dear sister safe moored before I loose the foresail. -- So
saying, the noble youth tenderly embraced me, when before my heart could give a
vent to the grateful sensations with which it glowed, the call of the old
Captain broke up our conference, and summoned us to the dinner-room.

There was something so pointedly engaging in the manner with which my brother
took Mortlake by the hand, when he joined the company, that it told more to my
feelings than a volume of fine speeches could have expressed: I remarked the
effect it had upon Mortlake, and I am sure his feelings sympathized with mine;
joy glistened in his eyes; all passed in silence, but where is the poet that can
find words for what that silence uttered? Oh! how I detest a chattering
fine-spoken sentamentalist: give me the mute eloquence of the heart; that only
is the genuine language of love and benevolence.

After dinner Lady Treville, knowing that all things were well understood
between my brother and me from a hint I had given her, and loving at her heart,
as you well know, a little good-natured mischief, began to question Mortlake
how his preparations went on at the parsonage, observing that it was much too
good a house for a single man, and that it would now behove him to look out for
a wife. -- This was hint enough for my brother, who immediately closed in with
it by saying he would answer for Mortlake that he would take a wife of his
recommending; upon which the old Captain loudly declared that he would venture
a wager he named the lady, for that it could be none other than the gunner's
daughter, which it seems is a cant phrase for a dozen lashes at the gun.

It is what I should have well deserved for my presumption, said this amiable
young man, (his face covered with blushes) if ambition had any share in my
affections, or if I could have been daring enough to have grounded a hope upon
that charming condescension, which though I could not choose but admire, I was
not so bold as to approach. -- What is the man talking about? cried the rough
old seaman, I cannot make out a word that he is saying. -- I don't know how you
should, said Lady Treville, for he is talking about love. -- No, no, answered
he, that hook will not hold, my Lady; I know too much of love to believe that;
love is a damned noisy, quarrelsome companion; the Doctor there is as meek as
Moses; love is all talk and bluster, storm and tempest; I have been in love
myself, and it always sets me a swearing, because, do you see, it throws me out
of my course and puts me upon the other tack; now Mortlake keeps on his way fair
and easy; nobody shall make me believe he is in love. -- Perhaps some of the
company may be of a different opinion, replied she; for instance there is Lady
Jane; I Will refer the case to her. -- With all my heart, cried the captain, Lady
Jane knows better things; I Will be judged by Lady Jane. -- Agreed, answered the
good lady, who so fit to decide upon Mortlake's passion, as she who inspires
it? -- Come, my dear Jane, added my brother, give sentence upon your friend. --
My sentence, I replied, will be passed upon myself, for if he does not love, I
am of all women most miserable. -- Mortlake was sitting next to me; he sprung
from his chair, seized my hand, and pressing it to his lips with an animation
that even startled me -- Then I take Heaven to witness, he cried, that my soul
doats upon you; my heart beats with love that cannot be uttered; I do but live
whilst you approve of me, and every moment of my life shall be devoted to
gratitude and love for the unspeakable blessing you have bestowed upon me. --
That Is right, cried the hearty old Commander, the man's as mad as a March-hare,
I give it up, I give it up; I don't say but what he is in love now, but I will
stand to what I did say, that he was not in love before. Egad! Mortlake, thou
art an honest fellow, a lad after my own heart; if you could be in love with
that charming creature and in your senses at the same time, I would not own you
for a man: I told you all I knew what love was, and here is my lady would have
persuaded me out of my senses: by the Lord Harry but I Will make the dollars jump
for this! My dear, dear boy, he cried, addressing himself to my brother, I hope
all this is to your good liking. -- To my very heart's content, replied my
beloved brother. -- Then about she goes! roared out the old blade, a health to
the happy couple! Harkye, Mortlake, do it justice, and I will stock your
cellars for your life to come. Damn it, Archey! you and I took the Dons in the
nick of time; aye, boy, and we'll have another brush amongst them; thank God,
we need not go far to find an enemy. Come, wheel it about! (taking a full glass
in his hand) my dear, dear Lady Jane, you must let me love you like a child of
my own, like my own dear Archibald, like my own boy Frank, (why the plague is
not he here at this moment?) May all happiness befall you! may you be blessed in
the arms of an honest man! for you are a noble, generous, lovely girl, and I
adore your spirit for throwing off that pigtailed puppy with his pouch full of
money, and taking this worthy fellow with a round curl and a black coat, but a
heart that is worth all the mines of Peru.

This is but coarse stuff, you will say, but it is honest, and has served to
hurry me out of all my embarrassments, and now I have nothing to encounter but
the eyes of Arundel -- Oh send him to us, with the fires of love and joy
sparkling in their brightest luster! but if you would complete the wish, come
with him yourself, then where in all the world shall there be found a circle of
such happiness as our's?

The grotto awaits you: Mortlake and I do not fail to visit it, and this
evening I rambled thither by myself; I had not long reposed myself in this
enchanted spot, before the selfsame sybil, who accosted me under the tree of
Fergus, visited me again in this distant solitude, and with somewhat more of
the poetic fury in her voice than the cold region of the North had inspired her
with, chanted forth the following stanzas: --

Fast by the Medway's silver tide,
Beneath the woodbine's fragrant shade,
Love's roving god by chance espied
A rustic grot, and thus he said --
" Hail, Grot! so silent and so sweet,
" Impending over this glassy stream,
" Be henceforth thou my favored seat,
" Propitious to the lover's theme!
" Here if the modest youth assays
" With faultering lips to move the fair,
" In the cold damsel's heart I Will raise
" A pity that shall grant his prayer.
" Here if the stubborn maid shall spy
" The melting tear his cheek bedew,
" I Will launch an arrow from his eye
" Shall pierce her proud heart through and through.
" Then wild and raging all amain
" With her tormented bosom's smart,
" Save me, she will cry, oh, ease my pain,
" And draw this arrow from my heart!
" He with fond arms encircling round
" Shall press her to his faithful breast,
" And the same hand, that gave the wound,
" Shall lull its agonies to rest."
LETTER LXXXVII. Charles Mortlake to Arundel.
THAT partiality, which you pronounced upon in its infancy, has exceeded your
warmest predictions: Lady Jane has verified the character you gave her, and
those attentions, which I thought could only be the effect of a little female
vanity, I now perceive sprung sincerely from the heart. Could I suppose that so
much beauty, youth and vivacity, such high pretensions as she derives from
rank, family and condition, could ever condescend to the humble lot in which I
am placed, and bid adieu to all the pleasures, all the pride of life? I must
have had an unreasonable share of presumption to have thought of her any
otherwise than I did: but after you and her brother had left us I confess to
you there were openings enough in her behavior to have inspired a man of less
diffidence than myself with very flattering hopes. Our walks were longer and
more frequent, she was industrious to find out the most solitary places, and
our conversations became more serious and particular: for a time indeed our
mutual anxiety in your absence allowed of no reflections but upon the dreadful
errand you were engaged in; we did little else but mingle sighs and sorrows,
and neither party was qualified to act the comforter to the other: as soon as
the joyful tidings of your safety arrived, though qualified with some little
terrors for her beloved brother, our spirits revived, and as this was followed
by further accounts, which set her mind at ease about Lord S. our happiness was
without alloy.

Anxious as I was to know my fate, I am satisfied I should never have found
resolution to declare myself, had not her encouragement, conspiring with a most
tempting opportunity, in a manner extorted it from me. It was then very
awkwardly brought out with so much trepidation and terror, that it is my wonder
how she could understand me; but her generous heart disdained to make sport of
my weakness, and she had too much pity for my painful struggles to indulge
herself in prolonging them: in short, my dear Arundel, I am confounded by my
own good fortune, and scarce believe the blessing I am possessed of: the gallant
Earl of S. has ratified his sister's humble choice with a liberality, which we
found it difficult to reduce within the bounds of moderation; Lady Jane is
surely the most disinterested as well as the most amiable of Heaven's
creatures; she says my income is affluence she has never been accustomed to;
she has laid down a plan for our domestic economy with the greatest precision,
and formed her little establishment of servants upon the scale of our moderate
circumstances with every attention to our future comfort and content. She has
superintended every thing that is going forward at the parsonage, and in
furnishing and fitting the house, as well as in the directions she has given
about the works you put in motion without doors, you will find she has been a
frugal manager of your unlimited generosity. The library is now completed and
a charming room it is; there are four excellent bed-chambers, and two with
little dressing-rooms and closets attached to them, all furnished with the
greatest neatness and simplicity. Her heart is set upon seeing Lady Louisa at
our wedding, which only waits your return to be fixed for an early day. I am
afraid to say how much I wish to see you, lest I should provoke your friendship
to comply with my desires at the expense of engagements more important and more
interesting to your own immediate happiness.

Oh my dear Arundel, when shall I hear that Heaven has turned the heart of that
obdurate father, who is now the sole bar to your happiness with your lovely
Lady Louisa? Is there no hope of her complying with the wishes of Lady Jane?
Alas! I fear it is in vain to think of it. Time and patience will bring all
things round; Providence has done wonders in your favor already; continue to
deserve its bounty, and there is no doubt but you will be blessed.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXXVIII. Arundel to Charles Mortlake.
SOON after I had dispatched my last letter, which left me in the utmost
anxiety of mind, I was surprised with a visit from Lord G. I was alone and had
fallen into such a gloomy train of thoughts, that I could not meet the sight of
him without the greatest trepidation, possessed as I was with the idea that he
was come to pronounce sentence upon my hopes; but when he drew forth a letter
from his pocket, and told me he was commissioned by Lady Louisa to present it
to me, methought I should have fainted at the instant; it seemed as if the
smile with which he delivered it was put on by malice to give a keener insult
to my feelings, and holding it unopened in my trembling hand -- My Lord, said
I, if this letter, which you have given me, contains the fatal sentence, which
must extinguish the faint hope that hardly glimmers in my breast, I do beseech
you let me hear it from your lips, and spare me the agony of a perusal, which
will throw me into such a situation, as the bitterest enemy could not
contemplate without pain and pity: if my offenses against you and my
presumption in aspiring to Lady Louisa's favor, deserve the punishment of a
contemptuous refusal, for the honor of humanity do not aggravate that
punishment by taking on yourself the office of a tormentor, and feasting your
eyes with the agonies you inflict. -- Upon my word, Mr. Arundel, replied he, I
am not privy to the contents of that letter; I have simply the honor of being
her Ladyship's messenger; but I am free to confess to you that it is an honor I
should have declined, if I could have supposed myself the bearer of any
unwelcome news to you, for I come hither with a heart very thoroughly disposed
to make peace, and if you will break the seal of my commission, I shall be very
much mistaken if it does not tally with my wishes. -- I opened the letter, and
immediately cast my eye upon these transporting words --

Welcome, my beloved Arundel! I welcome you with a transport of joy which I am
privileged to express to you. My father, who is your convert, will be the
bearer of this; you triumph every way, and my fond heart is the easiest of your
conquests; despise it not however, but come to me without delay; I die to see
you; Heaven be praised for its protection of my Arundel! Again I tell you come
to me, come without delay, or you do not know what it is to love like your

LOUISA.


My transport overpowered me; I could not speak; I could not restrain my tears;
I threw myself at the feet of Lord G. He raised me in his arms and tenderly
embraced me -- Thus let us seal our peace for ever, he cried; henceforth let us
be son and father! Louisa is your own. -- He would scarce suffer me to make him
any reply, much less to endeavor at expressing all my sensibility on this
transporting occasion: I dare say, he cried, Louisa's letter is a very eager
summons, and you are no less eager to obey it; and yet I am disposed to
trespass on your attention for a very few minutes, whilst I account to you for
the sudden revolution which you discover in my mind toward you; and for this
you are in the first place indebted to Louisa's honorable sincerity, in
confessing to me that she had gone the length of offering you a clandestine
marriage; I own to you this was a step, which I never apprehended she would
take, having passed her word to me against it, but when no other means appeared
to her of preventing your duel with Sir George Revel, in the extremity of her
distress no wonder if duty, and even honor itself, could not hold out against a
superior passion, and if any means appeared lawful to preserve a life so dear
and so invaluable to her: I therefore acquit her, but at the same time I very
highly respect you for the noble manner in which you declined her proposal; but
when I further understood that Sir George Revel had revoked his charge, of
which I was first informed by Lord S. and read the letter you brought to
Louisa, which by so full a confession on his part entirely does away every
shadow of suspicion that could remain in my mind, with what justice could I any
longer hold out against you, or pretend to exercise that right in Louisa to
your disfavor, which I owed singly to your honor and forbearance? No, Mr.
Arundel, even though you had been without excuse for your public opposition to
me, which to my shame I must own is not the case, yet under such circumstances,
injured as you had been by the falsest and basest accusations, assaulted both
in life and reputation by an assassin whom I blush to think was fostered and
adopted by me, unexceptionable in your family, fortune and character, master of
the affections of my daughter in the most honorable manner, and backed with the
most zealous approbation of her mother, what sort of man, or rather monster,
must I have been to have opposed myself to such pretensions? You have therefore
free and unreserved access to my Louisa; write to her, visit her, pursue the
dictates of your affection; I cannot doubt your honor, my confidence in you is
established upon proof, and, as you are in absolute possession of the
daughter's heart, I trust you will not refuse to be received into the father's.

No, my Lord, I replied, it is a tender which I accept with gratitude and will
endeavor to deserve, but I am so confounded with my good fortune, that I am in
the state of a man, who is hastily awakened from a dream, the impression of
which he cannot speedily shake off, nor recover senses enough to discern the
objects that surround him; I scarce believe my happiness to be real.

Trust me, Arundel, he replied, you will find no friend so zealous as a
converted enemy; and now he began to make enquiries about my stay in town, and
whether I would accompany Lady Louisa and him to Spring Grove. To this I
answered, that I must go down to Arundel House, to take leave of my uncle John
and Lord S. who would soon be ordered out to sea, and who were there waiting
with Lady Jane S. and old Lady Treville, in hourly expectation of my return.

His Lordship admitted the sufficiency of my plea, and with a kind of slyness
in his manner, asked what was to become of Lady Jane when her brother went to
sea: I smiled at this and said, I doubted if I was at liberty to answer his
question. Come, come, said he, your secret is not worth keeping; she is going
to be married out of hand to your friend Mortlake; you think yourself mighty
cunning, but for once I am beforehand with you. -- Then said I, Lady Louisa is
a tell-tale; I have just received a letter from Mortlake, and she, I suppose,
has had one from the bride-elect. -- She has so, replied he, and a strong
demand upon her at the same time, on the score of an old promise, to be present
at her wedding; but how is this to be performed? A country parsonage is seldom
very capacious, though I am told you have made this quite elegant; and as for
Arundel House, I suppose you would not admit Louisa and me into that for the
world. -- My Lord, answered I, you are determined to overpower me with your
kindness and condescension. -- I would willingly try if you will have better
luck in your own house, Arundel, than you have had in mine: hitherto I think
you are indebted to me for nothing but assassinations, duels, and calumnious
charges: let us see if we cannot repair these miscarriages by a peaceful
meeting, and a pleasant party at Arundel House: make me known to your gallant
uncle; let me be acquainted with this lucky friend of yours, who is carrying
off one of the finest and liveliest young women of the age in the face of all
the fine men of rank, fortune, and fashion, who would never think of taking
orders to make their way with a handsome girl of high distinction. Who in the
name of wonder would suppose the church to be the road to preferrment of that
sort?

I cannot wonder at your Lordship's question, as you are not acquainted with
the person and qualities of my friend Mortlake, and perhaps take measure of
Lady Jane by the general standard of her contemporaries: but if you will fulfill
the hopes you have given me, by honoring me with your company at Arundel House,
I do not doubt but a very short acquaintance with the object of her Ladyship's
choice will convince you of the superior good sense she has shown in making it.

Well, says he, let us go and try our joint interest with Louisa, to persuade
her to this journey; if she acquits herself well as bridemaid, it will be a
good kind of rehearsal before she performs as principal; but remember I
condition for the violin; give me music and I will not interrupt your love;
feed my ears well and I shall not quarrel with you for the rest of your
entertainment; you are but a young housekeeper, and I condition against being
feted; postpone that till Louisa presides at your table, and then we shall know
whom to blame, if the establishment is not according to form and order.

Now therefore, Mortlake, announce this to your soul's better part, tell it to
the whole worthy circle, let them share in the felicity of your friend; I shall
follow this letter close at the heels, yet I write, because even moments should
be anticipated, when they are charged with tidings of such joy. Whisper my good
housekeeper in the ear, and let her set her brooms and mops in motion; press
forward the works at your own house with vigor, and incense the chamber that
is destined to receive you to the arms of your beloved. -- Oh Charles, Charles!
what will become of you and me! can we outlive our transports? We have not
lowered our constitutions to that cold blood, which the stale hackneyed
sensualists of this voluptuous town reduce themselves to; we never wasted
nature's genial fount, never unstrung her bow, nor to the loathed embrace of
harlots prostituted our manly vigor; even our hearts will offer up their
maiden oblations to the respective goddesses of their idolatry: we never loved
before; hereafter we shall never cease to love.

I shall send down express the best Pianoforte I can purchase; I am determined
also to hang the late Lady Arundel's dressing room and bedchamber afresh for
my divine Louisa to repose in; for this purpose I shall dispatch a small
squadron of nimble artists from hence, who will decorate it in a trice; the
bed, to which those heavenly, those enchanting limbs are to be committed, shall
not be quite unworthy of the jewel it encases; I will keep it sacred and
untouched till she revisits again; I will kneel to it, as before a consecrated
altar, and there I will offer up my prayers to Heaven for blessings multiplied
upon her head. -- Oh, Heaven and Earth! what raptures have I been now
receiving! she loves me, Charles, beyond the power of love to speak of. Lord G.
(for which kind act may my grateful lips ever bless and praise him!) sent me up
alone to her chamber; I found her all impatience, ecstacy and love; she sprung
with open arms to my embrace; passion like here is disdains reserve, a soul so
noble spurns at all the petty forms of coy dissimulation; words had disgraced
her feeling, tears were her better eloquence and transports my more flattering
welcome. How long I held her in my arms, let those, who could have numbered
moments so employed, declare; I cannot guess at time, in which my senses were
entranced: upon her unresisting lips I sealed my gratitude, I left my soul. --
At length she murmured out -- Oh, Arundel! no more! support me to my chair: I
bore her in my arms; the nerves of Love are strong as the Nemaean lion's
nerves; I placed her on the seat, then threw myself upon my knees, and with my
arms around her waist supported my almost lifeless charmer, hanging her sweet
head and drooping like a lily. When her spirits had in some degree subsided,
and she began to recover, she drew forth a locket richly set, containing her
own miniature, to which she had affixed a ribband, and began to fasten it round
my neck; I suffered her to complete her work, then clasping her hands and
pressing them with the present they contained to my grateful lips, smothered
them with kisses. -- I now gently solicited to know when I might be blessed with
the divine original. -- This day, this hour, this instant, she replied; but now
contain yourself; be prudent for my sake; if it be possible, I love you but too
well. Come, talk to me of some more quiet subject; but not a word of your
affair beyond sea; my heart cannot bear it; tell me about Mortlake and my
charming Jane; dear girl, how I adore her! There is a heart, my Arundel! I am
sure the object of her choice deserves her; I know he is possessed of every
manly, virtuous, and engaging quality, because he is your chosen friend; I
therefore boldly pronounce him worthy of his happiness; but why do I anticipate
a pleasure I am so soon to enjoy? I am coming down to visit you: shall I be
welcome, Arundel? I think you will not turn me from your doors. -- But I might
ramble thus for ever, and I have already said enough to satisfy you of my
happiness. If I write more I shall be with you before you can have read my
letter through.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXXIX. The Countess to the Earl of G.
AS the solitude, to which your discarded wife has retreated, is by an
extraordinary chance now become known to you, I think that you should also know
the motives for my coming hither.

Whilst our wishes for the disposal of our daughter in marriage were so
opposite to each other, and you suspected me of taking an active part against
Sir George Revel, there appeared to me no step so likely to remove those
suspicions, as totally to seclude myself from all communication with my family.

When I thus broke from the dearest tie in nature, and sacrificed to your
repose the tender affections of a mother, I fondly thought I might escape your
censure, though I did not flatter myself with the hopes of your approbation:
but I was not suffered to remain in quiet oblivion; even in this solitude I was
still to be the mark and butt of malice; a new accusation was started against
me by an unhappy man, who has dearly atoned for his injustice. I took my
accuser into my house covered with wounds, and at the last gasp of life: the
compunctions of a guilty conscience, the terrors of impending death, and
gratitude for my unmerited attentions, conspired to produce that confession,
which I hope has reached your hand, and brought such conviction with it as you
can no longer withstand.

I have now a claim upon your justice for restoring me to my family, from which
you cruelly expelled me, and if this is in your meditation to do, I must
plainly tell you, that so long as you persist in excluding Mr. Arundel, you
exclude me. If I am innocent, can he be guilty? The same atonement is due to
both, and I reject every offer of reconcilement which does not include him.
Husbands have been known to pardon guilty wives, and many have received a
penitent offender into their family again, but pardon is not so readily
extended to the partner of their guilt, and no man lives who would contaminate
his blood by marrying the daughter to the seducer of the mother. Let this then
be the test of my innocence, and your complete persuasion of it: bestow your
daughter upon the man she loves; by one generous act you will give happiness to
your child, bring a blessing on yourself, make a friend of him whom you have
injuriously treated, and heal the wounded heart of a wife, who returns to you
on these conditions, or returns no more.

LETTER XC. The Earl to the Countess of G.
I HAVE received your letter, and you are obeyed: Mr. Arundel has this day
obtained my full consent and approbation for as speedy a marriage with our
daughter as circumstances will admit; his conduct has been, in all respects,
that of a man of perfect honor; and in making this sacrifice of my private
resentments, I have done no more than I ought to do upon conviction of my being
the first aggressor, with this aggravation of the affront I put upon him, that
I then regarded him in the light of a dependant.

I flatter myself you will not doubt that an acknowledgment like this can only
be the result of a strict self-examination, and to this I am now indebted for a
serenity of mind and temper, which I never before experienced.

The savage attack Sir George Revel made upon Mr. Arundel, in consequence of
what passed at Spring Grove, and the unjust grounds of that bloody rencontre,
which took place between them, wherein your reputation was traitorously
attempted, could not fail to open my eyes to the real character of the man whom
I so zealously and blindly abetted. The dreadful chastisement his guilt has
received from the hand of Arundel, the very extraordinary incident of his being
carried at the point of death to your house, and the confession which the
terrors of his situation in that crisis extorted from his conscience, are all
events combined, as it should seem, by the very hand of Heaven, and the
reflections they have awakened in my mind have effectually turned it to the
truth. I now see your innocence, I feel your sufferings, and I detest myself
for the cruel wrongs I have done you. As the character of Sir George Revel
sinks upon the review, that of Arundel rises in my esteem: Can I then refuse my
daughter to such a man, supported too by such an advocate as yourself, and
beloved by Louisa to a degree beyond example? Could I have held out against her
love, against your solicitation, and against his merits, I had been indeed
obdurate: add to this, that such is now his establishment in point of fortune,
reputation and pretensions of all sorts, that I shall be found to have
consulted our daughter's interest in this match not less than her happiness:
his family is of the noblest in the kingdom, and the best recommendation I can
give of my own is, that it has in times past branched from the root of the
Arundels.

All this while here is the gallant Earl of S. his friend and second, who in
point of pedigree would not vail his bonnet to the Bourbons, sees his sister
Lady Jane bestow herself upon a country parson, and applauds her choice: young
Mortlake, Arundel's intimate, is the happy man; he is settled in Arundel's own
parish, who has established him there in a very good living, and fitted up a
parsonage-house for him and Lady Jane, which I hear is one of the most elegant
things upon a moderate scale in all England. This young bride-elect has been
some time with her brother living at Arundel House, and there she commenced her
acquaintance with Mortlake, who has the character of a most amiable and
excellent young man. Louisa and I are to be present at the wedding, which is to
take place in a few days, and we shall be entertained in Mr. Arundel's house:
he is setting out for the country directly, and we shall go down a day or two
before the wedding, and immediately after the ceremony set out for Spring
Grove, where Arundel has promised to accompany us: his uncle John and Lord S.
are to set out at the same time to take command of their ships; and thus we
shall leave the bride and bridegroom to themselves, which I think is very well
planned for their comfort and repose.

I need not attempt to tell you how very much our dear ardent girl is in love
with this engaging young man; you know her disposition well, and can paint it
to yourself: much less can I describe to you her agonies, whilst he was absent
upon that dreadful errand; Heaven forbid I should ever behold her such a
spectacle again! nothing you can conceive will exceed it. Sure no human
creature ever loved as she does. I think two more perfect creatures were never
cast in human mould: I contemplate their forms with wonder and delight, and I
declare to you I find a sympathetic kind of likeness in their features, which
seems to mark them out as destined for each other. It was a transport to behold
them kneeling before me, her hand in his, and both their countenances animated
with joy and gratitude: I blessed them in your name as well as my own; I raised
them and embraced them in my arms; then taking our child by the hand, I desired
Arundel to receive her as a pledge of future friendship, never to cease between
us. I described her to him as she is, a creature formed in the extreme of all
that is generous in nature, ardent in affection and benevolent in soul; I
beseeched of him to guard a spirit so open and defenseless from the dangers of
a crafty and designing world; to cherish her with his love and counsel her with
his understanding. To her I said in few words -- Daughter, I have bestowed you
upon the man of your heart; remember what is due to his honor, to your own, to
mine, to your absent mother's.

In this moment I experienced a new delight, superior to any I had ever known,
the delight of giving happiness to a beloved child. The gratitude of these
young people was a passion, that like their love defies description. And now
have I deserved your pardon? can you withhold from me that pity and forgiveness
you bestowed on Revel? will you not return to me? In the mean time, as you have
made Arundel's marriage a previous condition, I shall expedite it without much
regard to the tardy proceedings of the law. I may promise myself not to be
opposed by Louisa in this, for I think of all Love's votaries she is the
truest. I hope to conclude the affair at Spring Grove in a few days after our
return from the wedding of Lady Jane: in the interim I send this to you by our
faithful old servant Davison, and I pray you to keep him with you, as I am
shocked to reflect how poorly you must be waited upon.

Your virtue, my excellent Louisa, has been tried and purified like gold in the
fire; my unworthiness of so great a blessing has deprived me of many happy
days, but I am at last awakened to an understanding of you and myself. Whilst
the vanity and bustle of office engrossed my worldly thoughts, your modest
unassuming character scarce attracted my attention; a revolution, which I no
longer lament, has put an end to all ambitious pursuits, and left me in a
situation more favorable to reflection: henceforth my pursuits shall be
addressed to worthier objects, and the first of these will be to regain your
good opinion and esteem.

Louisa shall write to you from Arundel House, and send you all particulars. I
send you a letter of credit upon the bank of Mess. Puysieux and Co. at Ostend,
which you will make use of without limitation, as your occasions may require.

I shall be impatient till I hear from you again.

Farewell.
LETTER XCI. Lady Louisa to the Countess of G.
Arundel House.
I AM happy in confirming to my dearest mother the happy tidings which my
father sent by the conveyance of Davison; every thing which has since occurred
convinces me of the entire revolution which his mind has undergone with respect
to you and Mr. Arundel; at the same time nothing can exceed his tenderness and
kindness to me.

We arrived at the place, whence this is dated, yesterday in the forenoon: Mr.
Arundel met us on horseback about three miles from the house, and conducted us
through his grounds and a fine avenue cut through a noble wood by a private
road. This is really a grand place: the park is bold and romantic, the river
quite delightful, and the house far beyond what I expected from the owner's
account of it. It is old and irregular, but very capacious, and contains some
noble apartments, which are more striking to me than all our modern elegance.
My father is in raptures, particularly with a collection of family portraits in
the hall and gallery, many of which are by Vandyke and other capital masters,
which you know are quite his passion.

Nothing ever equalled the respectful and cordial reception Arundel gave my
father; when he met our coach he dismounted from his horse, came up to the
window and welcomed us with the most grateful transports: we presented him our
hands, both which he saluted in the manner so peculiarly his own; my father's
with a filial devotion, mine with a lover's ardour.

Upon our entering the hall he embraced my father in presence of the company,
who had there arranged themselves to receive us: something he said, which I
lost in my hurry of spirits, but I heard the words -- You have made this a
joyful house, my Lord. -- Lady Jane S. Lady Treville, and my ever honored Lord
S. met us in the hall: if I say that I flew into the arms of my beloved Jane, I
scarce exceed the truth; my father seconded me with a gallantry that quite
charmed me -- I ever admired you, Lady Jane, henceforward I adore you, were the
words with which he addressed her. -- To the gallant Earl I whispered in a
murmuring voice -- Oh! my Lord S. my heart is too full to thank you: may Heaven
reward your generous friendship! -- All the world must love Arundel, he
replied; you alone deserve him. -- We were now ushered into a stately old room,
fitted with Norway oak and hung with pictures, where the majestic figure of the
brave John Arundel presented itself to our awe-struck eyes, like one of the
colossal heroes of ancient days, or it might be John of Gaunt himself. As
Arundel was leading me by the hand to present me to him, I protest my knees
knocked together and my heart trembled within me, for his gigantic stature and
martial air, with a tremendous gash across his forehead, which has no hair to
shelter it, would be too terrible to approach, if Nature had not thrown a gleam
of benevolence over his countenance, which seems to say to the pigmies of
creation -- Come near! I will not harm you. -- He took my quivering hands in
his, raised them to his lips, whilst he stooped to kiss them, and whilst the
big tears coursed one another down his manly cheek -- God Almighty bless you,
my dear Lady, he exclaimed, you are a lovely creature; by the Lord, nephew
Francis, she is as beautiful as an angel! -- Pardon my vanity, my dear mother,
for repeating his words; I give them to you as characteristic of the man, and
tell you things naturally as they passed.

One instance of Arundel's elegant attention to me I must not omit: upon
entering the apartment appropriated to my use, I perceived it had been newly
furnished for the occasion with silk hangings, disposed in a most brilliant and
striking taste, after a fashion which was new to me, being drawn up in folds
something like the draperies of a tent; the bed in partilar was one of the most
beautiful things I have ever seen. In my anti-room and on my dressing-table
there was every thing for use and ornament that art and nature could supply,
not forgetting a profusion of the sweetest flowers, which he knows I am so fond
of: over the chimney he had hung a most enchanting Saint Cecilia, divinely
conceived and executed by our Romney; a masterpiece of modern art.

After trifling a little at my looking-glass, and a few repairs, which a dusty
journey had made necessary, I came down to the company, and in a few minutes
after Mortlake entered the room: Jane's lovely face was scarlet on the
occasion; Arundel flew to him, as much to relieve his modest embarrassment as
to present him to Lord G. and me, which he did with that graceful sweetness
inseparable from his minutest actions, but on this occasion it was peculiarly
conspicuous; not a word was uttered by him or me, when we were presented to
each other, but the first view I caught of his face opened all the character of
his mind: it is a countenance of the most touching cast; it cannot be called an
unempassioned humility that prevails in it, and yet there is such a sweet and
almost feminine submission in his eyes, that you would think no injuries could
rouse him; it is in truth the emanation of an angel's mind, and when he smiles
it is benevolence itself; his mouth and teeth are exquisite, I cannot praise
them more than by telling you they are a counterpart of Arundel's; his voice
soft, tender, and melodious, and an expression in his features as various and
changeable as can well be imagined. In short, I give Jane all the credit in the
world, for he is elegantly and indeed very finely formed in his person, of a
manly make and becoming stature; and when his eyes glanced upon her I was well
convinced they were no idle engines in the hands of Love.

That gay soul old Lady Treville did the honors of the table at dinner, which
was admirably well served and attended: I never saw my father in such spirits;
he was in raptures with the old Captain, whom for the future we are to call by
a higher title, for after the cloth was removed, and a health or two was gone
round, Arundel presented him with a paper, which announced his promotion to a
Rear admiral's flag, and at the same time appointed him to take command of a
squadron fitting for immediate service, in which the Earl of S. is to have a
line-of-battle ship under his old commander. The old lady at the head of the
table, with the gallantry of a Frenchwoman, threw her glove to the Admiral, and
bid him tackle that to his flag, and beware how he parted with the favors of a
lady. It was a fair challenge, and the veteran did not flinch it, for he
started from his seat, marched to the head of the table, saluted the old lady
and the younger ones in turn, then sat down in great state, and with a loud
voice jovially cried out -- Now let the enemies of Great Britain keep their
distance, for by the Lord I am invincible; -- then turning to Lord S. exclaimed
-- What say you, my brave Archibald? which was accompanied with a hearty shake
of the hand, and other sea ceremonies and endearments, which I cannot explain.
In short he is the life and soul of our circle, but it requires a proper share
of nerves to relish his conversation, for he talks as loud as if he was in a
storm, and his laugh is a perfect feu-de-joie; he has a thousand sea-tricks
which he practices upon Lord S. and a set of jokes ready made for the occasion
that I dare say have a great deal of humor in their own language, but to me
were perfectly unintelligible. Arundel manages him with great address, but Lord
G. is so devoted to him, that he only studies how to please him and indulge his
humor. He doats upon Jane and calls her daughter, and in truth has proved
himself a father to her noble brother: his generosity to the betrothed couple
has already shown itself in a great cargo of wines and various articles of
housekeeping, which has made its appearance at the parsonage.

The afternoon being delicious, we made a little excursion on the Medway in a
four-oared wherry, rowed by the Admiral's and Lord S.'s servants, who are of
the amphibious sort, and as it should seem part of their crew. The Admiral took
the helm and kept roaring to them all the way from behind us, not without a due
proportion of such phrases as had novelty at least to recommend them. We cut
through the water at a prodigious rate, and as we passed under Mortlake's
terrace it was with joy I surveyed the charming spot, where my fair friend is
destined to reside with one of the most amiable of men. We did not land, but
returned the more expeditiously, as Arundel was impatient to give my father his
promised treat of a little music. Tomorrow morning we intend to devote to a
more particular view of that delicious spot, which Arundel has embellished with
so much fondness and with such elegance of taste.

Upon our return to the house we found a room prepared for our music, with an
admirable piano-forte, new for the occasion, and put in excellent tune and
order by a man sent down from the maker for the purpose: an elegant service of
ices and other refreshments was set out. The room, the instrument, Arundel's
delightful accompaniment, the joy of heart I then felt, the sight of faces so
dear to me, their flattering applauses and my uncommon flow of health and
spirits, all conspired to call out my small powers to their best advantage:
Arundel was Orpheus himself, his very eyes were melodious, nothing but harmony
was to be discovered in his countenance. We took care to select my father's
favorites, and we had the satisfaction to give him pleasure and content by
every thing we undertook.

When we retired to our apartments for the night, Arundel took the candles from
the servant, who was waiting in the hall to light me to my chamber, and asked
me if he might not be honored by that office. My father seeing this, cried out
-- By all means, by all means, my girl, keep him to his duty. Whereupon I
permitted it, and he walked before me into my dressing room, from which my
servant instantly retired, and I found myself alone with him. -- I cannot
behave so ill to you in your own house, I said, as not to ask you to sit down.
-- He immediately threw himself at my feet -- In what words shall I thank you,
my soul's idol, for this happy day? Was ever man so honored or so blessed? Oh! my
Louisa, how shall I deserve this goodness? My heart overflows with love and
gratitude. -- I tenderly beseeched him to arise; I raised him from the ground
-- Arundel, I replied, my heart is so entirely yours, you possess so wholly
every thought, every movement in my mind, and my confidence in you is so
unbounded, that I keep no reserve before you: know then there does not live a
creature so devoted as I am to my Arundel; for you alone I live; yours only I
am and ever will be; you are the unrivalled master of my affections.

Ah, my beloved mother, do you tremble for your fond empassioned daughter?
Tremble not, I beseech you; his delicacy did not permit him to stay another
minute: May all good angels watch over you, he cried! may your dreams be happy!
Farewell! I must attend upon your father.

I have now given you a circumstantial journal of our first day. The next
morning when we met at breakfast Mortlake attended to conduct us to the
parsonage; the weather was divinely fine, and Arundel and I had had a little
walk in the garden, where we had amused ourselves with projecting alterations
and improvements: the carriages attended at the door to convey us to the
riverside, and we ferried over the stream to a landing-place at the foot of
Mortlake's terrace, which brought us by a regular ascent up a very beautiful
sawn to the house, which we entered by a glass door, that opens into a library,
elegantly fitted and completely furnished with books, which I understand is a
very fine collection: this is absolutely a most enchanting room, and not the
less so in my eyes for containing a half-length portrait of Arundel over the
chimney, admirably painted by Gainsborough. There are upon the same floor an
eating-parlour, drawing room, and a little dressing room for the master of the
house; above stairs are four bed-chambers and two dressing-rooms; Jane's
apartment, which she is to take possession of tomorrow (this being the eve of
her wedding day) is furnished with great taste and simplicity; her
dressing-table displayed some elegant tokens of her brother's liberality, and
my father having very kindly desired I would provide myself with some wedding
token for my friend, and given me a very handsome sum for the purpose, I left
upon the table an enamelled watch, with chain and trinkers, of the best pattern
and workmanship I could purchase in London, which the dear girl flattered me by
accepting in the most gracious manner: Mortlake seemed extremely pleased with
it, and my Arundel above measure. This happy couple are completely established
by the liberality of their friends; they have a small but seemingly well-chosen
family of house-servants, and are stocked with every thing without doors as
well as within, which can be necessary for their comfort; every thing in and
about the house was finished at Arundel's expense; their plate, linen and
equipage were given them by Lord S. and the Admiral has stored their cellars;
they have a very neat and modest post-chaise with a pair of horses, and Jane,
who is an admirable rider, has a favorite mare for the side-saddle, which her
beloved purchased in the neighborhood. All these things we saw, not omitting
the minutest article; judge with what transport I surveyed this prelude to
their happiness, but you can have no idea of the effect it had upon my father.
Oh! my dear Madam, he is a new man, and he seems as if he was transplanted into
a new world. -- Where have I been, he cries, all this while, and what have I
been doing? This is happiness; this is the true ambition; what a phantom have I
been following! -- He observed to me in a whisper, that this was the very house
in the world to charm you above all the palaces of the great. Oh that she was
here present! added he, and then he declared to me, that as soon as he was
blessed with your society again, he would retire to the country, new model his
family by reducing the scale, and dispose of his house in town, and, if you
approved of it, of his villa also: he is charmed with Mortlake, and applauds
Lady Jane to the skies. As we were walking down the garden toward the river,
on our return, he drew me aside to express how delighted he was with the scene
of happiness he had been surveying, and what joy it gave him to reflect that I
should have such an amiable couple for my near neighbors and inseparable
friends; he then asked me if I approved of his requesting Mortlake to come to
Spring Grove to perform a ceremony for me and Arundel, which he hoped would
take place in a few days. I said that I supposed Arundel would settle that with
his friend. -- No, no, he replied, you may depend upon it he will not entrench
upon the lady's prerogative in that particular, but there can be no doubt of
its being a most acceptable choice to him, and therefore with your leave I will
make the request both to Mortlake and Lady Jane, the first opportunity I have
of speaking to them apart; I hope they will not much regret the trouble of a
short journey upon such an occasion: but upon second thoughts, added he,
perhaps it is a compliment that in the first place should be offered to Sir
Joseph Arundel, though I suspect there is not the greatest harmony in that
quarter; however I will consult with Arundel before I take any step in the
matter: indeed if my old tutor the Dean had been now living, I know not how I
could have passed him over, but his death leaves me free from any other
obligations, and by the way, Louisa, I have now a donative to dispose of, which
his decease has vacated, that would exactly fit this amiable young man, and
being one of those douceurs in the church, which are not attended with the cure
of souls, it can in no case detach him from his residence here. What say you to
this, my dear? you have all been making wedding presents, may I not throw in
mine amongst the rest? Had I been in office I must have attended to the demands
of interest, now it is in my power to indulge the impulse of friendship. -- Is
not this a most pleasing instance of a mind awakened to its genuine
sensibility? Can I give you a better proof of a temper happily reformed? Oh! my
beloved mother, Providence will repay your sufferings; there is happiness yet
in store for you; the hour, I hope, is approaching fast, when I shall press you
to my grateful heart and feel the pressure of your fond protecting arms: with
what tenderness did my Arundel talk of you this morning, as we conversed
together in our walk before breakfast! It is not in my power to convey to you
the one half of what he said with any justice to his sentiments, and if I could
repeat his words, it would be impossible to repeat his manner, which is so
peculiarly his own. I must not however omit to tell you, that amongst other
kindnesses he offered to bring me to you as soon as we were married for the
purpose of escorting you home, and I should add that my father has signified
his intention of coming to you in person, as soon as that event has taken
place: tell me, therefore, if it will be agreeable to you that Arundel and I
should accompany him on the journey; be assured it will afford us unfeigned
pleasure.

I must now bring my journal to a conclusion, because I make a point of dating
from this place, and our departure is fixed for tomorrow immediately after the
wedding, that we may reach Spring Grove before night. Arundel goes with us, and
my father brought his coach that we might have his company by the way: when our
ceremony has taken place we shall set off for Arundel House. -- Oh Heavens! my
dear mother, my heart palpitates with alarms, which I cannot describe; yet
Arundel is tender, there is mercy in his eyes; I love, I dote upon him to
distraction; why should I dread what I so much desire? why am I in these
terrors?

You know my friend Jane, amongst a thousand other agremens, has a talent for
poetry; you have seen some specimens of her verses: when I was in Mortlake's
library this morning, as my father was expatiating upon the charms of
retirement and tranquillity in such a delightful spot, Mortlake secretly put
into my hand a copy of the following little poem addressed to Solitude, which
with great difficulty he had persuaded Jane to let him transcribe. -- I give
these lines to your Ladyship, said he, assured that you will prize them for the
sake of the beloved author. -- I send them to you, my dear mother, as I think
the general sentiment is of that moral and contemplative cast, that will
harmonize with your feelings in your present solitude.

TO SOLITUDE.
O Solitude! to whose serene abode
The Hermit flies to commune with his God,
Where buried in some deep and silent glen
Shuddering he quits the guilty haunts of men,
With thee and the dear partner of my life,
Far, far from mad ambition's strife,
Here let me dwell a fond and faithful wife.
Nobility, thou empty, borrowed name,
I leave thee for substantial, self-earn'd fame,
And ye, that on the painted wing
Flutter awhile, then fix the sting,
Ye insect tribe of pleasures gay,
I brush your flimsy forms away,
Be gone, impertinents! you have had your day.
Thou, Solitude, art contemplation's friend,
On thee the rational delights attend;
No gilded chariot haunts thy door,
No flambeaus blaze, no drunkards roar,
No rattling dice, no clashing swords,
No squand'ring fool, no wretch that hoards,
No lordly beggars and no beggared lords.
And, O deceitful world! too well I know
How little worth is all thou can bestow,
The reputation of a day,
Which the next morning takes away,
The flattery that beguiles the ear,
The hypocrite's fictitious tear,
These thou can give, this semblance thou can wear.
Temperance shall spread my rural feast,
Content shall be my welcome guest,
No guilty thoughts that shun the light,
No conscious dreams to terrify the night;
Here in my peaceful rustic cell
With thee, calm Solitude, I Will dwell;
Hail, nature's offspring! sons of art, farewell!
At noon I Will walk beneath these spreading trees,
Where honied woodbines scent the passing breeze,
At eve, what time the flocks go forth to graze,
I Will follow where yon silver current strays,
And as it flows, Behold! I Will cry,
Pleasure's fleet emblem passes by;
Pass on, false friend! -- we part without a sigh.
Come then, thou pure and sainted youth,
Holy interpreter of truth,
Friend of my soul, my bosom's wedded Lord,
Impart those treasures which thy mind has stored;
By the soft link of nuptial love
Lead me the way that I should move,
And wed me to that bliss which reigns above.
LETTER XCII. Sir Joseph Arundel to his Son.
I HEAR, with equal shame and horror, that you, my son (alas! that I must call
you such) have killed a noble gentleman, Sir George Revel, in a duel; your
going into a foreign country to evade the laws, which obtain in your own, mark
the deliberation of the act, and show how unworthy you are to be a member of
that legislative body, who should jointly and severally protect the peace and
order of the state, from which you have made yourself a voluntary outlaw.

I hear withal that your quarrel with the deceased, whose blood is upon your
conscience, arose from a vain competition you entered into with him for the
favor of a certain noble heiress: great indeed must have been your presumption,
and only to be equalled by your absurdity (give me leave to say) when you could
aspire to the daughter of the Earl of G. whom you repaid for patronizing you in
poverty by a most virulent opposition to him, when by the wheel of fortune you
had been thrown into Parliament.

What notions must you have entertained of your own consequence, when you could
propose yourself as a rival to Sir George Revel; and where must have been your
senses, when the way you took to recommend yourself to the daughter was by
offering insults to the father?

The bloody triumph you have had may be matter of exultation to you, and your
uncle John and other ferocious companions, who make war their trade, and glory
in the slaughter of their fellow creatures; but to me, who am a preacher of
peace, it is horrible in the extreme, and it becomes my melancholy duty as a
parent to make an effort, however hopeless, for awakening your conscience to a
sense of these enormities, beseeching Heaven to turn your heart to repentance
and avert the judgment, which must otherwise overtake you.

So prays your unhappy father, JOSEPH ARUNDEL.

LETTER XCIII. Francis to Sir Joseph Arundel.
Arundel House.
THAT I have been compelled into a duel with Sir George Revel is true, but that
I have his blood upon my conscience is not a fact, as that gentleman is out of
danger from his wounds; neither will I believe, were I at liberty to explain
all the motives, which necessitated me to meet his sword, that even you would
condemn me for the consequences, had they been as fatal as you suppose.

Surely, Sir, it is the part of every one who judges another to hear before he
condemns, and I humbly conceive that paternal justice is not singly exempt from
that obligation; yet I have repeatedly fallen under your sentence upon
information only; I shall therefore be silent from appeal, and leave my
character to speak for itself: when you are disposed to think more favorably of
me, it shall be from conviction of facts, and not from pleas and remonstrances
on my part.

It may very well appear presumptuous in me to aspire to the daughter of the
Earl of G. and yet if the success of that presumption is any answer to the
charge of absurdity which you impute to me, you will find it in the letter
which I have the honor to enclose to you, from the father of that lady.

I am, etc. etc.

LETTER XCIV. The Earl of G. to Sir Joseph Arundel.
IF you are as sensible of the unparalleled merits of your excellent son, as
every one who knows him is, you will allow that I have great cause to pride
myself in the hope I entertain of being soon to participate with you in the
honor and happiness of calling him son.

The love, which my daughter conceived for this amiable youth from the first
day she saw him, the very high opinion which Lady G. has ever had of his
character, and the very delicate and honorable manner in which he has behaved
toward me and mine under circumstances the most trying, cruel and unjust, from
which nothing but his own true courage and the hand of Providence over his life
could have protected him, have all conspired to open my eyes to his uncommon
merit, and to rouse me from a delusion I reflect upon with shame and remorse.

As you and I have been old friends, I hope this alliance will not make us less
cordial than before, but I must ingenuously say this will entirely depend upon
the measure of your affection to a most excellent son; for I should think it
unpardonable if you, who are his father by nature, should love him less than I
who am only his father by law.

I have the honor to be, Sir, etc. etc.

LETTER XCV. Captain John to Sir Joseph Arundel.
BROTHER JOSEPH,
THOUGH I am your younger brother, and understand myself well enough to know I
cannot argue with you in the way of learning, yet I believe I know a little of
what is called common sense, and I hope I am not totally ignorant of what is
called common justice, though I am as you say one of those ferocious people,
who make war their trade.

I don't know what you mean by a trade, brother, but I hope it is a trade I
need not be ashamed of, and as for what I have earned by it, which is no
trifle, I let you know that I intend to leave it all to your son, unless you
can point out to me any honester or worthier man in the King of England's
dominions.

As ferocious as you may think me, I hope I have more human nature in my heart
than to write to my son, if I had one, as you have wrote to Frank. Before you
find fault, brother Joseph, why don't you stop to find where the fault lies? I
believe that is justice, and I am mistaken if it is not Christianity into the
bargain.

I don't mean to offend you, do you see, whereby I am brushing out to sea
again, and like enough may never let eyes on you again; therefore take what I
say in good part, for I am a plain man, and neither mean to flatter or affront
any man, much less a brother.

Frank is a going to be married to my Lady Louisa G. and I am sorry I cannot
wait to see the last hand put to the job; but as war is a trade, you know,
brother, it is a trade that must be followed or lost: however I have left my
blessing with him, and my will into the bargain, neither of which will, I hope,
do him any harm, if I don't live to come back again. I don't find fault with
your preaching peace, brother Francis, and I cannot see why you should be angry
with me for following war, when I am bid to do it, in the defense of my
country: if it was not for some of us ferocious animals, who venture our lives
for Old England, I question if you peaceable folks would have a church over
your heads to say your prayers in.

Farewell, brother Joseph, I have wrote you a monstrous long letter, but take
it in good part; when you preach up peace, remember to practice it; bless God
for the good son he has given you, and add a little ejaculation, when you are
about it, for

Your ferocious, Though affectionate brother, JOHN ARUNDEL.

LETTER XCVI. Lady Louisa G. to the Countess of G.
Spring Grove.
YESTERDAY was the auspicious day that united Lady Jane to her beloved
Mortlake, and transported me to this place with my beloved Arundel. We all
attended the happy couple to the altar, where the ceremony was performed by a
neighboring clergyman, an old friend of the house of Arundel. Jane deported
herself with all the fortitude and composure in the world, and made her
responses audibly and firmly: not quite so her espoused; and as for poor me, I
trembled most incontinently, and whenever my eye caught a glimpse of Arundel,
there were no bounds to my tremor. Awful as the ceremony is in itself, and more
particularly so as it appeared to me when deciding upon the fate of a beloved
friend, yet, to my shame, I confess I was more than once most sadly put to it
to keep my countenance, when the old Admiral roared out the responses so much
above the key-note of the clerk, and the rest of us, who made up the
congregation, that I and even Arundel himself were forced to cram our
handkerchiefs into our mouths, especially as the good man was not always very
correct, and occasionally took some small liberties with the text, particularly
where the minister repeated -- Be unto them a tower of strength -- the Admiral
sung out in a voice of thunder, as if he was upon his own quarter deck, From
the face of all our enemies -- at which moment I am persuaded he had a side-way
hit at the French and Spaniards, for his voice was not only particularly
exalted, but there was an energy in his tone, which convinces me he had them in
his thoughts: he had a large folio prayer book spread before him and a huge
pair of spectacles on his nose, which made him as irresistible to the sight as
to the hearing.

After the ceremony was over we repaired to the parsonage, where an elegant
little collation was set out in the library, and here with tears of joy I
embraced and congratulated my beloved Lady Jane Mortlake: Lord S. and the
Admiral were setting off for London as well as ourselves, so that we all parted
from the bride and bridegroom at the same moment. Alas! the fortitude, which my
poor Jane had exerted at the altar, here forsook her at the moment, when she
found herself, perhaps, for the last time (which Heaven avert!) in the arms of
her beloved brother. -- Oh, my dear, dear Archibald, she cried, may the God of
all mercies preserve thee from death, and give thee victory in battle! Go, my
hero! go to certain conquest, and let not my fond weakness unman thee; thy
sister shall pray for thee, Mortlake shall put up his prayers to that gracious
Being, whose blessing is upon us in this moment of our union, and who will not
refuse the petitions of his faithful servant -- And oh, my father and my
friend, she added, (throwing her arms round the neck of the gallant Admiral,
who stooped to embrace her) may you return with fresh laurels, to the joy of
your friends here present, and to the glory of your country! She now threw
herself down on the couch, whilst tears such as heroes shed fell from the eyes
of the departing warriors. -- Let us seize this moment and be gone, said my
father; Mr. Mortlake, we beg you will stay with your lady, and take no further
notice of us. -- The word was instantly obeyed by all; Arundel took my hand,
the Admiral put his arm under the Earl's, and my father led the way: we threw
ourselves without ceremony into our respective carriages, and were whirled away
with a rapidity, which those who have not traveled post in England have no
idea of.

Thus is grief compounded in our brightest joys, and the cup of blessing is for
ever dashed with tears. -- My father first broke silence, by desiring us to
take our own conversation without regarding him, as he should amuse himself
with his own thoughts and reflections upon the scenes he had left behind,
without interrupting us in our discourse: Consider yourselves, my dear
children, said he, as man and wife elect, talk over your own little projects,
follow your own inclinations, your endearments, your fondnesses to each other,
as if nobody was present, or at most an old nurse, who will only drop a salt
tear over your caresses, and chuckle at the happiness of her beloved bantling.

Having so said, he took the hand of Arundel and drew him to that side of the
coach where I was seated by myself, stretching himself over the back seat at
the same time, in an attitude as if he was going to sleep. -- My sweet Louisa,
says Arundel, since your father is no longer present, I must give some vent to
my heart, by telling you how deeply it is affected by his goodness to us both;
the honor he has done me by this visit, the confidence he reposes in me on all
occasions, and the happiness he has showered upon me in blessing me with all my
soul holds dear on this side heaven, have raised emotions in my heart, that I
shall never be in a capacity of doing justice to; you, my charmer, must find
occasion for telling him how truly I revere and love him; I know no other way
of expressing my gratitude to him, but by my everlasting devotion to his lovely
daughter.

My father took my hand, and joining it to Arundel's, tenderly pronounced a
blessing upon us, and as my head reclined on Arundel's shoulder, contemplated
us with a look of infinite sensibility and affection. We then by degrees fell
into discourse upon the happy event of the morning, and of Jane's solemn and
composed behavior at the altar, with which my father was greatly struck, but
owned that the Admiral's responses put his muscles to the trial: he demanded of
me, if I thought I could stand the office as heroically as she did; I shook my
head and Arundel smiled upon me; he then began to praise her to the skies for
her noble qualities, and declared he was never more affected than by her manner
of parting from her brother; my father was no less warm in his encomiums upon
Mortlake, which made Arundel's fine eyes glisten with delight: we talked over
their whole establishment, and my father was in raptures whilst he expatiated
on the Paradise, as he called it, in which they were placed, saying to Arundel
with a smile -- The only fault I can find with you, son Arundel, is, that you
are too rich. -- This put me in mind of Jane's address to Solitude, which I
sent you in my last letter, and having a copy in my pocketbook, I made Arundel
read the lines aloud; by such an audience the beloved author was sure to be
applauded.

We next amused ourselves with planning projects of improvements at Arundel
House, in which I stiffly contended for the ancient lares, which to my taste
were infinitely more venerable than all the extravagancies of modern foppery in
brick and plaster; something I allowed might be admitted without violating
their prerogative, but still I thought the line was to be followed which they
pointed out, and in this Arundel agreed with me. My father observed that he
seemed to be very well established in point of servants, and for his part he
could not see any occasion he had to increase them: Arundel acknowledged that
he did not think it could add to our happiness to be encumbered with a very
numerous suite of idlers, and seemed to apply to me for my opinion in the
matter. I told him that my notions of domestic economy had been formed upon
your lessons and instructions repeatedly imprinted on my thoughts, and
confirmed by what little judgment and experience I could boast of, so that I
was at no loss to express myself without hesitation on the subject. I set out
by saying, that as I wished to acquit myself as became the mistress of his
family, it was the first point with me to have my household upon such a scale
as I could completely superintend and manage; if I had a parcel of superfluous
and idle people about me, how could I undertake for this? I would wish my
husband in the first place to take an exact computation of his income, clear
and unencumbered as it came into his hands; upon that computation I would have
him lay down his general scale of expense, and regulate every article of it, as
far as could be done upon previous calculation; upon this there ought to be a
considerable balance for contingencies of various sorts, such as building,
improving, bounties, and a long list of unforeseen demands upon his taste or
charity. Beyond this income, be it what it may, I would on no account suffer my
expenses to go; wherever they threatened to exceed it, the reform must be
immediate and effectual; for there could be no peace in my mind while his
fortune was diminishing, and the greater that fortune was, the greater would be
my self reproach for so inexcusable a waste of it. That mere parade I detested
from my heart, and next to gaming I held electioneering as a most unjustifiable
and senseless profusion of property. That I took the opportunity now to say in
the most peremptory manner, and I hoped my father, who heard me say it, would
not discommend me for it, that I would absolutely not consent to accept a
single diamond from the hands of Arundel. -- Here Arundel stared, and my father
nodded assent with a smile of approbation. -- As for plate, I perceived he had
enough of it, and equipage to please me must be as simple and unpretending as
possible. I wished to rival no lady, pure or impure, in the splendour of her
carriage. I was too proud to pique myself upon such distinctions, for the merit
of which I was to resort to Long-acre. The chief part of our time, money and
attention would, I hoped, be addressed to the country, and there I should wish
to be carrying on a constant and gradual improvement, rather than a rapid and
expensive one; not only as it would be a lasting pleasure to us, who were
occupied in it, but as it would give a more permanent employment to our
laborious poor; of them I should be ambitious of collecting a colony about me,
lodged in comfortable cottages within my eye, and not driven into holes and
corners of the earth to make room for my unsocial and tyrannical ideas of
monopolizing a whole country for what is falsely called ornament and prospect;
their habitations would be the best ornament of my prospect, their population
my pride, and the contemplation of their comforts my reward. -- Here Arundel in
an ecstacy of joy threw his arms round my neck and smothered me with kisses. My
father clapped his hands as it were involuntarily together, and exclaimed aloud,
That Is right, my dear Arundel, she challenges your love. -- These tender and
encouraging caresses prompted me to proceed yet further, and I resumed my
discourse in substance as follows: -- Regularity in hours is essential to the
good order and comfort of a family; in the country there is no excuse for not
conforming to it, neither can I by any means approve of those fine people, who
adopt their London hours in their country houses, putting their neighbors who
visit them either out of their own habits and customs, or (which is worse)
teaching them to copy bad examples, and so corrupting the simplicity of
manners, so well becoming their condition and fortune. This is a thing that I
abominate; it is founded in affectation of high life; the very people who adopt
it suffer by it; it is unsocial, insulting and ridiculous in the extreme. No
one can contend that it is a better distribution of a day in summer (which is
generally the season when the rich retire into the country) to rise in the hear
of the forenoon, take our exercise in the midday, and dedicate the refreshing
hours of evening to the indolence and luxury of the table. Surely such an
arrangement of hours is the reverse of every thing that pleasure would teach
us, were we to consult no other guide; but there are a thousand other reasons
against it, which are aggravations of its absurdity. As for my table, I would
cautiously avoid that overbearing splendour, which seems more calculated to
display my own consequence, than to contribute to the comfort of my guests. I
would wish to do nothing that should pique my neighbors of inferior fortune
into emulation, or provoke their envy: I would keep an uniform table, in which
comfort should be chiefly considered and elegance by no means overlooked; all
should be welcome, and set dinners as much a possible avoided: my supreme
social delight would be to engage such a party of amiable and entertaining
people within my own family circle as would make the hours, that we passed
within doors, both lively and improving; men and women of elegant minds, people
of talents, eminent artists, respectable foreigners, pleasant and good-natured
companions, who have the faculty of exhilarating our convivial hours, are those
whose society I should covet, and the happy case with which we have at last
learnt to live with each other under the same roof, would leave me still at my
leisure for all the demands which the care of my family might have upon me in
the mean time. Upon this system I do not see any opening in a man of fortune's
time for the insipid dissipations of a listless life, for the desperate
resource of gaming, for the perpetual hurry of journies from place to place,
for the whim of a racehorse, or even the din of a pack of hounds. What an
endless fund of amusing occupation is there in a domestic farm! Whilst my
husband superintended the more interesting concerns of stock and cultivation, I
could find perpetual employment in the smaller departments; and I think there
is nothing would give me such health and pleasure as to be so engaged. I should
regret the day, when I was to quit my dairy for London and the drawing room --
And now methinks I must have pretty well wearied you both with my reveries.

They were so polite as to assure me they were by no means tired of listening
to me; and Arundel, with an air of the greatest sincerity, protested, that he
had set down every word in his memory, and would faithfully adhere to it, by
adopting my system with the strictest conformity to every rule.

Thus, my dear mother, our time insensibly passed away, whilst we were rapidly
approaching to our journey's end, which set us safely down at Spring Grove
before the darkness overtook us, where, after a night of happy repose, in which
the events of the day were compounded into a dream, wherein my happiness was
painted afresh in all the wild and glowing colors of romantic fancy, I arose
to execute this pleasing task, and then to realize the visions of the night by
flying into the arms of love and Arundel.

Farewell.
LETTER XCVI Arundel to Charles Mortlake.
Spring Grove.
UXORIOUS Mortlake, if thou can spare a moment from the enchanting arms of
thy adored wife, give your ear to a lover, happy in his approach to the
blessing he is eagerly expecting, and yet tantalized by that happiness from not
having possessed it, as thou have thine: I will not long entrench upon thy
transports.

To a married ear I can say more than I would commit to the inflammable brain
of a bachelor, as thou wast a day or two ago.

This lovely creature charms me into phrenzy; I am in a state of mental
intoxication with the fondness she bestows upon me. I have a thousand minds to
tell her fairly that I cannot, that I will not bear it. What does she think of
me? Oh Heavens! she thinks neither of me, nor of herself. How should I expect
mercy when she has none for her own feelings! We must be married without the
conveyancers; the law crawls like the tortoise, we fly toward the goal like
the nimble hare in the fable. -- Carry not my allusion any further, Mortlake,
for we will not halt by the way; at least if human resolution can hold out
against more than human beauty, against more than human passion.

There! now she will not let me write to thee -- Look, where it comes again! --
Was that all you came for? -- Oh Louisa, thou have a soul of love embodied in
the most attractive form of beauty -- Enchantress, Siren, Witch! why did you
put on that alluring dishabille? why did you dispose your auburn locks in those
ensnaring ringlets? what means that negligent simplicity, that
half-discovering, half-concealing veil, that only hides the surface not the
shape of your swelling bosom, the very model of perfection, into which my
senses sink even on the very sight? She has set my hand a trembling, and I
cannot proceed.

Oh Heavens! the angel form is here again, and now she comes to dictate to me;
I am to take up my pen and write whilst she hovers over me -- It is impossible,
my charming Louisa, whilst you stand within my reach in that alluring attitude;
if you mean me to be your scribe you must not come within the glance of my
eyes; post yourself in that chair behind me, and then begin with your
instructions.

You are to tell Lady Jane Mortlake, that Louisa cannot write to her, and yet
she expects to be written to. -- So much for her Ladyship's modesty. -- She
demands of me if I have not something to say to you about your coming hither.
-- Ah! what a blunder have I committed! that was only a hint for my private
ear, and not to be committed to yours. -- She blushes to the eyes, and insists
upon my striking it out; for it alludes to our wedding, which I must plainly
tell you stands for this day se'nnight, so now you must concert with Lady Jane
accordingly: I own I wish it very sincerely, and if without particular
inconvenience to your lady or yourself you could comply with my request, I
should be happy that the friend of my heart would tie that indissoluble band,
which I mean to keep for ever sacred and inviolate. This is in substance what
the lovely blushes on the cheeks of my Louisa mean to dictate to me; you, who
have seen them, know their eloquence, and I dare believe will not prove
yourself insensible to their persuasion.

When I ask her what she has else in charge to her beloved friend, she says she
will trust me with no more messages, and bids me leave off writing. -- What
must I do? what would you do in the like case? -- Obey: friendship, give place!
O love, what a monopolizer art thou!

Farewell.
LETTER XCVIII. Lady Jane Mortlake to Lady Louisa G.
IN the maidenish simplicity of my heart I promised you a long letter, but I
must break my word with you. Out of all the many injunctions which you laid
upon me, I can obey one only, and that is -- literally to write and no more. I
know my dear Louisa will be in a pet with me, but I will leave it to time to
apologize for my indolence; before many days come to an end you may have
sympathetic motives for acquitting me.

I am sure Mr. Mortlake will obey the call of his friend and come to you at
Spring Grove, when the happy day is fixed; but I rather think I must forego the
undertaking, especially as you will come down to Arundel House on the day of
your marriage, and to that resolution I would advise you to adhere.

But is this the languid style I should use to my Louisa? No, I will not close
my letter till I assure you, gratefully assure you, every prospect of happiness
opens upon me -- excess of it you know, my dear, will overpower the spirits,
and even force us to put on the very symptoms of sorrow. I am charmed with
every thing about me; external comforts surround me in abundance; But I have
that within which passes show. These are but the symphonies (if I may so call
them) the accompaniments of that superior strain of harmony, which breathes in
every look, action, and endearing movement of my beloved Mortlake; such a
heavenly temper beams upon me, such a gay, serene and placid mind, affections
so inexpressibly tender, such love, such ardour; oh, my Louisa, what a treasure
am I blessed with in this inestimable man! As for his understanding, it seems
to me like an exhaustless mine of the purest ore; he and your matchless Arundel
have not misspent the early morning of their life in dissipation and
intemperance, but with a prudent forecast have been storing up resources for
the evening of their day, for the night, wherein no one can work.

In a very few days I hope I shall begin to apportion out my time upon system,
and regulate both my little family and myself: I do not mean to engross my
husband's hours so entirely, as not to leave him a part of the day in which his
library shall be unapproachable by me; I should be unpardonable were I to break
in upon duties of so serious a nature as belong to his function, and to which
he is so conscientiously devoted; his studies therefore have a claim upon him
which I shall hold as sacred, and those hours I shall pass in my domestic
employments, and, when they do not call upon me, in such reading as he shall
recommend for instruction or amusement. But when in addition to those resources
I cast my eyes upon those neighboring turrets, which will soon be occupied by
the friend of my heart, what is there wanting to complete my prospect? what but
to merit a continuance of these blessings by gratitude to the God who bestows
them?

Farewell.
LETTER XCIX. Sir Joseph Arundel to the Earl of G.
THE respect, with which I have ever looked up to your Lordship, and the
elevated rank in which you stand, would never have permitted me to think of an
alliance with your family but as the most improbable of all events, had not
your letter informed me that an union between your amiable noble daughter and
my son is likely soon to take place, under the sanction of your consent and
good liking.

My Lord, I am at a loss what words to use upon this occasion: I cannot deny
that I have seen some particulars of Mr. Arundel's conduct with an eye of
displeasure, and I have given him my fatherly reproof accordingly: of this sort
have been his deportment in Parliament, and his duel with Sir George Revel; I
confess I wrote harshly to him on those topics; but I will not be obstinate
against conviction; I may have been misinformed, nay more than that, I may have
erred in judgment; but my intentions have been sincere. You are pleased to take
his defense very warmly upon yourself, and your words must ever have the
greatest weight with me; stronger proof cannot be given of the confidence you
have in him than that you have thought him worthy of being honored with the
hand of Lady Louisa, your only child: this is a testimony as honorable to him
as it is unexpected by me, and above all hope of mine.

My Lord, I am a sequestered man and move in a very private sphere; a title
indeed has descended upon me, but it has descended empty; it did not please my
brother Francis, living or dying, to take any notice of me, and I am given to
understand by my brother John, that no part of his spoils are likely to be
bestowed on me: these accumulations center in my son; his fortune is ample and
independent, and therefore as he does not want my help, I the less wonder at
the contempt he shows for my opinion or advice: it is from your Lordship I
learn the honor and happiness which await him.

But though I have thus detached myself from the world and all its ambition,
yet I am a man, and have the feelings of a man, and consistently with those
feelings it will be impossible for me to present my neglected person at the
haughty doors of that unbrotherly mansion, whose owner never permitted me to
enter them, nor gave me the welcome I had a right to expect. This I flatter
myself will appear so natural to your Lordship, that you will allow it a
sufficient excuse for my seeming omission, if I do not pay that respect to Lady
Louisa in her married state, which as your Lordship's daughter I have ever
entertained for her.

I have the honor to be, etc. etc. JOSEPH ARUNDEL.

LETTER C. Mortlake to Arundel.
I HAVE received your summons and shall fly to obey it with every ardent wish,
with every anxious prayer for your happiness; it is my lot to have been the
object of the marriage ceremony before I have been the performer of it in right
of my function; may the commencement be auspicious!

My dear Arundel, it is now the first time in my remembrance, that whilst
writing to you I have paused upon my pen, and found that my mind would not
furnish words to supply it. The fact is, my imagination is locked up by
repletion, so many grateful thoughts throng and press upon it at the same
moment, that language cannot extricate them: you have showered down benefits
upon your friend so fast, that though I am in no danger of forgeting them, I am
in no capacity of particularizing them. Wherever my eye goes, it meets some
remembrancer of your friendly generosity: if I survey my house, if I walk into
my garden, if my sight is directed to my church, I say within myself, O
Arundel! these are thy works: but there is yet another object, on whom my eyes
rest with peculiar fondness, one dear to my sight and in her person lovely, of
whom I can with truth pronounce, this blessing is the gift of Arundel -- And as
thy gift I will preserve and prize it; I will lodge it in my heart, cherish it
with unabating fondness, love, watch and tenderly protect it. Yes, may the God
whom I adore forsake me, when I wrong that excellence, the condescending
sweetness of whose generous nature stooped to the humble mute admirer, who only
sighed at a distance, and, whilst aspiring to nothing more than pity, gained
her love: and what a treasure is that love! what a combination of charms are
met together! beauty, that would have attracted all beholders without the aid
of mental excellencies; a mind, that would have won all hearts without the help
of personal attractions.

There was a mystery in old times, which the superstition of the initiated keep
sacred from all ears; there is a mystery of modern times, which its own
nonsense secures against discovery; but those joys to which I have been
admitted, my dear Arundel, are undiscoverable, because they can never be
described.

I find myself with a companion, in whose society no hour of the day can be
heavy; her lively genius gives a novelty to every subject, and we mutually
instruct each other: she tells me of the world as it is, I inform her of the
world as it has been. It gives me inexpressible delight to find that her
spirits are not damped by retirement and the tete-a-tete of a husband, on the
contrary their gaiety increases every day, and I may truly say we have never
waked but to a joyful morning: the temporary depression she felt upon parting
from her beloved brother is long since at an end, and her buoyant mind rises
superior to those gloomy and unsocial thoughts, which deal in melancholy
predictions and feed their spleen with horrors of their own painting; she on
the contrary sees all futurity in its brightest light, and by the force of a
sanguine fancy meets her gallant hero returning with fresh laurels to her arms,
and feasts upon the idea.

As for me, who by one of the most rapid transitions of fortune am of a sudden
transplanted from college rooms and the twentieth part of a bed-maker's
attendance to the possession of an elegant house and a family of servants, what
should I have done without her help? Things, which no time would have brought
to my understanding, she sees and comprehends in a moment; it is incredible
with what facility she arranges her domestic matters, and though every order is
given with the most perfect sweetness of temper, yet there is no trifling with
her commands; the strictest obedience is exacted and of course obtained. The
machine, now put in motion by her guiding hand, goes on mechanically and with
correct regularity, and for my part I shall be totally out of employ, unless I
keep some little land in my hands, which my lovely friend advises me to do. She
is accomptant-general of my finances, and has furnished herself with a huge
vellum book, and all the apparatus of a clerk, which I should never have
thought of, and suffered accordingly: she says our income will amply suffice
for our establishment, and leave some loose money for unforeseen occasions on
the balance; but I had no opportunity of talking with you about the very kind
offer, which Lord G. made me of a donative of L. 300 per annum, that has lately
elapsed: I was really so oppressed with bounty from all hands, that I did not
know what answer to make him, when I ought in gratitude to have said a great
deal; I must rely upon you to help me out, by telling him what an awkward
animal I am, when my friends confound me with their goodness, and at the same
time be sure to say in the most sincere and natural way to his Lordship, that I
must believe he has a number of expectants, who look up to him for favors, and
whose long attendance has given them far better claims upon his patronage than
I can pretend to; if therefore he has any one of these in his eye, I beseech
him to pass me over, and my gratitude will still be paid to his good wishes.
But if on the contrary his desire to do a grace to you in the person of your
friend, prevails against all other claims, I then beg of him to add a further
grace to his bounty by bestowing it upon her, from whom I derive every
pretension and to whom I owe every blessing in life, and let her, by whose hand
I am raised, and on whose smiles I live, appropriate to her private purse, that
which to me would be a superfluity. In God's name what am I? what right have I
to be thus caressed by fortune? I already sink under the blessings I enjoy; my
own unworthiness flies in my face and I tremble for the trials which prosperity
may expose me to. I am determined, Arundel, to humble myself even below what I
am by nature; there is nobody but yourself and my dearest Lady Jane to whom I
dare give a vent to the happiness of my heart, for fear my exultation should be
mistaken for insult; to my country neighbors, and particulary to my brethren
of the cloth, I am resolved nothing shall escape me to provoke their ill
opinion of me as a man intoxicated by good fortune, or to put them upon
enquiring how I merited what has befallen me: in short, my dear friend, I have
called myself to a strict account, and find I have no chance for preserving the
favor of Providence, but to humble myself with double diligence before God and
man, and to pray for support under the most dangerous of all trials, the trial
of unmerited prosperity.

Lady Jane was desirous upon her wedding day to give some little bounty to the
poor of the parish, and consulted me upon it; I showed her a little book, in
which I had minuted down the particulars of all the needy families, the number,
ages and sex of their children, with the occupation, condition and necessities
of their parents; I had the satisfaction to see she was very much pleased by
this account, which she considered as an instance of my attention to the duties
of a parish priest; she was at the trouble of copying my list, and has begun
her visitation in consequence of it. I perceive I shall have nothing to do but
write sermons, and preach them in their ears on a Sunday, for my weekly duty
will be in better hands.

Arundel, I repeat to you my resolution of never quitting the flock, which you
have put under my care: I will not make your bounty a stepping-stone to my
ambition, and of this I took an early opportunity to apprise Lady Jane, without
which explanation I thought it would have been dishonorable to have entered
into engagements with her: I need not say that her noble and disinterested
nature approved of my resolution.

I perceive I shall have a great passion for my garden, not only because you
have made it so alluring and beautiful, but because Lady Jane seems to have a
strong attachment to it, and it is an amusement in which I can have her company
and participation: as for the library, having now pretty well reconnoitred the
whole of it, I must really consider it as a very select and well-chosen
collection of books in good condition and of the best sort. We for the present
inhabit no other room, as the prospect it commands is so charming.

Lady Jane bids me say that she shall accompany me to Spring Grove; though she
wrote doubtfully of it to Lady Louisa. We shall be with you in the evening
before the happy day.

Farewell.
LETTER CI. The Countess to the Earl of G.
YOUR letter has given peace to an afflicted heart, and if I pause upon the
pleasing invitation it contains, these are my reasons: The retirement to which
I have for some time devoted myself, and the melancholy scene that has been
under my review, whilst Sir George Revel was in the house with me, have with
other conspiring causes lest impressions on my spirits, which will probably
disqualify me for the rest of my life from returning to that public station
your rank and fortune may require me to appear in; with a mind alienated from
the splendour of high life, and faculties incapacitated for stepping forward
upon the conspicuous stage of the great world, I think it just to apprise you
that I am no longer equal to the undertaking: reflection has cut so deep into
my heart, that nothing but the soothing scenes of tranquillity and privacy can
perfectly restore it; dissipation would but open all its wounds.

Let me not deceive you, nor give occasion for future discontent, when you find
yourself betrayed by pity into a step, which you have cause to repent of. It is
enough for me to know myself acquitted in your thoughts, to hear that my
beloved child is happy, and now and then to find myself in the kind remembrance
of those who are dear to me. Place me in some quiet retreat, where I may pass
my days in that obscurity for which nature designed me, and if ever that happy
period shall arrive, when your heart is sated with worldly pleasures and
pursuits, turn to my solitude, seek your humble friend, and my arms shall be
open to receive and welcome you to purer and more peaceful scenes than those
you leave behind you.

Trust me, my Lord, there is no worldly honor could befall you to give me half
the joy I take in hearing you have conquered your resentments against Arundel;
it was a noble effort, and you have subdued the worst enemies to your peace,
that can haunt the human breast, anger and suspicion. I read the account of
your visit to Arundel House with tears of joy and gratitude; accept the thanks,
the praises of a wife, to whom your happiness and welfare are infinitely
valuable; you have been employed in the heavenly office of dispensing blessings
to all around you; you have saved your child from misery and disgrace, and
healed a mother's broken heart; these, my dear Lord, are glorious actions,
these reflections may be dwelt upon with lasting delight, these honors can
never be taken from you.

I thank you for your kind attention to me in sending Davison; he is a good
creature and has been of great use and comfort to me; the money he brought with
him is so much more than my occasions call for, that I shall have no demand to
make upon the credit you have given me at Ostend: this supply in the mean time
has enabled me to show some little marks of my gratitude to Madame Polberg,
which have been very seasonable to the worthy creature, and have added much to
the few comforts left for her in this life. You knew the Baron when he was in
England, and it was under your administration he was employed by his court in a
secret and confidential commission to ours; as she states his case it must have
been extremely hard, for the business having failed through no miscarriage or
fault of his, the poor Baron never could obtain indemnification for his
charges, and having wearied out his health and exhausted his fortune in a
fruitless solicitation at Vienna, he died and left his disconsolate widow in
very narrow circumstances. You have flattered me with the hopes of coming to me
after the wedding, unless I prevented you by setting out upon Davison's
arrival: this I was strongly tempted to do, that I might prevent your trouble;
but great as was my joy when I received such instances of your returning
kindness, my health and spirits were still unequal to the undertaking, for to
say the truth I am far from well; a low fever hangs about me, and I take little
rest or nourishment: come to me therefore, my dear Lord, and repay yourself by
a double piece of charity, for I think you may be able to do Madame Polberg a
service with the Imperial minister, by stating the case of the Baron, as it
came under your cognizance, and it is to be hoped that your testimony will
assist her suit for obtaining justice. Thus you shall at once receive the
widow's blessing, and the grateful thanks of your devoted wife. Your presence
may repel this secret enemy that saps my health, if I see you happy and well
pleased with me, the smile of kindness will repair a broken spirit; but if I
hear that your retirement from office, and the happy marriage of Louisa, have
weaned your heart from the unprofitable pursuits of ambition, and if I find you
disposed to seek for peace and tranquillity in domestic life, and that a town
house and a suburban villa can no longer detach you from the venerable seat of
your ancestors, all complaints will vanish before such a blessed revolution,
and there will be no bounds to my joy and thankfulness. Then I will return with
you most gladly; from that moment my whole heart will be yours, and every hour
of my life shall be dedicated to the delightful task of pleasing and of serving
you: then we shall live again in our children, our youth shall be renovated in
their's; in the contemplation of Louisa's and Arundel's nuptial happiness, we
shall find a perpetual feast to our souls, and perhaps enjoy the further
felicity of seeing a young generation arise from the union of two noble
families, heirs of the virtue, beauty and generosity of their parents.

LETTER CII. The Countess to Lady Louisa G.
ALL joy to my beloved child! Your mother, who fled to this solitary dwelling
with no better hope, than to secret herself from calumny and unkindness, has
found it a scene of busy revolutions, selected as it were by Providence to
perform its wonders in, and by the most extraordinary coincidence of chances to
bring the accuser face to face with the accused, and extort confession from a
guilty heart under the terrors of impending death.

What unexpected happiness has followed the discovery of that wicked plot! How
much beyond all hope was the preservation of that desperate man, the least of
whose wounds seemed to take away all chance of life! How adorable was the
divine Grace, which inspired him with repentance, and moved him to make
atonement for his crimes by a clear, complete and explicit confession! Who
could have believed that your father's heart would have been so converted from
its resentment, and turned upon the sudden with such benignity toward Arundel!
What remained for you but to waste your life in bewailing his obduracy, or else
to have sunk your character by precipitating yourself into a clandestine
marriage against the protest of your parent? Hapless alternative! and yet where
was your hope but in the choice of these difficulties? -- When behold at once,
in the most unexpected moment, the hand of Heaven is laid upon your father's
heart, the quickening touch revives that conscience, which seemed dead within
him, the regenerate spirit of mercy inspires him with new feelings, peace and
reconciliation take place, Arundel is adopted, my prayers are granted and my
child is blessed.

Now, Louisa, I conjure you by your gratitude to that beneficent Power, which
has brought these mighty things to pass, let these reflections never fade in
your mind: remember what it is you owe, a debt that your whole life can never
overpay. Be dutiful, affectionate and tender to your father; remember what he
has done for you; call to mind what daggers he has drawn from your bosom, and
strike not a thorn, though the slightest and least painful, into his: cherish
him in his age, pity him in his infirmities, sooth him in those listless hours,
when life becomes a load: let him be ever welcome to your doors, open your arms
to receive him, though he bring no mirth or gaiety with him, and make
allowances for the dullness of that evening, which is too apt to close the day,
that has been sacrificed to ambition; though his mind may decay let not your
charity lose its vigor, and let the daughter's hospitality be the parent's
asylum.

In my letter to your father I took the liberty of hinting to him how blessed I
should be if he could detach his mind from worldly pursuits, and take this
opportunity of his recess from office to seek tranquillity in the country: let
me entreat you to cooperate with my wishes, and as your influence is great, to
exert it for his happiness. Grant for a moment that he was reinstated in his
former post, what can he gain by it? not any new accession of dignity; for what
is that honor, of whose instability he has had such recent experience? and if
he seeks it without obtaining it, a fruitless pursuit does but sink his
character and disgrace his politics. On the contrary, if he avails himself of
his dismission from public affairs, and without impatience or repining takes up
the respectable character of an independent nobleman, all mankind will give him
credit for the disintestedness of his past services, and not impute them to the
greediness of power, but to a patriot zeal for his country's good.

As for your own conduct in a married state, the lessons which I should have
repeated have been so faithfully remembered by you, and so aptly applied, that
you have anticipated all I had to say on that subject: those rules are now
become your own, and I trust you will never want perseverance in following what
your reason adopts.

In Mr. Mortlake and Lady Jane you will have the best neighbors in the world,
and I flatter myself they will both contribute to your happiness and themselves
enjoy it. The specimen you sent me of her poetry pleased me much, and the
subject still better than the execution of it. I beg you will present to them
my most cordial congratulations.

Mr. Arundel has so long commanded every good and zealous wish of my heart,
that it would be but idle ceremony to repeat them now: as the husband of my
Louisa he will have my warmest affection; but I must beseech both him and you
not to think of coming hither, as you kindly offered: no, my dear, that is a
sacrifice I will by no means allow you to make; and lest what I have said may
not be sufficient to divert you from it, remember that I positively forbid it.
As my health is somewhat impaired, I think it not improbable I shall try a
winter in the south of France, to which I am advised, and have the offer of all
necessary passports for the purpose. Let me hope I shall then return to you
with better spirits, and a more established state of health.

Sir George Revel is gone to Bareges, from which place he has written me a
letter full of acknowledgments; and I am well pleased to hear that he advances
in his recovery. It will be long before he returns to England.

I had almost forgot a circumstance, which I should more properly have
mentioned in my letter to your father; but I desire you will tell him, that
upon observing what you say to him and Mr. Arundel about diamonds, I shall be
extremely happy, with his approbation, to transfer my jewels to you, and I do
earnestly request he will consent to my desire. I delivered them into his hands
when I left London, and I hope he will deliver them into yours. God bless you,
my dear child!

Farewell.
LETTER CIII. Sir George Revel to the Countess of G.
Bareges.
A HEART so penetrated with your goodness as mine is cannot resist the impulse
of gratitude, though I fear there is a degree of presumption in thus repeating
to you my thanks, or supposing that it can be in any degree interesting to you
to hear, that I reached this place with less pain and fatigue than I expected,
and that I find myself much benefited since my arrival.

I saw with the deepest concern a very sensible alteration in your health,
whilst your charity was employed in restoring mine: the gentleman, who will
have the honor of waiting upon you with this letter, Dr. Ramsay of Edenborough,
is returning to his own country, having received his cure from these salutary
waters; let not this small but zealous effort offend you, and pardon me if I
have availed myself of the opportunity for tendering to you the advice of a
person so eminent in his profession, and so ardent to serve you. You have been,
under Providence, the preserver of my life; could I be the happy instrument of
adding but one hour of health to yours, how blessed should I be!

I have the honor to be, etc. etc. GEORGE REVEL.

LETTER CIV. Lady Louisa Arundel to the Countess of G.
Spring Grove.
I AM just returned from the church, where before a crowd of spectators Arundel
and your happy daughter have joined their hands and interchanged their wedded
vows before the altar; the mild serenity of Arundel's countenance, the pious
harmony of Mortlake's voice, who performed the solemn office, and the chearing
looks of my father and Lady Jane, supported me through the most awful moment of
my life. They tell me I acquitted myself with much propriety; I hope the wife
of Arundel will ever do so.

The first commands my husband lays upon me are to assure you of his most
respectful devotion, and I obey him with a heart, that overflows with filial as
with conjugal affection.

I am, etc. etc. LOUISA ARUNDEL.
P. S. My father writes to you; we are setting off for Arundel House.



LETTER CV. The Earl to the Countess of G.
I DISPATCH my servant Le Maitre with the joyful intelligence of our beloved
daughter's marriage, on which event I congratulate with you most cordially and
most affectionately.

The week that Arundel has passed here endears him to me above measure: never
did I contemplate a character more truly amiable, and I flatter myself I am now
received into his heart: he did not give himself so wholly up to lover like
dalliances as to exclude me from his attentions, but on the contrary I had many
hours in private with him, and in these friendly conferences he opened to me
the whole state of his affairs, and it was with pleasure I found him perfect
master of them, and thoroughly disposed to confine himself to such a scheme of
living, as will for ever secure him from exceeding them: I must do Louisa the
justice to say that it is her plan, or rather yours, which he has adopted in
its full extent; so solid an understanding as his will never depart from rules
so essential to domestic comfort, and so conformable to right reason.

The bride and bridegroom set off in their post-chaise for Arundel House soon
after the ceremony was over, but I requested Mr. Mortlake and Lady Jane to pass
the day with me, which they very charitably consented to, and great comfort
they afford me thereby, for they are lovely people.

I am now a solitary being upon earth till your friendly and forgiving heart
shall receive me once again and for ever; to that virtuous, that blessed asylum
I am hastening, impatient to atone to you for all your cruel sufferings, and to
approve myself a fond and faithful husband for the rest of our days.

Every thing in your letter (except the account of your health, which heavily
afflicts me) meets my perfect approbation: believe me on my word, Louisa, I
have taken a last leave of all the vanity and ambition of this world, and
devote myself to you and those endearing ties, which wrap our hearts together.
I have at last got sight of tranquillity, and made acquaintance with true
happiness and peace of heart; shall I forfeit their acquaintance? Never. The
reform you point out I have already put in motion, and my agent has
instructions to set my house in town to sale; the same shall be done by this
villa, if you recommend it, but as it was once a favorite with you, I postpone
its sentence till you give final judgment upon it: I have no holdings toward
it; compared to the superior claim of my hereditary residence it is but as a
mistress to a lawful wife, and I shall throw it off without a sigh. Upon a
close review of my domestics I find a parcel of spoilt puppies fit for little
else but furnishing the hall of a Minister's house, and I have accordingly
bequeathed them to the public, not choosing to annex such lumber to a sober
family upon a country establishment; we will have no such fellows about us.
Arundel's servants have been all drilled by the late general and are in perfect
discipline; they are not a numerous corpse but they are well trained, and move
with the regularity of machines. I offered him our town house, if he had been
disposed to have exchanged it for his own, but he says it is too large and
stately and will have nothing to do with it. You would be charmed with the
modest simplicity of their equipages; he is fond of horses, but does not seem
to have that passion for the stable, which young men of his age are so apt to
have; his ruling passion is that which sympathizes with our Louisa's; a mutual
love possesses them wholly; as for our dear doting girl, though you well know
and have often trembled for the uncommon sensibility of her heart, and its
proneness to the tenderest of all affections, still you can form no guess at
the excessive fondness every look, each word and every action express for the
beloved of her soul: I can speak only of what I have seen, and doubtless she
has put some check upon herself in my company; what I have not seen can be only
matter of conjecture, and as her darling's sensations seem to the full as quick
as her own, I am apt to think for both their sakes I have not married them an
hour too soon, though our deeds are far from completed. Arundel would not take
a guinea from my hands upon the marriage, as he knew I did not over-abound in
cash: I forced a thousand pounds upon Louisa, out of which she bought a few,
and but a few, articles of apparel; as for pinmoney she rejected the idea with
abhorrence. The rents of the estate, which with the barony of G. go to Louisa
in case I die without heir male, I have turned over to Arundel, and the reform
I have made, and shall further make, in my establishment, will more than answer
to that defalcation of my income; so that you and I shall be more than rich
enough for all the dignified enjoyments of life, and liberally provided for the
charities of it; as for these beloved creatures, I only fear they will be
wealthy to a surfeit.

I am only waiting for news of their safe arrival, and then I shall set out by
the way of Margate and Ostend, between which there is a pacquet-boat that
passes under the Emperor's colors: I shall have no one but a servant with me,
as I am prepared to find you in a very small house, and beseech you not to
hurry your spirits about preparations for me; the humblest diet and the meanest
lodging will be preferable to all earthly splendors in my estimation, if you
greet me with the smile of approbation and forgiveness, and if I am so blessed as
to find you recovering of that indisposition you complain of, and which has
raised a thousand anxious alarms in my bosom.

Le Maitre has orders to meet me at Ostend with an account of your health and
what other commands you may please to give him. In obedience to your wishes I
have searched out some papers relative to Baron Polberg's negotiation in
England, which I flatter myself will be of use to the widow's cause: the
Imperial prime minister is a very noble gentleman, and a lover of justice; I
don't despair of rendering Madame Polberg some services, if her case is rightly
stated.

Farewell.
LETTER CVI. Arundel to the Earl of G.
Arundel House.
I SNATCH a hasty moment to assure your Lordship of our safe arrival and in
early evening; we were considerably less time upon the road, than when we came
up with you, for our carriage was light and the post-boys were peculiarly
alert. Our dear Louisa says she has not only felt no fatigue by the way, but
scarce believes she has performed a journey, as her mind was not upon the road
but with the happy companion, who was seated by her side. That charming glow,
so natural to her spirits, has never abated; even she herself was never half so
beautiful as at this moment; judge then what she is: there is a luster in her
eyes too dazzling to look upon: what an angel have you bestowed upon me! Excuse
the incoherence of my letter, for I write to you a few words at a time, as I
can prevail with myself to take off my eyes from her enchanting person. I am
persuaded that even Saint Anthony could not have recollected himself in her
presence, how then should I keep any composure of thoughts or style, whilst she
is playing abou tthe room? -- We are alone and in the picture-room where my
venerable forefathers hang by the wall, gravely contemplating their enamoured
happy descendant. And am I mistress of this house? she says; will these grave
personages acknowledge me as one of their family? Am I an Arundel? -- and then
she makes a solemn obeisance to the old Cardinal at the upper end of the room,
which you contend to be a Titian. What can I do with such a playful, such an
enchanting creature? It is impossible to proceed. -- Now she has run to the
piano-forte and begins to sing; oh Heavens! with what expression. She is
irresistible; she masters all the senses at once. What can I say, my dear, my
generous Lord! All that is left of me is yours.

Farewell.
LETTER CVII. Lady Louisa Arundel to Lady Jane Mortlake.
HOW do you, my Lady Jane? I hear your Ladyship is just arrived, and I conceive
it to be an indispensable punctilio in country manners to enquire after my
neighbors, and put them to the trouble of a letter, though they live at next
door. Is the conscience of your beloved at peace within itself? Does he repine
at the mischief he committed yesterday on the person of his friend, or does he
feel as if he had done no mischief at all? Me he has blessed beyond the bounds of
human happiness, and whilst I continue to feel and endeavor to deserve the
blessing he has pronounced, surely he will not repent of having pronounced it;
if unabating love, fidelity and devotion to my Arundel, are good securities for
the conduct of a wife, to them I appeal without any fear of forfeiture.

Do not think I write to entice you from your house the very evening of your
arrival; I hope to morrow we shall dine together here at our old-fashioned
hour; in the mean time Arundel and I are not tired of each other's company. Oh,
my sweet Jane, my dear bridal sister, how I long to embrace you, and
interchange with you those warm and grateful effusions of the heart, which
happiness like our's inspires! Had I been told before I married Arundel, that
my love for him would admit of an increase, I should have spurned at the idea,
now I find it had been truly said, for he is ten times dearer to me than ever;
surely my affection is of a softer quality, the fires that love had lighted in
my heart now melt it, and whilst my eyes dwell on his engaging form, the tears
instinctively flow from them, and though I smile, I weep: he is now out of the
room giving some orders to his servants, else I could not write so composedly
as I do. Tell me, my Jane, are not your sensations like mine? Methinks they
are, for though you did not quite confess so much in words, your looks were
true interpreters of a most tender heart. I have seen your animated features
more alive, but never did you look so charming as at Spring Grove.

Thank Heaven! I have not brought Arundel a farthing, for it is my glory to owe
every thing to him. What a wretch should I have been, had I suffered him to
deck me out with diamonds! and now behold my generous mother wishes me to take
here is: I pause upon that offer; for what are all such things to me? The jewel
of my husband's heart is all I covet to possess: gross indeed would be my
error, were I so to disgrace myself with your disinterested example before me.
No, Jane, I will be moderate in all things but my love, and humble as
simplicity itself: there is nothing I more abhor than the idea of being a fine
bride, and I neither affect to be popular with the milliners, nor to be made
the subject of a puffing paragraph in a silly newspaper.

But I am writing you a long letter, and we are to meet tomorrow; let me beg
you will come an hour before dinner, or at least send your dearer half to me,
for I want to consult his judgment. There is one thorn in the filial heart of
my beloved Arundel, which I would fain attempt to draw; you will easily
perceive that it points to his father; that unfeeling, envious parent has
declared to Lord G. that he cannot think of entering this house, which so late
belonged to his deceased brother, with whom he was at enmity, and who totally
overlooked him in his will. Now it occurs to me that I might write to this Sir
Joseph, and if Mr. Mortlake does not dissuade from the undertaking, and will
help me in the execution of it, a woman's hand, when armed with a weapon of his
bestowing, may strike a hard blow upon a callous heart, and perhaps awaken it
to some sense of shame at least, if nothing better can be done. Apprize your
dear husband of this, and let him turn it in his thoughts, but do not let him
suppose I can think of sending any letter to Sir Joseph without showing it
first to Arundel, and having his sanction for the attempt.

Farewell.
LETTER CVIII. The Earl of G. to Lady Louisa Arundel.
I WRITE to you from the house of Madame Polberg, where I arrived the day
before yesterday, and had the satisfaction to find your dear mother in a fair
way to recover, though far from well. She had begun to receive great benefit
from the prescriptions of a Doctor Ramsay of Edenborough, who was then with
her, and, who being on his return from Bareges, had been sent thither by Sir
George Revel, and I confess it was a mark of grateful attention to his
benefactress, which gave me a very pleasing impression.

I will not awaken your sensibility by a description of our meeting, further
than to tell you in general words, that it was as tender and affecting as my
penitence and her forgiveness could make it. I flatter myself the anguish of
her mind is now healed, and that she credits me for the sincerity of the
professions I have made to her: indeed I have both the evidence of her looks
and the assurances of her physician to convince me of the very favorable
alteration in her health and spirits in the short time I have been with her:
notwithstanding this, I shall not have the happiness of bringing her home with
me immediately, as Dr. Ramsay very earnestly advises her to winter in the south
of France, and I believe it will be decided for Montpelier as soon as I can
procure the proper passports, of which there is no doubt.

This unforeseen journey will oblige me to throw some trouble on your dear
husband, to whom I shall take the liberty of addressing certain powers and
commissions for the regulation of my affairs at home, particularly as to the
sale of my house in Grosvenor Square, and also of my villa at Spring Grove,
both which we have jointly determined to dispose of: I must likewise desire him
to forward the presentation to Mr. Mortlake's donative, which I left in the
hands of my worthy agent, Mr. Green of Lincoln's Inn.

This is the compleatest solitude that can well be imagined; it is early
morning, and yet I have had the melancholy curiosity to visit the ever
memorable spot in the center of the adjoining wood, where your beloved husband,
like Heaven's avenging minister, struck pride and calumny to the ground. It was
a scene to call forth all the feelings of my heart; conscience did not pass it
over lightly; I humbled myself to the earth, and poured forth my thanksgivings
to that merciful Being, who has vouchsafed to shower such blessings on his
undeserving creature.

Farewell.
The EDITOR to the READER.
Candid and friendly Reader,
THESE Letters, which I have presented to thee, hoping they may serve to amuse
an hour or two of thy leisure, have been collected and arranged by me with some
pains in the series as they now stand, but when the principal correspondents
were married, and the two brides became neighbors, letter-writing no longer
was their concern; they had other business upon their hands: but though I
cannot for this reason gratify thy curiosity with their epistolary
correspondence, yet if what thou have read of their past story should interest
thee to be told of their succeeding prosperity in the married state, I have the
pleasure to inform thee that their domestic happiness has known no interruption.

Arundel and his charming Lady are as much in love with each other as ever;
they have strictly adhered to that rational plan they set out with, and are
beloved and blessed by all their neighbors, rich and poor; by gradual
improvements they have beautified their place to a very high degree, from the
superfluities of their income: Louisa's gardens, flower-houses, dairy and
poultry are the admiration of the whole neighborhood; Arundel's farm-houses,
cottages, woods and grounds are the talk of the country, and happy are those
tenants and laborers who live under him. He is a very respectable member of
Parliament, but no partisan; upon all great questions he is sure to be found in
his place and nobody is better heard in the House, but as to taking office I
believe there are few things he is more adverse to. Lady Louisa has brought him
four fine children, and if I am rightly informed his family consists of two
boys and two girls.

The Reverend Mr. Mortlake and Lady Jane are wedded to their delicious
retirement, and if there is happiness on earth, this amiable couple is in the
enjoyment of it. The harmony of their friendship with the house of Arundel has
gone on without check or abatement, for the hateful spirit of envy cannot sow
discord in such hearts as they are possessed of: they are adored by their
parishioners, and beloved by all who know them. Lady Jane is the happy mother
of five beautiful children, who, with the little Arundels, make a charming
group of playfellows.

The Earl and Countess of G. after passing a winter in the south of France,
came home the best of friends, and are retired to their country seat, where
they constantly reside, except when they make a visit to their beloved
connections at Arundel House. The mind of that amiable Lady being healed of all
its sorrows, she has recovered her health and spirits, and Lord G. declares he
has at last discovered wherein true happiness consists.

Admiral John Arundel having fought the good fight, has laid himself up for the
peace in a snug little tenement within a few miles of his nephew, which he has
fitted up as near as possible to the model of his ship's cabin, where he enjoys
himself after his own humor: it is a joyful holiday to all the children when
he comes over to Arundel House, as there is no such playfellow in the world as
uncle John.

The gallant Earl of S. having cleared his paternal estate from encumbrances
and put it into good condition with part of the sum he gained by his captures,
has married a Miss Dormer, who is a very amiable and accomplished lady; she is
neice to old Lady Treville and the Hon. Mrs. Dormer, and will inherit their
forturnes, which are very considerable.

Sir Joseph Arundel has paid the debt of nature, but not before he had seen his
errors, and reconciled himself to his worthy son by a visit to Arundel House,
where he was received with great kindness and respect.

Sir George Revel is at last returned to England not more perfectly healed of
his wounds than by them; he is in all respects a reformed man, and has married
a lady of a noble Huguonot family in the south of France, who promises to make
him an excellent wife, and to whom he seems very truly attached.

And now, kind Reader, if thou will allow a spare corner on thy shelf for these
little volumes and not throw them by with disdain, I hope they will repay thy
courtesy some rainy evening, when a trifling book may take its turn for want of
better company; or peradventure they may give thee a lift up a hill, or through
the sands, when thy chaise is slowly dragged by a pair of weary posthorses,
horses, and thy mind without something to feed upon would perchance be as weary
as the beasts that draw thee. At any time, or in any temper, though they may
only lull thee into a placid nap, so they amuse thy fancy and not offend thy
morals, trust me there does not live a man, who will more truly rejoice to
please thee than

Thy devoted friend and servant, R. C.

FINIS.

