THE LIFE AND OPINIONS OF TRISTRAM SHANDY, GENTLEMAN.

(...)

(...)

VOL. II.

The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY in Pall Mall. M.DCC.LX.

THE LIFE and OPINIONS OF TRISTRAM SHANDY, Gent.
CHAP. I.
I Have begun a new book, on purpose that I might have room enough to explain
the nature of the perplexities in which my uncle Toby was involved, from the
many discourses and interrogations about the siege of Namur, where he received
his wound.

I must remind the reader, in case he has read the history of King William's
wars, -- but if he has not, -- I then inform him, that one of the most
memorable attacks in that siege, was that which was made by the English and
Dutch upon the point of the advanced counterscarp, before the gate of St.
Nicolas, which enclosed the great sluice or water-stop, where the English were
terribly exposed to the shot of the counter-guard and demibastion of St. Roch:
The issue of which hot dispute, in three words, was this; That the Dutch lodged
themselves upon the counter-guard, -- and that the English made themselves
masters of the covered way before St. Nicolas's gate, notwithstanding the
gallantry of the French officers, who exposed themselves upon the glacis sword
in hand.

As this was the principal attack of which my uncle Toby was an eyewitness at
Namur, -- the army of the besiegers being cut off, by the confluence of the
Maes and Sambre, from seeing much of each other's operations, -- my uncle Toby
was generally more eloquent and particular in his account of it; and the many
perplexities he was in, arose out of the almost insurmountable difficulties he
found in telling his story intelligibly, and giving such clear ideas of the
differences and distinctions between the scarp and counterscarp, -- the glacis
and covered way, -- the half moon and ravelin, -- as to make his company fully
comprehend where and what he was about.

Writers themselves are too apt to confound these terms; -- so that you will
the less wonder, if in his endeavors to explain them, and in opposition to
many misconceptions, that my uncle Toby did often times puzzle his visiters, and
sometimes himself too.

To speak the truth, unless the company my father led up stairs were tolerably
clear-headed, or my uncle Toby was in one of his best explanatory moods, 'twas
a difficult thing, do what he could, to keep the discourse free from obscurity.

What rendered the account of this affair the more intricate to my uncle Toby,
was this, -- that in the attack of the counterscarp before the gate of St.
Nicolas, extending itself from the bank of the Maes, quite up to the great
waterstop; -- the ground was cut and cross-cut with such a multitude of dykes,
drains, rivulets, and sluices, on all sides, -- and he would get so sadly
bewildered and set fast amongst them, that frequently he could neither get
backwards or forwards to save his life; and was often times obliged to give up
the attack upon that very account only.

These perplexing rebuffs gave my uncle Toby Shandy more perturbations than you
would imagine; and as my father's kindness to him was continually dragging up
fresh friends and fresh inquirers, -- he had but a very uneasy task of it.

No doubt my uncle Toby had great command of himself, -- and could guard
appearances, I believe, as well as most men; -- yet any one may imagine, that
when he could not retreat out of the ravelin without getting into the
half moon, or get out of the covered way without falling down the counterscarp,
nor cross the dyke without danger of slipping into the ditch, but that he must
have fretted and fumed inwardly: -- He did so; -- and these little and hourly
vexations, which may seem trifling and of no account to the man who has not
read Hippocrates, yet, whoever has read Hippocrates, or Dr. James Mackenzie,
and has considered well the effects which the passions and affections of the
mind have upon the digestion, -- (Why not of a wound as well as of a dinner?)
-- may easily conceive what sharp paroxisms and exacerbations of his wound my
uncle Toby must have undergone upon that score only.

-- My uncle Toby could not philosophize upon it; -- 'twas enough he felt it
was so, -- and having sustained the pain and sorrows of it for three months
together, he was resolved some way or other to extricate himself.

He was one morning lying upon his back in his bed, the anguish and nature of
the wound upon his groin suffering him to lie in no other position, when a
thought came into his head, that if he could purchase such a thing, and have it
pasted down upon a board, as a large map of the fortifications of the town and
citadel of Namur, with its environs, it might be a means of giving him ease. --
I take notice of his desire to have the environs along with the town and
citadel, for this reason, -- because my uncle Toby's wound was got in one of
the traverses, about thirty toises from the returning angle of the trench,
opposite to the salient angle of the demi-bastion of St. Roch; -- so that he
was pretty confident he could stick a pin upon the identical spot of ground
where he was standing in when the stone struck him.

All this succeeded to his wishes, and not only freed him from a world of sad
explanations, but, in the end, it proved the happy means, as you will read, of
procuring my uncle Toby his HOBBYHORSE.

CHAP. II.
THERE is nothing so foolish, when you are at the expense of making an
entertainment of this kind, as to order things so badly, as to let your
critics and gentry of refined taste run it down: Nor is there any thing so
likely to make them do it, as that of leaving them out of the party, or, what
is full as offensive, of bestowing your attention upon the rest of your guests
in so particular a way, as if there was no such thing as a critic (by
occupation) at table.

-- I guard against both; for, in the first place, I have left half a dozen
places purposely open for them; -- and, in the next place, I pay them all
court, -- Gentlemen, I kiss your hands, -- I protest no company could give me
half the pleasure, -- by my soul I am glad to see you, -- I beg only you will
make no strangers of yourselves, but sit down without any ceremony, and fall on
heartily.

I said I had left six places, and I was upon the point of carrying my
complaisance so far, as to have left a seventh open for them, -- and in this
very spot I stand on; -- but being told by a critic, (though not by occupation,
-- but by nature) that I had acquitted myself well enough, I shall fill it up
directly, hoping, in the mean time, that I shall be able to make a great deal
of more room next year.

-- How, in the name of wonder! could your uncle Toby, who, it seems, was a
military man, and whom you have represented as no fool, -- be at the same time
such a confused, pudding-headed, muddle-headed fellow, as -- Go look.

So, Sir Critic, I could have replied; but I scorn it. -- It Is language
unurbane, -- and only befitting the man who cannot give clear and satisfactory
accounts of things, or dive deep enough into the first causes of human
ignorance and confusion. It is moreover the reply valiant, -- and therefore I
reject it; for though it might have suited my uncle Toby's character as a soldier
excellently well, -- and had he not accustomed himself, in such attacks, to
whistle the Lillabullero, -- as he wanted no courage, it is the very answer he
would have given; yet it would by no means have done for me. You see as plain
as can be, that I write as a man of erudition; -- that even my similies, my
allusions, my illustrations, my metaphors, are erudite, -- and that I must
sustain my character properly, and contrast it properly too, -- else what would
become of me? Why, Sir, I should be undone; -- at this very moment that I am
going here to fill up one place against a critic, -- I should have made an
opening for a couple.

-- Therefore I answer thus:

Pray, Sir, in all the reading which you have ever read, did you ever read such
a book as Locke's Essay upon the Human Understanding? -- Don't answer me
rashly, -- because many, I know, quote the book, who have not read it, -- and
many have read it who understand it not: -- If either of these is your case, as
I write to instruct, I will tell you in three words what the book is. -- It is
a history. -- A history! of who? what? where? when? Don't hurry yourself. -- It
is a history-book, Sir, (which may possibly recommend it to the world) of what
passes in a man's own mind; and if you will say so much of the book, and no
more, believe me, you will cut no contemptible figure in a metaphysic circle.

But this by the way.

Now if you will venture to go along with me, and look down into the bottom of
this matter, it will be found that the cause of obscurity and confusion, in the
mind of man, is threefold.

Dull organs, dear Sir, in the first place. Secondly, slight and transient
impressions made by objects when the said organs are not dull. And, thirdly, a
memory like unto a sieve, not able to retain what it has received. -- Call down
Dolly your chambermaid, and I will give you my cap and bell along with it, if
I make not this matter so plain that Dolly herself shall understand it as well
as Malbranch. -- When Dolly has indicted her epistle to Robin, and has thrust
her arm into the bottom of her pocket hanging by her right-side; -- take that
opportunity to recollect that the organs and faculties of perception, can, by
nothing in this world, be so aptly typified and explained as by that one thing
which Dolly's hand is in search of. -- Your organs are not so dull that I
should inform you, -- it is an inch, Sir, of red seal-wax.

When this is melted and dropped upon the letter, if Dolly fumbles too long for
her thimble, till the wax is over hardened, it will not receive the mark of her
thimble from the usual impulse which was wont to imprint it. Very well: If
Dolly's wax, for want of better, is beeswax, or of a temper too soft, -- though
it may receive, -- it will not hold the impression, how hard soever Dolly
thrusts against it; and last of all, supposing the wax good, and eke the
thimble, but applied thereto in careless haste, as her Mistress rings the bell;
-- in any one of these three cases, the print, left by the thimble, will be as
unlike the prototype as a brassjack.

Now you must understand that not one of these was the true cause of the
confusion in my uncle Toby's discourse; and it is for that very reason I
enlarge upon them so long, after the manner of great physiologists, -- to show
the world what it did not arise from.

What it did arise from, I have hinted above, and a fertile source of obscurity
it is, -- and ever will be, -- and that is the unsteady uses of words which
have perplexed the clearest and most exalted understandings.

It is ten to one (at Arthur's) whether you have ever read the literary
histories of past ages; -- if you have, -- what terrible battles, 'yclept
logomachies, have they occasioned and perpetuated with so much gall and
ink-shed, -- that a good natured man cannot read the accounts of them without
tears in his eyes.

Gentle critic! when thou have weighed all this, and considered within thyself
how much of thy own knowledge, discourse, and conversation has been pestered
and disordered, at one time or other, by this, and this only: -- What a pudder
and racket in COUNCILS about (...) and (...); and in the SCHOOLS of the learned
about power and about spirit; -- about essences, and about quintessences; --
about substances, and about space. -- What confusion in greater THEATERS from
words of little meaning, and as indeterminate a sense; -- when thou considers
this, thou will not wonder at my uncle Toby's perplexities, -- thou will drop a
tear of pity upon his scarp and his counterscarp; -- his glacis and his
covered-way; -- his ravelin and his half moon: 'Twas not by ideas, -- by
heaven! his life was put in jeopardy by words.

CHAP. III.
WHEN my uncle Toby got his map of Namur to his mind, he began immediately to
apply himself, and with the utmost diligence, to the study of it; for nothing
being of more importance to him than his recovery, and his recovery depending,
as you have read, upon the passions and affections of his mind, it behoved him
to take the nicest care to make himself so far master of his subject, as to be
able to talk upon it without emotion.

In a fortnight's close and painful application, which, by the bye, did my
uncle Toby's wound, upon his groin, no good, -- he was enabled, by the help of
some marginal documents at the feet of the elephant, together with Gobesius's
military architecture and pyroballogy, translated from the Flemish, to form his
discourse with passable perspicuity; and before he was two full months gone, --
he was right eloquent upon it, and could make not only the attack of the
advanced counterscarp with great order; -- but having, by that time, gone much
deeper into the art, than what his first motive made necessary, -- my uncle
Toby was able to cross the Maes and Sambre; make diversions as far as Vauban's
line, the abbey of Salsines, etc. and give his visiters as distinct a history
of each of their attacks, as of that of the gate of St. Nicolas, where he had
the honor to receive his wound.

But the desire of knowledge, like the thirst of riches, increases ever with
the acquisition of it. The more my uncle Toby pored over his map, the more he
took a liking to it; -- by the same process and electrical assimilation, as I
told you, through which I ween the souls of connoisseurs themselves, by long
friction and incumbition, have the happiness, at length, to get all be-virtu'd,
-- be-pictur'd, -- be-butterflied, and be-fiddled.

The more my uncle Toby drank of this sweet fountain of science, the greater
was the heat and impatience of his thirst, so that, before the first year of
his confinement had well gone round, there was scarce a fortified town in Italy
or Flanders, of which, by one means or other, he had not procured a plan,
reading over as he got them, and carefully collating therewith the histories of
their sieges, their demolitions, their improvements, and new works, all which
he would read with that intense application and delight, that he would forget
himself, his wound, his confinement, his dinner.

In the second year my uncle Toby purchased Ramelli and Cataneo, translated
from the Italian; -- likewise Stevinus, Marolis, the Chevalier de Ville,
Lorini, Cochorn, Sheeter, the Count de Pagan, the Marshal Vauban, Mons.
Blondel, with almost as many more books of military architecture, as Don
Quixote was found to have of chivalry, when the curate and barber invaded his
library.

Toward the beginning of the third year, which was in August, ninety-nine, my
uncle Toby found it necessary to understand a little of projectiles: -- And
having judged it best to draw his knowledge from the fountainhead, he began
with N. Tartaglia, who it seems was the first man who detected the imposition
of a canon-ball's doing all that mischief under the notion of a right line. --
This N. Tartaglia proved to my uncle Toby to be an impossible thing.

-- Endless is the Search of Truth!

No sooner was my uncle Toby satisfied which road the cannon-ball did not go,
but he was insensibly led on, and resolved in his mind to enquire and find out
which road the ball did go: For which purpose he was obliged to set off afresh
with old Maltus, and studied him devoutly. -- He proceeded next to Gallileo and
Torricellius, wherein, by certain geometrical rules, infallibly laid down, he
found the precise path to be a PARABOLA, -- or else an HYPERBOLA, -- and that
the parameter, or latus rectum, of the conic section of the said path, was to
the quantity and amplitude in a direct ratio, as the whole line to the sine of
double the angle of incidence, formed by the breech upon an horizontal plane;
-- and that the semiparameter, -- stop! my dear uncle Toby, -- stop! -- go not
one foot further into this thorny and bewildered track, -- intricate are the
steps! intricate are the mases of this labyrinth! intricate are the troubles
which the pursuit of this bewitching phantom, KNOWLEDGE, will bring upon thee.
-- O my uncle! fly -- fly -- fly from it as from a serpent. -- Is it fit,
good-natured man! thou should fit up, with the wound upon thy groin, whole
nights baking thy blood with hectic watchings? -- Alas! 'twill exasperate thy
symptoms, -- check thy perspirations, -- evaporate thy spirits, -- waste thy
animal strength, -- dry up thy radical moisture, -- bring thee into a costive
habit of body, impair thy health, -- and hasten all the infirmities of thy old
age. -- O my uncle! my uncle Toby!

CHAP. IV.
I Would not give a groat for that man's knowledge in pen-craft, who does not
understand this, -- That the best plain narrative in the world, tacked very
close to the last spirited apostrophe to my uncle Toby, -- would have felt both
cold and vapid upon the reader's palate; -- therefore I forthwith put an end to
the chapter, -- though I was in the middle of my story.

-- Writers of my stamp have one principle in common with painters. -- Where an
exact copying makes our pictures less striking, we choose the less evil;
deeming it even more pardonable to trespass against truth, than beauty. -- This
is to be understood cum grano salis; but be it as it will, -- as the parallel
is made more for the sake of letting the apostrophe cool, than any thing else,
-- it is not very material whether upon any other score the reader approves of
it or not.

In the latter end of the third year, my uncle Toby perceiving that the
parameter and semi-parameter of the conic section, angered his wound, he left
off the study of projectiles in a kind of a huff, and betook himself to the
practical part of fortification only; the pleasure of which, like a spring held
back, returned upon him with redoubled force.

It was in this year that my uncle began to break in upon the daily regularity
of a clean shirt, -- to dismiss his barber unshaven, -- and to allow his
surgeon scarce time sufficient to dress his wound, concerning himself so little
about it, as not to ask him once in seven times dressing how it went on: When,
lo! -- all of a sudden, for the change was as quick as lightening, he began to
sigh heavily for his recovery, -- complained to my father, grew impatient with
the surgeon; -- and one morning as he heard his foot coming up stairs, he shut
up his books, and thrust aside his instruments, in order to expostulate with
him upon the protraction of his cure, which, he told him, might surely have
been accomplished at least by that time: -- He dwelt long upon the miseries he
had undergone, and the sorrows of his four years melancholy imprisonment; --
adding, that had it not been for the kind looks, and fraternal chearings of the
best of brothers, -- he had long since sunk under his misfortunes. -- My father
was by: My uncle Toby's eloquence brought tears into his eyes; -- 'twas
unexpected. -- My uncle Toby, by nature, was not eloquent; -- it had the
greater effect. -- The surgeon was confounded; -- not that there wanted grounds
for such, or greater, marks of impatience, -- but 'twas unexpected too; in the
four years he had attended him, he had never seen any thing like it in my uncle
Toby's carriage; -- he had never once dropped one fretful or discontented word;
-- he had been all patience, -- all submission.

-- We ose the right of complaining sometimes by forbearing it; -- but we
oftener treble the force: -- The surgeon was astonished; -- but much more so,
when he heard my uncle Toby go on, and peremptorily insist upon his healing up
the wound directly, -- or sending for Monsieur Ronjat, the King's
Serjeant-Surgeon, to do it for him.

The desire of life and health is implanted in man's nature; -- the love of
liberty and enlargement is a sister-passion to it: These my uncle Toby had in
common with his species; -- and either of them had been sufficient to account
for his earnest desire to get well and out of doors; -- but I have told you
before that nothing wrought with our family after the common way; -- and from
the time and manner in which this eager desire showed itself in the present
case, the penetrating reader will suspect there was some other cause or
crotchet for it in my uncle Toby's head: -- There was so, and it is the subject
of the next chapter to set forth what that cause and crotchet was. I own, when
that is done, 'twill be time to return back to the parlour fireside, where we
left my uncle Toby in the middle of his sentence.

CHAP. V.
WHEN a man gives himself up to the government of a ruling passion, -- or, in
other words, when his HOBBYHORSE grows headstrong, -- farewell cool reason
and fair discretion!

My uncle Toby's wound was near well, and as soon as the surgeon recovered his
surprise, and could get leave to say as much -- he told him, 'twas just
beginning to incarnate; and that if no fresh exfoliation happened, which there
was no signs of, -- it would be dried up in five or six weeks. The sound of as
many olympiads twelve hours before, would have conveyed an idea of shorter
duration to my uncle Toby's mind. -- The succession of his ideas was now rapid,
-- he broiled with impatience to put his design in execution; -- and so,
without consulting further with any soul living, -- which, by the bye, I think
is right, when you are predetermined to take no one soul's advice, -- he
privately ordered Trim, his man, to pack up a bundle of lint and dressings, and
hire a chariot and four to be at the door exactly by twelve o'clock that day,
when he knew my father would be upon 'Change. -- So leaving a bank-note upon
the table for the surgeon's care of him, and a letter of tender thanks for his
brother's, -- he packed up his maps, his books of fortification, his
instruments, etc. -- and, by the help of a crutch on one side, and Trim on the
other, -- my uncle Toby embarked for Shandy-Hall.

The reason, or rather the rise, of this sudden demigration, was as follows:

The table in my uncle Toby's room, and at which, the night before this change
happened, he was sitting with his maps, etc. about him, -- being somewhat of
the smallest, for that infinity of great and small instruments of knowledge
which usually lay crowded upon it; -- he had the accident, in reaching over for
his tobacco-box, to throw down his compasses, and in stooping to take the
compasses up, with his sleeve he threw down his case of instruments and
snuffers; -- and as the dice took a run against him, in his endeavoring to
catch the snuffers in falling, -- he thrust Monsieur Blondel off the table and
Count de Pagan o'top of him.

'Twas to no purpose for a man, lame as my uncle Toby was, to think of
redressing all these evils by himself, -- he rung his bell for his man Trim; --
Trim! quoth my uncle Toby, pri'thee see what confusion I have here been making.
-- I must have some better contrivance, Trim. -- Can not thou take my rule
and measure the length and breadth of this table, and then go and bespeak me
one as big again? -- Yes, an' please your Honor, replied Trim, making a bow;
-- but I hope your Honor will be soon well enough to get down to your country
seat, where, -- as your Honor takes so much pleasure in fortification, we
could manage this matter to a T.

I must here inform you, that this servant of my uncle Toby's, who went by the
name of Trim, had been a Corporal in my uncle's own company, -- his real name
was James Butler, -- but having got the nickname of Trim in the regiment, my
uncle Toby, unless when he happened to be very angry with him, would never call
him by any other name.

The poor fellow had been disabled for the service, by a wound on his left knee
by a musket-bullet, at the battle of Landen, which was two years before the
affair of Namur; -- and as the fellow was well beloved in the regiment, and a
handy fellow into the bargain, my uncle Toby took him for his servant, and of
excellent use was he, attending my uncle Toby in the camp and in his quarters
as valet, groom, barber, cook, sempster, and nurse; and indeed, from first to
last, waited upon him and served him with great fidelity and affection.

My uncle Toby loved the man in return, and what attached him more to him
still, was the similitude of their knowledge: -- For Corporal Trim, (for so,
for the future, I shall call him) by four years occasional attention to his
Master's discourse upon fortified towns, and the advantage of prying and
peeping continually into his Master's plans, etc. exclusive and besides what he
gained HOBBY-HORSICALLY, as a body-servant, Non Hobby-Horsical per se; -- had
become no mean proficient in the science; and was thought, by the cook and
chambermaid, to know as much of the nature of strongholds as my uncle Toby
himself.

I have but one more stroke to give to finish Corporal Trim's character, -- and
it is the only dark line in it. -- The fellow loved to advise, -- or rather to
hear himself talk; his carriage, however, was so perfectly respectful, 'twas
easy to keep him silent when you had him so; but set his tongue a-going, -- you
had no hold of him; -- he was voluble; -- the eternal interlardings of your
Honor, with the respectfulness of Corporal Trim's manner, interceding so
strong in behalf of his elocution, -- that though you might have been incommoded,
-- you could not well be angry. My uncle Toby was seldom either the one or the
other with him, -- or, at least, this fault, in Trim, broke no squares with
'em. My uncle Toby, as I said, loved the man; -- and besides, as he ever looked
upon a faithful servant, -- but as a humble friend, -- he could not bear to
stop his mouth. -- Such was Corporal Trim.

If I durst presume, continued Trim, to give your Honor my advice, and speak
my opinion in this matter. -- Thou art welcome, Trim, quoth my uncle Toby, --
speak, -- speak what thou think upon the subject, man, without fear. Why
then, replied Trim, (not hanging his ears and scratching his head like a
country lout, but) stroking his hair back from his forehead, and standing erect
as before his division. -- I think, quoth Trim, advancing his left, which was
his lame leg, a little forwards, -- and pointing with his right hand open
toward a map of Dunkirk, which was pinned against the hangings, -- I think,
quoth Corporal Trim, with humble submission to your Honor's better judgment,
-- that these ravelins, bastions, curtins, and horn-works make but a poor,
contemptible, fiddle faddle piece of work of it here upon paper, compared to
what your Honor and I could make of it, were we in the country by ourselves,
and had but a rood, or a rood and a half of ground to do what we pleased with:
As summer is coming on, continued Trim, your Honor might sit out of doors, and
give me the nography -- (call it ichnography, quoth my uncle) -- of the town or
citadel, your Honor was pleased to sit down before, -- and I will be shot by
your Honor upon the glacis of it, if I did not fortify it to your Honor's
mind. -- I dare say thou would, Trim, quoth my uncle. -- For if your Honor,
continued the Corporal, could but mark me the polygon, with its exact lines and
angles. -- That I could do very well, quoth my uncle. -- I would begin with the
fosse, and if your Honor could tell me the proper depth and breadth, -- I can
to a hair's breadth, Trim, replied my uncle, -- I would throw out the earth
upon this hand toward the town for the scarp, -- and on that hand toward the
campaign for the counterscarp. -- Very right, Trim; quoth my uncle Toby. -- And
when I had sloped them to your mind, -- an' please your Honor, I would face
the glacis, as the finest fortifications are done in Flanders, with sods, --
and as your Honor knows they should be, -- and I would make the walls and
parapets with sods too; -- The best engineers call them gazons, Trim, said my
uncle Toby; -- Whether they are gazons or sods, is not much matter, replied
Trim, your Honor knows they are ten times beyond a facing either of brick or
stone; -- I know they are, Trim, in some respects, -- quoth my uncle Toby,
nodding his head; -- for a cannon-ball enters into the gazon right onwards,
without bringing any rubbish down with it, which might fill the fosse, (as was
the case at St. Nicolas's Gate) and facilitate the passage over it.

Your Honor understands these matters, replied Corporal Trim, better than any
officer in his Majesty's service; -- but would your Honor please to let the
bespeaking of the table alone, and let us but go into the country, I would work
under your Honor's directions like a horse, and make fortifications for you
something like a tansy, with all their batteries, saps, ditches, and
palisadoes, that it should be worth all the world's riding twenty miles to go
and see it.

My uncle Toby blushed as red as scarlet as Trim went on; -- but it was not a
blush of guilt, -- of modesty, -- or of anger; -- it was a blush of joy; -- he
was fired with Corporal Trim's project and description. -- Trim! said my uncle
Toby, thou have said enough. -- We might begin the campaign, continued Trim, on
the very day that his Majesty and the Allies take the field, and demolish them
town by town as fast as -- Trim, quoth my uncle Toby, say no more. -- Your
Honor, continued Trim, might sit in your arm-chair (pointing to it) this fine
weather, giving me your orders, and I would -- Say no more, Trim, quoth my
uncle Toby. -- Besides, your Honor would get not only pleasure and good
pastime, -- but good air, and good exercise, and good health, -- and your
Honor's wound would be well in a month. Thou have said enough, Trim, -- quoth
my uncle Toby (putting his hand into his breeches-pocket) -- I like thy project
mightily; -- And if your Honor pleases, I Will, this moment, go and buy a
pioneer's spade to take down with us, and I Will bespeak a shovel and a pick-ax,
and a couple of -- Say no more, Trim, quoth my uncle Toby, leaping up upon one
leg, quite overcome with rapture, -- and thrusting a guinea into Trim's hand,
-- Trim, said my uncle Toby, say no more; -- but go down, Trim, this moment, my
lad, and bring up my supper this instant.

Trim ran down and brought up his Master's supper, -- to no purpose: -- Trim's
plan of operation ran so in my uncle Toby's head, he could not taste it. --
Trim, quoth my uncle Toby, get me to-bed; -- 'twas all one. -- Corporal Trim's
description had fired his imagination, -- my uncle Toby could not shut his
eyes. -- The more he considered it, the more bewitching the scene appeared to
him; -- so that, two full hours before daylight, he had come to a final
determination, and had concerted the whole plan of his and Corporal Trim's
decampment.

My uncle Toby had a little neat country house of his own, in the village where
my father's estate lay at Shandy, which had been left him by an old uncle, with
a small estate of about one hundred pounds a year. Behind this house, and
contiguous to it, was a kitchen-garden of about half an acre; -- and at the
bottom of the garden, and cut off from it by a tall yew hedge, was a
bowling-green, containing just about as much ground as Corporal Trim wished
for; -- so that as Trim uttered the words, "A rood and a half of ground to do
what they would with:" -- this identical bowling-green instantly presented
itself, and became curiously painted, all at once, upon the retina of my uncle
Toby's fancy; -- which was the physical cause of making him change color, or
at least, of heightening his blush to that immoderate degree I spoke of.

Never did lover post down to a beloved mistress with more heat and
expectation, than my uncle Toby did, to enjoy this self-same thing in private;
-- I say in private; -- for it was sheltered from the house, as I told you, by
a tall yew hedge, and was covered on the other three sides, from mortal sight,
by rough holly and thickset flowering shrubs; -- so that the idea of not being
seen, did not a little contribute to the idea of pleasure preconceived in my
uncle Toby's mind. -- Vain thought! however thick it was planted about, -- or
private soever it might seem, -- to think, dear uncle Toby, of enjoying a thing
which took up a whole rood and a half of ground, -- and not have it known!

How my uncle Toby and Corporal Trim managed this matter, -- with the history
of their campaigns, which were no way barren of events, -- may make no
uninteresting under-plot in the epitasis and working up of this drama. -- At
present the scene must drop, -- and change for the parlour fireside.

CHAP. VI.
-- What can they be doing, brother? said my father. -- I think, replied my
uncle Toby, -- taking, as I told you, his pipe from his mouth, and striking the
ashes out of it as he began his sentence; -- I think, replied he, -- it would
not be amiss, brother, if we rung the bell.

Pray, what is all that racket over our heads, Obadiah? -- quoth my father; --
my brother and I can scarce hear ourselves speak.

Sir, answered Obadiah, making a bow toward his left-shoulder, -- my Mistress
is taken very badly; -- and where is Susannah running down the garden there, as
if they were going to ravish her? -- Sir, she is running the shortest cut into
the town, replied Obadiah, to fetch the old midwife. -- Then saddle a horse,
quoth my father, and do you go directly for Dr. Slop, the man-midwife, with all
our services, -- and let him know your Mistress is fallen into labor, -- and
that I desire he will return with you with all speed.

It is very strange, says my father, addressing himself to my uncle Toby, as
Obadiah shut the door, -- as there is so expert an operator as Dr. Slop so near
-- that my wife should persist to the very last in this obstinate humor of
hers, in trusting the life of my child, who has had one misfortune already, to
the ignorance of an old woman; -- and not only the life of my child, brother,
-- but her own life, and with it the lives of all the children I might,
peradventure, have begot out of her hereafter.

Mayhap, brother, replied my uncle Toby, my sister does it to save the expense:
-- A pudding's end, -- replied my father, -- the doctor must be paid the same
for inaction as action, -- if not better, -- to keep him in temper.

-- Then it can be out of nothing in the whole world, quoth my uncle Toby, in
the simplicity of his heart, -- but MODESTY: -- My sister, I dare say, added
he, does not care to let a man come so near her * * * *. I will not say whether
my uncle Toby had completed the sentence or not; -- it is for his advantage to
suppose he had, -- as, I think, he could have added no ONE WORD which would
have improved it.

If, on the contrary, my uncle Toby had not fully arrived at his period's end,
-- then the world stands indebted to the sudden snapping of my father's
tobacco-pipe, for one of the neatest examples of that ornamental figure in
oratory, which Rhetoricians style the Aposiopesis. -- Just heaven! how does the
Poco piu and the Poco meno of the Italian artists; -- the insensible MORE or
LESS, determine the precise line of beauty in the sentence, as well as in the
statue! How do the slight touches of the chifel, the pencil, the pen, the
fiddle-stick, et caetera, -- give the true swell, which give the true pleasure!
-- O my countrymen! -- be nice; -- be cautious of your language; -- and never,
O! never let it be forgotten upon what small particles your eloquence and your
fame depend.

-- "My sister, mayhap," quoth my uncle Toby, "does not choose to let a man
come so near her * * * *" Make this dash, -- it is an Aposiopesis. -- Take the
dash away, and write Backside, -- it is Bawdy. -- Scratch Backside out, and put
Cover'd-way in, -- it is a Metaphor; -- and, I dare say, as fortification ran so
much in my uncle Toby's head, that if he had been left to have added one word
to the sentence, -- that word was it.

But whether that was the case or not the case; -- or whether the snapping of
my father's tobacco-pipe so critically, happened through accident or anger, --
will be seen in due time.

CHAP. VII.
THOUGH my father was a good natural philosopher, -- yet he was something of a
moral philosopher too; for which reason, when his tobacco-pipe snapp'd short in
the middle, -- he had nothing to do, -- as such, -- but to have taken hold of
the two pieces, and thrown them gently upon the back of the fire. -- He did no
such thing; -- he threw them with all the violence in the world; -- and, to
give the action still more emphasis, -- he started up upon both his legs to do
it.

This looked something like heat; -- and the manner of his reply to what my
uncle Toby was saying, proved it was so.

-- "Not choose," quoth my father, repeating my uncle Toby's words) "to let a
man come so near her." -- By heaven, brother Toby! you would try the patience
of a Job; -- and I think I have the plagues of one already, without it. -- Why?
-- Where? -- Wherein? -- Wherefore? -- Upon what account, replied my uncle
Toby, in the utmost astonishment. -- To think, said my father, of a man living
to your age, brother, and knowing so little about women! -- I know nothing at
all about them, -- replied my uncle Toby; and I think, continued he, that the
shock I received the year after the demolition of Dunkirk, in my affair with
widow Wadman; -- which shock you know I should not have received, but from my
total ignorance of the sex, -- has given me just cause to say, That I neither
know, nor do pretend to know, any thing about 'em, or their concerns either. --
Methinks, brother, replied my father, you might, at least, know so much as the
right end of a woman from the wrong.

It is said in Aristotle's Masterpiece, "That when a man does think of any
thing which is past, -- he looks down upon the ground; -- but that when he
thinks of something which is to come, he looks up toward the heavens."

My uncle Toby, I suppose, thought of neither, -- for he looked horizontally.
-- Right end, -- quoth my uncle Toby, muttering the two words low to himself,
and fixing his two eyes insensibly as he muttered them, upon a small crevice,
formed by a bad joint in the chimney-piece. -- Right end of a woman! -- I
declare, quoth my uncle, I know no more which it is, than the man in the moon;
-- and if I was to think, continued my uncle Toby, (keeping his eye still fixed
upon the bad joint) this month together, I am sure I should not be able to find
it out.

Then brother Toby, replied my father, I will tell you.

Every thing in this world, continued my father (filling a fresh pipe) -- every
thing in this earthly world, my dear brother Toby, has two handles. -- Not
always, quoth my uncle Toby. -- At least, replied my father, every one has two
hands, -- which comes to the same thing. -- Now, if a man was to sit down
cooly, and consider within himself the make, the shape, the construction,
com-at-ability, and convenience of all the parts which constitute the whole of
that animal, called Woman, and compare them analogically. -- I never understood
rightly the meaning of that word, -- quoth my uncle Toby. -- ANALOGY, replied
my father, is the certain relation and agreement, which different -- Here a
devil of a rap at the door snapp'd my father's definition (like his tobacco
pipe) in two, -- and, at the same time, crushed the head of as notable and
curious a dissertation as ever was engendered in the womb of speculation; -- it
was some months before my father could get an opportunity to be safely
delivered of it: -- And, at this hour, it is a thing full as problematical as
the subject of the dissertation itself, -- (considering the confusion and
distresses of our domestic misadventures, which are now coming thick one upon
the back of another) whether I shall be able to find a place for it in the
third volume or not.

CHAP. VIII.
IT is about an hour and a half's tolerable good reading since my uncle Toby
rung the bell, when Obadiah was ordered to saddle a horse, and go for Dr. Slop
the man-midwife; -- so that no one can say, with reason, that I have not
allowed Obadiah time enough, poetically speaking, and considering the emergency
too, both to go and come; -- though, morally and truly speaking, the man,
perhaps, has scarce had time to get on his boots.

If the hypercritic will go upon this; and is resolved after all to take a
pendulum, and measure the true distance betwixt the ringing of the bell, and
the rap at the door; -- and, after finding it to be no more than two minutes,
thirteen seconds, and three fifths, -- should take upon him to insult over me
for such a breach in the unity, or rather probability, of time; -- I would
remind him, that the idea of duration and of its simple modes, is got merely
from the train and succession of our ideas, -- and is the true scholastic
pendulum, -- and by which, as a scholar, I will be tried in this matter, --
abjuring and detesting the jurisdiction of all other pendulums whatever.

I would, therefore, desire him to consider that it is but poor eight miles
from Shandy-Hall to Dr. Slop, the man midwife's house; -- and that whilst
Obadiah has been going those said miles and back, I have brought my uncle Toby
from Namur, quite across all Flanders, into England: -- That I have had him ill
upon my hands near four years; -- and have since traveled him and Corporal
Trim, in a chariot and four, a journey of near two hundred miles down into
Yorkshire; -- all which put together, must have prepared the reader's
imagination for the entrance of Dr. Slop upon the stage, -- as much, at least
(I hope) as a dance, a song, or a concerto between the acts.

If my hypercritic is intractable, -- alleging, that two minutes and thirteen
seconds are no more than two minutes and thirteen seconds, -- when I have said
all I can about them; -- and that this plea, though it might save me
dramatically, will damn me biographically, rendering my book, from this very
moment, a professed ROMANCE, which, before, was a book apocryphal: -- If I am
thus pressed. -- I then put an end to the whole objection and controversy about
it all at once, -- by acquainting him, that Obadiah had not got above
threescore yards from the stable-yard before he met with Dr. Slop; -- and
indeed he gave a dirty proof that he had met with him, -- and was within an ace
of giving a tragical one too.

Imagine to yourself; -- but this had better begin a new chapter.

CHAP. IX.
IMagine to yourself a little, squat, uncourtly figure of a Doctor Slop, of
about four feet and a half perpendicular height, with a breadth of back, and a
sesquipedality of belly, which might have done honor to a sergeant in the
horse-guards.

Such were the out-lines of Dr. Slop's figure, which, -- if you have read
Hogarth's analysis of beauty, and if you have not, I wish you would; -- you
must know, may as certainly be caracatur'd, and conveyed to the mind by three
strokes as three hundred.

Imagine such a one, -- for such, I say, were the out-lines of Dr. Slop's
figure, coming slowly along, foot by foot, waddling through the dirt upon the
vertebrae of a little diminutive pony, -- of a pretty color; -- but of
strength, -- alack! -- scarce able to have made an amble of it, under such a
fardel, had the roads been in an ambling condition. -- They were not. --
Imagine to yourself, Obadiah mounted upon a strong monster of a coach-horse,
pricked into a full gallop, and making all practicable speed the adverse way.

Pray, Sir, let me interest you a moment in this description.

Had Dr. Slop beheld Obadiah a mile off, posting in a narrow lane directly
toward him, at that monstrous rate, -- splashing and plunging like a devil
through thick and thin, as he approached, would not such a phenomenon, with such
a vortex of mud and water moving along with it, round its axis, -- have been a
subject of juster apprehension to Dr. Slop in his situation, than the worst of
Whiston's comets? -- To say nothing of the NUCLEUS; that is, of Obadiah and the
coach-horse. -- In my idea, the vortex alone of 'em was enough to have involved
and carried, if not the doctor, at least the doctor's pony quite away with it.
What then do you think must the terror and hydrophobia of Dr. Slop have been,
when you read (which you are just going to do) that he was advancing thus
warily along toward Shandy-Hall, and had approached to within sixty yards of
it, and within five yards of a sudden turn, made by an acute angle of the
garden wall, -- and in the dirtiest part of a dirty lane, -- when Obadiah and
his coach-horse turned the corner, rapid, furious, -- pop, -- full upon him! --
Nothing, I think, in nature, can be supposed more terrible, than such a
Rencounter, -- so imprompt! so ill prepared to stand the shock of it as Dr.
Slop was!

What could Dr. Slop do? -- He crossed himself -- Pugh! -- but the doctor, Sir,
was a Papist. -- No matter; he had better have kept hold of the pummel. He had
so; -- nay, as it happened, he had better have done nothing at all; -- for in
crossing himself he let go his whip, -- and in attempting to save his whip
betwixt his knee and his saddle's skirt, as it slipped, he lost his stirrup, --
in losing which, he lost his seat; -- and in the multitude of all these losses
(which, by the bye, shows what little advantage there is in crossing) the
unfortunate doctor lost his presence of mind. So that, without waiting for
Obadiah's onset, he left his pony to its destiny, tumbling off it diagonally,
something in the style and manner of a pack of wool, and without any other
consequence from the fall, save that of being left (as it would have been) with
the broadest part of him sunk about twelve inches deep in the mire.

Obadiah pulled off his cap twice to Dr. Slop; -- once as he was falling, --
and then again when he saw him seated. -- Illtimed complaisance! -- had not the
fellow better have stopped his horse, and got off and helped him? -- Sir, he
did all that his situation would allow; -- but the MOMENTUM of the coach-horse
was so great, that Obadiah could not do it all at once; -- he rode in a circle
three times round Dr. Slop, before he could fully accomplish it any how; -- and
at the last, when he did stop his beast, 'twas done with such an explosion of
mud, that Obadiah had better have been a league off. In short, never was a Dr.
Slop so beluted, and so transubstantiated, since that affair came into fashion.

CHAP. X.
WHEN Dr. Slop entered the back-parlour, where my father and my uncle Toby were
discoursing upon the nature of women, -- it was hard to determine whether Dr.
Slop's figure, or Dr. Slop's presence, occasioned more surprise to them; for as
the accident happened so near the house, as not to make it worth while for
Obadiah to remou^^ him, -- Obadiah had led him in as he was, unwiped,
unappointed, unanealed, with all his stains and blotches on him. -- He stood
like Hamlet's ghost, motionless and speechless, for a full minute and a half,
at the parlour door ( Obadiah still holding his hand) with all the majesty of
mud. His hinder parts, upon which he had received his fall, totally besmeared,
-- and in every other part of him, blotched over in such a manner with
Obadiah's explosion, that you would have sworn (without mental reservation)
that every grain of it had taken effect.

Here was a fair opportunity for my uncle Toby to have triumphed over my father
in his turn; -- for no mortal, who had beheld Dr. Slop in that pickle, could
have dissented from so much, at least, of my uncle Toby's opinion, "That
may-hap his sister might not care to let such a Dr. Slop come so near her * * *
*" But it was the Argumentum ad hominem; and if my uncle Toby was not very
expert at it, you may think, he might not care to use it. -- No; the reason
was, -- 'twas not his nature to insult.

Dr. Slop's presence, at that time, was no less problematical than the mode of
it; though, it is certain, one moment's reflection in my father might have solved
it; for he had apprized Dr. Slop but the week before, that my mother was at her
full reckoning; and as the doctor had heard nothing since, 'twas natural and
very political too in him, to have taken a ride to Shandy-Hall, as he did,
merely to see how matters went on.

But my father's mind took unfortunately a wrong turn in the investigation;
running, like the hypercritic's, altogether upon the ringing of the bell and
the rap upon the door, -- measuring their distance, -- and keeping his mind so
intent upon the operation, as to have power to think of nothing else, --
commonplace infirmity of the greatest mathematicians! working with might and
main at the demonstration, and so wasting all their strength upon it, that they
have none left in them to draw the corollary, to do good with.

The ringing of the bell and the rap upon the door, struck likewise strong upon
the sensorium of my uncle Toby, -- but it excited a very different train of
thoughts; -- the two irreconcilable pulsations instantly brought Stevinus, the
great engineer, along with them, into my uncle Toby's mind: -- What business
Stevinus had in this affair, -- is the greatest problem of all; -- it shall be
solved, -- but not in the next chapter.

CHAP. XI.
WRiting, when properly managed, (as you may be sure I think mine is) is but a
different name for conversation: As no one, who knows what he is about in good
company, would venture to talk all; -- so no author, who understands the just
boundaries of decorum and good breeding, would presume to think all: The truest
respect which you can pay to the reader's understanding, is to halve this
matter amicably, and leave him something to imagine, in his turn, as well as
yourself.

For my own part, I am eternally paying him compliments of this kind, and do
all that lies in my power to keep his imagination as busy as my own.

It Is his turn now; -- I have given an ample description of Dr. Slop's sad
overthrow, and of his sad appearance in the back parlour; -- his imagination
must now go on with it for a while.

Let the reader imagine then, that Dr. Slop has told his tale; -- and in what
words, and with what aggravations his fancy chooses: -- Let him suppose, that
Obadiah has told his tale also, and with such rueful looks of affected concern,
as he thinks will best contrast the two figures as they stand by each other: --
Let him imagine, that my father has stepped up stairs to see my mother: -- And,
to conclude this work of imagination, -- let him imagine the doctor washed, --
rubbed down, -- condoled with, -- felicitated, -- got into a pair of Obadiah's
pumps, stepping forwards toward the door, upon the very point of entering upon
action.

Truce! -- truce, good Dr. Slop! -- stay thy obstetric hand; -- return it safe
into thy bosom to keep it warm; -- little do thou know what obstacles; --
little do thou think what hidden causes retard its operation! -- Have thou,
Dr. Slop, -- have thou been entrusted with the secret articles of this solemn
treaty which has brought thee into this place? -- Art thou aware that, at this
instant, a daughter of Lucina is put obstetrically over thy head? Alas! it is
too true. -- Besides, great son of Pilumnus! what can thou do? -- Thou have
come forth unarmed; -- thou have left thy tire tete, -- thy new-invented
forceps, -- thy crotchet, -- thy squirt, and all thy instruments of salvation
and deliverance behind thee. -- By heaven! at this moment they are hanging up
in a green bays bag, betwixt thy two pistols, at thy bed's head! -- Ring; --
call; -- send Obadiah back upon the coach-horse to bring them with all speed.

-- Make great haste, Obadiah, quoth my father, and I Will give thee a crown; --
and, quoth my uncle Toby, I Will give him another.

CHAP. XII.
YOUR sudden and unexpected arrival, quoth my uncle Toby, addressing himself to
Dr. Slop (all three of them sitting down to the fire together, as my uncle Toby
began to speak) -- instantly brought the great Stevinus into my head, who, you
must know, is a favorite author with me. -- Then, added my father, making use
of the argument Ad Crumenam, -- I will lay twenty guineas to a single crown
piece, (which will serve to give away to Obadiah when he gets back) that this
same Stevinus was some engineer or other, -- or has wrote something or other,
either directly or indirectly, upon the science of fortification.

He has so, -- replied my uncle Toby. -- I knew it, said my father; -- though,
for the soul of me, I cannot see what kind of connection there can be betwixt
Dr. Slop's sudden coming, and a discourse upon fortification; -- yet I feared
it. -- Talk of what we will, brother, -- or let the occasion be never so
foreign or unfit for the subject, -- you are sure to bring it in: I would not,
brother Toby, continued my father, -- I declare I would not have my head so
full of curtins and horn-works. -- That, I dare say, you would not, quoth Dr.
Slop, interrupting him, and laughing most immoderately at his pun.

Dennis the critic could not detest and abhor a pun, or the insinuation of a
pun, more cordially than my father; -- he would grow testy upon it at any time;
-- but to be broke in upon by one, in a serious discourse, was as bad, he would
say, as a fillip upon the nose; -- he saw no difference.

Sir, quoth my uncle Toby, addressing himself to Dr. Slop, -- the curtins my
brother Shandy mentions here, have nothing to do with bed-steads; -- though, I
know, Du Cange says, "That bed-curtains, in all probability, have taken their
name from them;" -- nor have the horn-works, he speaks of, any thing in the
world to do with the horn-works of cuckoldom: -- But the curtin, Sir, is the
word we use in fortification, for that part of the wall or rampart which lies
between the two bastions and joins them. -- Besiegers seldom offer to carry on
their attacks directly against the curtin, for this reason, because they are so
well flanked. ('It Is the case of other curtins, quoth Dr. Slop, laughing).
However, continued my uncle Toby, to make them sure, we generally choose to
place ravelins before them, taking care only to extend them beyond the fosse or
ditch: -- The common men, who know very little of fortification, confound the
ravelin and the half moon together, -- though they are very different things; --
not in their figure or construction, for we make them exactly aliks in all
points; -- for they always consist of two faces, making a salient angle, with
the gorges, not straight, but in form of a crescent. -- Where then lies the
difference? (quoth my father, a little testily.) -- In their situations,
answered my uncle Toby: -- For when a ravelin, brother, stands before the
curtin, it is a ravelin; and when a ravelin stands before a bastion, then the
ravelin is not a ravelin; -- it is a half moon; -- a half moon likewise is a
half moon, and no more, so long as it stands before its bastion; -- but was it
to change place, and get before the curtin, -- 'twould be no longer a
half moon; a half moon, in that case, is not a half moon; -- it is no more than
a ravelin. -- I think, quoth my father, that the noble science of defense has
its weak sides, -- as well as others.

-- As for the horn-works (high! ho! sighed my father) which, continued my
uncle Toby, my brother was speaking of, they are a very considerable part of an
outwork; -- they are called by the French engineers, Ouvrage a corn, and we
generally make them to cover such places as we suspect to be weaker than the
rest; -- it is formed by two epaulments or demibastions, -- they are very
pretty, and if you will take a walk, I Will engage to show you one well worth
your trouble. -- I own, continued my uncle Toby, when we crown them, -- they
are much stronger, but then they are very expensive, and take up a great deal
of ground; so that, in my opinion, they are most of use to cover or defend the
head of a camp; otherwise the double tenaille -- By the mother who bore us! --
brother Toby, quoth my father, not able to hold out any longer, -- you would
provoke a saint; -- here have you got us, I know not how, not only souse into
the middle of the old subject again: -- But so full is your head of these
confounded works, that though my wife is this moment in the pains of labor, --
and you hear her cry out, -- yet nothing will serve you but to carry off the
man-midwife. -- Accoucheur, -- if you please, quoth Dr. Slop. -- With all my
heart, replied my father, I don't care what they call you, -- but I wish the
whole science of fortification, with all its inventors, at the devil; -- it has
been the death of thousands, -- and it will be mine, in the end. -- I would
not, I would not, brother Toby, have my brains so full of saps, mines, blinds,
gabions, palisadoes, ravelins, half-moons, and such trumpery, to be proprietor
of Namur, and of all the towns in Flanders with it.

My uncle Toby was a man patient of injuries; -- not from want of courage, -- I
have told you in the fifth chapter of this second book, "That he was a man of
courage:" -- And will add here, that where just occasions presented, or called
it forth, -- I know no man under whose arm I would sooner have taken shelter;
nor did this arise from any insensibility or obtuseness of his intellectual
parts; -- for he felt this insult of my father's as feelingly as a man could
do; -- but he was of a peaceful, placid nature, -- no jarring element in it, --
all was mixed up so kindly within him; my uncle Toby had scarce a heart to
retaliate upon a fly.

-- Go -- says he, one day at dinner, to an overgrown one which had buzzed
about his nose, and tormented him cruelly all dinnertime, -- and which, after
infinite attempts, he had caught at last, as it flew by him; -- I Will not hurt
thee, says my uncle Toby, rising from his chair, and going across the room,
with the fly in his hand, -- I Will not hurt a hair of thy head: -- Go, says he,
lifting up the sash, and opening his hand as he spoke, to let it escape; -- go
poor devil, get thee gone, why should I hurt thee? -- This world surely is wide
enough to hold both thee and me.

I was but ten years old when this happened; -- but whether it was, that the
action itself was more in unison to my nerves at that age of pity, which
instantly set my whole frame into one vibration of most pleasurable sensation;
-- or how far the manner and expression of it might go toward it; -- or in
what degree, or by what secret magic, -- a tone of voice and harmony of
movement, attuned by mercy, might find a passage to my heart, I know not; --
this I know, that the lesson of universal good will then taught and imprinted
by my uncle Toby, has never since been worn out of my mind: And though I would
not depreciate what the study of the Literae humaniores, at the university,
have done for me in that respect, or discredit the other helps of an expensive
education bestowed upon me, both at home and abroad since; -- yet I often think
that I owe one half of my philanthropy to that one accidental impression.

This is to serve for parents and governors instead of a whole volume upon the
subject.

I could not give the reader this stroke in my uncle Toby's picture, by the
instrument with which I drew the other parts of it, -- that taking in no more
than the mere HOBBY-HORSICAL likeness; -- this is a part of his moral
character. My father, in this patient endurance of wrongs, which I mention, was
very different, as the reader must long ago have noted; he had a much more
acute and quick sensibility of nature, attended with a little soreness of
temper; though this never transported him to any thing which looked like
malignancy; -- yet, in the little rubs and vexations of life, 'twas apt to show
itself in a drollish and witty kind of peevishness: -- He was, however, frank
and generous in his nature; -- at all times open to conviction; and in the
little ebullitions of this subacid humor toward others, but particularly
toward my uncle Toby, whom he truly loved; -- he would feel more pain, ten
times told (except in the affair of my aunt Dinah, or where an hypothesis was
concerned) than what he ever gave.

The characters of the two brothers, in this view of them, reflected light upon
each other, and appeared with great advantage in this affair which arose about
Stevinus.

I need not tell the reader, if he keeps a HOBBYHORSE, -- that a man's
HOBBYHORSE is as tender a part as he has about him; and that these unprovoked
strokes, at my uncle Toby's could not be unfelt by him. -- No; -- as I said
above, my uncle Toby did feel them, and very sensibly too.

Pray, Sir, what said he? -- How did he behave? -- Oh, Sir! -- it was great:
For as soon as my father had done insulting his HOBBYHORSE, -- he turned his
head, without the least emotion, from Dr. Slop, to whom he was addressing his
discourse, and looked up into my father's face, with a countenance spread over
with so much good nature; -- so placid; -- so fraternal; -- so inexpressibly
tender toward him; -- it penetrated my father to his heart: He rose up hastily
from his chair, and seizing hold of both my uncle Toby's hands as he spoke. --
Brother Toby, said he, -- I beg thy pardon; -- forgive, I pray thee, this rash
humor which my mother gave me. -- My dear, dear brother, answered my uncle
Toby, rising up by my father's help, say no more about it; -- you are heartily
welcome, had it been ten times as much, brother. But it is ungenerous, replied,
my father, to hurt any man; -- a brother worse; -- but to hurt a brother of
such gentle manners, -- so unprovoking, -- and so unresenting; -- it is base: --
By heaven, it is cowardly. -- You are heartily welcome, brother, quoth my uncle
Toby, -- had it been fifty times as much. -- Besides, what have I to do, my
dear Toby, cried my father, either with your amusements or your pleasures,
unless it was in my power (which it is not) to increase their measure?

-- Brother Shandy, answered my uncle Toby, looking wistfully in his face, --
you are much mistaken in this point; -- for you do increase my pleasure very
much, in begetting children for the Shandy family at your time of life. -- But,
by that, Sir, quoth Dr. Slop, Mr. Shandy increases his own. -- Not a jot, quoth
my father.

CHAP. XIII.
MY brother, does it, quoth my uncle Toby, out of principle. -- In a
family-way, I suppose, quoth Dr. Slop. -- Pshaw! -- said my father, -- it is not
worth talking of.

CHAP. XIV.
AT the end of the last chapter, my father and my uncle Toby were left both
standing, like Brutus and Cassius at the close of the scene making up their
accounts.

As my father spoke the three last words, -- he sat down; -- my uncle Toby
exactly followed his example, only, that before he took his chair, he rung the
bell, to order Corporal Trim, who was in waiting, to step home for Stevinus; --
my uncle Toby's house being no further off than the opposite side of the way.

Some men would have dropped the subject of Stevinus; -- but my uncle Toby had
no resentment in his heart, and he went on with the subject, to show my father
that he had none.

Your sudden appearance, Dr. Slop, quoth my uncle, resuming the discourse,
instantly brought Stevinus into my head. (My father, you may be sure, did not
offer to lay any more wagers upon Stevinus's head) -- Because, continued my
uncle Toby, the celebrated sailing chariot, which belonged to Prince Maurice,
and was of such wonderful contrivance and velocity, as to carry half a dozen
people thirty German miles, in I don't know how few minutes, -- was invented by
Stevinus, that great mathematician and engineer.

You might have spared your servant the trouble, quoth Dr. Slop (as the fellow
is lame) of going for Stevinus's account of it, because, in my return from
Leyden through the Hague, I walked as far as Schevling, which is two long miles,
on purpose to take a view of it.

-- That Is nothing, replied my uncle Toby, to what the learned Peireskius did,
who walked a matter of five hundred miles, reckoning from Paris to Schevling,
and from Schevling to Paris back again, in order to see it, -- and nothing else.

Some men cannot bear to be out-gone.

The more fool Peireskius, replied Dr. Slop. But mark, 'twas out of no contempt
of Peireskius at all; -- but that Peireskius's indefatigable labor in trudging
so far on foot out of love for the sciences, reduced the exploit of Dr. Slop,
in that affair, to nothing; -- the more fool Peireskius, said he again: -- Why
so? -- replied my father, taking his brother's part, not only to make
reparation as fast as he could for the insult he had given him, which sat still
upon my father's mind; -- but partly, that my father began really to interest
himself in the discourse. -- Why so? -- said he. Why is Peireskius, or any man
else, to be abused for an appetite for that, or any other morsel of sound
knowledge? For, notwithstanding I know nothing of the chariot in question,
continued he, the inventor of it must have had a very mechanical head; and though
I cannot guess upon what principles of philosophy he has achieved it; -- yet
certainly his machine has been constructed upon solid ones, be they what they
will, or it could not have answered at the rate my brother mentions.

It answered, replied my uncle Toby, as well, if not better; for, as Peireskius
elegantly expresses it, speaking of the velocity of its motion, Tam citus erat,
quam erat ventus; which, unless I have forgot my Latin, is, that it was as
swift as the wind itself.

But pray, Dr. Slop, quoth my father, interrupting my uncle (though not without
begging pardon for it, at the same time) upon what principles was this selfsame
chariot set a-going? -- Upon very pretty principles to be sure, replied Dr.
Slop; -- and I have often wondered, continued he, evading the question, why
none of our gentry, who live upon large plains like this of ours, --
(especially they whose wives are not past childbearing) attempt nothing of
this kind; for it would not only be infinitely expeditious upon sudden calls,
to which the sex is subject, -- if the wind only served, -- but would be
excellent good husbandry to make use of the winds, which cost nothing, and
which eat nothing, rather than horses, which (the devil take 'em) both cost and
eat a great deal.

For that very reason, replied my father, "Because they cost nothing, and
because they eat nothing," -- the scheme is bad; -- it is the consumption of
our products, as well as the manufactures of them, which gives bread to the
hungry, circulates trade, -- brings in money, and supports the value of our
lands; -- and though, I own, if I was a prince, I would generously recompense the
scientific head which brought forth such contrivances; -- yet I would as
peremptorily suppress the use of them.

My father here had got into his element, -- and was going on as prosperously
with his dissertation upon trade, as my uncle Toby had before, upon his of
fortification; -- but, to the loss of much sound knowledge, the destinies in
the morning had decreed that no dissertation of any kind should be spun by my
father that day; -- for as he opened his mouth to begin the next sentence,

CHAP. XV.
IN popp'd Corporal Trim with Stevinus: -- But 'twas too late, -- all the
discourse had been exhausted without him, and was running into a new channel.

-- You may take the book home again, Trim, said my uncle Toby, nodding to him.

But pri'thee, Corporal, quoth my father, drolling, -- look first into it, and
see if thou can spy aught of a sailing chariot in it.

Corporal Trim, by being in the service, had learned to obey, -- and not to
remonstrate; -- so taking the book to a side-table, and running over the
leaves; an' please your Honor, said Trim, I can see no such thing; -- however,
continued the Corporal, drolling a little in his turn, I Will make sure work of
it, an' please your Honor; -- so taking hold of the two covers of the book,
one in each hand, and letting the leaves fall down, as he bent the covers back,
he gave the book a good sound shake.

There is something fallen out, however, said Trim, an' please your Honor; but
it is not a chariot, or any thing like one: -- Pri'thee Corporal, said my
father, smiling, what is it then? -- I think, answered Trim, stooping to take
it up, -- it is more like a sermon, -- for it begins, with a text of scripture,
and the chapter and verse; -- and then goes on, not as a chariot, -- but like a
sermon directly.

The company smiled.

I cannot conceive how it is possible, quoth my uncle Toby, for such a thing as
a sermon to have got into my Stevinus.

I think it is a sermon, replied Trim; -- but if it please your Honors, as it
is a fair hand, I will read you a page; -- for Trim, you must know, loved to
hear himself read almost as well as talk.

I have ever a strong propensity, said my father, to look into things which
cross my way, by such strange fatalities as these; -- and as we have nothing
better to do, at least till Obadiah gets back, I should be obliged to you,
brother, if Dr. Slop has no objection to it, to order the Corporal to give us a
page or two of it, -- if he is as able to do it, as he seems willing. An'
please your Honor, quoth Trim, I officiated two whole campaigns in Flanders,
as clerk to the chaplain of the regiment. -- He can read it, quoth my uncle
Toby, as well as I can. -- Trim, I assure you, was the best scholar in my
company, and should have had the next halberd, but for the poor fellow's
misfortune. Corporal Trim laid his hand upon his heart, and made an humble bow
to his master; -- then laying down his hat upon the floor, and taking up the
sermon in his left hand, in order to have his right at liberty, -- he advanced,
nothing doubting, into the middle of the room, where he could best see, and be
best seen by, his audience.

CHAP. XVI.
-- If you have any objection, -- said my father, addressing himself to Dr.
Slop. Not in the least, replied Dr. Slop; -- for it does not appear on which
side of the question it is wrote; -- it may be a composition of a divine of our
church, as well as yours, -- so that we run equal risks. -- It Is wrote upon
neither side, quoth Trim, for it is only upon Conscience, an' please your
Honors.

Trim's reason put his audience into good humor, -- all but Dr. Slop, who,
turning his head about toward Trim, looked a little angry.

Begin, Trim, -- and read distinctly, quoth my father; -- I will, an' please
your Honor, replied the Corporal, making a bow, and bespeaking attention with
a slight movement of his right hand.

CHAP. XVII.
-- But before the Corporal begins, I must first give you a description of his
attitude; -- otherwise he will naturally stand represented, by your
imagination, in an uneasy posture, -- stiff, -- perpendicular, -- dividing the
weight of his body equally upon both legs; -- his eye fixed, as if on duty; --
his look determined, -- clinching the sermon in his left hand, like his
firelock: -- In a word, you would be apt to paint Trim, as if he was standing
in his platoon ready for action: -- His attitude was as unlike all this as you
can conceive.

He stood before them with his body swayed, and bent forwards just so far, as
to make an angle of 85 degrees and a half upon the plain of the horizon; --
which sound orators, to whom I address this, know very well, to be the true
persuasive angle of incidence; -- in any other angle you may talk and preach;
-- it is certain, -- and it is done every day; -- but with what effect, -- I
leave the world to judge!

The necessity of this precise angle of 85 degrees and a half to a mathematical
exactness, -- does it not show us, by the way, -- how the arts and sciences
mutually befriend each other?

How the duce Corporal Trim, who knew not so much as an acute angle from an
obtuse one, came to hit it so exactly; -- or whether it was chance or nature,
or good sense or imitation, etc. shall be commented upon in that part of this
cyclopaedia of arts and sciences, where the instrumental parts of the eloquence
of the senate, the pulpit, the bar, the coffee-house, the bedchamber, and
fireside, fall under consideration.

He stood, -- for I repeat it, to take the picture of him in at one view, with
his body swayed, and somewhat bent forwards, -- his right-leg firm under him,
sustaining seven-eighths of his whole weight, -- the foot of his left-leg, the
defect of which was no disadvantage to his attitude, advanced a little, -- not
laterally, nor forwards, but in a line betwixt them; -- his knee bent, but that
not violently, -- but so as to fall within the limits of the line of beauty; --
and I add, of the line of science too; -- for consider, it had one eighth part
of his body to bear up; -- so that in this case the position of the leg is
determined, -- because the foot could be no further advanced, or the knee more
bent, than what would allow him mechanically, to receive an eighth part of his
whole weight under it, -- and to carry it too.

This I recommend to painters? -- need I add, -- to orators? -- I think not;
for, unless they practice it, -- they must fall upon their noses.

So much for Corporal Trim's body and legs. -- He held the sermon loosely, --
not carelessly, in his left hand, raised something above his stomach, and
detached a little from his breast; -- his right-arm falling negligently by his
side, as nature and the laws of gravity ordered it, -- but with the palm of it
open and turned toward his audience, ready to aid the sentiment, in case it
stood in need.

Corporal Trim's eyes and the muscles of his face were in full harmony with the
other parts of him; -- he looked frank, -- unconstrained, -- something assured,
-- but not bordering upon assurance.

Let not the critic ask how Corporal Trim could come by all this; I Have told him
it shall be explained; -- but so he stood before my father, my uncle Toby, and
Dr. Slop, -- so swayed his body, so contrasted his limbs, and with such an
oratorical sweep throughout the whole figure, -- a statuary might have modeled
from it; -- nay, I doubt whether the oldest Fellow of a College, -- or the
Hebrew Professor himself, could have much mended it.

Trim made a bow, and read as follows:

The SERMON.
HEBREWS xiii. 18. -- For we trust we have a good Conscience. --
"TRust! -- Trust we have a good conscience!"

[Certainly, Trim, quoth my father, interrupting him, you give that sentence a
very improper accent; for you curl up your nose, man, and read it with such a
sneering tone, as if the Parson was going to abuse the Apostle.

He is, an' please your Honor, replied Trim. Pugh! said my father, smiling.

Sir, quoth Dr. Slop, Trim is certainly in the right; for the writer (who I
perceive is a Protestant) by the snappish manner in which he takes up the
Apostle, is certainly going to abuse him, -- if this treatment of him has not
done it already. But from whence, replied my father, have you concluded so
soon, Dr. Slop, that the writer is of our Church? -- for aught I can see yet,
-- he may be of any Church: -- Because, answered Dr. Slop, if he was of ours.
-- he durst no more take such a license, -- than a bear by his beard: -- If, in
our communion, Sir, a man was to insult an Apostle, -- a saint, -- or even the
paring of a saint's nail, -- he would have his eyes scratched out. -- What, by
the saint, quoth my uncle Toby. No, replied Dr. Slop, -- he would have an old
house over his head. Pray is the Inquisition an ancient building, answered my
uncle Toby, or is it a modern one? -- I know nothing of architecture, replied
Dr. Slop. -- An' please your Honors, quoth Trim, the Inquisition is the vilest
-- Pri'thee spare thy description, Trim, I hate the very name of it, said my
father. -- No matter for that, answered Dr. Slop, -- it has its uses; for though
I Am no great advocate for it, yet in such a case as this, he would soon be
taught better manners; and I can tell him, if he went on at that rate, would be
flung into the Inquisition for his pains. God help him then, quoth my uncle
Toby. Amen, added Trim; for, heaven above knows, I have a poor brother who has
been fourteen years a captive in it. -- I never heard one word of it before,
said my uncle Toby, hastily: -- How came he there, Trim? -- O, Sir! the story
will make your heart bleed, -- as it has made mine a thousand times; -- but it
is too long to be told now; -- your Honor shall hear it from first to last
some day when I am working beside you in our fortifications; -- but the short
of the story is this: -- That my brother Tom went over a servant to Lisbon, --
and then married a Jew's widow, who kept a small shop, and sold sausages,
which, some how or other, was the cause of his being taken in the middle of the
night out of his bed, where he was lying with his wife and two small children,
and carried directly to the Inquisition, where, God help him, continued Trim,
fetching a sigh from the bottom of his heart, -- the poor honest lad lies
confined at this hour; -- he was as honest a soul, added Trim, (pulling out his
handkerchief) as ever blood warmed. --

-- The tears trickled down Trim's cheeks faster than he could well wipe them
away. -- A dead silence in the room ensued for some minutes. -- Certain proof
of pity!

Come, Trim, quoth my father, after he saw the poor fellow's grief had got a
little vent, -- read on, -- and put this melancholy story out of thy head: -- I
grieve that I interrupted thee; -- but pri'thee begin the sermon again; -- for
if the first sentence in it is matter of abuse, as thou say, I have a great
desire to know what kind of provocation the Apostle has given.

Corporal Trim wiped his face, and returning his handkerchief into his pocket,
and, making a bow as he did it, -- he began again.]

The SERMON.
HEBREWS xiii. 18. -- For we trust we have a good Conscience. --
"TRust! trust we have a good conscience! Surely if there is any thing in this
life which a man may depend upon, and to the knowledge of which he is capable
of arriving upon the most indisputable evidence, it must be this very thing, --
whether he has a good conscience or no."

[I am positive I am right, quoth Dr. Slop.]

"If a man thinks at all, he cannot well be a stranger to the true state of
this account; -- he must be privy to his own thoughts and desires; -- he must
remember his past pursuits, and know certainly the true springs and motives,
which, in general, have governed the actions of his life."

[I defy him, without an assistant, quoth Dr. Slop.]

"In other matters we may be deceived by false appearances; and, as the wise
man: complains, hardly do we guess aright at the things that are upon the
earth, and with labor do we find the things that are before us. But here the
mind has all the evidence and facts within herself; -- is conscious of the web
she has wove; -- knows its texture and fineness, and the exact share which
every passion has had in working upon the several designs which virtue or vice
has planned before her."

[The language is good, and I declare Trim reads very well, quoth my father.]

"Now, -- as conscience is nothing else but the knowledge which the mind has
within herself of this; and the judgment, either of approbation or censure,
which it unavoidably makes upon the successive actions of our lives; it is plain
you will say, from the very terms of the proposition, -- whenever this inward
testimony goes against a man, and he stands self-accused, -- that he must
necessarily be a guilty man. -- And, on the contrary, when the report is
favorable on his side, and his heart condemns him not; -- that it is not a
matter of trust, as the Apostle intimates, -- but a matter of certainty and
fact, that the conscience is good, and that the man must be good also."

[Then the Apostle is altogether in the wrong, I suppose, quoth Dr. Slop, and
the Protestant divine is in the right. Sir, have patience, replied my father,
for I think it will presently appear that St. Paul and the Protestant divine
are both of an opinion. -- As nearly so, quoth Dr. Slop, as east is to west; --
but this, continued he, lifting both hands, comes from the liberty of the press.

It is no more, at the worst, replied my uncle Toby, than the liberty of the
pulpit; for it does not appear that the sermon is printed, or ever likely to be.

Go on, Trim, quoth my father.]

"At first sight this may seem to be a true state of the case; and I make no
doubt but the knowledge of right and wrong is so truly impressed upon the mind
of man, -- that did no such thing ever happen, as that the conscience of a man,
by long habits of sin, might (as the scripture assures it may) insensibly
become hard; -- and, like some tender parts of his body, by much stress and
continual hard usage, lose, by degrees, that nice sense and perception with
which God and nature endowed it: -- Did this never happen; -- or was it certain
that self-love could never hang the least bias upon the judgment; -- or that
the little interests below, could rise up and perplex the faculties of our
upper regions, and encompass them about with clouds and thick darkness: --
Could no such thing as favor and affection enter this sacred COURT: -- Did WIT
disdain to take a bribe in it; -- or was ashamed to show its face as an
advocate for an unwarrantable enjoyment: -- Or, lastly, were we assured, that
INTEREST stood always unconcerned whilst the cause was hearing, -- and that
passion never got into the judgment seat, and pronounced sentence in the stead
of reason, which is supposed always to preside and determine upon the case: --
Was this truly so, as the objection must suppose; -- no doubt then, the
religious and moral state of a man would be exactly what he himself esteemed
it; -- and the guilt or innocence of every man's life could be known, in
general, by no better measure, than the degrees of his own approbation and
censure."

"I own, in one case, whenever a man's conscience does accuse him (as it seldom
errs on that side) that he is guilty; and, unless in melancholy and
hypocondriac cases, we may safely pronounce upon it, that there is always
sufficient grounds for the accusation.

"But the converse of the proposition will not hold true; -- namely, that
whenever there is guilt, the conscience must accuse; and if it does not, that a
man is therefore innocent. -- This is not fact: -- So that the common
consolation which some good christian or other is hourly administering to
himself, -- that he thanks God his mind does not misgive him; and that,
consequently, he has a good conscience, because he has a quiet one, -- is
fallacious; -- and as current as the inference is, and as infallible as the
rule appears at first sight, yet, when you look nearer to it, and try the truth
of this rule upon plain facts, -- you see it liable to so much error from a
false application; -- the principle upon which it goes so often perverted; --
the whole force of it lost, and sometimes so vilely cast away, that it is
painful to produce the common examples from human life which confirm the
account.

"A man shall be vicious and utterly debauched in his principles; --
exceptionable in his conduct to the world; shall live shameless, in the open
commission of a sin which no reason or pretense can justify; -- a sin, by which
contrary to all the workings of humanity, he shall ruin for ever the deluded
partner of his guilt; -- rob her of her best dowry; and not only cover her own
head with dishonor, -- but involve a whole virtuous family in shame and sorrow
for her sake. -- Surely, you will think conscience must lead such a man a
troublesome life; -- he can have no rest night or day from its reproaches.

"Alas! CONSCIENCE had something else to do, all this time, than break in upon
him; as Elijah reproached the God Baal, -- this domestic God was either
talking, or pursuing, or was in a journey, or peradventure he slept and could
not be awoke.

"Perhaps HE was gone out in company with HONOR to fight a duel; to pay off
some debt at play; -- or dirty annuity, the bargain of his lust: Perhaps
CONSCIENCE all this time was engaged at home, talking loud against petty
larceny, and executing vengeance upon some such puny crimes as his fortune and
rank in life secured him against all temptation of committing; so that he lives
as merrily," [If he was of our church though, quoth Dr. Slop, he could not] --
"sleeps as soundly in his bed; -- and at last meets death as unconcernedly; --
perhaps much more so than a much better man."

All this is impossible with us, quoth Dr. Slop, turning to my father, -- the
case could not happen in our church. -- It happens in ours, however, replied my
father, but too often. -- I own, quoth Dr. Slop (struck a little with my
father's frank acknowledgment) -- that a man in the Romish church may live as
badly; -- but then he cannot easily die so. -- It Is little matter, replied my
father, with an air of indifference, -- how a rascal dies. -- I mean, answered
Dr. Slop, he would be denied the benefits of the last sacraments. -- Pray how
many have you in all, said my uncle Toby, -- for I always forget? -- Seven,
answered Dr. Slop. -- Humph! -- said my uncle Toby; -- though not accented as a
note of acquiescence, -- but as an interjection of that particular species of
surprise, when a man, in looking into a drawer, finds more of a thing than he
expected. -- Humph! replied my uncle Toby. Dr. Slop, who had an ear, understood
my uncle Toby as well as if he had wrote a whole volume against the seven
sacraments. -- Humph! replied Dr. Slop, (stating my uncle Toby's argument over,
again to him) -- Why, Sir, are there not seven cardinal virtues? -- Seven
mortal sins? -- Seven golden candle-sticks? -- Seven heavens? -- It Is more than
I know, replied my uncle Toby. -- Are there are not seven wonders of the world?
-- Seven days of the creation? -- Seven planets? -- Seven plagues? -- That
there are, quoth my father, with a most affected gravity. But pri'thee,
continued he, go on with the rest of thy characters, Trim.]

"Another is sordid, unmerciful," (here Trim waved his right hand) "a
strait-hearted, selfish wretch, incapable either of private friendship or
public spirit. Take notice how he passes by the widow and orphan in their
distress, and sees all the miseries incident to human life without a sigh or a
prayer." [And please your Honors, cried Trim, I think this is a viler man than
the other.]

"Shall not conscience rise up and sting him on such occasions? -- No; thank
God there is no occasion; I pay every man his own; -- I have no fornication to
answer to my conscience; -- no faithless vows or promises to make up; -- I have
debauched no man's wife or child; thank God, I am not as other men, adulterers,
unjust, or even as this libertine, who stands before me."

"A third is crafty and designing in his nature. View his whole life; -- it is
nothing but a cunning contexture of dark arts and unequitable subterfuges,
basely to defeat the true intent of all laws, -- plain dealing and the safe
enjoyment of our several properties. -- You will see such a one working out a
frame of little designs upon the ignorance and perplexities of the poor and
needy man; -- shall raise a fortune upon the inexperience of a youth, or the
unsuspecting temper of his friend, who would have trusted him with his life.

"When old age comes on, and repentance calls him to look back upon this black
account, and state it over again with his conscience, -- CONSCIENCE looks into
the STATUTES at LARGE; -- finds no express law broken by what he has done; --
perceives no penalty or forfeiture of goods and chattels incurred; -- sees no
scourge waving over his head, or prison opening his gates upon him: -- What is
there to affright his conscience? -- Conscience has got safely entrenched
behind the Letter of the Law; sits there invulnerable, fortified with Cases and
Reports so strongly on all sides; -- that it is not preaching can dispossess it
of its hold."

[Here Corporal Trim and my uncle Toby exchanged looks with each other. -- Aye,
-- aye, Trim! quoth my uncle Toby, shaking his head, -- these are but sorry
fortifications, Trim. -- O! very poor work, answered Trim, to what your Honor
and I make of it. -- The character of this last man, said Dr. Slop,
interrupting Trim, is more detestable than all the rest; -- and seems to have
been taken from some pettifogging Lawyer amongst you: -- Amongst us, a man's
conscience could not possibly continue so long blinded; -- three times in a
year, at least, he must go to confession. Will that restore it to sight, quoth
my uncle Toby? -- Go on, Trim, quoth my father, or Obadiah will have got back
before thou have got to the end of thy sermon; -- it is a very short one,
replied Trim. -- I wish it was longer, quoth my uncle Toby, for I like it
hugely. -- Trim went on.]

"A fourth man shall want even this refuge; -- shall break through all this
ceremony of slow chicane; -- scorns the doubtful workings of secret plots and
cautious trains to bring about his purpose: -- See the barefaced villain, how
he cheats, lies, perjures, robs, murders. -- Horrid! -- But indeed much better
was not to be expected, in the present case, -- the poor man was in the dark!
-- his priest had got the keeping of his conscience; -- and all he would let
him know of it, was, That he must believe in the Pope; -- go to Mass; -- cross
himself; -- tell his beads; -- be a good Catholic, and that this, in all
conscience, was enough to carry him to heaven. What; -- if he perjures! -- Why;
-- he had a mental reservation in it. -- But if he is so wicked and abandoned a
wretch as you represent him; -- if he robs, -- if he stabs, -- will not
conscience, on every such act, receive a wound itself? Aye, -- but the man has
carried it to confession; -- the wound digests there, and will do well enough,
and in a short time be quite healed up by absolution. O Popery! what have thou
to answer for? -- when, not content with the too many natural and fatal ways,
through which the heart of man is every day thus treacherous to itself above all
things; -- thou have wilfully set open this wide gate of deceit before the face
of this unwary traveller, too apt, God knows, to go astray of himself; and
confidently speak peace to himself, when there is no peace.

"Of this the common instances which I have drawn out of life, are too
notorious to require much evidence. If any man doubts the reality of them, or
thinks it impossible for a man to be such a bubble to himself, -- I must refer
him a moment to his own reflections, and will then venture to trust my appeal
with his own heart.

"Let him consider in how different a degree of detestation, numbers of wicked
actions stand there, though equally bad and vicious in their own natures; -- he
will soon find that such of them, as strong inclination and custom have
prompted him to commit, are generally dressed out and painted with all the
false beauties, which a soft and a flattering hand can give them; -- and that
the others, to which he feels no propensity, appear, at once, naked and
deformed, surrounded with all the true circumstances of folly and dishonor.

"When David surprised Saul sleeping in the cave, and cut off the skirt of his
robe, -- we read his heart smote him for what he had done: -- But in the matter
of Uriah, where a faithful and gallant servant, whom he ought to have loved and
honored, fell to make way for his lust, -- where conscience had so much
greater reason to take the alarm, his heart smote him not. A whole year had
almost passed from the first commission of that crime, to the time Nathan was
sent to reprove him; and we read not once of the least sorrow or compunction of
heart which he testified, during all that time, for what he had done.

"Thus conscience, this once able monitor, -- placed on high as a judge within
us, and intended by our maker as a just and equitable one too, -- by an unhappy
train of causes and impediments, takes often such imperfect cognizance of what
passes, -- does its office so negligently, -- sometimes so corruptly, -- that
it is not to be trusted alone; and therefore we find there is a necessity, an
absolute necessity of joining another principle with it to aid, if not govern,
its determinations.

"So that if you would form a just judgment of what is of infinite importance
to you not to be misled in, -- namely, in what degree of real merit you stand
either as an honest man, an useful citizen, a faithful subject to your king, or
a good servant to your God, -- call in religion and morality. -- Look, -- What
is written in the law of God? -- How read thou? -- Consult calm reason and
the unchangeable obligations of justice and truth; -- what say they?

"Let CONSCIENCE determine the matter upon these reports; -- and then if they
heart condemns thee not, which is the case the Apostle supposes, -- the rule
will be infallible;" [Here Dr. Slop fell asleep] " thou will have confidence
toward God; -- that is, have just grounds to believe the judgment thou have
past upon thyself, is the judgment of God; and nothing else but an anticipation
of that righteous sentence which will be pronounced upon thee hereafter by that
Being, to whom thou art finally to give an account of thy actions.

" Blessed is the man, indeed then, as the author of the book of Ecclesiasticus
expresses it, who is not pricked with the multitude of his sins: Blessed is the
man whose heart has not condemned him; whether he be rich, or whether he be
poor, if he have a good heart (a heart thus guided and informed) he shall at
all times rejoice in a cheerful countenance; his mind shall tell him more than
seven watchmen that sit above upon a tower on high." -- [A tower has no
strength, quoth my uncle Toby, unless it is flanked.] "In the darkest doubts it
shall conduct him safer than a thousand casuists, and give the state he lives
in a better security for his behavior than all the clauses and restrictions
put together, which lawmakers are forced to multiply: -- Forced, I say, as
things stand; human laws not being a matter of original choice, but of pure
necessity, brought in to fence against the mischievous effects of those
consciences which are no law unto themselves; well intending, by the many
provisions made, -- that in all such corrupt and misguided cases, where
principles and the checks of conscience will not make us upright, -- to supply
their force, and, by the terrors of goals and halters, oblige us to it."

[I see plainly, said my father, that this sermon has been composed to be
preached at the Temple, -- or at some Assize. -- I like the reasoning, -- and
(...) sorry that Dr. Slop has fallen asleep before the time of his conviction;
-- for it is now clear, that the Parson, as I thought at first, never insulted
St. Paul in the least; -- nor has there been, brother, the least difference
between them. -- A great matter, if they had differed, replied my uncle Toby,
-- the best friends in the world may differ sometimes. -- True, -- brother
Toby, quoth my father, shaking hands with him, -- we'll fill our pipes,
brother, and then. Trim shall go on.

Well, -- what do thou think of it? said my father, speaking to Corporal
Trim, as he reached his tobacco-box.

I think, answered the Corporal, that the seven watchmen upon the tower, who,
I suppose, are all sentinels there, -- are more, an' please your Honor, than
were necessary; -- and, to go on at that rate, would harrass a regiment all to
pieces, which a commanding officer, who loves his men, will never do, if he can
help it; because two sentinels, added the Corporal, are as good as twenty. -- I
have been a commanding officer myself in the Corpse de Guard a hundred times,
continued Trim, rising an inch higher in his figure, as he spoke, -- and all
the time I had the honor to serve his Majesty King William, in relieving the
most considerable posts, I never left more than two in my life. -- Very right,
Trim, quoth my uncle Toby, -- but you do not consider, Trim, that the towers,
in Solomon's days, were not such things as our bastions, flanked and defended
by other works; -- this, Trim, was an invention since Solomon's death; nor had
they horn-works, or ravelins before the curtin, in his time; -- or such a fosse
as we make with a cuvette in the middle of it, and with cover'd-ways and
counterscarps pallisadoed along it, to guard against a Coup de main: -- So that
the seven men upon the tower were a party, I dare say, from the Corpse de Guard,
set there, not only to look out, but to defend it. -- They could be no more,
an' please your Honor, than a Corporal's Guard. -- My father smiled inwardly,
-- but not outwardly; -- the subject between my uncle Toby and Corporal Trim
being rather too serious, considering what had happened, to make a jest of: --
So putting his pipe into his mouth, which he had just lighted, -- he contented
himself with ordering Trim to read on. He read on as follows:]

"To have the fear of God before our eyes, and, in our mutual dealings with
each other, to govern our actions by the eternal measures of right and wrong:
-- The first of these will comprehend the duties of religion; -- the second,
those of morality, which are so inseparably connected together, that you cannot
divide these two tables, even in imagination (though the attempt is often made in
practice) without breaking and mutually destroying them both.

"I said the attempt is often made, and so it is; -- there being nothing more
common than to see a man who has no sense at all of religion, -- and indeed has
so much honesty as to pretend to none, who would take it as the bitterest
affront, should you but hint at a suspicion of his moral character, -- or
imagine he was not conscientiously just and scrupulous to the uttermost mite.

"When there is some appearance that it is so, -- though one is unwilling even to
suspect the appearance of so amiable a virtue as moral honesty, yet were we to
look into the grounds of it, in the present case, I am persuaded we should find
little reason to envy such a one the honor of his motive.

"Let him declaim as pompously as he chooses upon the subject, it will be found
to rest upon no better foundation than either his interest, his pride, his
ease, or some such little and changeable passion as will give us but small
dependence upon his actions in matters of great stress.

"I will illustrate this by an example.

"I know the banker I deal with, or the physician I usually call in," [There is
no need, cried Dr. Slop, (waking) to call in any physician in this case] "to be
neither of them men of much religion: I hear them make a jest of it every day,
and treat all its sanctions with so much scorn, as to put the matter past
doubt. Well; -- notwithstanding this, I put my fortune into the hands of the
one; -- and what is dearer still to me, I trust my life to the honest skill of
the other.

"Now, let me examine what is my reason for this great confidence. -- Why, in
the first place, I believe there is no probability that either of them will
employ the power I put into their hands to my disadvantage; -- I consider that
honesty serves the purposes of this life: -- I know their success in the world
depends upon the fairness of their characters. -- In a word, -- I Am persuaded
that they cannot hurt me, without hurting themselves more.

"But put it otherwise, namely, that interest lay, for once, on the other side;
that a case should happen, wherein the one, without stain to his reputation,
could secret my fortune, and leave me naked in the world; -- or that the other
could send me out of it, and enjoy an estate by my death, without dishonor to
himself or his art: -- In this case, what hold have I of either of them? --
Religion, the strongest of all motives, is out of the question: -- Interest,
the next most powerful motive in the world, is strongly against me: -- What
have I left to cast into the opposite scale to balance this temptation? --
Alas! I have nothing, -- nothing but what is lighter than a bubble -- I must
lay at the mercy of HONOR, or some such capricious principle. -- Strait
security for two of my most valuable blessings! -- my property and my life.

"As, therefore, we can have no dependence upon morality without religion; --
so, on the other hand, there is nothing better to be expected from religion
without morality; -- nevertheless, it is no prodigy to see a man whose real
moral character stands very low, who yet entertains the highest notion of
himself, in the light of a religious man.

"He shall not only be covetous, revengeful, implacable, -- but even wanting in
points of common honesty; yet, inasmuch as he talks aloud against the
infidelity of the age, -- is zealous for some points of religion, -- goes twice
a day to church, -- attends the sacraments, -- and amuses himself with a few
instrumental parts of religion, -- shall cheat his conscience into a judgment
that, for this, he is a religious man, and has discharged truly his duty to
God: And you will find that such a man, through force of this delusion,
generally looks down with spiritual pride upon every other man who has less
affectation of piety, -- though, perhaps, ten times more moral honesty than,
himself.

" This likewise is a sore evil under the sun; and, I believe there is no one
mistaken principle, which, for its time, has wrought more serious mischiefs. --
For a general proof of this, -- examine the history of the Romish church;" --
[Well, what can you make of that, cried Dr. Slop?] -- "see what scenes of
cruelty, murders, rapines, bloodshed," [They may thank their own obstinacy,
cried Dr. Slop] "have all been sanctified by a religion not strictly governed
by morality.

"In how many kingdoms of the world," [Here Trim kept waving his right hand
from the sermon to the extent of his arm, returning it backwards and forwards
to the conclusion of the paragraph.]

"In how many kingdoms of the world has the crusading sword of this misguided
saint-errant spared neither age, or merit, or sex, or condition? -- and, as he
fought under the banners of a religion which set him loose from justice and
humanity, he showed none; mercilessly trampled upon both, -- heard neither the
cries of the unfortunate, nor pitied their distresses."

[I have been in many a battle, an' please your Honor, quoth Trim, sighing,
but never in so melancholy a one as this. -- I would not have drawn a tricker
in it, against these poor souls, -- to have been made a general officer. --
Why? what do you understand of the affair? said Dr. Slop, looking toward Trim
with something more contempt than the Corporal's honest heart deserved. -- What
do you know, friend, about this battle you talk of? -- I know, replied Trim,
that I never refused quarter in my life to any man who cried out for it; -- but
to a woman or a child, continued Trim, before I would level my musket at them,
I would lose my life a thousand times. -- Here Is a crown for thee, Trim, to
drink with Obadiah tonight, quoth my uncle Toby, and I Will give Obadiah another
too. -- God bless your Honor, replied Trim, -- I had rather these poor women
and children had it. -- Thou art an honest fellow, quoth my uncle Toby. -- My
father nodded his head, -- as much as to say, -- and so he is. --

But pri'thee Trim, said my father, make an end, -- for I see thou have but a
leaf or two left.]

Corporal Trim read on.

"If the testimony of past centuries in this matter is not sufficient, --
consider at this instant, how the votaries of that religion are every day
thinking to do service and honor to God, by actions which are a dishonor and
scandal to themselves.

"To be convinced of this, go with me for a moment into the prisons of the
inquisition." [God help my poor brother Tom.] -- "Behold Religion, with Mercy
and Justice chained down under her feet, -- there sitting ghastly upon a black
tribunal, propp'd up with racks and instruments of torment. Hark! -- hark! what
a piteous groan!" [Here Trim's face turned as pale as ashes.] "See the
melancholy wretch who uttered it," -- [Here the tears began to trickle down]
"just brought forth to undergo the anguish of a mock trial, and endure the
utmost pains that a studied system of cruelty has been able to invent." -- [D^n
them all, quoth Trim, his color returning into his face as red as blood.] --
"Behold this helpless victim delivered up to his tormentors, -- his body so
wasted with sorrow and confinement." -- [Oh! it is my brother, cried poor Trim
in a most passionate exclamation, dropping the sermon upon the ground, and
clapping his hands together -- I fear it is poor Tom. My father's and my uncle
Toby's hearts yearn'd with sympathy for the poor fellow's distress, -- even
Slop himself acknowledged pity for him. -- Why, Trim, said my father, this is
not a history, -- it is a sermon thou art reading; -- pri'thee begin the
sentence again.] -- "Behold this helpless victim delivered up to his
tormentors, -- his body so wasted with sorrow and confinement, you will see
every nerve and muscle as it suffers.

"Observe the last movement of that horrid engine!" [I would rather face a
cannon, quoth Trim, stamping.] -- "See what convulsions it has thrown him into!
-- Consider the nature of the posture in which he now lies stretched, -- what
exquisite tortures he endures by it!" -- [I hope it is not in Portugal.] --
"'It Is all nature can bear! Good God! see how it keeps his weary soul hanging
upon his trembling lips!"

[I would not read another line of it, quoth Trim, for all this world; -- I
fear, an' please your Honors, all this is in Portugal, where my poor brother
Tom is. I tell thee, Trim, again, quoth my father, it is not an historical
account, -- it is a description. -- It Is only a description, honest man, quoth
Slop, there is not a word of truth in it. -- That Is another story, replied my
father. -- However, as Trim reads it with so much concern, -- it is cruelty to
force him to go on with it. -- Give me hold of the sermon, Trim, -- I Will finish
it for thee, and thou may go. I must stay and hear it too, replied Trim, if
your Honor will allow me; -- though I would not read it myself for a Colonel's
pay. -- Poor Trim! quoth my uncle Toby. My father went on.]

" -- Consider the nature of the posture in which he now lies stretched, --
what exquisite torture he endures by it! -- It Is all nature can bear! -- Good
God! See how it keeps his weary soul hanging upon his trembling lips, --
willing to take its leave, -- but not suffered to depart! -- Behold the unhappy
wretch led back to his cell!" [Then, thank God, however, quoth Trim, they have
not killed him] -- "See him dragged out of it again to meet the flames, and the
insults in his last agonies, which this principle, -- this principle, that
there can be religion without mercy, has prepared for him." [Then, thank God,
-- he is dead, quoth Trim, -- he is out of his pain, -- and they have done
their worst at him. -- O Sirs! -- Hold your peace, Trim, said my father, going
on with the sermon, lest Trim should incense Dr. Slop, -- we shall never have
done at this rate.]

"The surest way to try the merit of any disputed notion is, to trace down the
consequences such a notion has produced, and compare them with the spirit of
Christianity; -- it is the short and decisive rule which our Savior has left
us, for these and suchlike cases, and it is worth a thousand arguments, -- By
their fruits ye shall know them.

"I will add no further to the length of this sermon, than, by two or three
short and independent rules deducible from it.

" First, Whenever a man talks loudly against religion, -- always suspect that
it is not his reason, but his passions which have got the better of his CREED.
A bad life and a good belief are disagreeable and troublesome neighbors, and
where they separate, depend upon it, it is for no other cause but quietness sake.

" Secondly, When a man, thus represented, tells you in any particular
instance, -- That such a thing goes against his conscience, -- always believe
he means exactly the same thing, as when he tells you such a thing goes against
his stomach; -- a present want of appetite being generally the true cause of
both.

"In a word, -- trust that man in nothing, who has not a CONSCIENCE in every
thing.

"And, in your own case, remember this plain distinction, a mistake in which
has ruined thousands, -- that your conscience is not a law: -- No, God and
reason made the law, and have placed conscience within you to determine; -- not
like an Asiatic Cadi, according to the ebbs and flows of his own passions, --
but like a British judge in this land of liberty and good sense, who makes no
new law, but faithfully declares that law which he knows already written."

FINIS.
Thou have read the sermon extremely well, Trim, quoth my father. -- If he had
spared his comments, replied Dr. Slop, he would have read it much better. I
should have read it ten times better, Sir, answered Trim, but that my heart was
so full. -- That was the very reason, Trim, replied my father, which has made
thee read the sermon as well as thou have done; and if the clergy of our
church, continued my father, addressing himself to Dr. Slop, would take part in
what they deliver, as deeply as this poor fellow has done, -- as their
compositions are fine; (I deny it, quoth Dr. Slop) I maintain it, that the
eloquence of our pulpits, with such subjects to inflame it, -- would be a model
for the whole world: -- But, alas! continued my father, and I own it, Sir, with
sorrow, that, like French politicians in this respect, what they gain in the
cabinet they lose in the field. -- 'Twere a pity, quoth my uncle, that this
should be lost. I like the sermon well, replied my father, -- it is dramatic, --
and there is something in that way of writing, when skilfully managed, which
catches the attention. -- We preach much in that way with us, said Dr. Slop. --
I know that very well, said my father, -- but in a tone and manner which
disgusted Dr. Slop, full as much as his assent, simply, could have pleased him.
-- But in this, added Dr. Slop, a little piqued, -- our sermons have greatly
the advantage, that we never introduce any character into them below a
patriarch or a patriarch's wife, or a martyr or a saint. -- There are some very
bad characters in this, however, said my father, and I do not think the sermon
a jot the worse for 'em. -- But pray, quoth my uncle Toby, -- who is can this
be? -- How could it get into my Stevinus? A man must be as great a conjurer as
Stevinus, said my father, to resolve the second question: -- The first, I
think, is not so difficult; -- for unless my judgment greatly deceives me, -- I
know the author, for it is wrote, certainly, by the parson of the parish.

The similitude of the style and manner of it, with those my father constantly
had heard preached in his parish church, was the ground of his conjecture, --
proving it as strongly, as an argument a priori, could prove such a thing to a
philosophic mind, That it was Yorick's and no one's else: -- It was proved to
be so a posteriori, the day after, when Yorick sent a servant to my uncle
Toby's house to enquire after it.

It seems that Yorick, who was inquisitive after all kinds of knowledge, had
borrowed Stevinus of my uncle Toby, and had carelessly popp'd his sermon, as
soon as he had made it, into the middle of Stevinus; and, by an act of
forgetfulness, to which he was ever subject, he had sent Stevinus home, and his
sermon to keep him company.

Ill-fated sermon! Thou wast lost, after this recovery of thee, a second time,
dropped through an unsuspected fissure in thy master's pocket, down into a
treacherous and a tattered lining, -- trod deep into the dirt by the left hind
foot of his Rosinante, inhumanly stepping upon thee as thou falledst; -- buried
ten days in the mire, -- raised up out of it by a beggar, sold for a halfpenny
to a parish-clerk, -- transferred to his parson, -- lost for ever to thy own,
the remainder of his days, -- nor restored to his restless MANES till this very
moment, that I tell the world the story.

Can the reader believe, that this sermon of Yorick's was preached at an
assize, in the cathedral of York, before a thousand witnesses, ready to give
oath of it, by a certain prebendary of that church, and actually printed by him
when he had done, -- and within so short a space as two years and three months
after Yorick's death. -- Yorick, indeed, was never better served in his life!
-- but it was a little hard to male-treat him after, and plunder him after he
was laid in his grave.

However, as the gentleman who did it, was in perfect charity with Yorick, --
and, in conscious justice, printed but a few copies to give away; -- and that,
I am told, he could moreover have made as good a one himself, had he thought
fit, -- I declare I would not have published this anecdote to the world; -- nor
do I publish it with an intent to hurt his character and advancement in the
church; -- I leave that to others; -- but I find myself impelled by two
reasons, which I cannot withstand.

The first is, That, in doing justice, I may give rest to Yorick's ghost; --
which, as the country people, -- and some others, believe, -- still walks.

The second reason is, That, by laying open this story to the world, I gain an
opportunity of informing it, -- That in case the character of parson Yorick,
and this sample of his sermons is liked, -- that there are now in the
possession of the Shandy family, as many as will make a handsome volume, at the
world's service, -- and much good may they do it.

CHAP. XVIII.
OBADIAH gained the two crowns without dispute; for he came in jingling, with
all the instruments in the green bays bag we spoke of, slung across his body,
just as Corporal Trim went out of the room.

It is now proper, I think, quoth Dr. Slop (clearing up his looks) as we are in
a condition to be of some service to Mrs. Shandy, to send up stairs to know how
she goes on.

I have ordered, answered my father, the old midwife to come down to us upon
the least difficulty; -- for you must know, Dr. Slop, continued my father, with
a perplexed kind of a smile upon his countenance, that by express treaty,
solemnly ratified between me and my wife, you are no more than an auxiliary in
this affair, -- and not so much as that, -- unless the lean old mother of a
midwife above stairs cannot do without you. -- Women have their particular
fancies, and in points of this nature, continued my father, where they bear the
whole burden, and suffer so much acute pain for the advantage of our families,
and the good of the species, -- they claim a right of deciding, en Soveraines,
in whose hands, and in what fashion, they choose to undergo it.

They are in the right of it, -- quoth my uncle Toby. But, Sir, replied Dr.
Slop, not taking notice of my uncle Toby's opinion, but turning to my father,
-- they had better govern in other points; -- and a father of a family, who
wished its perpetuity, in my opinion, had better exchange this prerogative with
them, and give up some other rights in lieu of it. -- I know not, quoth my
father, answering a little too testily, to be quite dispassionate in what he
said, -- I know not, quoth he, what we have left to give up, in lieu of who
shall bring our children into the world, -- unless that, -- of who shall beget
them. -- One would almost give up any thing, replied Dr. Slop. -- I beg your
pardon, -- answered my uncle Toby. -- Sir, replied Dr. Slop, it would astonish
you to know what Improvements we have made of late years in all branches of
obstetrical knowledge, but particularly in that one single point of the safe
and expeditious extraction of the foetus, -- which has received such lights,
that, for my part (holding up his hands) I declare I wonder how the world has
-- I wish, quoth my uncle Toby, you had seen what prodigious armies we had in
Flanders.

CHAP. XIX.
I Have dropped the curtain over this scene for a minute, -- to remind you of
one thing, -- and to inform you of another.

What I have to inform you, comes, I own, a little out of its due course; --
for it should have been told a hundred and fifty pages ago, but that I foresaw
then 'twould come in pat hereafter, and be of more advantage here than
elsewhere. -- Writers had need look before them to keep up the spirit and
connection of what they have in hand.

When these two things are done, -- the curtain shall be drawn up again, and my
uncle Toby, my father, and Dr. Slop shall go on with their discourse, without
any more interruption.

First, then, the matter which I have to remind you of, is this; -- that from
the specimens of singularity in my father's notions in the point of
Christian-names, and that other point previous thereto, -- you was led, I
think, into an opinion, (and I am sure I said as much) that my father was a
gentleman altogether as odd and whimsical in fifty other opinions. In truth,
there was not a stage in the life of man, from the very first act of his
begetting, -- down to the lean and slipper'd pantaloon in his second
childishness, but he had some favorite notion to himself, springing out of it,
as skeptical, and as far out of the highway of thinking, as these two which
have been explained.

-- Mr. Shandy, my father, Sir, would see nothing in the light in which others
placed it; -- he placed things in his own light; -- he would weigh nothing in
common scales; -- no, -- he was too refined a researcher to lay open to so
gross an imposition. -- To come at the exact weight of things in the scientific
steel-yard, the fulcrum, he would say, should be almost invisible, to avoid all
friction from popular tenets; -- without this the minutiae of philosophy, which
should always turn the balance, will have no weight at all. -- Knowledge, like
matter, he would affirm, was divisible in infinitum; -- that the grains and
scruples were as much a part of it, as the gravitation of the whole world. --
In a word, he would say, error was error, -- no matter where it fell, --
whether in a fraction, -- or a pound, -- 'twas alike fatal to truth, and she
was kept down at the bottom of her well as inevitably by a mistake in the dust
of a butterfly's wing, -- as in the disk of the sun, the moon, and all the
stars of heaven put together.

He would often lament that it was for want of considering this properly, and
of applying it skilfully to civil matters, as well as to speculative truths,
that so many things in this world were out of joint; -- that the political arch
was giving way; -- and that the very foundations of our excellent constitution
in church and state, were so sapp'd as estimators had reported.

You cry out, he would say, we are a ruined, undone people. -- Why? he would
ask, making use of the sorites or fyllogism of Zeno and Chrysippus, without
knowing it belonged to them. -- Why? why are we a ruined people? -- Because we
are corrupted. -- Whence is it, dear Sir, that we are corrupted? -- Because we
are needy; -- our poverty, and not our wills, consent. -- And wherefore, he
would add, -- are we needy? -- From the neglect, he would answer, of our pence
and our halfpence: -- Our bank-notes, Sir, our guineas, -- nay our shillings,
take care of themselves.

It Is the same, he would say, throughout the whole circle of the sciences; --
the great, the established points of them, are not to be broke in upon. -- The
laws of nature will defend themselves; -- but error -- (he would add, looking
earnestly at my mother) -- error, Sir, creeps in through the minute holes, and
small crevices, which human nature leaves unguarded.

This turn of thinking in my father, is what I had to remind you of: -- The
point you are to be informed of, and which I have reserved for this place, is
as follows:

Amongst the many and excellent reasons, with which my father had urged my
mother to accept of Dr. Slop's assistance preferably to that of the old woman,
-- there was one of a very singular nature; which, when he had done arguing the
matter with her as a Christian, and came to argue it over again with her as a
philosopher, he had put his whole strength to, depending indeed upon it as his
sheet anchor. -- It failed him; though from no defect in the argument itself; but
that, do what he could, he was not able for his soul to make her comprehend the
drift of it. -- Cursed luck! -- said he to himself, one afternoon, as he walked
out of the room, after he had been stating it for an hour and a half to her, to
no manner of purpose; -- cursed luck! said he, biting his lip as he shut the
door, -- for a man to be master of one of the finest chains of reasoning in
nature, -- and have a wife at the same time with such a headpiece, that he
cannot hang up a single inference within side of it, to save his soul from
destruction.

This argument, though it was entirely lost upon my mother, -- had more weight
with him, than all his other arguments joined together: -- I will therefore
endeavor to do it justice, -- and set it forth with all the perspicuity I am
master of.

My father set out upon the strength of these two following axioms:

First, That an ounce of a man's own wit, was worth a tun of other peoples; and,

Secondly, (Which, by the bye, was the groundwork of the first axiom, -- though
it comes last) That every man's wit must come from every man's own soul, -- and
no other body's.

Now, as it was plain to my father, that all souls were by nature equal, -- and
that the great difference between the most acute and the most obtuse
understanding, -- was from no original sharpness or bluntness of one thinking
substance above or below another, -- but arose merely from the lucky or unlucky
organization of the body, in that part where the soul principally took up her
residence, -- he had made it the subject of his enquiry to find out the
identical place.

Now, from the best accounts he had been able to get of this matter, he was
satisfied it could not be where Des Carts had fixed it, upon the top of the
pineal gland of the brain; which, as he philosophised, formed a cushion for her
about the size of a marrow pea; though to speak the truth, as so many nerves did
terminate all in that one place, -- 'twas no bad conjecture; -- and my father
had certainly fallen with that great philosopher plumb into the center of the
mistake, had it not been for my uncle Toby, who rescued him out of it, by a
story he told him of a Walloon officer at the battle of Landen, who had one
part of his brain shot away by a musket-ball, -- and another part of it taken
out after by a French surgeon; and, after all, recovered, and did his duty very
well without it.

If death, said my father, reasoning with himself, is nothing but the
separation of the soul from the body; -- and if it is true that people can walk
about and do their business without brains, -- then certes the soul does not
inhabit there. Q. E. D.

As for that certain, very thin, subtle, and very fragrant juice which
Coglionissimo Borri, the great Milaneze physician, affirms, in a letter to
Bartholine, to have discovered in the cellulae of the occipital parts of the
cerebellum, and which he likewise affirms to be the principal seat of the
reasonable soul (for, you must know, in these latter and more enlightened ages,
there are two souls in every man living, -- the one, according to the great
Metheglingius, being called the Animus, the other the Anima); -- as for this
opinion, I say, of Borri, -- my father could never subscribe to it by any
means; the very idea of so noble, so refined, so immaterial, and so exalted a
being as the Anima, or even the Animus, taking up her residence, and sitting
dabbling, like a tad-pole, all day long, both summer and winter, in a puddle,
-- or in a liquid of any kind, how thick or thin soever, he would say, shocked
his imagination; he would scarce give the doctrine a hearing.

What, therefore, seemed the least liable to objections of any, was, that the
chief sensorium, or headquarters of the soul, and to which place all
intelligences were referred, and from whence all her mandates were issued, --
was in, or near, the cerebellum, -- or rather some-where about the medulla
oblongata, wherein it was generally agreed by Dutch anatomists, that all the
minute nerves from all the organs of the seven senses concentered, like streets
and winding alleys, into a square.

So far there was nothing singular in my father's opinion, -- he had the best
of philosophers, of all ages and climates, to go along with him. -- But here he
took a road of his own, setting up another Shandean hypothesis upon these
corner-stones they had laid for him; -- and which said hypothesis equally stood
its ground; whether the subtilty and fineness of the soul depended upon the
temperature and clearness of the said liquor, or of the finer network and
texture in the cerebellum itself; which opinion he favored.

He maintained, that next to the due care to be taken in the act of propagation
of each individual, which required all the thought in the world, as it laid the
foundation of this incomprehensible contexture in which wit, memory, fancy,
eloquence, and what is usually meant by the name of good natural parts, do
consist; -- that next to this and his Christianname, which were the two
original and most efficacious causes of all; -- that the third cause, or rather
what logicians call the Causa sine qua non, and without which all that was done
was of no manner of significance, -- was the preservation of this delicate and
fine-spun web, from the havoc which was generally made in it by the violent
compression and crush which the head was made to undergo, by the nonsensical
method of bringing us into the world by that part foremost.

-- This requires explanation.

My father, who dipped into all kinds of books, upon looking into Lithopaedus
Senonesis de Partu difficili The author is here twice mistaken; -- for
Lithopaedus should be wrote thus, Lithopaedii Senonensis Icon. The second
mistake is, that this Lithopaedus is not an author, but a drawing of a
petrified child. The account of this, published by Albosius, 1580, may be seen
at the end of Cordaeus's works in Spachius. Mr. Tristram Shandy has been led
into this error, either from seeing Lithopaedus's name of late in a catalogue
of learned writers in Dr. (...), or by mistaking Lithopaedus for
Trinecavellius, -- from the too great similitude of the names.
, published by Adrianus Smelvgot, had found out, That the lax and pliable state
of a child's head in parturition, the bones of the cranium having no futures at
that time, was such, -- that by force of the woman's efforts, which, in strong
labour-pains, was equal, upon an average, to a weight of 470 pounds averdupoise
acting perpendicularly upon it; -- it so happened that, in 49 instances out of
50, the said head was compressed and molded into the shape of an oblong
conical piece of dough, such as a pastry-cook generally rolls up in order to
make a pie of. -- Good God! cried my father, what havoc and destruction must
this make in the infinitely fine and tender texture of the cerebellum! -- Or if
there is such a juice as Borri pretends, -- is it not enough to make the
clearest liquor in the world both feculent and mothery?

But how great was his apprehension, when he further understood, that this
force, acting upon the very vertex of the head, not only injured the brain
itself or cerebrum, -- but that it necessarily squeezed and propell'd the
cerebrum toward the cerebellum, which was the immediate seat of the
understanding. -- Angels and Ministers of grace defend us! cried my father, --
can any soul withstand this shock? -- No wonder the intellectual web is so rent
and tattered as we see it; and that so many of our best heads are no better
than a puzzled skein of silk, -- all perplexity, -- all confusion within side.

But when my father read on, and was let into the secret, that when a child was
turned topsy-turvy, which was easy for an operator to do, and was extracted by
the feet; -- that instead of the cerebrum being propell'd toward the
cerebellum, the cerebellum, on the contrary, was propell'd simply toward the
cerebrum where it could do no manner of hurt: -- By heavens! cried he, the
world is in a conspiracy to drive out what little wit God has given us, -- and
the professors of the obstetric art are listed into the same conspiracy. --
What is it to me which end of my son comes foremost into the world, provided
all goes right after, and his cerebellum escapes uncrushed?

It is the nature of an hypothesis, when once a man has conceived it, that it
assimilates every thing to itself as proper nourishment; and, from the first
moment of your begetting it, it generally grows the stronger by every thing you
see, hear, read, or understand. This is of great use.

When my father was gone with this about a month, there was scarce a
phenomenon of stupidity or of genius, which he could not readily solve by it;
-- it accounted for the eldest son being the greatest blockhead in the family.
-- Poor devil, he would say, -- he made way for the capacity of his younger
brothers. -- It unriddled the observation of drivellers and monstrous heads, --
showing, a priori, it could not be otherwise, -- unless * * * * I don't know
what. It wonderfully explained and accounted for the acumen of the Asiatic
genius, and that sprightlier turn, and a more penetrating intuition of minds,
in warmer climates; not from the loose and commonplace solution of a clearer
sky, and a more perpetual sunshine, etc. -- which, for aught he knew, might as
well rarify and dilute the faculties of the soul into nothing, by one extreme,
-- as they are condensed in colder climates by the other; -- but he traced the
affair up to its springhead; -- showed that, in warmer climates, nature had
laid a lighter tax upon the fairest parts of the creation; -- their pleasures
more; -- the necessity of their pains less, insomuch that the pressure and
resistance upon the vertex was so slight, that the whole organization of the
cerebellum was preserved; -- nay, he did not believe, in natural births, that
so much as a single thread of the network was broke or displaced, -- so that
the soul might just act as she liked.

When my father had got so far, -- what a blaze of light did the accounts of
the Caesarian section, and of the towering geniuses who had come safe into the
world by it, cast upon this hypothesis? Here you see, he would say, there was
no injury done to the sensorium; -- no pressure of the head against the pelvis;
-- no propulsion of the cerebrum toward the cerebellum, either by the os pubis
on this side, or the os coxcygis on that; -- and, pray, what were the happy
consequences? Why, Sir, your Julius Caesar, who gave the operation a name; --
and your Hermes Trismegistus, who was born so before ever the operation had a
name; -- your Scipio Africanus; your Manlius Torquatus; our Edward the Sixth,
-- who, had he lived, would have done the same honor to the hypothesis: --
These, and many more, who figured high in the annals of fame, -- all came
side-way, Sir, into the world.

This incision of the abdomen and uterus, ran for six weeks together in my
father's head; -- he had read, and was satisfied, that wounds in the
epigastrium, and those in the matrix, were not mortal; -- so that the belly of
the mother might be opened extremely well to give a passage to the child. -- He
mentioned the thing one afternoon to my mother, -- merely as a matter of fact;
-- but seeing her turn as pale as ashes at the very mention of it, as much as
the operation flattered his hopes, -- he thought it as well to say no more of
it, -- contenting himself with admiring -- what he thought was to no purpose to
propose.

This was my father Mr. Shandy's hypothesis; concerning which I have only to
add, that my brother Bobby did as great honor to it (whatever he did to the
family) as any one of the great heroes we spoke of: -- For happening not only
to be christened, as I told you, but to be born too, when my father was at
Epsom, -- being moreover my mother's first child, -- coming into the world with
his head foremost, -- and turning out afterward a lad of wonderful slow parts,
-- my father spelt all these together into his opinion; and as he had failed at
one end, -- he was determined to try the other.

This was not to be expected from one of the sisterhood, who are not easily to
be put out of their way, -- and was therefore one of my father's great reasons
in favor of a man of science, whom he could better deal with.

Of all men in the world, Dr. Slop was the fittest for my father's purpose; --
for though his new-invented forceps was the armor he had proved, and what he
maintained, to be the safest instrument of deliverance, -- yet, it seems, he
had scattered a word or two in his book, in favor of the very thing which ran
in my father's fancy; -- though not with a view to the soul's good in extracting
by the feet, as was my father's system, -- but for reasons merely obstetrical.

This will account for the coalition betwixt my father and Dr. Slop, in the
ensuing discourse, which went a little hard against my uncle Toby. -- In what
manner a plain man, with nothing but common sense, could bear up against two
such allies in science, -- is hard to conceive. -- You may conjecture upon it,
if you please, -- and whilst your imagination is in motion, you may encourage
it to go on, and discover by what causes and effects in nature it could come to
pass, that my uncle Toby got his modesty by the wound he received upon his
groin. -- You may raise a system to account for the loss of my nose by marriage
articles, -- and show the world how it could happen, that I should have the
misfortune to be called TRISTRAM, in opposition to my father's hypothesis, and
the wish of the whole family, Godfathers and Godmothers not excepted. --
These, with fifty other points left yet unraveled, you may endeavor to solve
if you have time; -- but I tell you beforehand it will be in vain, -- for not
the sage Alquise, the magician in Don Belianis of Greece, nor the no less
famous Urganda, the sorceress his wife, (were they alive) could pretend to come
within a league of the truth.

The reader will be content to wait for a full explanation of these matters
till the next year, -- when a series of things will be laid open which he
little expects.

END of the SECOND VOLUME.

