AN ESSAY For Abridging the Study of Physic. To which is added, A DIALOGUE,
(Betwixt HYGEIA, MERCURY and PLUTO,) Relating to the PRACTICE of PHYSIC, As it
is managed by a certain Illustrious Society. As also an EPISTLE from Usbek the
Persian to J -- W -- d, Esquire;

LONDON; Printed for J. WILFORD, behind the Chapter House, near St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1735.

(Prince One Shilling.)

TO THE ANTACADEMIC PHILOSOPHERS, TO THE Generous DESPISERS of the Schools, TO
THE Deservedly-Celebrated J -- W -- d, J -- M -- r, and the rest of the
numerous Sect of Inspired PHYSICIANS; This little Work is humbly inscribed, by

Their most Devoted Servant, and Zealous Admirer.

AN ESSAY For Abridging the STUDY of PHYSIC.
Sic ubi visceribus gravidae telluris imago
Effecta est hominis, foeto consurgit in arvo;
Quodque magis mirum simul edita concutit arma.
OVID. METAMORPH.
OUR University Method of studying Physic is attended with so many
Discouragements, it is such an expensive, tedious, difficult way to Science,
that one who has any talent at Projecting cannot, I think, employ it more
humanely than in putting the distressed Youth upon a shorter and easier road.
The Pride and Ill Nature, perhaps the Avarice too, of the Learned in every
Science, would gladly make a mystery of the art they profess, and render it
inaccessible but to a few. Ask a Gentleman of the Aesculapian tribe, what
course of Education is requisite to the making of a Physician? He will
presently tell you, that a young Man who would successfully apply himself to
the Study of Medicine, must first of all have an Understanding capable of
Instruction; and that after he is pretty far advanced in the Languages and such
other pieces of Learning as he imagines to be necessarily previous and
introductory to Physic, he must study every particular Branch of that Science
under able Teachers, and labor night and day for God knows how many years,
before he can be supposed fit to Practice. Very modest Demands truly! This is
either the most malicious fetch or the simplest mistake in the world: for in
reality, Learning is no more necessary to a Physician than to a Fiddler. And for
all this pother, I am mistaken too if I cannot lay down a Method, by the
religious and strict observance of which, a young man (whatever his natural
Sense be) may, in two or three years time, without any expense either of Money
or Animal Spirits worth calculating, drop into the world not only a ripe
Surgeon or Physician, but Physician, Surgeon and Apothecary all in one. But
before I proceed to communicate my Scheme, I here solemnly declare that I have
not the least pique at the present Faculty of Physicians, nay, that I honor
that learned Society; but Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, magis amica veritas.
It were a piece of complaisance, unworthy a truly generous and
extensively-benevolent disposition, to conceal such means as must evidently
make the acquisition of an useful Art much easier, merely for the sake of
indulging the narrow humor of it is present Professors, who grudge that any
should rise to the Dignities and Privileges of their Profession with less Pain
and Charge than themselves have done.

Well then, to begin with the previous Qualifications of our Student. He must
be provided by bountiful Nature, with an inexhaustible fund of Assurance, that
cardinal Virtue, which without the assistance of any other is sufficient to
make a great man. A little Sense would not be amiss; but as this is seldom an
Ingredient in a Constitution where the other predominates, and as it is not
absolutely necessary, we shall not reckon upon it. Impudence alone will do, for
it gives such a force to the otherways lightest Merit, that the Address, or
rather the Assault, of a man who possesses it to any eminent degree, is not to
be resisted. If besides he can make a shift to read Corderius with the help of
a Dictionary, that is to say, if he has a Quantum sufficit of Latin to enable
him to understand a Recipe and to accent a hard word gracefully, he is now
fitted to attempt the most arduous parts of the Study.

As soon therefore as our young man is thus hopefully qualified, let him
forthwith be bound Apprentice for two or three years to an Apothecary, who
presides like a wholesome Planet over some Country-Town, shedding kindly
Influence for several miles round him. His main business during the time of his
Apprenticeship will be, to spread now and then a Plaster, sometimes to make up
an Electuary or a Mass of Pills, to administer Clysters in great abundance, and
to manage the Non-naturals of the gaunt hide-bound Steed upon whose back his
Master ranges the Country, like the King of Terrors on his pale Horse. Though
this last may not appear to be a very liberal Office, yet as far as it will
give him an occasion to become acquainted with the Constitution of that
generous Animal, and with the general Regimen that suits it best, he will find
it of mighty advantage to him afterward, when he comes to exercise the
Hippohiatrical Function, the cultivation of which makes a very considerable
Article in the Practice of Medicine, in some parts of the Country. When he is
at leisure from these more important Duties, he may, if he pleases, glance over
some short general System of Anatomy. I must own indeed this is almost a
needless trouble, yet I would have him able to tell upon occasion whether the
Stomach lies in the Abdomen or in the Thorax, and the like, if it were only for
ornament's sake, and to keep him in countenance among those people who have got
a notion that some acquaintance with the structure of the Human Body is
necessary to a Physician; for we must not hope to reform the world all at once.
When he has thus laid a good Foundation in Anatomy, to which I allow him a
month, or, if his Master rides much and the roads are dirty, six weeks, let him
proceed to the Practice of Physic and Surgery: A short System for each will be
sufficient. He will frequently have occasion to practice Chemie under his
Master's eye, and thus may gain a competent skill in this Branch of the Study
without the fatigue of Reading. A Botanist he must grow, whether he will or
not. And as for the Materia Medica and Methodus praescribendi, he may make
himself Master of these in this manner. As often as a Physician's Bill comes to
his Master's Shop, let him out with his Pocketbook, slap it down and make it
his own, according to Mr. Bayes's Rule of Records. As he must have frequent
access to know, against what Disease this or that Prescription was designed,
let him therefore devote a page or so in his Pocket-companion to every Disease,
and under each of these let him range the Prescriptions adapted thereto. Thus
when he engages in the Practice himself, whatever Disease shall fall in his
way, he has no more to do but turn over his Vade mecum, where he will probably
find something proper for it. With regard to the different Stages of Diseases,
the various Combinations of Symptoms, and the like, these are subtle trifles
that none but your whimsical people give themselves any trouble about. In the
mean time, su^^ Receipts as he has not got sufficient intelligence to warrant
his reducing under the Article of any Disease, will serve him in good stead
(...) Anomalous Cases, which in all probability will frequently occur to him.
If by sollowing this course, he is not furnished with a complete System of
Recipes by the time that his Apprenticeship is expired, let him consult
Markham's English Housewife's skill in Physic, to be found in the Quarto
Edition of his Works, where he will meet with Receipts that will either help or
prove a sovereign Cure in every Disease. I have known very valuable Collections
of this kind in the hands of some Ladies.

Behold! what a bare simple thing is Physic! when it is showy Luxuriances, it is
fruitless Branches, are lopped off. Vain swelling Science, how much art thou
shrunk! How is the Learning of the Eastern and the Western Schools, how are the
toils of the ancient Sages and Those of modern days, swallowed up almost at
once by a Boy! and a Boy of no great depth neither! For now is the grand Affair
finished, and our Scholar is perfectly well instructed in every part of his
Study. I shall appeal to himself if he is not. If a young man, blessed with
these natural Gifts I have demanded, after such a happy Education, is not
conscious of greater Abilities than almost any of those you call regular
Physicians, I am much mistaken. This very Show of Merit, though he possessed
nothing at all of the Substance, will recommend him prodigiously to the Vulgar,
Great and Small, (that is to say, to nineteen at least of twenty parts of
Mankind) who are such humane Judges of a man's qualifications, that they never
seek further than his own word for them, but always measure his Abilities by
his Pretensions. Now I say our young Doctor may go where he pleases. He cannot
fail to be by this time a skilful Apothecary, and for Physic and Surgery, it
is strange if he is not equally qualified for Practicing either ubique gentium.
Or if he finds his Genius more particularly turned to one Disease than to the
rest, he may with considerable emolument both to himself and the Public,
confine his Practice to that, and may make a good figure as an Antidysenteric
or Antimaniac Physician, as a Vermicide, a Tooth-drawer, or a Corn-cutter. And
if he applies himself to the Obstetrical Art, let him turn over Culpepper's
Midwife enlarged night and day. That little Book is worth a whole Library. All
that is possible to be known in that Art is there treasured up in a small
Duodecimo. Blessed, yea for ever blessed, be the memory of the inimitable
Author, who, and who alone, had the curious happiness to mix the profound
Learning of Aristotle with the facetious Humor of Plautus!

And now, that I may not omit any thing that lies in my power toward the
preparing of our Doctor for business, I shall offer him a few Advices for the
regulation of his Conduct, when he comes abroad into the World. As soon
therefore as he is thus exquisitely accomplished, he must think of
Transplanting himself to some Place where he is little known. And whether he
commence itinerant or fixed Physician (though I would rather he chused the latter
Situation, as more agreeable to the Dignity of his Profession) I advise him
first to make himself a little acquainted with Geography, that he may not be at
a loss to relate what Wonders he has seen in foreign Countries. This will have
a mighty Charm with the Vulgar, who have a shrewd notion of things which one
would think above their reach, and know perfectly well what an amazing
Influence the foreign Air has upon a man's Intellectuals. How this foreign Air
operates, is not to the present purpose to enquire; only it is undeniable that
it has a prodigious effect. It is not only the most effectual, but the easiest
way to Improvement; since in this case a man has no need to exert himself any
further, than just to condescend in his own mind upon any Art or Science that
he would desire to be master of, and he must imbibe it or cease to Breathe. He
is a Sponge thrown into water. For take me a man that has scarce sense enough
to spell his own name, and Steep him for two or three years in a foreign
Atmosphere, you will bring him out again Wringing-full of Knowledge, though he
had done nothing considerable all the time but drank pure quintessential Rum or
a little sprinkled with water by way of Punch in a Guineaship, or strolled
about arrayed in Sheep's guts with the ingenious Inhabitants of the Cape of
Good Hope. Nay, suppose he had passed all the time of his foreign Sojourn in a
profound Sleep, he should find himself strongly Impregnated with Science when
he awaked. The meanest and most ignorant of the vulgar know this; And it is
convenient to humor them. For it is really no cheat at bottom, if one who has
received all the Erudition which far-distant Regions can communicate, without
stirring a foot from home, if such a one, I say, should take the benefit of
being reputed a traveled Gentleman.

But I had almost forgot to enjoin a very necessary Branch of Education.
Necessary in some cases, though indeed to an ordinary Judge it may appear
somewhat trifling. What I have in view at present is the art of Fumisuction and
of Drinking strong Liquor valiantly. I would have him apply indefatigably to
these in the time of his Apprenticeship, his more important Studies need not
cool for it neither: And he must have a very slow capacity, if after two or
three years diligent application, he is not as able a Practitioner both ways as
the most Phlegmatic Justice in a whole County. He will find the Advantage of
these Qualifications, if his Lot is ordered him in any part of the Country
where the exercise of such elegant Arts is the reigning Diversion or Business.
For they will almost infallibly recommend him to the Patronage of some jocular
Squire, who every Evening, assisted by his never-flinching friend, the
spiritual Doctor, wraps himself up in a thick night of Tobacco-smoak, and
murders an artificial Thirst with repeated Draughts of strong-Beer. If, added
to this, he be a good Shot, and can roar at a Fox-chase, his Fortune is made in
spite of hazard.

Now as soon as our Physician begins to lay himself out for Business, let him
assault the general Ear with long and loud Relations of the mighty Exploits he
has performed. Exempli gratia: Every Brook will furnish him with Pebbles,
rugged, brown, and large enough, which, after his Brethren the other Physicians
had condemned his Patient to undergo the operation of Lithotomy, he made him
discharge by the sole virtue of Diuretics. In this case, the larger that he
picks his stones the better, only he must take care that they are no larger
than the human Bladder may be supposed able to contain; if he keeps himself
within these bounds he cannot overdo things, for the greater the wonder be, it
is so much the more taking. Let him talk confidently of such feats, no matter
whether they are possible or not; for though Miracles, they say, are ceased, the
Beast with many heads can swallow them with as much alacrity as ever. It likes
hugely too to be regaled with hard words; these work like a Spell upon the
ignorant Hearers, and are the sure sign of a great Scholard. Therefore for the
inrichment of his Phraseology and the edification of the gaping Herd, I counsel
him, instead of turning over a Dictionary, which is but an awkard, troublesome,
way of learning the Terms of Art, to get by heart the Latin Index to any
System of Botany, where he may have as many odd-sounding words at one view, as
may, when judiciously mixed, sufficiently darken his Expression, and give his
discourse the air of an Oracle.

Now must he, like the Carrion-crow, smell out his Prey, and wherever the
Diseased are, there let him be. When a Physician's Prescription comes to his
shop, I advise him without delay to make a visit to the Patient, and to let him
know that he did not think it proper to make up the Medicines which were
ordered till he knew his Condition himself. Then after he has felt his Pulse,
viewed his Water, and asked him a few Questions, he may proceed in this manner
-- "It is very lucky for you, Sir, that I happened to use this Caution, for the
Recipe that came to my hand is quite wide of the purpose; so we shall, if you
please, let it alone, and I Will send you something that will in a little time do
you service." -- This cannot fail to succeed to his wish among the Million. But
where the Patient is so obstinate and intractable, that all he can utter to his
own praise or the disadvantage of the Physician is not sufficient to shake him,
he may have his full Revenge both upon the Physician and Patient through the
grace of Pharmacy. -- Thus I have delivered the principal Rules by which our
Doctor must direct his Conduct; the rest I leave to his own Discretion.

Since I wrote this, I am informed by several hands, that the Method I have
laid down is generally in every point, and has been for some ages, practiced
through Great Britain, and that the Physicians of this kind are distinguished by
the name of Quacks. However, I conceive it may not be unacceptable to these
Gentlemen to present them with a regular Draught of their own Scheme, and it
may at the same time be of service to Beginners to give them a view of their
Agenda at once. In the mean time I am glad, that though I am disappointed of the
honor of being the first Discoverer of this way, I am for that very reason
safe from engaging in a Quarrel with the Physicians, which I had almost laid my
account with. And moreover, one of my Friends tells me, that the more Quacks,
as he calls them, the better for the Physicians. "For, says he, the Wrath of
Heaven and the proper Vices of Mankind, are scarce so productive of Diseases as
are these Quacks; who in places where they abound, and where the Inhabitants
for every aching head or scratch of a pin, have recourse to their skill, keep
up a perpetual Spring and Fall the whole year round." But this I take to be
mere Raillery.

Another Friend of mine, who is also a Projector, and confiders things
seriously, has a Scheme by him for the more advantageous regulation of the
Civil Punishments. Among other things he proposes, that all Doctors of this
kind, whether Officinal or Errant, should be taken up and distributed among the
public Goals, to superintend the Health of Capital Offenders: (for he
disapproves of public Executions.) And that such of these Delinquents as
escape with life and limb after a year's Discipline under their respective
Physicians, should be taken into the Army; "for, says he, they will probably make
hardy Soldiers." He thinks further, that for the support of these private
Officers, besides the discarded Hangman's Fees, the Country should not grudge a
small Tax upon every Life, (at least upon the Lives of those who used to employ
them before the commencement of their new Dignity) especially since by this
means they are secured from the most mortal dangers they were exposed to.

But for all this, I shall not lose conceit of my Scheme till I have better
reason. For I have some cause to suspect that the Gentlemen who talk so
unfavourably of these Sons of Poean, are not altogether free of Prejudice.

A DIALOGUE, Relating to the PRACTICE of PHYSIC, As it is managed by a certain
Illustrious Society.
Di, quibus imperium est animarum, umbraeque silentes,
Et Chaos, et Phlegethon, loca nocte tacentia late;
Sit mihi fas audita loqui, sit numine vestro
Pandere res alta terra and caligine mersas.
VIRG.
She was the Heathen Goddess of Health.
Hygeia. Mercury. Pluto.
Hygeia. WEll Mercury, now that we are arrived at Pluto's Palace, pray tell me
what is my Business here? You came to me with a distracted hurry in your looks,
and desired me to follow you with all speed, which I did implicitly enough,
expecting to learn from you on the road upon what strange emergency my presence
was necessary in Hell. But you plied your wings so eagerly, that though I don't
use to saunter in my motions, I could not come within hearing of you all the
way. But now that you have recovered Breath, and since Pluto, with whom it
seems I am to have affairs, is taking a Nap, pray tell me what are his demands
upon me?


Mercury. A Nap quotha! would he were well out on it. The fatigue of this Bout
has it seems done more for him than all the virtues of my Rod. But if he had
one grain of Mortality in him, he had slept his last before this.


Hyg. You amaze me! Nay then, some strange Revolution must be near when the
Gods themselves grow sick. I should not have thought it so prodigious neither,
to have heard that Venus was under a Salivation, or that Bacchus was sitting
Cushioned up with the Gout, or Raving in a Fever. But Pluto, that regular,
temperate, sober-living God, and of a good firm Constitution too; Pluto sick!
it is impossible. Mercury you're arch sure, this must be one of your Bites; but
I am not so credulous as you imagine.


Merc. Well, you will know by and by whether I jest or not. It Is not long since I
thought as little of Sickness as you do, and Pluto as little as either of us.
And let me tell you, if you had the same cause to be sick that He has, I
question much if that clean alert Constitution of yours, and all the firmness
of your Animal Economy, could preserve you from these Disorders which we have
hitherto imagined were only incident to Mortals.


Hyg. But prithee Mercury, if I may believe you're in earnest, tell me how came
the Infernal Jupiter by this Indisposition?


Merc. Why you shall hear. -- Did you observe what a pickle he was in two or
three nights ago, at our last Merry-making?


Hyg. I left the Company just as they seemed to have reached a reasonable
degree of Mirth. For you know I seldom sit longer upon these Occasions, than
the first Bottle is emptied.


Merc. True. But Pluto does not always confine himself to such Rules. The
Nectar, you remember was of the right generous kind, which he plied as long as
Drinking was good. And when all the rest were for going, He and Silenus, who
had got into a Corner by themselves, and were grown vastly Loving and
Facetious, laid their heads together for another Bottle, though he had enough in
all conscience before. Well, he was at last prevailed upon to rise, and he
staggered home as drunk as twenty Beggars, roaring, and singing Sonnets to
Proserpine, like a Bacchanal, all the way as he went. While the Inhabitants of
the Infernal Regions, were so tickled in their Spleens to see their King on
such a merry pin, that they fell all a capering and dancing round him; and he
reeled and gambol'd as fast as the best of 'em. In short, you would have split
your Sides, had you seen this odd Scene of Pleasantry. I saw all that passed by
the light of the Torches. For though he was affronted at my offering to conduct
him home, as if he were Drunk forsooth; yet I thought it was proper to follow
him at a distance, and accordingly did not lose sight of him the whole way.


Hyg. Your Description diverts me extremely. Pluto is not often in such a
frolicksome vein. But pray how did his Nectar digest with him? I hope that did
not grumble in his Guts?


Merc. No, hang it! that would not have touched him neither. This was only the
Prelude to the Tragedy. No sooner was he got home than he calls for a fresh
Bottle, and would needs make every body drink that was near him; laughing, and
talking, and singing, with all the gaiety imaginable, and smacking, and kissing
all about him. As he was playing a thousand Anticks that shook the whole Palace
with Laughter, up comes there a brazen-faced Son of a Wh -- of a Pill-giving
Quack, and --


Hyg. Begging your pardon, these are they that my sick Votaries every day curse
so heartily in their Prayers to me; but I could never yet perfectly learn what
they are.


Merc. Rot 'em! I don't want to know any more about them than I do already --
But to my Tale. This precious Rascal finding Pluto in a very affable tune,
comes up to him, and with a deal of affected Concern in his Countenance,
accosts him in this manner -- " Dread Sir, I take it to be indispensably
incumbent upon all Subjects to exert their several Capacities in the Service of
their lawful Sovereigns. My Profession is Physic, and" (after he had told a
thousand Lies concerning his Education, and what Cures he had performed) "my
Concern, says he, for your Majesty's Welfare obliges me to take the liberty to
tell you, that I Am afraid you have drunk more tonight than is consistent with
your Health. Your Eyes look red, your Pulse (here he fumbled about Pluto's
Wrist) strikes much too fast, and from the present Plenitude of your Vascular
System, I can easily prognosticate, by the Rules of my Art, that if you don't
purge off your Crapula, your Majesty must unavoidably, within the space of a
few hours, be seized with an Ephemerous Fever, or a Febris ardens, or perhaps
drop headlong into an Apoplexy. But these Misfortunes may easily be prevented,
by taking two or three of my Pilulae Catholicae, which I invented, and always
prepare my self, and which scarce ever fail to succeed in this, or any other
Intention. -- There they are." With that he pulled out a Box as full of Plagues
as Pandora's, and presenting Pluto with two of his Pills, -- "Your Majesty will
please to swallow these, (says he,) and I shall insure you from all the bad
Consequences of this night's work. I am confident, if your Majesty once knew
the inestimable Virtues of these my Pills, your Majesty would never go without
some of them about you afterward." Good Gods! what Simpletons does Drink make
of us! Pluto, without reflecting upon the Absurdity of this Speech, or once
dreaming of what he was a doing, takes the confounded Pills, and tosses them
over with great Alacrity. And indeed they soon cured him of his Drunkenness, or
at least of his Mirth. For they had not been an hour in his Stomach, till he
grew monstrous sick, and fell a vomiting and scouring most enormously. He did
so roar and curse, and toss and tumble, and run hobbling and crouching up and
down with his Guts in his Arms, screwing his Face, sweating like a Horse, and
looking as pale as Ashes, that but for his Immortality one would not imagine he
could have lived in that Condition two hours. The Villain of an Empirick was
sent to, who, when he heard how Matters went with his Majesty; had the
impudence to say, He liked him so much the better that the Medicine operated
well, and that he would but just stay till he made up something to alleviate
the Stimulus; if there was occasion for it, and give him ease, and then would
follow. But the sorry Scoundrel thought fit to sneak off, and he has not been
heard of since. I suppose he sculks in some blind Corner or other, but he cannot
long lie hid from the Punishment he deserves so richly. In the mean time, Pluto
has continued for these two days in as bad a way as when his Physic first
began to work. And yet, sick as he was, he would not for a long time consent to
the taking of any Measures, which might divulge an Affair that was so little to
his Honor; but he was forced to yield to Necessity at last, and dispatched me
in great haste to find you out. And though he is just now asleep it seems, I Am
afraid there is still work enough left for you. For considering what he has
suffered, and how miserably ill he was but lately when I left him, I am apt to
suspect that his present Rest is merely owing to his Weakness, and you know
much better than I, how deceitful these Truces sometimes prove.


Hyg. Well, I shall do what lies in my power for him; though I must own I am not
very sorry that he smarts for his Folly neither. -- But pray Mercury, can you
tell me what sort of People these Quacks are? For though they practice Physic it
seems, and pretend to have some Interest with me, I have no Correspondence with
them.


Merc. No, I don't imagine you have. I shall tell you in as few words as
possible all that I know about them. You remember that in former times, none
were allowed to practice Physic but those that were found duly qualified, and
had prepared themselves by a long Course of Study for that important
Employment. But now there is not a poor Peasant or Mechanic, but if he has two
Sons, one of them must be a Doctor, as they call them, with a vengeance, though
it were in spite of both Nature and Education. And what wise Method do you
think they fall upon to accomplish this great work? A very short one you will
say. They have no Notion of Education themselves, and they are not able to bear
the Expenses of introducing their Sons regularly to the knowledge of the Art.
But instead of this, they place a raw unlettered Lad for two or three years
under the Care of some Apothecary, who perhaps does not know a great deal more
than his Apprentice. Here he fancies he learns not only to prepare and compound
Medicines, but, by perusing and Common-placing the Physicians Bills, how to
apply them too forsooth. And so at last, by a happy Delusion, he thinks himself
not only an Apothecary, but a Physician. Thus, what by his own proper Fund of
Ignorance, what by his Master's, improving it, he comes out at last a doubly
greater Fool than he entered. But in the mean time, as Ignorance and want of
Sense give him Assurance, and the Lowness of his Education preserves him at
liberty from the combersome Shackles of Honor and Honesty, if he has but
slight enough to save himself from Transportation or the Gibbet, he is sure to
make a Livelihood, though never so many should suffer for it. Others have fallen
upon a yet easier way of scaling the Heights of Physic, by setting up upon
something that they call a Nostrum, left them in a Legacy by their
Grandmother, by which they pretend infallibly to cure some one, or perhaps all
Diseases. And this, whether it is insignificant or dangerous, they administer
the same way in all Circumstances, and in the same Dose to Persons of all Ages,
Sexes, and Constitutions.


Hyg. A hopeful Education I Will swear! Well, I don't wonder that those Fools who
venture their Lives in the hands of such Bunglers, load them with such
Imprecations at last.


Merc. These Wretches however have for some time been in great favor with
Pluto. And in return for their contributing so considerably to the peopling of
his Dominions, they have had the Honor to lodge in the same Quarter with
Alexander, Caesar, and the rest of the noble Tribe of Man-butchers. But of late
years they have sent down such numerous Colonies, that it would have puzzled
Pluto to account for so many swarms (at a time when he heard nothing, by any
Advices from the upper World, either of Famine or Pestilence, or very hot Wars)
if it were not that, of all the Myriads that daily descend to Hell, there is
scarce One of Six, but what lays the Blame of his untimely Fate upon the
Quacks. So that at last, he begun to consider them with another eye, and to
remit of his Indulgence toward them, as dreading they would at this rate in a
short time quite destroy the Brood of Mankind, and so cut off all future
Supplies to his Realms. But now this Affair I presume will complete their
Disgrace, and entirely ruin them with Pluto. They have for a long time played
their Pills, Drops, and Potions here upon the poor Wretches that are miserable
enough besides. But there was never any ear given to their Complaints, for it
was suspected to be all mere Fetch and Knavery, and that they were only sick to
get the Rigor and wholesome Discipline of our Infernal Regions a little
abated. And but the other day, one of these Miscreants, as he was passing by
Tantalus, who was crying out of Thirst after his old rate, stopped and told him,
that Symptom was entirely owing to the redundant Choler in his Blood, and that
he could give him a Potion that would purge it off to his great Relief. Poor
Tantalus, who was glad to drink any thing, made but one Draught of his Potion,
and poured a thousand Blessings upon his pretended Benefactor. But it proved a
bitter Draught to him. For it handled him so unmercifully, and, instead of
having his Thirst quenched by it, he called out at last so pitifully for Drink,
and swooned away so often, that he was obliged to be taken out of his Tub: And
now that his great rage of Sickness is abated, they are even fain to cocker him
up with Broths and Jellies to fill his empty Vessels again. Such things as
these passed without being much taken notice of, and for the most part without
being credited; but I shall wonder if these Varlets are not called to a severe
Account, now that the Gods themselves cannot live for them. For you must know
that, just about the time that Pluto took his Physic, honest old Charon got
his Dose too.


Hyg. No sure! How in the name of wonder came Charon so tractable and
complaisant? I hope his Austerity was not mellowed by a Bottle too?


Merc. No faith; He was as sober as I am just now: but you shall hear how it
happened. One of these Poison-mongers, who wanted a Cast over, but had not a
Farthing to pay his Fare, bethought himself of a sly Expedient. He takes his
Seat just by the old Waterman, and begins to make his Court by complimenting
him upon his vigorous Constitution and the Greenness of his old Age; but at the
same time could not help observing that his Skin disgraced them, (for you know
he is not very nice about his Linnens, and does not go into a Bath perhaps once
in a Century) and that he had contracted something of a Scorbutic Taint, by
having lived so long upon the Water. But if he would accept of some Doses of
his Pulvis Scelotyrbicus, and now and then make use of the warm Bath, he might
soon become as sleek and pure as a Snake that has just cast his Slough. Charon
at first made him surly enough Answers, and was like to have grown very rough,
but the insinuating Rascal plied him so with positive Remonstrances, that the
simple old Dotard began at last to imagine that his Skin really itched. He told
him, that what he said might be true enough, but that he had not Leisure to
take Physic. The unconscionable Knave replied, that the Medicine which he had
to offer him was an Alterative and acted insensibly, so that he needed not lose
a Moment's Business, nor so much as change his Diet for it. Well, not to tire
you with a long Tale, Charon takes the Powders in lieu of Fare, which was all
that the Rascal wanted. And one Dose has wrought him so heartily, that if they
were to cure him of a Leprosy, I suppose Cerberus may take the rest for him. He
was obliged to crawl out of his Boat into a Hut by the River's side, where he
lies cursing and blaspheming at a hideous rate, and is so peevish and in such a
nasty pickle, that no body cares to go near him. Since this Misfortune happened
to him, I have been obliged to perform his Office: but to secure my self from
having a Pill or Powder crammed down my Throat too, not a Rag of a Quack comes
into the Boat as long as I Am Master. They make a deal of pother for Admittance,
but I even let them strole about the wrong side of the Lake till Charon is
ready to take care of them himself; and if he does not take care of them with a
vengeance, as soon as he gets upon his Stumps again, I shall say his Choler is
purged off effectually. There is as good as Ten or a Dozen of them already, and
they are become so bold, that if I did not keep them at a distance by brushing
their Jackets for them when they advance too near, I believe they would think
of storming the Boat. But I expect good Sport when they come under Charon's
Discipline. It will delight one to see how he will tear and lay about him, and
how the poor Scoundrels will scamper up and down, as if they walked upon hot
Iron.


Hyg. Yes, I presume they will stand in need of more Skill than their own to heal
themselves. -- But I wish Pluto would make and end of his Nap, for I shall be
obliged to be going presently.


Merc. So shall I. I Will step into his Chamber, and see if he is yet awake. --
O! I hear him groaning and stretching himself upon the Bed. You may come in,
Hygeia.


Hyg. How is it with you now, Pluto? Mercy on me, you look pitifully!


Pluto. O Hygeia! what have I suffered since I saw you!


Hyg. Well, I hope you shall not suffer much longer; and if you were once set
to rights again, I presume you will not tamper any more with these unlucky
Ministers of the Fatal Sisters.


Pluto. A Pestilence on them! But what must I do? for I find I shall soon be as
bad as ever.


Hyg. Why, you must send for some skilful Physician. You have Hippocrates,
Celsus, Sydenham, and I don't know how many here, that are an Honor to their
great Father Aesculapius, and, for the good Offices they have done Mankind,
deserve the immortal Fame and complete Happiness they now enjoy. You must have
recourse to their Help, for without Nature's Means and theirs, I never do any
thing.


Pluto. Their Help! I never could endure them: for my Empire might still have
remained an unpeopled Desert for them. And I have often been angry with Minos
and Rhadamanth, for allotting them the same habitations with Solon, Lycurgus,
Socrates, Cicero, Brutus, and the other public Benefactors of Mankind. I little
thought ever to have Dealings of this kind with them; but I have reason to lay
aside my old Grudges now.


Merc. Well, I expect you will judge more favorably of them hereafter. -- But in
the mean time, Pluto, as there is nothing so cursed but what brings some good
along with it, I humbly think this Accident might be improved to a profitable
use. You know Ixion's Wheel is falling to pieces, the Furies Scourges are worn
so light and limber, that they are become mere Children's Play: In short, all
the Instruments of Hell are going to wrack. Now to save the Expense of
repairing them, which will make a great Gap in your Fund, what if all that
pompous Apparatus, and this Variety of Tortures, were laid aside, and the
Medicines of these Quacks (which come cheap enough, for all their exorbitant
Bills) made use of in their stead, and administered once, twice, or thrice a
Week, in proportion to the Offense, Habit, and Constitution of the Criminals,
and pro ratione Virium and Operationis.


Tantalus. Blast me, all the Gods! if I take Potion more. -- I Will drink
Phlegethon first. -- Let me into my Tub again -- Oh! --


Hyg. So Tantalus, you have got a quick Ear. Pluto will perhaps excuse you if
you speak him fair. But pray, Mercury, let us hear the rest of your Scheme,
with Pluto's leave, it may perhaps divert him.


Merc. Well, in the mean time that the Furies may not lie out of Business, nor
want an Employment suitable to their Dispositions; I would propose that they
should have the pleasure to administer these Pills, Potions, etc. and in short
to perform the Office of the Quacks.


Hyg. And pray what will you make of the Quacks themselves? What uncommon
Torments are you preparing for them?


Merc. As for them, that they may still be occupied in something Analogous to
their former Trade, let it be their Business to take care of the Kennels,
Sewers, and Common-shores; nor think it below them to be the Scavengers of Hell.


Hyg. By Jupiter, a good Contrivance! Pluto, what do you say to this?


Merc. -- Ye Gods! Pluto is as bad as ever! How he heaves! how he sweats! how
he is convulsed! as if his whole Frame were disjointed! I must make Dispatch,
and send hither Hippocrates and some of the rest of the Physicians, and then to
the Oar again. Do you, Hygeia, stay here in the mean time.


Hyg. I shall. Fare you well, Mercury, and make haste.


ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Letter was found in the Streets, where it had probably been
dropped by Mr. W -- d. This accident has in all likelihood deprived those
impartial Records of Fame, The London Evening Post and Daily Advertiser, of the
Honor of ushering it into the World. But that it may not be entirely lost,
neither to the Public nor that illustrious Person to whom it does Justice, I
take the liberty to print it here.

To the greatest of self-taught Physicians, to the Sage pregnant with Knowledge
not revealed by Mortal Pens, to the Dragon's Eye of Sagacity, to the far-fam'd
Master of the Pill of Pills and Drop of Drops, to the invincible J -- W --,
Usbek the Persian, greeting. I Took the wondrous Pill which thou sentest me,
and lay for three Days and three Nights under the despotic Sovereignty of
Physic. Almighty Alla! How did the Billows of Sickness overwhelm me! How did
the Rage of vollied Torments shake my fleshly Mansion almost to ruins, while my
trembling Soul thought of nothing but Flight! But now rosy Health smiles again
upon me, and my Years look green in a new Spring: For which I thank thy
spirit-giving Hand, and shall ever celebrate thy immortal Name with Praises
lofty as Imaus, sweet smelling as the spicy Vales of Arabia. Hail, enormous
Mass of Pilular Merit! Thou mighty Possessor of the Universal Remedy, the Pill
of Strength, the Drop of Energy, the Arcanum of the Wise, the Philosopher's
Stone, such as never rose from the secret Furnace of mysterious vaunting
Paracelsus! (For not the golden Pill of Day disperses Influence more vivifying
than thine Terrestrial and of Mineral Birth!) Thou, for whom the Great (O
glorious Task!) wield their deputed Pens! And to whom the Judges of the Earth
do Justice! Thou, who compressest the Glands of the Paralytic Eye, and
administrest to the Wretched, the sweet relief of Tears! For thrice wretched
they to whom this Comfort is denied! In a word, thou great earthly Mover of the
obedient Microcosm! all hail! And may I join to thee, Him next in Name? who
daily thunders almost with equal Force on my astounded Ear: Him, the vindictive
Scourge of Worms! Him, greater than the Flower of English Chivalry, the Boast
of ancient Time, St. George! Him, conspicuous with the Spoils of many a
vanquished Monster! And to whom contending Monarchs, justled from the middle of
the Sheets of Fame, diurnally give place! And let my upright heart bestow upon
your whole illustrious Brotherhood their due share of Incense. Alla forbid that
I should pass them in stupid Silence! For neither is their Renown unknown to
me. O all ye (who can count you, innumerable and bright as the Stars!) Ye, who
without the help of vain Science, and uncramped by stiff Education, have gained
the proud heights of Physic! Ye Worthies of Emetic Renown! Ye whose skilful
hands weed the too luxuriant animal Kingdom! Ye whose Pills and Potions purge
the World! Let me stand astonished at your Power, and bid my voracious Appetite
of Wonders riot eternally on your miraculous Might. For you command, and
Destruction opens wide her devouring Jaws! The wrathful Pestilence waits your
tremendous Nod! You teach the imprisoned Aphrodisiack Bane to rage, and the
great ones of the Earth tremble! They tremble, yea and melt in fearful Sweats
at your Power! That Power, the liberal Gift of auspicious Nature, the Envy and
Astonishment of the Learned. O unbought Erudition! More to be valued far than
the Mountains of Ophir teeming with Gold, or the massy Pearls of the Orient! --
O when will come these Golden Days when Physicians shall be all of one Sect?
When Hippocrates, when Galen; when Boerhaave, shall be no more? When
Spontaneous Knowledge shall spring from the uncultivated Soil? When the grief
of Reading and tedious Application shall cease? When the universal Smoke of
blazing Libraries shall ascend, and wrap the happy Day in a more glorious
Night? And when the Professors of the healing Art shall, with one Mind,
entirely resign themselves to enlightening Nature, and like you (O sole
inspired Physicians!) trust to Inspiration alone? Even then when a new Gothic
Inundation shall overwhelm the Earth, and the last footsteps of abhorred
Learning shall melt away. Happy! Oh! infinitely happy! they, whom kind Nature
locks up in the dark Womb of Time, to sally forth with impetuous eagerness into
the Enjoyment of these blissful Days! Oh! too happy already! if they could but
know their happiness. For even we, the present Generation of Mortals, we (thank
Heaven!) taste the Sweets of these delicious Days: Taste, and envy the sleeping
Seeds of our late Posterity. Yes, in you we taste these Joys, O Godlike
Deliverers from mortal Woes, from the Bondage of the Flesh, and from all the
Sorrows and Infirmities that Flesh is Heir to! O! that I could wield the
irresistible Bolts of Demosthenian Eloquence! Oh! for the Tongues of Ten
thousand Seraphims to sing your Praises, and hush with conscious Shame the
mistuned Spheres! For sure no Mortal, not all the Mortals that have sprung from
the Loins of the first Man, with all that shall precede the last Crush of this
System, joined in full Concert, could warble Elogiums worthy you. Let me not
therefore violate the sacred Theme, nor touch your divine Names with my fleshly
Lips, lest a wrathful Cancer should consume them, or a commissioned Palsy
revenge you on my profane Tongue. And yet -- But whither do these Raptures
hurry me? Transported by the inspiring Subject, I have unawares swelled my
Letter of acknowledgment to Thee, with an Encomium upon the Society of which
thou justly claimest to be the Head. And now, before I lay down my Pen, I must
tell thee that, smit with an absolute Curiosity, I design a Visit this Winter
to thy amazing Country: The Land of Wonders, where, besides the almost
incredible Feats of thy astonishing Fraternity, a thousand other Prodigies,
worthy (if Fame says true) of eternal Admiration, grow. For I hear of Things
and Manners marvelous, scarce utterable by mortal Tongues, and not to be
believed without the Vouchers of one's proper Eyes. Alla preserve thee, sage J
-- s -- ah.

From Paris.

THE END.

