A Rational Account of the Natural Weaknesses OF WOMEN, And of the Secret
Distempers peculiarly incident to them.

Plainly Discovering Their Nature, true Cause, and best Method of Cure, so as
Women or Maids of the meanest Capacity may perfectly understand, and Cure their
own Illnesses: With a clear and very particular Account of Conception and
Generation; Also of Barrenness and Miscarriage, directing how certainly to Cure
the Former, and absolutely prevent the Latter.

To which are added, Prescriptions in English of admirable and long Experienced
Medicines, for the Cure of each Private Distemper Women and Maids are subject
to, by which they may safely Cure themselves, without Trouble, the Advice, or
Knowledge of any other Person.

SHOWING ALSO, The great Danger Women are in, from the Slightest Weakness, if
let alone, and the Imminent Hazard they run, of becoming incurably Barren, and
of losing their Lives, by following the Advic^ of Ignorant Persons, Unskilful
Midwives, etc. Undeniably proving, That the most difficult Indispositions Women
labor under, may be easily and quickly Remedied, if rightly managed according
to the Method and Medic^nes herein Faithfully revealed.

The whole I^lustrated With Various Cases of Persons Cured, Proper Hints,
Useful Cautions, Observations and Instructions; the like for General Benefit to
the Female Sex, never before published. Necessary to be read by all Women, in
order to prevent, as we^l as Cure, the Weaknesses and Distempers they are
liable to.

By a Physician.

The Second Edition, with several Additions, and Amendments.

London: Printed, and Sold at the Two Blue Posts, near the Square in Haydon
Yard, in the Minories; And A. Dodd, without Temple Bar. Price stich'd 1 s.
Bound 1 s. 6 d.

All the Medicines mentioned and prescribed in this Book, are Sold only by the
Gentlewoman at the Two Blue Posts, near the Square in Haydon Yard, in the
Minories, London; at the moderate Rate set down in the Catalogue of them,
printed at the End of the Book.

Note, Those who think fit to leave Letters for the Author, at the Place above
mentioned, are desired not to expect Answers, unless they leave a suitable Fee
with them, for he has not Leisure to read Letters, consider Cases, and return
Answers without being gratified for his Time and Trouble.

THE PREFACE.
Which (for the better understanding of the Book) the Reader is desired to
peruse first.
THIS little Book, purely for want of Leisure to look over and Correct it in
order for a second Edition, has been, out of Priot a considerable While;
neither should I have spared time now from my other Affairs and private
Practice, which indeed is sufficient to ingross all my Thoughts, had it not
been very often called for, since the first Impression has been Sold off, and
my self mush importuned to reprint it, on account of the service the Medicines
prescib'd in it have done, daily do, and are further likely to do, those
afflicted with the Illnesses it treats of.

In this second Edition I have added, altered, and amended, whatever the many
Observations I have made, and my longer Experience caused me to think
necessary, and have given every where very particular and more minute
Directions, how the Patients should manage themselves under the Course of
Remedies I have advised to, than was in the first Edition, so that as the
Censoriousness of the Age we live in, and no other reason, made me determine
when I first published this Book, not to set my Name to it, or be known as the
Author, there will now be the less occasion for it.

I designed to have added some very remarkable Cases of Persons that I have
very lately Cured, of the several Distempers the Book treats of, and that by
the very Medicines I have herein prescribed; but considering that those
Additions, would inhance the price of the Book, and that the Cases inserted in
the first Edition, are sufficient to illustrate the Method recommended, I
resolved to let it remain (in that respect) just as it was before.

When I first commenced Physician, I considered how and after what manner I
could render my self serviceable to the Public in my Station, and observing
that few of our Faculty had bent their Study, to gain a true Knowledge of the
Cause and Cure of Female Grievances, under which abundance of Women lived
miserably, laboring with afflicting Weaknesses, continually Languishing and
Consuming by deplorable Illnesses, peculiar to that Sex, and at last forced to
submit to Death, purely for want of proper Advice and Medicines for their
Distempers, which I then thought, as I soon after found, might be easily Cured
by an ingenious Physician, if he rightly understood the true Cause of them:
Seriously weighing this, I resolved to Study the Cure of the Weaknesses and
Maladies incident only to Women, many of the Gentlemen of our Profession (though
most Learned aind Ingenious in other Cases) not rightly understanding Female
Distempers, because not inclined to Study or Practice that way, whereby
thousands of Women, I believe, have lamentably suffered many Years together,
and numbers gone to the Grave many Years sooner, than they would have done, had
they been treated in a proper Method, and with the most Efficacious Medicines.

I know it is a common Thing for some Gentlemen of our Art, to excuse their not
practicing in those Illnesses, by alleging that Women have their Midwives to
apply to in such Cases; but if they maturely considered the danger Women are
in, from even the least degree of the Weaknesses I have in this Book treated
of, I am sure they would be of another Opinion: For indeed how can it be
supposed that Midwives, though Ingenious in their proper Business, should Cure
Distempers of which they know not the Cause, but are truly ignorant of the
whole Matter; being unacquainted with the Medical Art, not in the least
understanding the Virtue of Medicines, or the Reason of their different
Operations upon the Blood and other Fluids of the Body? So that if a Woman is
cured of Weakness or Illness by them, it may be justly esteemed a mere Chance,
and she has reason to thank God, that instead of Cure she did not meet with
Ruin, having trusted her Life to the Unskilful; which Women would never do, if
they were sensible of the Nature and Danger of even their slightest
Indispositions, if not managed rightly.

Thus, when I first began to practice Physic, being convinced by these
Melancholy Reflections, that I could be very useful in my Generation, by
studying and obtaining the perfect Knowledge of the Indispositions incident
only to the Female Sex, I resolved to endeavor to find out the real Cause
thereof, and, if possible, a better and more certain method of Cure than
commonly practiced, which with diligent Study, much Application and careful
Observation, I quickly obtained in such a measure, that I thank God I have had
very great Success, and have perfectly cured abundance of the Female Sex, who
had suffered many Years under deplorable Sickness; and have also retrieved
several from the edge of the Grave, who had been given over by all; insomuch,
that many, who through Illness afflicting them have been reduced to mere
Skeletons, and so weak as scarcely able to stand, I have, through the Blessing
of God, restored to their perfect Health and Strength, so as to become more
brisk and well than ever, and to Conceive and bear Children, and that by the
Method and Medicines inferred in this Book, which, after many Changes and
Experiments, I have pitched upon, and by unquessionable Experience have found
them absolutely Effectual, and do now wholly rely upon them in my private
Practice.

But becoming still more and more sensible of the Misery most Women undergo at
one time or other, through Illness afflicting them, and considering that a
great many of the Female Sex, are unwilling to make known their private
Indispositions to Men, (though that Modesty often proves the Loss of their Lives)
and that those who do, many times stay till too late to be Cured, or perhaps
fall into the Hands of Practitioners, that do not rightly understand their
Distempers, or else apply to Midwives for help, commonly to their Ruin: I say,
thinking on the dismal Misfortunes and Calamitous Circumstances, that thus
attend, injure, and often destroy many Women in the Prime of their Age, it put
me upon undertaking something whereby I might be more generally useful to the
World, and in a greater degree serviceable to Suffering Women, than I could be
in Private Practice only: Therefore I chose to write this little Book, wherein
I have practically treated in a familiar way, and so as the meanest Reader may
understand, of the Symptoms, Nature, Cause, and Cure of the Secret Illnesses
that Women are subject to, and have prescribed, as before mentioned, such
Medicines as will most certainty Cure them without Trouble; whereby Women, who
are not willing to make known their Weaknesses and Diseases, may be acquainted
with their Distempers, and know how to Cure themselves safely, and for a
trifling Charge; by which means, those who before were thought incapable of
Conceiving, may be rendered Fruitful, and others be retrieved from the Danger
of Death, which most of the Illnesses, I have mentioned, will certainly bring
upon the Patients, if not timely Cured.

The Medicines I have advised to, are pleasant to take, safe and easy in
Operation, and being founded upon unerring Experience, are certainly to be
depended upon, as absolutely Effectual for the Weaknesses and Illnesses they
are mentioned to Cure.

And considering the Trouble and Difficulty most Women would find, to get the
Medicines made up, and the hazard they would run in trusting to Apothecaries
Boys, that understand not the Artful Method of compounding Medicines:
Therefore, that nothing might be wanting wherein I could render my self
serviceable, I have left a quantity of all the Medicines, mentioned in this
Book, prepared with my own Hand, with the Gentlewoman, at the Two Blue Posts,
near the Square, in Haydon-Yard in the Minories, London; where this Book is
also Sold, and intend always so to do, for the Benefit of the Female Sex, while
God grants me Life; and I here assure the World, that I will never suffer the
Medicines to be sold elsewhere, without first giving Notice in another Edition
of this Book; so that all Persons who have occasion for any of the Medicines
herein prescribed, will, by buying them there, always be sure to have them
right and well prepared, upon which they may entirely rely for the Cure of the
Illnesses they are appropriated to.

And the better to prevent all Abuses, I have designedly concealed the chief
Chemical Preparation in every Prescription, on which Secret, the Virtue of each
Medicine, mostly depends, and without which, would be almost insignificant, but
being regularly Compounded, or mixed, according to Art, does so alter, ferment,
and adapt all the Ingredients in each prescribed Remedy, to the Cure of the
Illness for which it is intended, that were it discovered, it would appear
wonderful to all Artists in Physic.

The Reason of my thus concealing the most Powerful Ingredient of each
Medicine, was, that because Women cannot make up the Medicines themselves, they
must, had I freely declared the whole, have had them made up by an Apothecary,
who, very likely, by reason of the dearness of the main Ingredient in each,
would exact an Extravagant Price, or else not make the Medicines up right; but
put in one thing instead of another, which many Apothecaries too often do, in
making up Chargeable Prescriptions, to the detriment of the Patient and
Disadvantage of the Physician.

Therefore to prevent any from being so grossly imposed upon, and to remedy all
Inconveniences, was it, that I did not make known the chief Ingredient in each
Prescription; but appointed the Medicines, rightly prepared with great Care and
Exactness, to be Sold at the Place before mentioned, and for the fixed easy
Prices set down in the Catalogue of them at the end of the Book, which Prices
are as reasonable, as the Medicines can well be allowed for, and much Cheaper
than they would be, if rightly made up in small quanties by any other Person,
were the Specific Preparation in each Remedy known; I having in this Second
Edition, carefully calculated the intrinsic Value of them, and for the sake of
those whose Circumstances may not be extraordinary, lowered the Price where
there was room for it, so that most of the Medicines are now set down at a
cheaper Rate, than they were in the first Edition.

Now by this means, all Gentlewomen, and others, will be freed from Trouble,
and besure of having the true Preparation, which will always prove effectual,
and that at an easy Rate, by only sending a Servant or other Person to the
Place aforesaid, to ask for such or such a Medicine, by its Name or Number, and
by giving so much for it, as in the Catalogue is set down to be the Price.

Those who live in the Country may also order any Friend in London, or a
Carrier that comes to Town, to buy at the same Place any of the Medicines they
have occasion for, and so be supplied with them with Ease.

Thus the main Intent of writing this Treatise was for the Service and Benefit
of the Female Sex; and therefore without studying Artfully to embellish it with
powerful Rhetoric, or a beautiful Style, I chose to let it appear in a plain
Dress, so as to be perfectly understood by the meanest Capacity, which perhaps
may give Distaste to some of our Learned Critics, who I did not design to
please, and whose Censure I do not value, being well assured, that all Men of
Ingenuity and Candor, who Practice Physic, in whose Hands it may chance to
fall, will applaud the Undertaking; for they will plainly perceive that an
Intent of being Serviceable to my Generation, was the chief Motive of it, and
will also find, (notwithstanding I have concealed the main Ingredient in every
Prescription) that the Book will be of Use to young Practitioners in Physic, I
having in a more concise manner discovered the Signs, Nature, Causes, and best
and nearest Method of Cure, of Female Grievances, than perhaps they may
elsewhere meet with, and in the Seventh Chapter treating of Barrenness, have
given such a clear and particular Account of Conception and Generation, as may
serve to rectify the Notions of several, who have imbibed very absurd Opinions
concerning them.

One thing I must inform my Readers of, which is, That while I was writing this
Book, I was often concerned, that necessity obliged me to mention Women's
Weaknesses so plainly, as I found my self forced to do, to be well understood
by the Female Sex; could I have made it intelligible otherwise, I should have
been heartily glad; but that being impossible, I have treated of all their
Indispositions, with as much Caution and Modesty as I could, and therefore hope
none will make an ill use of it, or in the least blame me on that account.

I shall no longer detain my Readers, but hoping it will meet with a Reception
suitable to my good Intention of Writing it for the Benefit of Suffering Women,
and leaving them to judge of it themselves, subscribe my self Their

Faithful Friend and Humble Servant,
August, 30th. 1716.
THE CONTENTS
CHAP. I. Of the Deficiency of the Terms, and Green Sickness in Virgins. Page
3. Chap. II. Of the immoderate Flux, or overflowing of the Terms. P. 15. Chap.
III. Of the exceeding Pain and Uneasiness some Women endure, just upon the
coming down of their Courses; and of the bad Color and ill Smell of the Blood,
that flows from some Persons; as also of the Disorders Women in Years are
subject to, when their Courses begin to leave them. Page 26. Chap. IV. Of the
Piles. Page 32. Chap. V. Of the Whites. Page 39 Chap. VI. Of the Downfalling of
the Womb and Fundament. Page 51. Chap. VII. Of Barrenness; with a clear and
very particular Account of Conception and Generation. Page 55. Chap. VIII. Of
Miscarriage; with Directions how to cause speedy Delivery in Childbirth, and
also how to Rectify the Disorders of the Lochia, or Childbed Purgations. p. 71
A Rational Account Of the Natural Weaknesses of Women, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
IN treating of the Natural Weaknesses and Distempers peculiarly incident to
the Female Sex, I shall begin with those occasioned by the Irregularity of the
Menstrual Flux, or Courses, which begin to flow in Young Women when they are
about Fourteen Years old, and in some sooner: About that Age Virgins begin to
grow ripe, and if in Health, to think of Love; the Blood also at certain
Periods undergoes a new Ferment, and while that continues, issues out through
the Blood Vessels that open into the Womb: And this Natural Purgation, or Flux
of Blood, is called the Monthly Terms or Courses.

When they first come down in Maids, they many times do not flow above once in
two Months or ten Weeks; but as the Person grows more ripe, and the blood and
its Natural Ferment increases, they come down oftener, till the settled Term of
once a Month is fixed, and then they continue so constantly till Forty, Forty
five, and sometimes till Fifty Years of Age, or longer, except when Illness,
being with Child, or Suckling Children hinders.

They flow generally from first to last, four, five or six Days, and sometimes,
though very rarely, seven; and the Quantity of Blood that comes away during
that time, (if the Flux is regular, and the Person in perfect Health) is
commonly as much as may be contained in the Shell of a Goose Egg; but in some
Women, especially those of a strong Body and sanguine Complexion, they flow in
a larger quantity than in others: If the Terms flow constantly once a Month,
and in a due quantity, they generally preserve Women in perfect Health; but if
they do not, or if there is any Disorder in this Flux, Women cannot be well,
^^cause the Course of Nature is then changed, and her admirable Order broke.

The Disorders this Monthly Purgation is liable to, being several, and very
different, I intend to treat of them, and of the other Indispositions Women are
particularly subject to, in their Order, and under their respespective Heads or
Chapters.

CHAP. I. Of the Deficiency of the Terms, and Green Sickness in Virgins.
THE Deficiency or Suppression of the Courses, is when they flow too seldom, or
but little in quantity, (that is too sparingly, as by Drops, etc.) or not at
all: The Fault is either in the Blood, (which is then too gross or thick,
occasioned by a bad Stomach, ill Digestion of Food, Colds, Grief, etc. or in
the Vessels of the Womb, through which the Terms flow, which then are
obstructed by a Viscous or Tough Humor.

If the Badness of the blood is the Cause of the Deficiency of the Courses, the
Person becomes pale and dull, unwilling to stir about, and is afflicted with
Loss of Appetite, loathing of Food, desire after things not fit to be eaten,
bad Digestion, Pain in the Stomach, which in some Patients is so violent by
Fits, as hardly to be borne, Shortness of Breath, often swelling about the
Ankles, sometimes vomiting, and universal Disorder; also if any Blood does
flow, it generally appears of a pale and wan Color.

If the Fault be in the Vessels of the Womb, the Person then retains her usual
Color; but, at the time the Courses ought to flow, feels racking Pains in the
small of her Back, and about her Loins Weariness of her Limbs, and moving Pains
accompanied with a violent Motion of the Blood, flushing in the Face, Vapors,
Headache, and general uneasiness over the whole Body; and sometimes the Blood
issues out at the Nose, Hemorrhoid-Veins, etc.

When the Courses do not flow at all in Maids, and the Obstruction is of long
standing, it is then called the Green Sickness; but Widows, and sometimes
married Women, are afflicted with this Distemper: The latter must take great
Care they do not mistake the Stoppage of the Monthly Courses, occasioned by
their conceiving, for this Disease, least by taking Medicines to cure their
fancied Illness, they should cause a Miscarriage; but if they have not their
Courses for three or four Months together, and become pale and wan, with
difficulty of Breathing, etc. without growing bigger, or having any Signs of
being with Child, they may then be assured that the Deficiency or Suppression
of the Terms is a Distemper, and not caused by Impregnation or Conception.

If the Deficiency or Stoppage of the Courses is not speedily remedied,
Barrenness, and very dangerous Illnesses will be produced, as Cachexy, Asthma,
Inflammation, and Ulceration of the Lungs, Pleurisy, Hysteric Fits, Dropsy,
etc.

Now to take off all or any of the above enumerated Symptoms, to prevent the
Dismal Effects of this Indisposition, and to cure the Deficiency or Suppression
of the Courses, whether in Maids, Married Women, or Widows, such Medicines must
be given, as will cleanse the Stomach and first Passages, dissolve all viscous
Humors, purify the Blood and Juices, restore their Natural Ferment, and
effectually open all Manner of Obstructions in any Part of the Body, after
which, such Corroborating, Deobstructive Remedies must be prescribed, as will
confirm the Texture of the Fluids, strengthen the Stomach and Bowels, create an
Appetite, cause a good Digestion, and finally establish the Blood in its
natural florid State, and thereby assuredly restore a good Color to the Face,
and perfect Health to the Body.

In the first Place therefore, three or four Days before the Terms are expected
or ought to flow, the Patient must take four of the following Purging Pills,
betimes in the Morning fasting; but if it be the first Time of their Stoppage,
and happens, as sometimes it will, after the Courses have begun to appear, then
the Purging Pills must be taken the very next Morning, Drinking Water Gruel,
Posset Drink, Barly-water, warm Ale, or Tea, in the Working, and they will give
four, five or fix easy Stools, handsomely cleanse the Stomach and Bowels, and
do infinite Good; sometimes a Dose alone will bring down the Courses especially
if the Illness be but of short standing, and occasioned only by Obstruction of
the Womb-Vessels. They are thus made, No. 1. The Purging Pills.
Take of the best Russia Castor, four Grains; Opening Saffron of Steel, two
Scruples; Pil Cochia the greater, two Drams; Chemical Oil of Savin, three
Drops; of my Mineral Secret, half a Dram; Balsam of Peru, nine Drops, Syrup of
Mugwort, a sufficient quantity, mix and make fifteen Pills.



A Day or two after taking a Dose of these Purging Pills, if the Courses do not
come down, the Patient must begin the following pleasant Opening Powder, taking
full as much of it as will lie heaped upon a Shilling betimes every Morning,
and at three a Clock every Afternoon, and also about Eight a Clock every
Evening, for a complete Month together, either licking it up from a Spoon by it
self, or mixing it with near half a spoonful of White Wine, or with a little of
any pleasant Syrup, as she likes best, and drinking a large Glass of White
Wine, or a Draught of strong Mace Ale, or which is better than either, a large
Glass of bitter Wine, after each Dose, and walking about at least half an Hour
or more after it; and it will open all Manner of Obstructions, strengthen the
Stomach, purify the Blood, rectify the Juices, take away all Paleness,
Dullness, Weariness, Difficulty of Breathing, Pain in the Stomach etc. create
an Appetite, cause a good Digestion, bring a good Color into the Face, and
make the Patient brisk, lively, active, and healthy to Admiration. It is made
thus, No 2. The Opening Powder.
Take Winters Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each one Scruple; Compound Powder
of Roots of Cuckow-pints, one Dram; Prepared Steel, half an Ounce; double
Resin'd Loaf-Sugar, one Ounce; of my Aperitive Magistery, half a Dram; mix and
make a subtle Powder according to Art, which keep in a warm dry Place for Use.



But if the Deficiency or Suppression of the Courses is of long standing, or
should prove stubborn, and not to be removed after taking this Powder for a
whole Month or thirty Days together, which will very seldom happen, then it
will be necessary to take another Dose of the Purging Pills, and a Day or two
after that, the Powder again in like Order as before, and so to continue it
till the Illness is effectually cured, which will soon be, observing all the
while she is under this Course, to abstain from all Fruit, Greens, and Herbs,
and also not to drink too freely of small Liquors, such as Tea, Small Beer,
etc. but only what is just sufficient to quench Drowth; for small Liquors being
drank quickly after taking the Powder, or in too large a Quantity at any time,
will not only prevent its having so good Effect as otherwise it would, but also
cause a little Sickishness at Stomach.

But if it any time the Powder should happen to lie heavy on the Stomach, or
make the Patient a little sickish, she may presently be relieved from that, or
any other Inconvenience, by drinking a large Glass or two of good strong White
Wine.

If the Patient finds four of the purging Pills work a little too much the
first time she takes them, then the next time she must take but three of them
for a Dose, but if she finds four of them not purge enough, then she must take
five Pills for the next Dose.

But if the Patient by being long afflicted with this Illness, or by taking
other Medicines, is brought into a very weak Condition, so as to be unfit to
bear Purging, then she must not take the Purging Pills, but begin with the
Opening Powder, and continue to take it constantly as directed before, without
taking the Purging Pills at all, and during the time she is taking the Powder
to provoke the Terms, she must use moderate Exercise almost continually, such
as walking abroad, or riding on Horseback, stirring about House, up and down
Stairs, etc.

And after the Patient by taking the Purging Pills, or Opening Powder, or both,
has had her Courses, then to strengthen the Womb, and its Vessels, to establish
the good Texture of the Blood and Juices, and to confirm her Health
effectually, so that she may not relapse into the former Disorder, it will be
highly needful for her to take the quantity of a large Nutmeg of the following
Corroborating Electuary, from off the Point of a Knife every Morning, and at
Four a Clock, every Afternoon for a Fortnight, three Weeks, or a Month
together, as she finds proper, drinking a Glass of White Wine, or rather bitter
Wine, after each Dose. It is thus made. No. 3. The Corroborating Electuary.
Take of Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, ten Grains; Russia Castor, fifteen Grains;
Compound Powder of Cuckow-pints, half a Dram; Treacle of Andromachus, candid
Nutmegs, candid Ginger, of each two Scruples and five Grains; candid
Orange-Peel, candid Angelica, Steel prepared with Sulphur, of each a Dram;
Conserve of Roman Wormwood, two Drams; of my specific Salt, ten Grains; Syrup
of Coral a sufficient quantity, to make an Electuary according to Art.



This Electuary visibly revives and strengthens the whole Body, increases the
Blood and Spirits, comforts, drives away Melancholy, and makes those robust
and strong who before were weak and pining, so altering the whole Frame of
Nature for the be^ter, that one would stand amazed at it.

Thus having briefly made known all that is necessary for the Cure of the
Deficiency or Stoppage of the Terms, whether in Maids, Married Women, or
Widows; I shall conclude this Chapter with a Letter I received while I was
writing it, from a Gentleman in Hartford, whose Daughter, a young Gentlewoman,
about seventeen Years of Age, had never had the Benefit of Nature, but was
almost ruined by the Green Sickness, being exceeding pale, short breathed, and
hardly able to move about, without any Appetite to Food, but desirous of eating
Chalk, Cinders, Wall, etc. which she could scarcely be kept from; her
affectionate Parents had taken the Advice of several Physicians, and the young
Lady took a great many Medicines to no purpose, till she took my purging Pills
and Opening. Powder before mentioned, which happily cured her: She chanced
accidentally to take my Medicines thus:

Her Father being in London about six Weeks ago, was, with several other
Elderly Men and their Wives, invited by a worthy Gentleman his Friend, to Dine
with him, I being also desired, made one of the Company, and after Dinner,
among other Discourse, the Gentlewomen happening to talk of the respective
Sicknesses they had suffered, and of the Indispositions several of their
Friends labored under, the Hartfordshire Gentleman took that Opportunity,
understanding I was a Physician, to acquaint me with his Daughter's Illness: As
soon as he had done, I was sent for away, but heard afterward, that the
Company proceeding on that Topic, the Gentleman of the House, and his Wife,
were pleased to speak much to my Advantage, in respect to the great Success
that attended my Practice in Female Distempers. 'The Hartfordshire Gentleman
went into the Country the next Morning, and coming to his House, found his
Wife, who is about Thirty six Years of Age, exceeding ill, with torturing Pains
in her Back, and sometimes in her Head, attended with flushing in her Face,
Feverish Heat, and universal Uneasiness, which was all occasioned by a
Suppression of the Courses, through a violent Cold she got, when they were just
ready to flow; It being the first time she had been afflicted in that manner,
she was the more surprised at it, and as her Husband came in, was going to send
for a Physician near them, under whose Hands her Daughter had for some time
been; but her Husband mentioning what he had heard of my Skill, and both of
them considering what little Help their Daughter had received, from the
Prescriptions of all the Physicians they had consulted concerning her, resolved
to send to me; accordingly, the Gentleman wrote his Wife's Case, in a Letter,
and sent his Servant on Horseback with it immediately, desiring me to advise to
what I thought proper, and send something by his Man as soon as could be; I
considered the Lady's Case, and being sensible that her Indisposition, and all
the Symptoms would be removed by provoking her Courses, which were only hindered
from coming down by an Obstruction the violent Cold had caused, in the Vessels
of the Womb, through which the Blood flows; I therefore sent her a Box of my
Purging Pills, one Dose of which I expected would remedy the whole Matter, but
least the Stoppage of the Terms should prove stubborn, as sometimes it will, I
sent her a pretty large quantity of my Opening Powder also, with Directions to
take four of the purging Pills betimes the next Morning, and if they did not
accomplish the Business, to begin the Opening Powder the Day following just as
I have directed before in this Chapter, till her Courses came down, after which
I wrote, that it would be necessary for her to take my Corroborating Electuary,
to confirm her Health, and prevent a Relapse for the future; I informed the
Gentleman also, that if one Dose of the purging Pills removed her Illness, then
if he pleased, to let his Daughter take the Pills and Powder in the same Manner
as I directed his Wife to take them, I was satisfied they would cure her also:
They followed my Advice, and the Medicines had the desired Effect, not only
upon the Gentleman's Wife, whom one Dose of the Pills set to rights, but also
upon his Daughter, and another young Woman at Hartford, who were both cured, as
by the Letter, which the Gentleman sent me, with a very handsome Gratification,
appears more particularly.

Hartford, December. 1. 1710.
Worthy Sir,
I Send this to return you my hearty Thanks for the great Service you have done
my Family: One Dose of your Purging Pills brought my Wife into good Order,
without taking the Opening Powder at all. I should have wrote to you before
now, but that my Wife receiving so much Benefit, was resolved that my Daughter,
who had been ill with the Green Sickness a great while, and had taken abundance
of Physic in vain, as I told you, when I was in London, should take both your
Pills and Opening Powder, as you advised in your Letter, and therefore I
delayed Writing till I could give you an Account of the Effect they had upon
her: She being tired with taking Medicines, was with much difficulty persuaded
to take one Dose of the Purging Pills, which worked very well, and being a
little weak the next Day, she did not begin the Opening Powder till the Day
following; but then continued it, constantly for about three Weeks, after
which, she took another Dose of the Purging Pills, and the next Day the Opening
Powder again, which she took for about tour Days more, and it brought the
Benefit of Nature upon her, since which, she eats drinks and digests her
Victuals well, looks something fresh and ruddy, and is recovered to Admiration.
My Wife gave the Remainder of the Powder to a Neighbor's Daughter, who was in
the same Condition, but so weak as not fit to take the Purging Pills, and that
alone has Cured her, in about a Fortnight, all but Want of Strength, which she
now daily recovers, and begins to look brisk, and have a good Stomach. Now Sir,
my Wife and Daughter, and the young Woman, desire you to send the Corroborating
Electuary, that in your Letter you informed me would be necessary for my Wife
to take after the other Medicines to confirm Health, and prevent Relapse, and
they believe, by the excellent Effects they have already found by your Pills
and Powder, that That will be all the Physic they shall have occasion for.


The rest of the Letter contained nothing but an Encomium on my Skill and
Ability, with Thanks, etc. for my Civility, therefore I purposely omit it.

CHAP. II. Of the immoderate Flux, or Overflowing of the Terms.
THE Courses are properly deemed immoderate, when the Blood flows from the
Womb-Vessels in too large a Quantity, or too long together, or oftener than once
a Month. In some Women they continue many Days together, in others not longer
than usual, but then return often, as once a Fortnight, or sooner, and in some
the Flux is more, in others less violent, many Women also, as soon as the
Courses stop, are afflicted with the Whites, or Piles, and sometimes with both.

This Illness, or excessive Flowing of the Terms, is generally caused by an
evil Ferment, occasioned by sharp scorbutic Salts in the Blood and Juices, and
sometimes by Disorder of the Womb-Vessels.

The Overflowing of the Courses is most commonly accompanied with a burning
Feverish Heat, tearing Pains in the small of the Back, Pain and Heat about the
Neck of the Womb, violent Headache, Loss of Appetite, and languishing Weakness
of the whole Body; and if not speedily cured, reduces the Person exceedingly,
causing total Barrenness, lasting Weakness, pining Consumption, etc. which
terminate in Death, if not timely remedied.

If the Blood that comes away is of a bright red Color, and when taken upon
Linen and dry, discovers a pale Circle, it shows that the Blood is thin and
waterish, the Vessels of the Womb too lax or loose, the Patient very weak, but
not exceeding Feverish; but if it be of a deep red, and easily clots, it is
then a Sign of a Redundancy of Blood, and that the Person is very hot feverish
and uneasy, and if the Blood in coming away causes a great Itching and
Uneasiness of the Parts, it shows, that the Juices of the Body are very full of
sharp acrid Salts

Now to cure this Indisposition (Revulsion by Bleeding, etc. being first made)
such Medicines must be prescribed, as by their cooling, absorbent, and
sub-astringent Qualities, will put a Stop to the violent Ferment of the Blood,
allay Thirst and Heat, take off the Fever, subdue all scorbutic acrid Salts in
the Blood, rectify the Juices, and strengthen the Womb-Vessels; by which
Means, the Courses will be quickly stopped, and the Patient wholly restored to
perfect Health and Strength.

For which End, and effectually to prevent the afore-mentioned ill
Consequences, the Patient must first be let Blood in the Arm, to the Quantity
of about Nine or Ten Ounces, and the very next Morning about six a Clock, she
must take the Quantity of a very large Wallnut, or more of the following
Laxative Electuary, either by it self, or dissolved in a little thin
Water Gruel, which she likes best, and sleeping about an Hour after it; and if
in about two Hours after it is taken, it should not move her to Stool, then it
will be proper for her to take as much more of it, so as to give her five or
six Stools: Water Gruel, Barley-water, or Tea, are Liquors proper to be drank
after it begins to operate. No. 4 The Laxative Electuary.
Take Extract of Cassia new drawn, Lenitive Electuary, and Cream of Tartar, of
each six Drams; of my Loosening Confect, six Drams; mix and make an Electuary
according to Art.



And the Day after she has been purged with the Laxative Electuary, she must
begin the following Cooling Anodyne Powder, taking as much of it as will lie
heaped upon a Shilling, in a little warm Water Gruel, or other agreeable Liquor
betimes every Morning, and at four a Clock every Afternoon, till all Feverish
Heat, and other Symptoms are entirely taken off. No. 5. The Cooling Anodyne
Powder.
Take of Prunel Stone, one Dram; White Amber prepared, a Dram and a half;
cooling Species of Gum Tragacanth, two Drams of my Anodyne Salt, three Drams
and a half mix and make a fine Powder, which keep for use.



And besides this Powder, the Patient mus^ take the Quantity of a large Nutmeg
of the following pleasant Specific Electuary, from the point of a Knife, at
Eleven a Clock ever^ Forenoon, and at Eight a Clock every Nigh^ till the Flux
is quite stopped, the Cure perfectly completed, and the Strength wholly
restored; minding not to eat any thing for a^ Hour before or after each Dose,
but drinkin^ a little of any agreeable Liquor to wash (...) down. It is thus
made. No. 6. The specific Electuary.
Take Balaustines, Troches of Lemnian Earth, of each one Scruple; red Coral
prepared; Pomegranate Peel, of each half a Dram; Earth of Japan, Aromatic
Powder with Roses, of each two Scruples; Confect of Jacinth, a Dram; Juice of
Chermes Berries, Marmalade of Quinces, of each two Drams; Conserve of Red
Roses, three Drams; Chemical Oil of Nutmegs, three Drops; of my Metalline
Absorbent Powder, two Scruples; Syrup of Quinces, a sufficient Quantity to make
an Electuary.



These two Medicines being taken according to the Directions, will immediately
strike at the very Cause of the Illness, allay the violent Heat and Thirst,
take off the Fever, rectify the Blood and Juices, stop the immoderate Flux,
strengthen the Back, and weakened Vessels of the Womb, prevent the Piles (which
are often caused by the common Medicines given to stop the Courses) and will
bring the Patient into good order in a short time, and by continuing of them
for about a Fortnight, will perfectly restore her to Health and Strength, and
effectually prevent a Relapse for the future.

When the Fever and all preternatural Heat is perfectly extinguished, the
Patient may leave off taking the Cooling Anodyne Powder, and take only the
pleasant Specific Electuary, as before directed; so also if the Patient should
happen to be troubled with the Colic or Gripes, she must omit the Powder, but
constantly take the Electuary till she is perfectly Cured, because it admirably
strengthens the Stomach, Back and weakened Vessels, brings the Blood and Juices
into excellent Order, fortifies the Spirits, and firmly establishes Health and
Vigor.

If the Patient, while she is taking the pleasant Specific Electuary, finds
her self Costive, or hard bound, then once in three or four Days she must take
a Dose of the Laxative or Loosening Electuary in the Morning fasting, as before
directed, (omitting to take the other Medicines that Day) and it will give
three, or four gentle Stools, and make the Body pleasant and easy, without
Griping, making sick, weakening, or causing the least Trouble or Confinement.

Note, Whilst the Patient is in this Course, it will be convenient for her to
drink freely of Tea, or Water Gruel, which will cool and dilute the Blood,
quench Thirst, and do much good. She mus^ also mind to abstain from all strong
(...) inflaming Liquors, and from hot spiced Food, or very salt Meats.

Note also, That if the Patient is reduced very low, and is so exceeding weak
and faint, as not able to bear Bleeding or gentle Purging, though that very
rarely happens, then she must have immediate Recourse to the Opening Powder,
and pleasant specific Electuary, taking them as before directed, omitting
either first Bleeding or Purging, or both, as she finds most proper.

Thus, these Directions being followed, and the Medicines regularly taken, the
overflowing of the Courses, though never so bad, will most certainly be cured;
an eminent Instance or two of which, occurring to my Memory, I judge the
Relation will be acceptable, as well as serviceable to the Reader, and
therefore will insert the Particulars, and so end this Chapter.

The first Case I design to mention, is of a Gentlewoman about Thirty, who for
six or eight Months before, had been afflicted with the flowing of her Courses
constantly once a Fortnight, in the same quantity that used to flow, when she
was in good Order, once a Month, and as soon as they went off, she was
exceedingly troubled with the Piles for three or four Days, and after that,
with the Whites to an excessive Degree which always held her till her Terms
came down again. This Indisposition had reduced her to exceeding Weakness, her
Stomach was much out of Order; she was continually feverish, had great Pain in
her Head, but a more violent Pain in her Back, insomuch that she was hardly
able to walk about House. As soon as I was acquainted with her Illness, I found
that her Blood, by the pale Circle it discovered upon Linen, was poor,
waterish, and very acrid, which occasioned the Feverish Heat, and all the other
Symptoms.

And considering that her Stomach and Bowels were very foul, I therefore first
ordered her to take a very large Dose of my Laxative Electuary the next Morning
to cleanse them, which had very good Effect, and the Day following I caused her
to begin my Cooling Anodyne Powder, and pleasant Specific Electuary, and take
them as before directed, for two Days, which took off all immoderate Heat, and
stopped her Courses, after that, I directed her to continue the pleasant
Specific Electuary alone, for a Fortnight, in order to absorb all sharp
Humors, rectify her Blood, and strengthen her Back and Womb Vessels; but in
three Days time she sent me Word, that she believed she should be troubled with
the Piles, being somewhat Costive, and a little pained when she went to Stool.
I therefore ordered her to take a large Dose of the Laxative Electuary again
the next Morning betimes, and to omit the pleasant Specific Electuary that
Day, and so to take the Laxative One, once every three or four Days, if she
found her self Costive, and the pleasant Specific Electuary constantly the
other Days for the Remainder of the Fortnight, or till she was quite well, and
had perfectly recovered her Strength.

Accordingly she took the quantity of a large Wallnut of the Laxative
Electuary, the next Morning, which gave her two or three loose Stools, and
wholly freed her from all Apprehensions of the Piles, and the next Day, she
began the pleasant Specific Electuary again, and thus by following Directions
as above, she was soon perfectly cured, has had her Courses in regular Order,
never in the least been troubled with the Whites or Piles; but lived in good
Health and Strength ever since, it being now four Months ago.

The other Case that occurs to my Mind, was of a young Gentlewoman of about
Eighteen Years of Age, of a jolly sanguine Complexion, to whom I was sent for
about three Months since. Till a little before tha^ time she had always enjoyed
perfect Health* but then was taken of a sudden with a violent Fever, and an
exceeding Flux of the Courses; when I came to her she had had them for ten or
twelve Days upon her, and they still continued to flow in an exceeding large
quantity.

Her Fever, notwithstanding the great Loss of Blood she had suffered, being
very high, I ordered her to bleed immediately in the Arm, which in some Measure
diverted the Course of the Blood; I did not give her my Laxative Electuary, she
being very weak, and her Stomach and Bowels not foul; but presently sent her my
Cooling Anodyne Powder, and pleasant Specific Electuary, directing her to take
both in the Manner above ordered, for about four Days; she had not taken above
six Doses of each, but her Feverish Heat was overcome and her Courses stopped; on
the fourth Day she happened to be a little griped, therefore I ordered her to
leave off the Cooling Anodyne Powder, and take only the pleasant Specific
Electuary, which she did for two or three days longer, and it perfectly cured
her, she only remaining a little weak, occasioned by the exceeding Flux she had
labored under; but she soon recovered her Strength without any more Medicines,
and has remained well ever since. There was no absolute necessity for her to
continue the pleasant Specific Electuary any longer, because the sudden hot
Fermentation of her Blood, which was the cause of her Illness, being taken off
by Bleeding and the cooling Medicines, the Effects of course ceased without
much Fear of returning: But in the Gentlewoman's Case first mentioned, it was
quite different; for her Illness being caused by acrid Salts in her Blood, and
having continued a long time, it had much injur d the Womb-Vessels, which could
not be strengthened sufficiently, nor her Blood have been rectified as it
ought, without taking the pleasant Specific Electuary, for a Fortnight or
more; and indeed, could the young Gentlewoman have been persuaded to have taken
it for Nine or Ten Days longer, which she refused, it would have been the
better for her, for she would have thereby recovered more Strength in one Day,
than without it she did in three, it being so excellently powerful in restoring
Persons weakened by that Illness.

CHAP. III. Of the exceeding Pain and Uneasiness some Women endure just upon
the coming down of their Courses; and of the bad Color and ill Smell of the
Blood, that flows from some Persons; as also, of the Disorders Women in Tears
are subject to, when their Courses begin to leave them.
AMONG the Disorders of the Courses, the Misery that some Women undergo, just
upon their coming down, every time they flow, is none of the least; it being
very grievous and dangerous.

They are commonly afflicted with violent shooting Pains in the Head, Pain in
the Back. Stomach and Bowels, not much unlike the Colic, with most racking
Misery about the Region of the Womb, and sometimes Palpitation of the Heart,
Vapors Convulsions, etc. all which proceed from Wind, or from the smallness of
the Vessels of the Womb, or from their being full o^ Blood, and their Openings
obstructed with a Viscous Matter, so as not freely to afford it Passage
suitable to its extraordinary Ferment, which plainly appears by this, that when
the Courses come down freely, the Symptoms presently abate and go off.

If this Indisposition be not remedied, there will in time follow a total
Suppression or Stoppage of the Terms: To prevent which, and cure this Disorder,
Carminative, Anodyne, Hysteric and Deobstructive Medicines must be prescribed;
such as will effectually expel Wind, allay Pain, correct the Viscofity of the
Juices, and open all Obstructions, so as to give immediate Ease to the Patient
in the Fit, and entirely prevent the Return of that Indisposition for the
future.

Therefore assuredly to prevent what may ensue, and entirely to be freed from
this Difficulty of the Courses, or uneasy Indisposition, the Patient must take
as soon as she perceives the approaching Flux of the Terms, and is in Pain, Six
or Eight Spoonfuls of the following Hysteric Julep, and continue to take the
like quantity, every three, four or five Hours, as there is Occasion, till the
Courses flow freely, or without much Pain, but no longer; minding to lie down
upon the Bed, and be covered very warm immediately after taking it. It is thus
made. No. 7. The Hysteric Julep.
Take Mugwort Water, Pennyroyal Water, and Rue-Water, of each two Ounces;
Bryony Water Compound, Treacle Water, and strong Cinnamon Water, of each one
Ounce; Syrup of Mugwort, one Ounce; Spirit of Salt Armoniack, a Dram; liquid
Laudanum, forty Drops; of my Specific Tinctare two Drams, mix for an Hysteric
Julep.



This Hysteric Julep will absolutely take off all Manner of Pain and
Uneasiness, cause pleasant Rest and Sleep, support the Patient's Spirits,
strengthen her Stomach, expel Wind, open all Obstructions, enlarge the Vessels
through which the Blood flows, banish all the Symptoms, and finally cure the
Disorder for the time present.

But effectually to cure this Indisposition, so as not to be liable to it for
the future, the Patient, when the present Fit of Pain is overcome, and as soon
as her Courses cease to flow, must begin my pleasant Opening Powder, prescribed
in the first Chapter of this Book, Page 7. and take it constantly, and exactly
as there directed, for a whole Month, six Weeks, or longer, which will
assuredly free her from any future Return of Pain and Uneasiness at the time
the Terms begin to flow, entirely prevent all ill Consequences of that
Indisposition, and absolutely establish Health and Strength.

In some Women, the Courses are of various and ugly Colors, the Blood that
flows being yellowish, livid, black, etc. and sometimes has a very nauseous
Smell; which disorders are caused by the Badness of the whole Mass of Blood, or
its particular Corruption in the Vessels of the Womb: The Blood and Juices
therefore must be purified, and the whole Body cleansed by proper Cathartick,
and Alterative Medicines, as the Case requires; but these Indispositions are
safely and speedily remedied by the following Uterine Drops, the Patient taking
eighty or ninety of them or more (first shaking the Vial) in a Glass of
White Wind, every Morning Fasting, and at Five a Clock every Afternoon, for
three Weeks or a Month together, minding not to eat any thing for half an Hour
before or after each Dose, but to walk about pretty much after taking them.
They are made thus. No. 8. The Uterine Drops.
Take of Tartariz'd Elixir of Property, half an Ounce; Mynsicht's Tincture of
Steel, two Drams; Spirit of Penny Royal, a Dram; of my Specific Essence half a
Dram, mix according to Art, and keep them for use.



These admirable Uterine Drops will rectify the Stomach and Blood, purity all
the Juices, and powerfully cleanse the Womb; they resist all Manner of
Corruption and Putrefaction in a wonderful Degree, keep the Body in good Order,
and rather Loose than Bound, and so particularly correct and extirpate all foul
Humors, without any the least Disorder, that they effectually cause the Terms
to be of a good Color, and free from any ill Scent, etc. except the Blood is
exceedingly corrupted indeed; in which Case, besides these Drops, some powerful
Catharticks must be also taken at due Intervals; therefore if the Patient,
after taking the Uterine Drops, as before directed, for three Weeks, or a
Month, should find, the next time the Courses flow, that the Blood is not
brought to its due Color, or that its strong Smell is not perfectly gone,
which will very seldom happen, then she must once every four or five Days, as
Strength will permit, take a Dose of my Purging Pills, prescribed in the first
Chapter of this Book, Page 6. aforegoing, taking them betimes in a Morning, as
is there directed; and the intervening Days she must take the Uterine Drops
also, as above ordered, continuing this Course for a Month or Six Weeks
together, which will assuredly purify the whole Mass of Blood, cleanse the
Womb-Vessels, strike at the Root of all Corruption and Putrefaction, bring the
Courses to their natural Color, and perfectly take away all offensive Smell,
restoring the Patient to pristine Health and good Order.

And here it will not be amiss to touch upon the Disorders that most Women
labor under, when being between Forty or Fifty Years of Age, their Courses
begin first to dodge, and at last to leave them; for then they are frequently
troubled with a severe Pain in the Head and Back, and about the Loins;
sometimes also with Colic Pains, Gripes and Looseness; at other times, with
Vapors to a violent degree; likewise feverish Heats and wandering Rheumatick
Pains, etc. to prevent and cure all which, no Method or Medicines are more
proper and beneficial than my Purging Pills to be taken, a Dose every Four or
Five Days, as before said, and my Uterine Drops, the other days in the same
Dose and Manner as above directed, and so continue them for a Month or Six
Weeks together, or longer, which then will assuredly have the desired Effect.

And thus I have gone through the Weaknesses and Indispositions that often
attend the Female Sex, occasioned by the Irregularity of the Menstrual Flux or
Courses, and have set down, in a plain intelligible Manner, the best Method of
Cure, so as every one suffering under those afflicting Illnesses, may without
Trouble, or revealing their Case, certainly cure themselves with the greatest
Safety, Ease and Expedition imaginable.

CHAP. IV. Of the Piles.
THIS Distemper being common to Men, as well as to Women, it may be thought
strange that I treat of it here; but considering that many of the Fair Sex do
not care to acquaint Physicians that they are afflicted with the Piles, it made
me conclude that this Chapter would prove as serviceable, and be as acceptable
to them as the others.

The Indisposition called the Haemorrhoids, or Piles, is miserably painful,
making the Patient exceeding Restless, Fretful and Faint; it is a Swelling and
Soreness of the Haemorrhoid Veins, just within, and sometimes just without the
Fundament: When they do not bleed, they are called the Blind Piles and then
they generally swell much, and cause violent Pain and inexpressible Torture at
going to Stool: The Bleeding Piles though very sore, are not so bad or
dangerous as the other, except the Flux is exceeding Violent, and continues
long, for then it induces Fainting, Swooning, Loss of Strength, Citron like
Color of the Skin, resembling the Jaundise, Evil Habit of the Body,
Consumption, Dropsy, etc.

The Cause of this Illness is most commonly a Rarefaction and Fermentation of
the Blood and Humors, as the Feverish Disposition of the Patient at that time
plainly shows, so that a Redundancy of Blood, Stoppage of the Terms, (either
accidentally, or by irregular Methods) Colds, etc. often occasion the Piles, by
hindering the usual Secretions, and thereby inflaming the Blood, and putting it
into a great Ferment, when filling the Haemorrhoid Veins, if they easily open,
it issues out, and if they do not, it there stagnates and swells them, etc. as
before mentioned; sometimes the Piles are caused by hard Riding, or other
violent Exercise, also severe purging, etc. but in those Cases, the Illness
commonly goes off, by Ease, Rest, and temperate Living.

If the blind Piles continue long, the Swelling may grow Scirrhous, and an
Ulcer, or Fistula, difficult to Cure, may succeed.

To prevent which, and Cure the Piles, proper Alterative and Cooling Medicines
must be given inwardly, to allay the Ferment of the Blood, reduce its Discracy,
and thereby destroy the prime Cause of the Distemper, whilst suitable
intrinsic Remedies are outwardly applied, to discuss the Tumor, ease Pain,
and perfectly heal and cure the affected Part.

If the Patient be Feverish, or the Pain and Inflammation great, Bleeding in
the Arm, to the quantity of about Ten Ounces, will be absolutely necessary to
divert the Humors; after which, let as much of the following Alterative
Powder, as will lie heapd upon a Shilling, be taken four times every Day, viz.
betimes in the Morning Fasting, at Eleven a Clock in the Forenoon, at Four a
Clock in the Afternoon, and at Night going to Bed: The Patient may take it in a
Spoonful of Beer, Water Gruel, or any other small Liquor, she likes better,
drinking a little of the same, made lukewarm, after each Dose. No. 9. The
Alterative Powder.
Take Cream of Tartar, six Drams; Liquorice Powder, and White Amber prepared,
of each two Drams and a half; Prunel-stone, two Drams; sweet Salt of Steel, a
Dram; of my Mineral Magistery, two Drams; mix and make a fine Powder according
to Art.



This Alterative Powder will allay the violent Ferment of the Blood, restrain
its Impetuosity cool and rectify the whole Mass, and obtund and correct all
acrid or sharp Humors to Admiration.

And at the same time the Patient is taking this Alterative Powder, let the
following Intrinsic Liniment be used three or four times in a Day, or oftener,
applying it with a fine warm Linen Rag, or with your warm Fingers very gently
to the affected part, endeavoring when the Piles are inward, to get as much of
the Liniment up as can be. It is thus made. No. 10. The Intrinsic Liniment.
Take Chemical Oil of Amber, twenty four Drops; Sugar of Lead, a Dram; Ointment
of Poplar Buds, an Ounce; of my Chemical Oil for the Piles, half an Ounce; mix
and make a Liniment according to Art.



This Intrinsic Liniment quickly gives Ease, and mightily contributes to the
Cure of both blind and bleeding Piles.

Thus the Alterative Powder must be constantly taken, and the Intrinsic
Liniment be carefully used according to these Directions, till the Cure either
of blind or bleeding Piles is perfectly accomplished: They will quickly give
Ease, and assuredly complete the Cure of the Piles in a short time; for the
Alterative Powder effectually strikes at the first Cause of that Illness, and
prevents the parts being supplied with sharp Humors, while the Intrinsic
Liniment, after an admirable Manner eases all pain, discusses the Tumor or
Swelling of the blind Piles, and heals and perfectly cures the bleeding.

The Alterative Powder agrees with the Stomach, and takes off all Feverish
Heat, without disordering the Body in the least; it sometimes makes the Belly a
little loose, and thereby contributes very much to the Cure; for nothing is
more tormenting, to those troubled with the Piles, than to be Costive, or hard
bound, it putting them to intolerable pain and misery at going to Stool.

Therefore, if the Alterative Powder should not loosen the Belly, it will be
necessary for the Patient, once every two or three Days, to take a Dose of my
Laxative Electuary, prescribed in the second Chapter of this Book, page 17.
aforegoing, taking it exactly as is there directed; minding only to omit taking
the Alterative Powder, that Day the Laxative Electuary is taken.

The Patient, during the time she is afflicted with the Piles, ought to drink
freely of Water Gruel, Tea, or Posset Drink, made small, and carefully abstain
from strong Liquors, Spices, Salt Meats, etc. which tend to inflame and
increase the Malady.

Thus these Directions being truly observed, this grievous Indisposition, which
some labor under many Months will be perfectly cured in a little time, so as
not to return again.

About three Months ago, I was sent for to a Gen^lewoman who had been afflicted
with the Piles almost continually, for some Years: She having taken very many
Medicines to little or no purpose, told me, she feared she should never be
Cured, yet least she should be wanting to her self, hearing of my Skill, was
the Reason she had sent for me, and desired I would use my utmost Endeavor to
free her, if possible, from her Illness; She acquainted me also that sometimes
they bled pretty much, and then she was much easier than when they only swelled
and did not; she was at that time in much Torment, and being of a hot
Constitution, and something Feverish, I ordered her immediately to be blooded
and prescribed my Alterative Powder and intrinsic Liniment, the first to be
taken, and the latter to be used exactly as I have directed in this Chapter,
for a Week or nine Days, at the End of which, she was very well, and better, as
she affirmed, than she had been for any time in nine Months before;
nevertheless, I ordered her by all Means to continue the Alterative Powder for
a Fortnight or three Weeks longer, without using the Intrinsic Liniment any
more.

My ordering her to take the Alterative Powder so long, was with design to
correct her Blood, and wholly subdue the Acrid Principle, or Cause of that
severe Malady that had so long afflicted her, which it effectually did, she
having been very well ever since, and likely so to continue,

Much about the same Time, I had another Woman under my Care, who was also
sorely troubled with the Piles; her Blood was very Acrid, but she was not
exceeding Feverish, yet was then in exceeding pain, and a little before she
sent for me, the Piles had bled very much, I therefore did not order her to be
blooded, but directed her to take my Alterative Powder, and use my Intrinsic
Liniment presently, and continue them till she was cured: In four Days time she
was tollerably well but happening to be Costive, I directed her to take a Dose
of my Laxative Electuary, once every three or four Days, and to take the
Alterative Powder, as directed, on the other Days, which she did, and was
perfectly cured in a Fortnights time.

I could give many more Instances of persons cured of the Piles by these
Remedies, who by Reason of their being exceeding bad, and having been so long
afflicted with them, imagined they could never be cured; but designing brevity,
I shall wave that Trouble.

What I have here wrote concerning the Piles, may prove as beneficial to Men
troubled with them as to Women, for the Method and Medicines I have prescribed,
infallibly cure that Illness in both Sexes.

CHAP. V. Of the Whites.
THIS Disease is the flowing of a White Humor from the Cervical Glandules, or
Vessels about the Neck of the Womb.

The Whites sometimes come away in large, and sometimes in but small
Quantities, are attended with Pain in the small of the Back, Pain in the Head,
want of Appetite, bad Digestion, Weariness, Restlessness, sometimes Swelling of
the Legs, pale Countenance, etc. Maids of a weakly Constitution, are often
afflicted with this Malady, as well as Married Women and Widows.

If this Distemper be not timely remedied, it certainly causes incurable
Barrenness, and the Blood and Juices become more and more depauperated, till a
deplorable Consumption, or Dropsy etc. ushers in Death to end the melancholy
Tragedy.

There are few Women, especially of the weaker sort, but at one time or other
are afflicted with this Illness, it being a Distemper often attendant upon, and
caused by other Diseases; and whatever Disease reduces a Woman to a languid
weakly Frame, it is commonly succeeded by this Indisposition: Thus Women that
are naturally of a more weak Habit or Constitution than ordinary, are more
subject to the Whites than others: And as this Illness is mostly occasioned by
foregoing Distempers, (though sometimes by sudden Frights, violent Exercise,
immoderate Venery, etc.) so it weakens the Body also more and more, till the
suffering Patient becomes a miserable Victim to Death, being brought into a
hopeless Consumption, Dropsy, etc. as aforesaid, unless cured by proper
Remedies, administered by a Skilful Hand.

But the immediate Cause of the Whites, is a Weakness, Laxity or Looseness of
the Cervical Glandules, or Vessels about the Neck of the Womb, whose Tone is
either spoiled by the ill Constitution of the Stomach and Blood, (depraved by
other Distempers) or by some of the Accidents, immoderate Exercise. etc. before
mentioned; by which Means, those Vessels cannot sufficiently retain the proper
Humor separated by them from the Blood, to lubricate or moisten the Neck of
the Womb, etc. but let it gleet or slide away in too large a quantity, thereby
impoverishing the Juices of the Body, inevitably causing Barrenness, if not
timely cured, and bringing the whole humane Frame into a pining desperate State.

Some Women indeed have this white Flux much more moderate than others, and not
continually, but at times only, without causing any great or remarkable
Prostration of Strength, till a Year, or two, or more, after its first
beginning to appear; but then it becomes more violent and dangerous, weakening
the Body excessively, and, as it were, at once, and is then much more hard to
Cure; this being a known and undoubted Truth, that the longer this Flux of
white Matter has afflicted the Patient, and the larger in quantity it is, the
longer time will be required, and the more difficult will it be, to accomplish
the Cure; the Humors being the more habituated to flow that way, and the Tone
of the Glandules or Vessels, through which they flow, being the more spoiled.

Many Authors write, that if the Whites continue long, they degenerate, and
become variously Colored, as Green, etc. and some times smell intollerably
ill; but in all the Women I ever had under my Care for this Illness, I never
could find any such discolored Flux, when there was not reason to suspect
another Disease, which makes me absolutely of the Opinion, that a greenish Flux
is never seen, but where it takes its Rise from a more malignant Distemper,
which must then be managed wholly after a different Manner from the Illness I
here treat of, otherwise the Patient may be ruined.

It Is of great Moment, therefore, carefully to distinguish the Whites from
other Distempers that resemble that Malady; for Numbers of Women, who have met
with ill Husbands, have labored under a Venereal Running, or a Running caused
by the Foul Disease, for some Years together, still imagining it to be only the
Whites: Others have mistaken a Running, occasioned by an Ulcer in the Womb for
that Flux; thus it being very difficult for Women to distinguish these
Distempers, and yet absolutely necessary that they should, I think it here very
proper to give some Rules, by which they may assuredly know one from the other.

The Whites may be certainly distinguished from a Gonorrhaea, or Venereal
Running by this: That whenever the Courses come down, the Whites always cease,
and do not trouble the Patient again till a little while after the Courses have
done flowing; whereas a Venereal Running remains constantly upon the Patient,
and does not cease during the Flux of the Terms, but continues all they time
they flow, as well as before and after.

The Whites may also be distinguished from an Ulcer in the Womb by this; That
an Ulcer in the Womb, is always attended with very sharp and gnawing Pains in
the Womb, and its Neck, from the very beginning of the Disease; whereas in the
Whites, though sometimes the Humor may be so sharp as to cause Smarting in the
outer Parts, yet there is no such sharp Pain felt in those iner Parts.

The Cure of the Whites must first be endeavored, if Strength will admit, by
cleaning the Stomach and Bowels with Catharticks, and afterward by rectifying
the Blood and Juices, strengthening the Vessels of the Womb, and restoring the
weakened Body to its pristine Vigor, with Alterative, Balsamic, and
Sub-astringent Medicaments.

The Patient therefore, to prevent the dismal Effects that may ensue, and
entirely to Cure the Whites, if she is not exceeding weak indeed, must take a
Dose, two, or three as she thinks most proper, or finds her self able to bear,
of the Purging Pills prescribed in the first Chapter of this Book, page 6.
aforegoing, taking them exactly as is there directed, excepting only, that
instead of four Pills, she must take but three of them for a Dose, the first
time, because Persons afflicted with the Whites, are commonly much easier to be
purged, than those troubled with a Stoppage of the Terms.

Three or Four of those Purging Pills will give four, five, or six Stools,
without the least Trouble or Disorder, neither Griping the Bowels, or making
the Patient sick, but being taken every other, or every third Morning, for two
or three times, as Strength will bear, will admirably cleanse the Body of foul
Humors, and prepare it for other Remedies to finish the Cure.

Therefore, as soon as the Patient has purged two or three times, according to
her own Discretion, and as her Constitution will allow; she must the next Day
take the quantity of a very large Nutmeg of the following Balsamic Electuary
every Night and Morning, and at four a Clock every Afternoon also, not eating
any thing an Hour before or after each Dose, but drinking a Glass of Red Rough
W^ne, or of any strong Wine more agreeable, after it to wash it down. No. 11.
The Balsamic Electuary.
Take the finest Dragons Blood, Earth of Japan, Bole-Armoniack, and candid
Nutmegs, of each, a Dram and fifteen Grains; Binding Saffron of Steel, a Dram
and a half; Powder of boiled Turpentine, four Drams; of my Chemical Balm, a
Dram and a half; Syrup of Quinces, a sufficient Quantity to make an Electuary
according Art.



This Balsamic Electuary must be constantly taken till the Person is perfectly
cured, which will soon be, provided it be taken punctually as directed; in some
the Cure will be accomplished in a Fortnight, or three Weeks; but in others,
whose Illness is exceeding bad, it may perhaps be a Month or Six Weeks before
it is quite finished; but its Sovereign Efficacy may be depended upon, for it
will most certainly cure, and all Persons will from the first two or three
Days, apparently find themselves mend exceedingly all the while they are taking
it, which may serve as a Demonstration to them, that by continuing it for a
reasonable Time, the Cure will be assuredly completed.

Therefore, effectually to prevent a Relapse, I advise every one who begins
this Balsamic Electuary, not to leave it off, notwithstanding they may find
themselves in Nine Days or a Fortnight pretty well Cured of the Whites, but to
continue taking it constantly as directed, for a Month, five, or six Weeks,
which then will certainly prevent any Return of that Distemper.

It never disorders the Body, but commonly keeps it rather loose than bound, is
pleasant to take, and displays its Virtues aster an admirable Manner,
effectually answering all the Intentions of Cure; for it strengthens the
Stomach and Bowels, purifies the Blood and Juices, restores the Womb-Vessels to
their pristine Order, by gently straitning and reducing them to their natural
Tone; it also wonderfully corroborates the whole Body, taking away all manner
of Weakness in the Back, etc. rendering the Patient lively, brisk, healthy and
strong, and perfectly putting an End to that troublesome Distemper, the Whites.

Whilst the Patient is under this Course, her Food ought to be of very easy
Digestion, and if she drinks a Glass or two of Wine at her Meals, it will be
the better; she must observe also, to avoid eating Sallets, Greens, and all
sorts of Fruit.

If the Patient is troubled with the Headache, or is Feverish, then the Day
before she takes any Medicines, it will be highly proper for her to bleed in
the Arm, to the Quantity of eight or nine Ounces.

If she is exceeding weak, and ill before she begins these Medicines, then she
must not take the purging Pills, before recommended, more than once or twice,
or not at all, if she thinks she cannot bear Purging, but must begin to take
the Balsamic Electuary immediately, and continue it constantly till she is
perfectly well, and indeed for a Week or Fortnight afterward; for it will
thereby strengthen the Body to such a Degree, and confirm the Cure of the
Whites in such a Manner, as re prevent any Relapse into the same for the future.

As soon as the Courses, or any Sign of them approach, and indeed for two or
three Days before they are expected, the Balsamic Electuary must be lest off,
and not be taken again till the Terms have done Flowing.

Some Women that are very subject to be Costive, may happen to be bound in
their Bodies, while they are taking the Balsamic Electuary, (though it most
commonly proves otherwise) in which Case, the Patient may take a Dose of the
Laxative Electuary, recommended in the second Chapter of this Book, Page 17. a
foregoing, as is there directed, so as just to loosen her Belly, but not more,
observing only, to omit taking the Balsamic Electuary that Day the Laxative
One is taken.

If the Patient troubled with the Whites, labors at the same time under any
Disorder of the Courses, it will be proper for her first to get Cured of that
Disorder, as directed in the foregoing Chapters, before she attempts the Cure
of the Whites; as for Example, suppose a Woman should be afflicted with a
Deficiency of the Terms, or their flowing but sparingly, etc. and with the
Whites also, which frequently happens, she must then first Cure her self of the
Deficiency of the Courses, by taking the Opening Powder, etc. prescribed in the
first Chapter of this Book, p. 7. Exactly as there directed, and when by that
Means her Terms flow regularly, and well, and are of a good Color, etc. then
she ought to begin the Remedies prescribed in this Chapter, for the Cure of the
Whites, but not before.

I could give almost innumerable Instances of Persons cured of the Whites, by
the Method and Medicines above described, but shall only relate one or two
Cases, the Particulars of which I believe will prove acceptable to my Readers.

I was sent for about seven Months since to a young Gentlewoman about Nineteen
Years of Age, who for three Years before, as I was informed, had at times been
troubled with this white Flux, but it not continuing constantly upon her, nor
flowing violently, neither her self or Mother much minded it, till at last
growing very bad, the Whites increasing in Quantity, her Legs swelling, and her
whole Body becoming more and more disordered, they thought proper to seek for
Help.

I found her in great Distress, her Back much pained, her Appetite almost lost,
her Legs a little swelled, and the Flux (by her Mother's Relation) very severe,
yet she was not exceeding feverish, therefore, I did not think fit to have her
blooded, but ordered her to take two Doses of my Purging Pills before
mentioned, at two Days distance from each other: They operated very well, took
down the Swelling of her Legs, and made her something better; However, being a
little weakened, I did not order her to purge again, but directed her the next
Day to take my Balsamic Electuary as above, and continue it constantly till
she was cured.

In about fourteen Days the Flux was so much abated, as hardly to be perceived,
the Pain in her Back was nearly gone, and she began to look brisk and recover
Strength; but being always much subject to Costiveness, she was something bound
in her Body. I therefore ordered her the Day following to take a Dose of my
Laxative Electuary before mentioned, just to loosen her Bowels, and if she
found any further occasion, to take a Dose of it every five Days, and the
Balsamic Electuary constantly the other Days, which she did, for a Fortnight
longer, in which time she was perfectly cured, and has remained in complete
Health ever since.

Near six Months ago a Gentlewomen of about thirty Years of Age sent for me,
and desired my Assistance, she being exceedingly afflicted with the Whites,
which she had been troubled with upwards of four Years: That Illness began
quickly after a Miscarriage, which had like to have proved her Death, and which
was occasioned by a great Fright.

She told me she had taken abundance of Medicines, first by the Advice of her
Midwife, and an eminent Apothecary, and afterward by the Direction of a
Physician of good Note, without receiving any Benefit; and added, that she
feared there was no Cure for her, but that she must dye, yet desired I would do
all in my Power, and save her Life, if possible, for her Children's Sake, she
having three alive.

Her Case was exceeding bad indeed; she was very ill and weak, scarce able to
stir, had a violent Pain in her Head and Back, no Appetite to Food, was
frequently very feverish, and almost wore to a Skeleton by the great Flux of
white Matter that she had so long labored under, nevertheless I let her know,
that with the Blessing of the Almighty, I did not doubt but to restore her to
Health, provided she would follow my Directions, and take my Medicines
punctually, which she readily promised to do.

This Gentlewoman was too weak to bear Purging, therefore I forbore ordering
her my Purging Pills; but considering the great Pain in her Head, and that she
was inclined to be feverish, I directed her, first, to have about eight Ounces
of Blood taken from her Arm, which without weakening her, diverted the Humors,
and prevented a Fever, which might otherwise have happened, and the next Day, I
ordered her to begin my Balsamic Electuary, and continue it constantly, as
directed in this Chapter,

At the End of Five Days, I found her mightily recovered, the Whites being
nearly stopped, her Spirits revived, her Strength much encreasd, the Pain in her
Head and Back almost entirely gone, and her Appetite in some Measure come to
her: However, she being something hot and uneasy by turns, and not having
purged at first, because of her exceeding Weakness, I advised her: though she
was not in the least Costive, to take a Dose of my Laxative Electuary, once
every Five or Six Days, and the Balsamic Electuary the other Days, as before,
and to continue that Course till she was perfectly well, and for Nine or Ten
Days after.

Accordingly she took my Advice, and in a Month from the Time she first began
my Medicines, she left off taking them, having been well for about a Week
before, and was then, and still remains in perfect Health and Strength, to the
Admiration of all that knew her.

CHAP. VI. Of the Bownfalling of the Womb and Fundament.
WHAT is vulgarly called the Downfalling of the Womb, is in Reallity no such
Thing, for there can be no Out-hanging of That, without present Death; but the
Disorder commonly known by that Name, is an Out-hanging of the Vagina, or outer
Neck of the Womb, and is truly only the Wrinkles of the Sheath, or Passage
relaxed and swollen, so as to fall cut and appear, something like a Ball with a
Hole in the Middle: It is generally very painful and troublesome, and sometimes
so much inflamed, as to threaten a Gangrene.

This Indisposition is caused by straining or irritating the Secret Parts, by
hard Labor in Childbearing, by the Hand of an unskilful Midwife, by excessive
Venery, or immoderate Exercise, as hard Riding, Dancing, Leaping, etc. or by a
violent Flux, either of the Whites or Courses, which often not only relaxes, or
loosens the Vagina, but also frets or irritates it so, as to cause it to become
sore, swell and hang down.

The Falling down of the Fundament is an Out hanging of the Intestinum Rectum,
or great Gut, and is caused by Weakness and Relaxation of its Fibers, or
tearing of them, either by severe Costiveness, violent straining in hard
Labor, or sharp Looseness, etc. It is not only troublesome but dangerous, if
not quickly remedied, and oftentimes becomes the Seat of a foul Ulcer or
Fistula.

In the Cure of these Illnesses, the Medicines that we give inwardly, must be
Vulnerary, and such as will endue the Blood and Juices with a Balsamic
Property, in order to strengthen and create an Aptness in the relaxed Fibers,
and swollen Parts to recover their Tone, and retain their natural Station, when
reduced, or gently put up, after peculiar Emollient, and moderately Astringent
Fomentations have been externally applied.

If the Patient is costive, particular Care must be had to remove that
Disorder, for straining at going to Stool is not only painful, but increases
the Malady, as well that of falling down of the Womb, as the falling down of
the Fundament.

If the Part hanging down is inflamed or angry, Bleeding in the Arm will be
absolutely necessary, after which, in order certainly to cure these
Indispositions, the Parts affected must be bathed outwardly with my sanative
Fomentation, which is thus made. No. 12. The Sanative Fomentation.
Take of Pomegranate Peel, two Drams; dried red Roses, Pomegranate Flowers, of
each half an handful; Oak Bark, half an Ounce; boil them in a Quart of Spring
Water, till it comes to a Pint, which then strain out, and while it is very
hot, add Sugar of Lead, white Vitriol, and my healing Salt, of each one Dram;
stir it about till the Salts are dissolved, and when cold, add of common Spirit
of Wine, two Ounces; which mix well, and reserve the whole for use.



This Sanative Fomentation must be used thus; Pour a little of it into a well
glazed Pipkin, or other Earthen Vessel, and make it very hot over the Fire,
then with a fine Flannel Cloth dipped into it, bathe and foment therewith the
Part hanging out, either of the Fundament or Womb, as hot as can be well
endured, for a quarter or half an Hour together; after which, the Patient lying
down, let the Part be gently put up by a tender Hand, and kept in its Place by
a Truss, or convenient Bands of Linen Cloth, minding to bathe those Parts two
or three times every Day in the same manner, for five or six Days together,
though the Part does not fall out again.

By the use of this Fomentation alone, without taking Medicines inwardly, the
falling down of the Womb will be assuredly cured; but in the falling down of
the Fundament, especially if it be through great Weakness, it will be very
necessary for the Patient, besides bathing the Part affected with the Sanative
Fomentation, to take at the same time the Balsamic Electuary prescribed in the
foregoing Chapter, Page 44. as is there directed, and it will wonderfully
strengthen the Parts, etc. whilst the Sanative Fomentation used outwardly, will
abate the Swelling, heal all Soreness, cause the relaxed Fibers to regain their
Tone, and keep the Part affected in its Natural Situation.

But if the Patient is Costive and the Balsamic Electuary should not cause
loose Stools, as it generally will, then the Laxative Electuary, prescribed in
the second Chapter, Page 17. aforegoing, must be taken, as there directed, in a
Morning Fasting, every third, fourth or fifth Day, as the Patient finds
needful; taking such a Dose of it as will just give two or three loose Stools,
but not more, and minding to omit the Balsamic Electuary that Day the Laxative
One is taken.

It will be convenient also for those troubled with the down falling of the
Womb, if they are Costive, to take the Laxative Electuary in like manner.

Thus these Directions being punctually followed, the falling down of the Womb,
(as it is vulgarly called) and also of the Fundament, will be certainly and
effectually Cured.

CHAP. VII. Of Barrenness.
AS being the Mother of Children is the highest Honor, and most exalted State
of Satisfaction, that the Fair Sex can attain to in a Married Life; so on the
contrary Barrenness, of all other Misfortunes is by much the greatest,
producing the most severe Affliction that can attend a Family, and causing the
deepest secret Grief in a Woman that is possible to be imagined: What Discord?
What Differences are bred in many of the best Families for want of Children to
crown the earnest Desires of Married Persons? And what Reproaches and
melancholy Reflections that want often occasions, with the dismal Disorders
that from thence frequently arise, may be easily conceived by Judicious
Persons, who will give themselves liberty to consider how great the Sorrow of
that Woman must be, who knows, that could she have Children; she should be
absolutely happy in a Married State, when for want of them she is perhaps
treated with Ignomy and Contempt, and made the most unfortunate of her Sex.

This being true, it Naturally follows, that nothing is more necessary than to
treat of, and faithfully discover, the Causes and Cure of Barrenness in Women,
when it is done, with a real Intent of being serviceable to the World, in
rendering such a considerable Number of the Fair Sex fruitful and happy, who,
with the last degree of Sorrow, now labor under the ungrateful Imputation of
being Barren.

And the more useful will it still appear, when we consider that the Natural
Excellent Modesty of our Women, hinder them from openly seeking for a Cure of
that unfortunate Circumstance, which, by means of the plain modest Account I
intend to give, may be secretly remedied by themselves without the Knowledge of
others.

It is to be understood here, that I mean to write only of the Cause and Cure
of Barrenness in Women of suitable Years, and not in those who are either too
old, or too young; in the former, when their Terms have left them, Conception
is impossible, and the latter must contentedly wait, till Age has ripened, and
made them capable of Childbearing; for some Women there are, who being Married
very young, Conceive not till they are Nineteen, Twenty or Twenty two or three
Years of Age, or more, and then become very Fruitful; and others that. Marrying
betimes have Children at Fourteen or Fifteen: Thus there is a very remarkable
and manifest Difference in the Nature and Ripeness of the Female Sex. This
being premised.

I shall first show the several Causes of Barrenness, and here by the way I
cannot pass by, what with Concern I have often observed, viz. That many likely
Women have been deemed incurably Barren, lived uncomfortably many Years, and at
last gone out of the World without bearing Children, for want only of their
Physician's having a true Knowledge of the seemingly unaccountable Cause, which
in all probability might have been easily removed by a proper Method and fit
Medicines, and the Women have been rendered as capable of having Children as
any whatever; but to proceed.

The Causes of Barrenness are many, as the visible ill Structure or Formation
of the Parts, exceeding Fatness, Scirrhous Tumors or Swellings in the Neck of
the Womb, Ulcers, etc. in all which Cases there cannot be a regular Admission
of the Male Seed, so that it is impossible a Conception should happen; but as
these Causes are seldom seen, and as rarely Cured, I shall not enlarge upon
them. Other Causes of Barrenness are, I. The Deficiency of the Monthly Terms,
and then the Natural Ferment of the Blood and Juices is wanting, the lively,
desirous Faculty is spoiled, neither is the Womb fit to receive the Spirituous
Effluvia of the Masculine Seed that a Conception might follow. II. The
immoderate Flux of the Courses, which impoverishes the Fluids, weakens the
whole Body, and thereby incapacitates a Woman to Conceive. III. The Whites,
Slipperiness, or over Moistness of the Womb, which weaken it and its Vessels,
plainly prevent Conception, by condensing or drowning, as it were, the Vital
Spirits of the Male Seed, and by that means causing Sterility. IV. The Swelling
of the Vagina, or Wrinkles of the Privities, so as to hang out of the Body,
vulgarly called the Downfalling of the Womb, which then hinders Enjoyment.


But there are yet other Causes of barrenness, that are not visible, the Women
being in perfect Health, Young, Brisk, Jolly, and as likely to have Children to
all Appearance, and as they themselves believe, as any in the World, and by
reason the Causes of Sterility in such Women do not immediately appear, the
Vulgar Practitioners call them occult, or unknown, and indeed are so to them;
but to an Ingenious Physician, who makes Nature his Study, is expert in
Anatomy, and who carefully searches into the Abstruse Principles and Causes of
Things, to such, these pretended occult Causes are well known, easily accounted
for, and quickly removed, and which I will unfold.

But first it will be necessary, in order to explain and fully lay open what
may otherwise appear intricate, to Women and others in treating of these
Causes, to show the Nature of Generation, and how a Foetus is produced.

Within the Body of a Woman, on each side the outer Part of the Bottom of the
Womb, at about eight Fingers Breadth distance from it, are situated the Ovaria,
so named from their Likeness to the Collection of little Eggs found in the
Bodies of Fowl; these Ovaria are of an Oval Figure, a little flat on their
upper Part, and about half as big as a Man's Testicles, and are vulgarly called
Testicles or Stones.

In the Ovaria there are several little Ova or Eggs, almost like Bladders,
contained in proper separate Cells, one of which Eggs in the time of Coition is
foecundated or impregnated by the Spirituous Part or Effluvium of the Male Seed
cast to the Womb, which Spirit or Effluvium ascends from thence to the Ovaria
through the Vessels called Womb Trumpets, which are about four or five Fingers
breadth long, and arise on each side from the Bottom of the Womb; the upper
Part of these Womb Trumpets, being wide and open, embrace the Ovaria in the
time of Enjoyment, and dilate or open so as to give free Passage to the
Effluvium, or Spirit of the Masculine Seed cast to the Womb, that it may
instantly arrive at the Ovaria, where it stimulates, acts upon, and impregnates
one of the little Ova or Eggs therein contained, as before mentioned; which
then falls from its Cell, through one of the Womb Trumpets, into the Womb, as a
proper Place assigned by Nature for its Reception; where it is nourished, grows
bigger, and becomes a Foetus.

If two or more of these little Eggs happen to be foecundated, or impregnated
at the same time, the Woman then has Twins, or several Children at a Birth, as
is often seen.

The falling of one of the little Eggs from its Cell in the Ovaria, through one
of the Womb Trumpets, into the Womb, often occasions an uncommon Sensation and
gentle shivering of the Body after the Conjugal Act, which is therefore a Sign
of Conception; it also causes a Contraction of the inner Neck or Mouth of the
Womb, so as perfectly to close it, in order to retain the Egg in the Womb, and
prevent its slipping away, till at the end of nine Months, the time allotted
for its Perfection and Birth, it is become Ripe for Expulsion, and fit to live
in the open Air.

And thus Conception is caused, and not by the fancied, true and equal mixture
of Male and Female Seed, as was the Notion of the Ancients; for Women have no
such thing as Seed other than the Ovaria, vulgarly called Testicles, before
described.

Indeed in the time of Coition most Women void a white limpid Humor, which
having some resemblance to Seed, might help to occasion the Mistake of the
Ancients; but modern Discoveries demonstrate, that this white Liquor comes from
the small Pores of the Vagina celled Lacunae, and not from the Womb, neither in
the time of Carnal Conjunction does it go into the Womb, which is a plain Proof
that it is not Seed, but that it is only designed by Nature to create Desire in
Women, lubricate the Passage to the Womb, and to cause exceeding Pleasure in
the Conjugal Act.

Now it must be allowed, that it is most likely a Woman should Conceive at the
Moment this white Liqour is voided, provided the Male Seed is at that instant
emitted also, because then the Woman feels excessive Delight, which occasions
the Mouth of the Womb to open and receive the Spirituous Part of the Masculine
Seed, the Womb Trumpets also dilate or widen to such a degree, as to give
Passage to the little Egg, which when impregnated falls from its Cell in the
Ovaria, through one of them into the Womb, as before taught.

And thus having discovered how Generation and Conception happens, I shall
proceed to treat of the Causes of Barrenness, which do not plainly appear, and
are not known to Women themselves, which now from what follows may be easily
conceived by Persons of tolerable Sense and Reason.

The Causes then that hinder Conception in Women of suitable Years, brisk, and
not laboring under any Apparent Weakness or Indisposition, must be either an
Obstruction of the Womb Trumpets, which then hinders the Spirituous Part of the
Masculine Seed from passing through them to the Ovaria, without which
Impregnation or Conception cannot happen; or from the Faultiness of the Ova or
Eggs contained in the Ovaria, so as they are incapable of being impregnated by
the Vital Effluvia of the Male Seed, that Conception might follow; or else from
an inappitency to Matrimonial Pleasure in general, which last is common to
Women of a Cold Constitution, in whom the Spirits flow not to the lower Parts,
they feel no Pleasure in Coition, the Womb contracts, its inner Neck closes,
and for want of warm Desires in the mind, gives not, but refuses a suitable
Reception to the Effluvia of the Male Seed, and so absolutely hinders
Conception.

Thus having shown the Causes of Barrenness, as well those that are deemed
occult, or unknown, as those that are obvious to common Practitioners and Women
themselves, I shall in the next Place point out the true and direct method of
Cure.

First then, if Conception be hindered by Diseases, as the Deficiency or want of
the Courses, immoderate flowing of the Terms, the Whites, Slipperiness of the
Womb, outhanging or bearing down of the swelled Vagina, etc. then recourse must
be immediately had to the method and Medicines appointed for their Cure, under
their proper Heads in the 'foregoing Chapters, and when the Patient is thereby
brought into good Order, has her Courses regular, and her Body is in an
apparent, healthy State, then, if she does not quickly Conceive, must be
administered proper Uterine Medicines, Cordial and Strengthening, and which have
a peculiar Faculty to prepare, fortify and invigorate the Parts appropriated to
Generation, and make a Woman Prolifick, of which Nature are the Medicaments I
shall by and by prescribe.

Now when Barrenness proceeds from Obstruction or Stoppage of the Womb
Trumpets, or from the Faultiness of the Ova or Eggs in the Ovaria, (which
Causes) do not appear otherwise than in their Effect) or from defect or want of
convenient Amorous Desire, then, and in all these Cases, Endeavors must be
used to attenuate the Blood and Juices, rouse and increase the Animal Spirits,
cause them to act with Ardour, to revive the whole Humane Frame, and create
Mirth, and particularly to rectify all Disorders of the Genital Parts, by such
Salubrious Medicines, as are specificated to open Obstructions of the Womb
Trumpets, and at the same time adapted to comfort and strengthen the whole
Body, nourish, increase and fill the Ova or Eggs in the Ovaria, make them apt
and ready to be foecundated or impregnated and also to correct and drive away
the Saturnine Habit, and all supperfluous, cold, moist Humors, which deaden
Desires to Matrimonial Pleasure, and thereby destroy even the very intent of
that Divine Institution, such Medicines I say must be given, as will replenish
the Blood and Juices, and revive an Inclination to Conjugal Enjoyment, so that
it may no more be burdensome, as it is to some Women, but suitably acceptable,
that thereby happy Issue may be the Consequence.

In the first Place therefore, those who have reason to believe their not
Conceiving proceeds from the 'foremention'd, occult, unknown, or not apparent
Causes, must take the following Prolifick Elixir, which will open any Stoppage
or Obstruction of the Womb Trumpets, fit and prepare the Ova or Eggs for
Impregnation, rectify the Blood and Juices, and correct all Vicious Qualities
thereof. No. 13. The Prolifick Elixir.
Take fine Aloes and Myrrh in Powder, of each six Drams; best Russia Castor in
Powder, and choice English Saffron well picked, of each three Drams; Chemical
Powers of Sage, Baum, Clary, Comfry, Eringo, and Amber, of each two Drams; of
Tartariz'd Spirit of Wine, half a Pint; mix the Chemical Powers and Spirit of
Wine first, which then pour upon the other Ingredients, and digest them in a
Sand heat for ten Days, or till a very deep, strong Elixir is obtained; which,
after it is well settled, decant from the Faeces, and add to it, my Tincture of
Mars, and Chemical Prosifick Oil, of each two Ounces; mix them very well by
shaking, and keep the whole close stopped for use.



Of this Elixir the Patient must take eighty or ninety Drops (first shaking the
Vial) every Morning Fasting, and at Five a Clock every Afternoon also, in a
Glass of White Wine, not eating any thing for about an Hour before or after
each Dose. Thus it must be taken constantly for three Weeks or a Month
according to the Patient's own discretion, and then forbearing that, it will be
highly proper for her to take the quantity of a large Wallnut of the following
Powerful Confect every Night and Morning, and also at Four a Clock every
Afternoon, with a Glass of good Canary, or other choice generous Wine, which
Confect will certainly incline and dispose the Patient to Conceive; for it
increases the Spirits revives, exhilerates, and strengthens to Admiration;
makes the Ova, or Eggs in the Ovaria, full, ripe, and apt to be foecundated,
widens the Womb Trumpets, etc. and thereby absolutely removes all Natural
Causes of Barrenness. No. 14. The Powerful Confect.
Take of Chemical Powers of Vipers, a Dram; Confect of Chermes Berries, three
Drams; Confect of Satyrion Roots, two Ounces and an half; of my Stimulating
Essence, eighteen Drops; mix and make a Confect according to Art.



This Powerful Confect is exceeding pleasant to the Palate, is certainly the
most effectual Medicine for Barrenness that ever was made in the World, and may
be taken for a Month together or longer.

If the Patient believes her not Conceiving is occasioned through Natural
Coldness of Constitution only, then she need not take the Prolifick Elixir, but
begin to take the Powerful Confect immediately, which will in most Cases prove
sufficiently Efficacious; yet taking the Prolifick Elixir first, is undoubtedly
the surest way.

But if the Patient be of an exceeding Cold Constitution, and should find (as
may possibly happen) that the Powerful Confect does not sufficiently answer the
Intention, then it will be convenient for he, besides taking the Powerful
Confect, just to anoint the Secret Parts with a very little of the following
Stimulating Balm, either by means of a Feather dipped in it, or otherwise; which,
being used outwardly, and the Powerful Confect taken inwardly at the same time,
will assuredly have the desired Effect, and promote Conception in an
extraordinary manner. No. 15. The Stimulating Balm.
Take Adeps Rosarum, and Essence of Limon-Time, of each half a Dram; Essence of
Orange-Flowers, two Drams; Essence of Cloves, three Drams; Essence of Limons;
six Drams and half; Oil of Jessamine, five Ounces; and of my Provocative
Chemical Powers, one Ounce; first mix the Adeps Rosarum, the Essences, and my
Chemical Powers, and then add the oil of Jessamine, and make a Stimulating
Balm, which, if done according to Art, will be very Odoriferous, and finely
Transparent.



This Stimulating Balm is not Nauseous to use, but has a pleasant fragrant
Scent, and proves excellently serviceable.

If by using it much, the Parts should at any time be overheated, so as to
cause any uneasiness, then presently wash and bathe them for near half an Hour
together with warm Milk and Water, and the Heat or Uneasiness will be
immediately taken off.

Men may be cured of Impotency by the Medicines prescribed in this Chapter, as
well as Women of Barrenness; for the Prolifick Elixir admirably corrects any
ill quality of the Seed, the Powerful Confect increases it, and that as well as
the Stimulating Balm is equally proper and beneficial for Men afflicted with
Imbecility, as for Women, and may be taken and used by them in the same manner.

And now having directed to the most proper Method and effectual Medicines for
the Cure of Barrenness, I shall end this Chapter with advising all Women who
desire to be the honorable Mothers of Children, not to use Venery too often,
for that very commonly occasions Sterility or Barrenness; from the due
Observation of which, and punctually following the Directions I have given,
with the greatest Reason in the World, may be expected happy Conception and
hopeful Issue, unless for Grievous Sins, God is pleased to deny that most
valuable Blessing; therefore above all, let incessant Prayers be put up to the
Almighty, who had promised to hear the Afflicted, and who can instantly make
the Barren Fruitful, and the most Disconsolate Glad.

While I was writing this Chapter, a Gentleman came to return me Thanks and
Gratify me for the Service I had done his Lady. The Case was this: About six
Months ago he acquainted me that he had been married to a brisk handsome young
Woman above five Years, without having any Children, or her being once with
Child, which occasioned great Sorrow to them both, and sometimes Contention
between them, the Gentleman alleging that it was not his Fault, and the Lady
being as Confident, which from all outward Appearance she might, that it was
not hers: After he had informed me of the whole Matter, I concluded, that his
Wife's not Conceiving was occasioned by Obstruction, or narrowness of the Womb
Trumpets, and therefore gave him a Bottle of my Prolifick Elixir (which I
believed would render her Fruitful) with Direction for her to take it for a
Fortnight or three Weeks constantly, as I have ordered in this Chapter, which
he persuaded her to, and she Conceived quickly after, being now, to her great
Joy, as well as her Husband's, above four Months gone with Child.

Another Gentleman (near three Quarters of a Year since) let me know, that he
had been Married pear seven Years without having Children, and that his Wife,
being of a Cold Constitution, he believed that was the Cause of her not
Conceiving, which was my Opinion also. I therefore ordered her my Powerful
Confect to be taken for a Fortnight together or more, as I have directed in
this Chapter, which she took, and without using my Stimulating Balm, it had
such Effect, that she quickly Conceived, and is now near the Time of her
Delivery.

I could here insert Cases of abundance of Women that I have had under my Care
for the Cure of Barrenness, and who by the very Method and Medicines above
prescribed, have been made fruitful, so that they quickly after Conceived; but
the Book in general, and this Chapter in particular, having swelled beyond my
first Intention, I shall save my Readers the trouble of Reading, and my self
that Writing any farther on this Head.

CHAP. VIII. Of Miscarriage, with Directions how to cause speedy Delivery in
Childbirth, and also how to rectify the Disorders of the Lochia, or Childbed
Purgations.
AS there is nothing more unpleasing than to be disappointed of expected and
wished for Issue, through Miscarriage, so nothing proves more dangerous to the
Female Sex, than that unhappy misfortune; for it being Unnatural, is always
attended with ill Symptoms, and proves much worse than a regular Childbirth:
And though a Woman recovers the immediate Danger of losing her Life by a
Miscarriage, yet if she is frequently afflicted in the same manner, it
certainly ruins her Constitution, weakens the whole Body, brings on incurable
Illnesses, and necessarily shortens Life.

And it is a Grievance that often becomes habitual to the Fair Sex, many Women
Miscarrying five or six, and some, ten or twelve times following one another,
exactly at a certain Length of Time after Conception: Thus Miscarriage happens,
to some always in the third Month of their going with Child, to others in the
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh or eighth, and then it is much more dangerous
than in the first two or three Months.

The oftener a Woman has miscarried, the more difficult will it be to cause her
to retain the Fruit of her Womb, the whole nine Months that Divine Providence
has appointed, for ripening a Natural Birth; for when a Woman is accustomed to
miscarry, the Womb at the usual time endeavors with its utmost Efforts to
eject its Burden.

Miscarriage is commonly caused the first time by a sudden Fright, violent
Blow, or Fall, or longing for Things seen without having them, either of which,
causes a contraction of the Womb, and a kind of Convulsive Motion, so as to
expel the Foetus. In a word, whatever irritates the Womb, and excites the
Expulsive, and weakens the Retentive Faculty, procures Miscarriage; so that a
great Cold, immoderate Exercise, intemperate Eating, Drinking too much Wine in
the first Months, excessive Passion, either of Anger, Joy, Fear, Grief, etc. or
disorder of the Kidneys, or of the Bowels, the redundancy and rarefaction of
the Blood, flagginess of the Womb, want of Spirits through prodigious
Bleedings, also vehement Coughing, Sneezing, or Vomiting, may occasion this
great Unhappiness.

The imminent Symptoms that threaten immediate Miscarriage, are an heaviness
and weight about the Loins, a bearing down of the Womb, Pain of the Back, and
Pains from the Navel downwards, also trembling, palpitation of the Heart,
shivering, inappetency, laziness, flagginess of the Breasts, flux of Matter
from the Womb, etc all, or any of which, portend Miscarriage.

If there is Reason to believe, that the Foetus is already separated from the
Womb, the Expulsion of it must not be hindered, but, on the contrary, be
promoted as much as may be, by the Assistance of a Skilful Midwife or Physician
practicing that Art; and such Remedies must be given as will hasten its
Expulsion, and by their forcing Quality, speedily Ease the Womb of its then
dangerous Burden; for which end I recommend the following Expulsive Cordial, a
Spoonful or two of which, the Patient must take every now and then, first
shaking the Bottle, and it will cause the Womb to expel the Foetus or Child,
though Dead, with admirable and unexpected Ease.

For which reason it is also wonderfully serviceable to those in Labor, who
have gone out their whole Time; for being taken as before directed, when the
Pains relent, or are weak, it brings them on kindly, and causes a speedy and
easy Delivery. No. 16. The Expulsive Cordial.
Take Bryony Water Compound, Treacle Water, and, strong Cinnamon Water, of each
half an Ounce; Baum Water, and Chamomile Water, of each one Ounce; Mugwort
Water, and Penny royal Water, of each two Ounces and an half; Testicles of an
Horse prepared, four Scruples; Tincture of Castor, two Drams; Tincture of
Saffron, one Dram; Spirit of Salt Armoniack, two Scruples; Salt of Amber, one
Scruple; Chemical Oil of Savin, Oil of Aniseeds, and Oil of Chamomile (first
mixed with a little white Powder Sugar) of each three Drops; of my forcing Salt,
two Scruples; Syrup of Mugwort, one Ounce and an half; mix and make a Cordial
according to Art.



This Expulsive Cordial has excellent Effects in the afore-mentioned Cases, and
is truly the most proper Medicine in the World to remedy a hard or slow Labor;
for it is not only powerfully forcing, but also eases and comforts the Woman,
strengthens the Child, and disposes the Womb to expel its Burden with ease and
safety, provided the Child is in a right Posture, and fit to be expelled, which
an Ingenious Midwife may presently know; for if it be not, that and all other
forcing Medicines will do more hurt than good, and prove dangerous, and
therefore must be avoided, till by the Hand of a Skilful Midwife the Birth is
made to present right, and then the Expulsive Cordial being given as before
directed, will soon display its wonderful Efficacy, and speedily cause an happy
Delivery.

And if after Delivery, the Lochia or Childbed Purgations do not come down
regularly, then a Spoonful or two of the Expulsive Cordial, being given to the
Patient according to the Discretion of her Midwife, will prove very
serviceable, and bring down the Flux freely.

But to return to Miscarriage: If the Foetus or Child be not separated, nor the
Blood Vessels broke, Endeavors, by all possible means, must then be used to
confirm the Tone of the Ligaments, strengthen the Womb, and corroborate the
Foetus; for which purpose such Medicines must be immediately given, as are
Comforting, Balsamic, Sub-astringent, Temperate in respect to Heat, and that
have a Power to absorb all irritating or sharp Humors, which often cause a
Contraction of the Womb and Expulsion of the Birth.

Therefore if a Woman has, never miscarried, but, being with Child, is
frightened, or receives a Blow, Fall, etc so as to endanger a Miscarriage, I
advise her, instantly to drink a Glass, two, or more of strong Florence or
Barabar Claret, there being nothing better on those Occasions; for it recovers
and raises the Spirits depressed by Frights, etc. and at the same time by its
Noble Astringent Quality, strengthens the Womb and its Vessels; Burnt-Claret
may also be drank to good Effect: After which, if any Symptoms of Miscarrying
continue; the Patient must take from the Point of a Knife, the quantity of a
large Nutmeg of my Specific Electuary, prescribed for the immoderate Flux of
the Courses in the second Chapter of this Book, Page 19. a foregoing, as soon
as can be, and continue to take the same quantity of it three times every Day,
viz. every Night and Morning, and at three or four a Clock every Afternoon,
till all danger of Miscarrying is over, minding to drink a Glass of the
aforementioned Wine or other agreeable Liquor after each Dose, and it will
assuredly prevent Miscarriage.

But if the Patient has Miscarried once, or several times before, then it will
be highly necessary for her to begin to take the Specific Electuary, as before
directed, a Week or more, before the last or usual time of her Miscarrying, and
continue it till a Week or Fortnight after the time she most fears, though she
has no Symptoms of Miscarrying, by which means she will certainly prevent that
misfortune, though she has miscarried many times before.

For it powerfully corroborates the Womb and its Vessels, confirms and
establishes the Tone of the Ligaments that keep the Birth fixed to the Womb,
and strengthens the Foetus more than can be expressed; it also comforts the
Stomach and Bowels, absorbs all acrid or sharp Humors, and fortifies the
Spirits exceedingly: Therefore the longer it is taken, during a Woman is with
Child, the more secure will she be of going out her whole Time with safety,
ease and health; yet about the last Month of her Time, if no danger of
Miscarrying appears, it will be proper for her to leave taking it, because it
strengthens the Membranes, Ligaments, and Vessels so exceedingly, that being
taken too near the Time of Delivery, it may possibly cause her Labor to be
something more hard than otherwise it would.

If after a Woman is brought to Bed, the Lochia or Childbed Purgations should
flow violently, so as to make it necessary to restrain the Flux, then a few
Doses of the Specific Electuary, being given to the Patient by Advice of her
Midwife, will do infinite Good.

If the Patient, during the time of taking the Specific Electuary, to prevent
her Miscarrying, should happen to he Costive, or very hard Bound, then it will
be necessary for her to take some very gentle Medicine, just to loosen her
Belly every now and then, as she finds occasion, for which purpose a small Dose
of the Laxative Electuary prescribed in this Book, Page 17. aforegoing, being
taken, will prove very proper.

If the Symptoms of Miscarriage are occasioned by longing for Things seen, etc.
whatever they be, they ought immediately to be procured, if possible.

And if the Patient is of a Sanguine Complexion, and full of Blood, it will not
be amiss for her to be presently blooded to the quantity of eight Ounces.

Thus I have given all the necessary Directions concerning Miscarriage, etc.
which being duly followed, will certainly have the desired Effect; as the
number of Women I have cured of the Habit of Miscarrying, by the Method herein
set down, evinces.

About two Years ago, a Gentlewoman near thirty Years of Age came to me much
afflicted, having miscarried ten times before, and always about the third
Month; she was very desirous to be cured of that Faculty, and was then about
nine or tea Weeks gone with Child, and began to have some Symptoms of
approaching Miscarriage, I therefore ordered her to take my Specific
Electuary, as I have directed in this Chapter, and to continue it constantly
for six Weeks at least, which she did, and without taking any think else, she
was cured, went out her whole Time, and brought into the World a healthy Boy;
and so complete was the Cure, that since that, she has had another Child,
without taking any Medicines, or having the least sign or fear of Miscarriage.

Note, It being a common thing for Women who are afflicted with Illness to
leave off taking Medicines, after the worst Symptoms of their Indispositions
are taken off, and before they are perfectly Cured, I could not here omit
advising them, to avoid that Practice, and to keep to the Course of Medicines
that they enter into, regularly, for the whole time they are directed,
otherwise they cannot expect less than to relapse into their Diseases again,
which will then give them double Trouble, increase the Expense, and prove more
difficult to Cure.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of all the Medicines prescribed in this Book, and which may be had
of the Author's own Preparing, at the Two Blue Posts near the Square, in
Haydon-Yard in the Minories, London; where only he has allowed them to be
disposed of at the following Prices, viz.
s. d. No. 1. Purging Pills prescribed in Page 6. 3 6 No. 2. Opening Powder, p.
7. 3 6 No. 3. Corroborating Electuary, p. 9. 3 6 No. 4. Laxative Electuary, p.
17. 3 0 No. 5. Cooling Anodyne Powder, p. 18. 3 6 No. 6. Specific Electuary,
p. 19. 3 6 No. 7. Hysteric Julep, p. 28. 5 0 No. 8. Uterine Drops, p. 29. 3 6
No. 9. Alterative Powder, p. 34. 3 6 No. 10. Intrinsic Liniment, p. 35. 3 6
No. 11. Balsamic Electuary, p. 44. 5 0 No. 12. Sanative Fomentation, p. 53. 5
0 No. 13. Prolifick Elixir, p. 65. 5 0 No. 14. Powerful Confect, p. 66. 5 0 No.
15. Stimulating Balm, p. 67. 5 0 No. 16. Expulsive Cordial, p. 74. 5 0

Note, All Persons living in the Country, etc. who have occasion tor any of
these Medicines, are advised to send for more than one Pot or Bottle, etc. at a
time, least that not being sufficient, they should be inconveniently obliged to
stop in the middle of the Course, for want of more Medicines to perfect their
Cure.


