THE BEAUTIES OF THE LATE Right Hon. EDMUND BURKE.

THE BEAUTIES OF THE LATE Right Hon. EDMUND BURKE, SELECTED FROM THE WRITINGS,
etc. OF THAT EXTRAORDINARY MAN, ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED.

Including the following celebrated Political Characters, drawn by himself:
Antoinette, late Queen of France Comte D'Artois Paul Benfield, Esquire M. Brissot
Richard Burke, Esquire Late Earl of Chatham M. Condorcet Right Hon. Henry Dundas
Hon. C. J. Fox George III. Lord Grenville Late Mr. Grenville Warren Hastings,
Esquire Late Lord Keppel Sir Hercules Langrishe Louis XVI. Louis XVIII. Lord North
Right Honorable William Pit Marquis of Rockingham Charles Townsend Esquire John
Wilkes, Esquire etc. etc.


TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A SKETCH OF THE LIFE, WITH SOME ORIGINAL ANECDOTES OF
Mr. BURKE.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED BY J. W. MYERS, AND SOLD BY W. WEST, No 1, QUEEN'S-HEAD
PASSAGE, PATERNOSTER-ROW. 1798.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is presumed that the following selection will be found extremely useful to
Readers of almost every class: -- To the youthful, as it contains the choicest
flowers of fancy, which cannot fail to warm and refine the imagination: -- To
the Statesman, Philosopher, etc. as abounding in excellent maxims and
reflections, drawn from extensive reading, tried and approved by experience and
observation: -- To all who aspire to enlarge the sphere of their understanding,
but to Englishmen in particular, as every British subject is interested in some
part of it.

It is necessary to premise, that the passages selected from Mr. Burke's
Pamphlet, entitled, "A Vindication of Natural Society," are not to be taken as
conveying Mr. Burke's own opinions, but as an ingenious and artful attack on
the principles of Lord Bolingbroke.

A sketch of Mr. Burke's Life, with some original anecdotes, is prefixed, for
which the Author entreats the indulgence of the Public, as it is the first
attempt of a trembling pen in the biographic line.

A copious index is added, to supply any defects in the arrangement of the
different articles, as it was very difficult, amidst such a variety, to place
every one under its proper head.

The letter to Mr. Smith was transmitted by an anonymous hand, of course we
cannot vouch for its authenticity.

A SKETCH of the LIFE, WITH SOME ORIGINAL ANECDOTES OF Mr. BURKE.
THE gentleman, who suggested the idea of the following selection, conceived
that it would be acceptable to prefix some anecdotes of the author. If time,
talent, and the nature of the work admitted, it would, in many respects, be a
pleasing task to trace this extraordinary man through all the mazes of his
politics, to attend him in studious retirement, to mark the boldest flights of
his imagination, to fathom a mind, rich and profound as the ocean, and as
easily agitated by every gust of passion, and tornado of resentment. -- Mr.
Burke was called into action in the most eventful period that ever enriched the
page of history. His voice was early raised in favor of liberty in America.
The blazing suns of India have been often lost in the splendor of his
eloquence. The fable children of Africa have numbered him in the list of their
advocates, and almost every state in Europe has, at one time or other, been the
subject of his tongue and his pen.

Mr. Burke was first taught to read by his mother, a woman of excellent
understanding, and a highly cultivated mind. He was instructed in writing and
accounts by Mr. James Fitzgerald, who kept a day-school near Smithfield,
Dublin. At the age of twelve he was committed to the care of Mr. Abraham
Shackelton, a Quaker, master of an eminent classical academy in Balitore, in
the County of Kildare. That the reader may form some idea of his preceptor, and
the seminary, we transcribe the following advertisement, which appeared in the
public prints about that time:

BALITORE BOARDING-SCHOOL.
Abraham Shackelton informs his friends and the public, that being placed
guardian over the morals of the youth under his care, he declines, from
conscientious motives, to teach that part of the academic course, which he
conceives injurious to morals, and subversive of sound principles, particularly
those authors, who recommend in seducing language, the illusions of love, and
the abominable trade of war. Those who design their sons for the college, will
take their measures accordingly. He professes to fit youth for business, and
instruct them in polite literature. His terms are six pounds per quarter -- no
entrance money demanded.

Mr. Shackelton was a man of fine even temper, severe in his morals, but
extremely indulgent to his pupils, with regard to the bent of their genius,
which he was studious to discover and cultivate -- his maxim was Natura
sequitur melius quam ducitur. Young Burke was very attentive to his studies --
sometimes at the expense of his health. He did not confine himself to the Greek
and Roman classics, he read at intervals some of the best English writers, and
evinced much taste in the selection of the finest passages -- many of which he
committed to memory. He was passionately fond of reading Don Bellianis of
Greece. This circumstance he mentioned himself one night in the House of
Commons, in the debate on the Affairs of Holland in 1786. He also takes notice
of this romance in his Essay on the Sublime and Beautiful. Notwithstanding he
appears to have read the poets with all the enthusiasm of a warm imagination,
yet it does not appear that he ever invoked the Muses. At one time, it is said,
he could repeat all Young's Night Thoughts by rote; in a copy of this work,
which he used to carry in his pocket, the two following lines in his
handwriting were found some years since on a blank leaf. Jove claimed the
verse old Homer sung,
But God himself inspired Young.


Several of his witticisms have been repeated by his schoolfellows, but as they
are all unworthy of so great a genius, even in bud, we shall pass them over,
with this single observation, that the shafts of his wit were not always winged
with the feather of a dove. His filial piety was truly exemplary, and his
affection for Mr. Shackelton, his master, was evinced on many occasions. When
the good old man visited him in London, he received him as a father, introduced
him to many of his friends, particularly to Mr. Benjamin West, the painter of
posterity, and what is still greater, one of the best of men. He also mentioned
him with great respect and veneration in one of his speeches on the Test Act.
Having passed a proper time at Balitore Academy, he was transplanted to Trinity
College, Dublin, as may appear from the following transcription from the
admission book of that university:

"1743, April 14, Edmundus Burke, Pens. filius Johannis Genesis annum agens 16,
natus Dublinii, educatus sub ferula M. Shakelton. Tut. D. Pellifier."

Elected a scholar of the House 26th of May, 1746, commenced A. B. 23d
February, 1747-8. He does not appear to have been elected a native. This term,
in the Irish University, is applied to a student, who, having obtained a
scholarship, is entitled to an annual stipend after a certain standing.


Doctor M. Kearney, senior Fellow of the University, shone as the rival of Mr.
Burke, in every class of the college course. The strictest friendship, however,
subsisted between them, and when separated, they continued to correspond with
each other till within a few weeks of Mr. Burke's dissolution.

Mr. Burke's father was an attorney, of some eminence in his profession, very
highly respected for the integrity of his character. Having completed his
academic studies, it is said that he offered himself as a candidate to fill the
moral chair in the University of Glasgow, vacant by the death of his countryman
Mr. Hutcheson. Mr. Reid, however, was raised to that situation, which induced
Mr. Burke to turn his attention to the bar. For this purpose he came to London,
and entered his name on the books of the Middle Temple. What a transition! he
that had d^ed the most charming season of life in culling the fairest flowers
of imagination, in tracing the pl^sing labyrinths of science, to be obliged to
w^ the midnight oil in po^g over Coke on Lyttleton. He wa^ not, however, to be
dismayed; the entrance was barren and rugged, but it promised a gold^ (...),
and ambition was not the least of Mr. Burke's passions. With such eagerness did
he sit down to these new studies, that something (...) almost "forgot himself
to stone." His constitution was not equal to the task. His health began to
d^ne; he was advised to consult his friend and countryman, Doctor Nugent, who
had pra^ed many years with great success at Bath. The Doctor was so benevolent
a man, that it is said of him by those who knew him best, that if he had the
misfortune to lose a patient, he felt as if he had lost a child. In addition to
this, he was so highly charmed with the conversation and opening talents of Mr.
Burke, that he was resolved, if possible, to preserve them to the world. For
this purpose, he ^gned him apartments in his own house, where he treated him
with all the affection of an indulgent parent. Miss Nugent, the Doctor's only
daughter, evinced, by her attention, how deeply she was interested in the
recovery of his health, and what at first assumed the name of friendship,
changed into that of love. In short, Mr. Burke was made happy in the possession
of a hand that bestowed at the same time one of the gentlest of hearts.

His studies became more diversified, and the success of some pens induced him
to turn his attention to some work that might raise his fame as a writer. His
success in this line was equal, nay, superior to his expectation, but he soon
found that "fondness of fame was avarice of air," in consequence of which he
procured a letter of introduction to the late Earl of Bath, the Mecaenas of the
day. His Lordship received him with the utmost politeness, lamented that it was
not in his power to render him any service, as he was no longer in power. The
impression which this unexpected intelligence made on Mr. Burke did not escape
his Lordship's eye; he felt for the situation of the young man, and after a
pause, "I will give you a letter, said he, to the Earl of Bute, though I don't
know that I am entitled to take that liberty." The proposition revived Mr.
Burke's drooping spirits, and he waited, without loss of time, on Lord Bute,
who professed his sorrow that it was likewise out of his power to render him
any service, as he had resigned all his employments that very morning, adding,
that his influence with his Majesty was greatly over-rated; anxious, however,
that a man of genius and talent should not pine in the shade, he would take one
step, he said, which he did not know he ought to take, but he would venture,
and if crowned with success, it would yield him great pleasure. As Lord Halifax
had been appointed to assume the vice-regal government of Ireland, perhaps in
that situation, he would be able to render Mr. Burke some service in his native
country. The Earl accordingly wrote to Lord Halifax, and recommended the bearer
of it as a man of promising genius, who would reflect honor on his patronage
and protection. The new appointed Viceroy expressed the deepest regret that
every department in his appointment, except that of private secretary to his
own secretary was filled up. Mr. Burke was accordingly appointed private
secretary to the Right Hon. Gerard Hamilton, commonly called Single Speech
Hamilton, in consequence of his having made only one speech in the House of
Commons during all the time that he sat in Parliament, but which has ever been
considered as an effort of unprecedented talent, and is thought to have been
composed by the subject of these memoirs.

Having now cursorily traced Mr. Burke to his first debut on the great theater
of public life (in which it was allowed on all sides that he played his part
with great applause) we shall introduce him in another character, not so
splendid, undoubtedly, but still more amiable. Having contracted an early
acquaintance with a Mr. Michael Smith, a country schoolmaster, it ripened into
mutual friendship. Several letters passed between them; the following is a copy
of one which Mr. Burke addressed to him, soon after his arrival in London. Mr.
Smith, it appears, taught the Greek and Roman classies at this time in the
parish of Fenagh, in the county of Leitrim. --

MY DEAR MICHAEL,
Mr. Balf was so very kind as to deliver me your friendly epistle about half an
hour ago. I read it over, blessed the first inventor of letters, and as I have
plenty of ink, pens, and paper, and as this is one of my holidays, I intend to
dedicate it to friendship. -- Balzac having once escaped from a company, where
he found it necessary to weigh every word that he uttered, chanced to meet a
friend, "Come," said he to him, "let us retire to some place where we can
converse freely together, and commit as many solecisms as we please." I need
not tell you the application. You Will expect some short account of my journey to
this great city; to tell you the truth, I made very few remarks as I rolled
along, for my mind was occupied with many thoughts, and my eyes often filled
with tears when I reflected on all the dear friends I left behind; yet the
prospects could not fail to attract the attention of the most indifferent;
country seats sprinkled round on every side, some in the modern taste, others
in the style of old de Coverley Hall, all smiling on the neat, but humble
cottage. Every village as gay and compact as a beehive, resounding with the
busy hum of industry, and inns like palaces. What a contrast between our poor
country, where you will scarce find a cottage ornamented with a chimney. But what
pleased me most of all was the progress of agriculture, my favorite study, and
my favorite pursuit, if Providence had blessed me with a few paternal acres. A
description of London and its nations would fill a volume. The buildings are
very fine, it may be called the sink of vice, but her hospitals and charitable
institutions, whose turrets pierce the skies, like so many electrical
conductors, avert the very wrath of Heaven. The inhabitants may be divided into
two classes, the undoers and the undone, generally so, I say, for I am
persuaded there are many men of honesty and women of virtue in every street. An
Englishman is cold and distant at first; he is very cautious even in forming an
acquaintance, he must know you well before he enters into friendship with you,
but if he does, he is not the first to dissolve that sacred band; in short, a
real Englishman is one that performs more than he promises; in company he is
rather silent, extremely prudent in his expressions, even in politics, his
favorite topic. The women are not quite so reserved; they consult their
glasses to the greatest advantage, and as nature is very liberal in her gifts
to their persons, and even mind, it is not easy for a young man to escape their
glances, or to shut his ears to their softly flowing accents. As to the state
of learning in this city, you know I have not been long enough in it to form a
proper judgment of that subject. I don't think, however, there is as much
respect paid to a man of letters on this side the water as you imagine. I don't
find that genius, the "rath primrose, which forsaken, dies," is patronized by
any of the nobility, so that writers of the first talents are left to the
capricious patronage of the public. Notwithstanding this discouragement,
literature is cultivated in a high degree. Poetry raises her enchanting voice
to Heaven. History arrests the wings of time in his slight to the gulf of
oblivion. Philosophy, the queen of arts, and the daughter of heaven, is daily
extending her intellectual empire. Fancy sports on airy wing like a meteor on
the bosom of a summer cloud, and even Metaphysics spins her cobwebs and catches
some flies. The House of Commons not unfrequently exhibits explosions of
eloquence, that rise superior to those of Greece and Rome, even in their
proudest days. Yet after all a man will make more by the figures of arithmetic
than by the figures of rhetoric, unless he can get into the trade wind, and
then he may sail secure over pactolean sands. As to the stage, it is sunk, in
my opinion, into the lowest degree; I mean with regard to the trash that is
exhibited on it, but I don't attribute this to the taste of the audience, for
when Shakespeare warbles his "native wood notes," the boxes, pit, and gallery,
are crowded -- and the Gods are true to every word, if properly winged to the
heart.

Soon after my arrival in town, I visited Westminster Abbey; the moment I
entered I felt a kind of awe pervade my mind, which I cannot describe; the very
silence seemed sacred. Henry the Seventh's chapel is a very fine piece of
Gothic architecture, particularly the roof, but I am told that it is exceeded
by a chapel in the University of Cambridge. Mrs. Nightingale's monument has not
been praised beyond its merit. The attitude and expression of the husband, in
endeavoring to shield his wife from the dart of death, is natural and
affecting. But I always thought that the image of death would be much better
represented with an extinguished torch, inverted, than with a dart. Some would
imagine that all these monuments were so many monuments of folly -- I don't
think so; what useful lessons of mortality and sound philosophy do they not
exhibit. When the highborn beauty surveys her face in the polished parian,
though dumb the marble, yet it tells her that it was placed to guard the
remains of as fine form, and as fair a face as her own. They show besides how
anxious we are to extend our loves and friendship beyond the grave, and to
snatch as much as we can from oblivion -- such is our natural love of
immortality; but it is here that letters obtain the noblest triumphs; it is
here that the swarthy daughters of Cadmus may hang their trophies on high, for
when all the pride of the chissel, and the pomp of heraldry yield to the silent
touches of time, a single line, a half worn-out inscription, remain faithful to
their trust. Blessed be the man, that first introduced these strangers into our
islands, and may they never want protection or merit. I have not the least
doubt, that the finest poem in the English language, I mean Milton's II
Penseroso, was composed in the long resounding isle of a mouldering cloister or
ivy'd abbey. Yet after all, do you know that I would rather sleep in the
southern corner of a little country church yard, than in the tomb of the
Capulets. I should like, however, that my dust should mingle with kindred dust.
The good old expression, "Family burying-ground," has something pleasing in it,
at least to me. I am glad that Dr. Sheridan is returned, and determined to
spend the rest of his days in your quarter. I should send him some Botanic
writings, which I have in view, if I were not certain that the Irish
Hippocrates would rather read nature in her own works; with what pleasure I
have seen him trace the delicate texture of a lily, and exclaim with the God in
humanity, that "Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of those,"
and you know that our lilies are fairer than new fallen snow. I am extremely
sorry that any dispute should arise betwixt you and your brother-in-law; he is,
I know, a little hotheaded, especially when he takes a glass, and I am afraid
he leans a little too much to the social can. Mr. Peyton, however, is a peace
maker, and I am sure, if the whole was laid before him, that he would settle it
to your satisfaction, and the sooner the better. You are quite mistaken when
you think I don't admire Plutarch, I prefer his writings to those of any other.
-- Sacra semper excipio, quae in summa arce locare fas est and aequum nunquam
non in manibus habenda.

Mr. Balse sets out for Germany in the spring, on a visit to his uncle, who is
now in Vienna. The General is very rich, and advancing in years, so that it is
probable when he is called to repose on his laurels, that his nephew will be
his heir, and I need not tell you that he is worthy of it. I expect, in a day
or two, to be introduced to Miss Woffington, our country-woman. She is rapidly
rising into theatric same; I could wish to publish a few anecdotes of her. She
is of low origin, it is true, but talents and nature often avenge themselves on
fortune in this respect. The roses of Florida spring out of the finest soil,
they are the fairest in the universe, but they emit no fragrance. I recollect
that she read her recantation in a little country church, somewhere in the
county of Cavan. Mr. Fleming of Stahalmuck, wrote some verses on that occasion.
I wish you could procure a copy of them for me as soon as possible. I also wish
that you could procure some anecdotes of Mr. Brook, author of the justly
celebrated tragedy of Gustavus Vasa.


The remainder of this letter touches on some of Mr. Smith's family affairs,
which would not be proper to publish.

That the Reader may judge of the epistolary style of Mr. Burke's
correspondent, it may not be unacceptable to insert the answer. --

MY GOOD SIR,
I once read of a King of Spain, Alphonsus, I think, who was cured of a
dangerous disease by reading a passage in Livy. Your kind letter had much the
same effect on me, for my spirits were so low the moment I received it, that it
is not in the power of words to describe my situation; but scarce had I read
six lines, when my heart began to emerge, and the sun shone as bright as ever,
and if you pity a poor dealer in Syntax, buried alive, I may say, write to me
as often as you can. My school is on the increase, it is true, but the people
are so poor that they cannot pay. I have thirteen Latin scholars, at a crown a
quarter, and six and twenty in writing and figures. I have taken a little farm,
of about five acres, so that betwixt the cultivation of my fields, and that of
the tender mind, I have very little time on my hands, or my feet, I may say,
for sometimes I mingle in the dance. As to Greek, there is no attention paid to
it in this quarter. Last week I endeavored to prevail on Mr. Johnson to permit
me to give his nephew a few lessons in the language of Heaven. He said he had
no objection, if I could assure him that it would enable Jack to buy a cow or a
horse to more advantage. Having cast his eye on a Greek book, which I had in my
hand, What, said he, would you have my nephew spend his time in learning these
pot-hooks and hangers? Thus you see how learning is prized in this part of the
world; and from your own account, I don't find that the Muses are held in such
high estimation in England, which I was early taught to consider as the seat of
arms and arts. What, then, is to become of their votaries? -- neglected, and I
am afraid despised! -- You Will forgive me, I feel myself so uneasy and depressed
as often as I think on this matter, that I cannot help dropping a tear on my
books -- the only source and companions of my solitary hours, so that you see
we have little cause to boast of the triumph of letters over the breathing
marble, or the proudest trophies of war. Yet I join with you in blessing the
memory of the man that first introduced the swarthy daughter of Cadinus into
these islands. I think I can recollect some lines on this subject in the form
of an aenigma, which, perhaps, you have not seen.

Bis venere novem juvenes ad moenia nostra
Ex aliis, huc ad nos rediere, locis:
Conspicui forma, pariles florentibus annis,
Attamen his minime par decor oris adest.
Nil est egregiae quod dicas de esse cohorti,
Quam quod non potis est edere lingua
Non illis vox est, sed secum quemque godales sonos.
D^cunt, ex his, ut verba loquantur, habent;
Sub^eto nullum dicunt interpret verbum,
Orb sed est toto gloria magna verum.
Whilst I am on this interesting subject, I am sorry to tell you that our old
Irish bard, who could conduct those nymphs through all the mystic mazes of
poetic dance, resigned his tuneful breath last week. I accompanied his remains
to the grave. He has left me all his manuscripts, and I shall select some of
the finest passages of them for you, and translate them for you as well as I
can.

My school-house was levelled with the ground last week in a storm; -- Boreas,
of true Russian descent, pays very little respect to learning. The neighbors,
however, assembled the next day, and raised me a new one, on a more pleasing
site, so that my barefooted pupils are quite happy, as it is better wooded,
and of course will afford them an opportunity of playing hound and hare with
more art. O'Gara has made me a present of a dial, which I intend to erect in
the spring. Oh the wit of man, that can even turn a shadow into use, and teach
it to point out the sleeting hours, as unsubstantial as itself! But, Paullo
majora Canamus. I once read in an old Irish poem, that when Jupiter made man,
he gave him his choice either of wings or imagination; he accepted the latter,
which shows that our first fabulous father had some brains. Let me rise on this
divine plume then, and for once cast a glance into futurity. What do I see? Why
I see my worthy friend, arrayed in a flowing robe; I hear his voice raised in
the cause of innocence and distress; the widow and the orphan bless his name,
and the wily villain, hunted down through all the mazes of law. Once more
Astrea revisits the earth; I see him raised to the seat of judgment, his ermine
as pure as his native snow; the golden scales even balanced in his hands, and
the sword of justice tempered in the tears of mercy. -- The ascent to this
eminence is difficult, but Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis.


I know you will be glad to hear that Tom and I are on good terms. -- You are
right, he drinks whiskey as often as he can get it -- Ore rotundo, and
sometimes Warm from the still, and faithful to its fires,
too, which is worst of all. Your account of London, I believe, is very just.
All great cities from Rome down are the sinks of vice, and the graves of
genius. I admire the idea of your public charities. One of the three
impossibilities amongst the ancients was Eripere Jovi fulmen, and amongst the
Christians Eripere Deo fulmen iroe, but Charity is the emanation of Heaven!

As to Miss Woffington, I can collect very little of her. She was born in
Dublin, read her recantation in the parish church of Lurgan, near Virginy, in
the country of Cavan, before the Reverend Mr. Sterling, who was a great
musician. Mr. Fleming did write some verses on that occasion, but it is not
easy to procure them, for you know he is a great man -- a Justice of Peace, and
one of the Grand Jury. They began thus, I think: -- And now the Sun, revolving
to the west,
Bequeathed the wearied hemisphere to rest.
And now the Moon, in milder glories dight,
Resumed the peaceful empire of the night.


I can recollect no more, and I don't know that these are correct. There is an
anecdote told of her, and I believe there is very little doubt of the truth of
it. --

Mr. -- having spent some time in Paris, soon after his return happened to dine
at Mr. Gore's, where Miss W. captivated the company with her sprightly wit and
easy manners; our Parisian hero paid such attention to the glass, that the
cloth was scarce removed when the table and chairs exhibited the effects of it,
as well as those that were present, particularly Miss W. who, as she happened
to be formed of the common mould, was reminded of it, to which she only
answered, "Sir, I expected all this, I observed for some time past the yellow
clay breaking through the plaster of Paris."

As to Mr. Brook, I believe I can collect you many particulars relative to
him. -- His father was a clergyman of the Church of England. He is married to a
Miss Mears, a relation of his own. He has lately built a house at Longfield,
one of the most desert spots in the county of Mead. He is an enthusiast in
agriculture, and has spent his patrimony in draining lakes, to very little
advantage. He has had many children, but Heaven was so indulgent as to call
them out of this life just as they began to taste the miseries of it.

Doctor Sheridan is well, and desires to be remembered to you. I hope that you
will write as often as you can. You cannot conceive what pleasure it will afford
me to correspond with you.

I am, my good Sir, Yours most truly, M. SMITH.


[ These letters are taken from copies.]

Notwithstanding the multiplicity of business that naturally devolved on Mr.
Burke, as private secretary to Mr. Hamilton, he had the happy art of arranging
his affairs in such a manner as to devote some moments to the cultivation of
literature. He used to pass two evenings every week in conversation with Doctor
Thomas Wilson, senior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and Doctor Blundell,
the friends of humanity and letters. The former offered to join with Mr. Burke
in a translation of Livy, but the latter preferred reading the sententious
Tacitus to the prince of Roman historians, and it appears from many parts of
his maxims, etc. that he studied this writer with unwearied attention. Doctor
Wilson was considered as a wit, but it seldom rose above a pun. Mr. Burke
happened to meet him one evening in a short coat, the Doctor immediately
observing that his friend did not know him in that guise, exclaimed, -- Brevis
esse laboro,
Obscurus fio.


The Doctor passing one day through a street, chanced to espy a person
advancing on the same side with whom he did not wish to speak at that time, in
consequence of which he crossed to the other side, where he ran his head almost
against another with whom he did not wish to speak at any time, on which he
repeated, -- Incidit in Scyllam
Que vult vitare Charybdin.


Notwithstanding the rays of regal favor shone so conspicuously through the
Earl of Halifax, that it may be ^id preferment was in his nod, and
notwithstanding the prospects in this respect that opened on every side to Mr
Burke, yet he preserved great equanimity of mind, and did not in the least
affect the insolence of office. He corresponded with his friends in every line
as usual, and received such as visited him with great affection. His character,
at this time, was drawn by a lady in the following lines: With judgment witty,
eloquent with sense,
Polite with ease, and free without offense.


This I had from a gentleman, who, to use his own expression, was very well
acquainted with Single Speech Hamilton, and Double Speech Burke.

Mr. Hamilton entertained so high an opinion of the talents and integrity of
Mr. Burke, that he procured him a pension of three hundred a year on the Irish
establishment. On their return to England, they lived on terms of the greatest
intimacy, till the Protege, began to think that his patron did not exert all
the influence he still possessed to usher him into life; several letters passed
between them on this subject, which ended in the dissolution of their political
friendship, and in order to lessen the debt of gratitude, Mr. Burke resigned
his pension, which was transferred to Captain Jephson, author of the tragedy of
Braganza, etc.

As Mr. Burke had now entered on the arduous study of politics, he was
determined not to relinquish the pursuit, in hopes that some favorable
opportunity would present itself, which, if taken at the tide, might lead on to
fortune and preferment. The weakness and ill-timed measures of the cabinet,
with respect to the American colonies, threatened the downfall of the
administration; it lasted, however, much longer than was expected; at length it
was obliged to give way. Accordingly, on the 13th of April, 1765, the Marquis
of Rockingham, William Dowdeswell, Esquire Lord John Cavendish, Thomas Townshend,
Esquire and George Onslow, Esquire were appointed Lords of the Treasury; Mr. Dowdeswell
Chancellor of the Exchequer; the Duke of Grafton and General Conway,
Secretaries of State. The Marquis felt himself in want of a private Secretary;
Mr. Burke was recommended to fill that confidential situation by Mr.
Fitzherbert, the father of the present Lord St. Helens. Mr. Burke, in a short
time, rendered himself so useful, that he was brought into parliament for the
borough of Wendover, through the interest of Lord Verney. As the Marquis knew
that fortune had only hitherto smiled on Mr. Burke deceitfully, he lent him
L20,000 on his bond, as the most delicate mode of conferring such a savor. Mr.
Burke immediately purchased his elegant seat near Beaconsfield with this sum,
as an occasional retreat from the "uneasy seat of high desires," or the
conflict of passions, and happy would it have been for the world, perhaps, if
he had thrown himself into the arms of philosophy, and spent the rest of his
days in the cultivation of those arts which elevate and embellish human nature.
But our young statesman had tasted of power, and preferred the noise and
intrigue of party to lettered ease and retirement in his enchanting Tusculum.

Mr Burke may be now considered as a fair public character, and therefore when
the "History of the Man," to use Lord Bolingbroke's expression, is also the
"History of the State," great judgment is required in selecting, and ability in
composing, to produce a full, uniform, and compacted piece. I do not aspire to
such qualifications, nor does it fall within my plan. I shall therefore only
notice the pro^ events of his political life, etc. and leave the detail to
abler pens.

As the Duke of Cumberland had recommended the new ministry, he constantly
assisted them with his advice; an advantage, which, it is very probable, the
nation could not have enjoyed under any other ministry, and which, alone, might
compensate all the defects, if real, which the friends of the old ministry were
continually finding in them. This advantage, however, though of continuance
enough to be felt by the nation, did not last as long as the nation could have
wished, even under men of equal integrity and capacity with the present, and
greater experience. Whilst his Royal Highness was preparing one evening to
assist at one of those councils, frequently held to put matters in a way of
being more speedily dispatched by the Privy Council, and without whose
assistance the Privy Council business must go on slowly, as the parliam^nt
business without that of the Committees, he was seized with a sudden disorder,
of which he had some symptoms the evening before, and in a sit of shivering
sunk senseless, almost instantaneously, in the arms of the Earl of Albemarle,
on the gist of October, 1765 Annual Register for 1765.
.

It is presumed that it would be almost an apology of itself for the
introduction of the following sketch of parties, etc. at this period, to say
that it came from the pen of Mr. Burke. It will also serve as an early specimen
of his powers as an historian, and even of his moderation. --

"At the conclusion of our last volume, we saw the nation involved in the most
distressful circumstances that could well be imagined; our manufacturers at a
stand, commerce almost totally annihilated, provisions extravagantly dear, and
a numerous populace unemployed, without the means of procuring a livelihood.
Such, and so gloomy was the prospect that opened at home upon us, along with
the year; nor did the view become more pleasing by extending it across the
Atlantic, where the colonies exhibited nothing but scenes of anarchy and
confusion, where licentiousness was carried almost to the highest pitch that it
could possibly admit, without assuming another name; whilst the profligate and
abandoned (as is usually the case in civil commotions) under the specious
pretext and mask of liberty and the common cause, gave a loose to their own
unruly passions, and committed all those exorbitances which the vulgar are so
prone to, when under any pretense they are allowed to assemble in bodies, and
through any relaxation of the laws, they have not the fears of immediate
punishment upon them. We have before observed, that those of an higher rank
amongst them did not take any pains to allay the ferment; it is probable that
many of the more serious of them condemned in their own minds several acts that
were committed, but did not think proper to damp a spirit, which, however
irregularly or improperly exerted, they, perhaps, at that time, thought it
conducive to their designs to keep alive.

"But though a violent resentment supported the spirit of the colonists, they
could not but sensibly feel the inconveniences which an entire stoppage of
trade must occasion among a people who had hitherto subsisted by commerce.
However, their warehouses were full of British goods, for which they had not
paid; and the many resources of so vast an extent of country, abounding in the
most essential articles of life, prevented them from feeling so much immediate
distress as our own manufacturers and laboring poor at home.

"It must be observed, that the enormous sums owing to our merchants, in the
colonies, added greatly to the difficulties the public were under, and severely
afflicted the trading and manufacturing part of the community. These debts,
amounting to several millions sterling, the Americans absolutely refused to
pay, pleading in excuse their utter inability, which plea, it appears, the
merchants admitted to be reasonable.

"As the nation was never, perhaps, in a more critical situation, so, of
consequence, no administration ever had greater difficulties to encounter than
the new one. They were under an immediate necessity of enforcing the stamp act
by fire and sword, or else of moving its immediate repeal in parliament. In the
former case, though there was no doubt of the ability of Great Britain to
crush, or even extirpate the colonies, yet such a decision, if not looked upon
as absolute suicide, must, at least, be considered as making use of one arm to
cut off the other.

"Fatal were the consequences, which it was foreseen and foretold, would attend
such an attempt, and it was obvious, that if such consequences should ensue,
the first framers and promoters of the obnoxious laws, would have been entirely
forgot in the general odium and execration, which would have fallen solely upon
the ministers, who, by enforcing such ^inous measures, had wrought the
destruction of their country.

"On the other hand, if the act should be repealed, a colorable appearance was
not wanting to charge them with sacrificing the dignity of the crown, together
with the honor and interest of the nation to their own irresolution, or else
to a causeless animosity which it would be said they bore to their
predecessors, and a blind opposition to all their measures.

"The loss of their illustrious friend and patron, the Duke of Cumberland,
seemed, at this period, to be truly critical to the ministry; his influence,
his authority, his good sense, his patriotism, and the high regard the public
held him in, would have added greatly to their strength and security.

"Thus situated, they had an opposition to encounter, consisting of gentlemen,
several of whom had held the first employments in the kingdom, and who, for
abilities, experience, knowledge of business, property, and connexions, were
very reputable, and therefore truly formidable.

"Some of these gentlemen seemed obliged in honor, as well as through opinion,
and a spirit of opposition, to embark warmly in vindication and support of
measures which had originally been their own, for which it may be supposed they
had the natural partiality of a parent, and in defense of which they were
determined to dispute every inch of ground with the ministry. Some also joined
them through principle.

"They thought that the insolence of the Americans deserved chastisement,
where, otherwise, the hardship of their circumstances might merit relief.
Others there were who gave themselves no trouble as to the rectitude of the
American taxation, but who would have been very glad that their own burdens at
home could be at all lightened, by any sums, that could be drawn in any manner,
out of the pockets of the colonists; and, in general, it may be supposed that
the lovers and assertors of high prerogative naturally chimed in with the rest,
upon their own principles. There were not a few also who first kept aloof from,
and in due time declared against the ministry, upon some symptoms which
appeared early, of their wanting that countenance, which, as it has been
favorable or adverse, has determined the good or ill fortune of the several
successive systems of administration for some years past. This part of the
opposition was, for very obvious reasons, by much the most dangerous.

"To balance this powerful opposition, the administration consisted of
gentlemen, who, though many of them were young in office, were yet extremely
high in estimation; whose characters were clear, whose integrity was far above
suspicion, and whose abilities seemed to grow with the difficulties of the
business they were engaged in; their constant adherence also to the cause of
liberty had procured them the confidence and good will of the public, both of
which they enjoyed in a very eminent degree Mr. Burke is supposed to have
included himself in this class.
. They had, besides, some other advantages, as they were not bound to the
support of measures at all events, merely because they had planned or advised
them; so they could weigh matters with coolness and impartiality, and judge
without prejudice or passion; at least they had the happiness not to be obliged
to act systematically wrong.

"They appear, accordingly, to have avoided, as well as in matters so critical,
perhaps, they could be avoided, the two extremes; in one, which it was
apprehended they must inevitably have struck, they neither precipitated affairs
in America by the rashness of their councils, nor did they sacrifice the
dignity of the crown or nation by irresolution or weakness; and the firmness,
as well as temper, which appeared in their dispatches to the different
governors, when examined by the House, did them the greatest honor. By
preserving this medium, by suspending their own judgment in a matter of so
great importance, till they had obtained that of the representatives of the
nation, they still left it in the power of the supreme legislature to use
healing measures, and did not urge their fellow subjects, through desperation,
to the committal of such acts as could not be forgiven.

"Notwithstanding the prudence of this conduct, it was severely animadverted on
by the opposite party. These gentlemen would have the most coercive means made
use of, for forcing the new laws and regulations, in which themselves had so
great a share, fully sensible of the disgrace that must be reflected on them by
a repeal; it is not unnatural to suppose that they wished to see the executive
power so deeply engaged before the meeting of parliament that the legislative
could not then in honor recede from the support of it. Upon this principle,
the plan of moderation that had been adopted, was opposed with the greatest
acrimony, and the severest invectives pointed at administration, for not having
immediately employed troops and ships of war to enforce the laws in such a
manner, as the outrageousness of the resistance, and the importance of the
authority which was resisted, did, as they asserted, indispensably require.

"In the mean time the American affairs were become a general subject of
discussion, and numberless pamphlets were wrote on both sides of the question;
in general, both sides were guilty of the same fault, though in the most
opposite extremes; the advocates for the colonies carried the idea of liberty
to the highest pitch of enthusiasm, while their antagonists seemed to imagine,
that a person forfeited every birthright and privilege of an Englishman by
going to live in America. They both also proved a great deal too much, while
the former seemed to consider the colonies rather as independent states, in a
sort of equal alliance with the mother country, than as deminions depending
upon and belonging to her; they furnished the strongest reasons why that
irregular spirit of enthusiasm should be timely checked, by making them
sensible of their dependence.

"On the other hand, the enemies of the colonies, by exaggerating their power,
opulence, and popularity, sufficiently proved the necessity of treating them
with tenderness, as if their calculations were allowed to be half founded, it
must be impossible to retain them long in subjection by any other means.

"In this situation were affairs, (17th Dec.) when the parliament met in the
latter end of the year 1765. Particular notice was taken from the throne of the
importance of the matters which had occurred in North America, and which were
given as a reason for assembling the two houses sooner than was intended, that
they might have an opportunity to issue the necessary writs on the many
vacancies that had happened since the last session, and proceed, immediately
after the recess, to the consideration of the weighty matters that should then
be laid before them, for which purpose the fullest accounts of the American
affairs should be prepared for their inspection. Most of the friends to
administration had vacated their seats in consequence of the late changes, so
that by death and promotions, there were forty-one seats now vacant. Some
thought it would be ungenerous to make any strictures upon the conduct of the
ministers, till they should be in a situation to vindicate or explain it, in
their proper persons as members of the house: it appears, however, that others
were of a contrary opinion. An address having been resolved in answer to the
king's speech, a motion was made by the opposition, that his majesty might be
addressed to give orders, that copies of all lettters, papers, orders or
instructions, sent from the Secretary of State's office, or the other principal
departments, to the governors and officers of the crown in North America,
together with copies of all answers thereto, and of all other papers relative
to the late disturbance there, to the execution of the stamp duty, to the
enforcing of the law, and to the quelling of riotous and tumultuous disorders,
should be laid before the house. This motion seemed the more extraordinary, as
it had been declared from the throne, that the fullest accounts of these
affairs should be laid before parliament.

"The house probably thought the proposition not very decent with regard to the
crown, nor candid with regard to the ministry, in their situation at that time,
so that on a sharp debate, the previous question being put, it was carried in
the negative by a majority of 70 to 35. The house having then issued the
necessary writs, adjourned for the holidays."

Mr. Burke was thus brought into parliament, at a time that a single glance,
even at the map of our territories, was almost sufficient to dismay a young
senator -- our extensive colonies in America, our possessions in the east --
our navy triumphant in every quarter of the globe, and the joyful sound of
victory in our ears, and all under the auspices of a youthful monarch, the dawn
of whose administration promised a refulgent day. But these appear to have been
so many objects that tended rather to excite than to dismay our young senator
his mind was well stored with reading, his imagination glowing, his heart, no
do doubt, filled with gratitude to those that had raised him to that exalted
situation, and every pulse beating high with emulation to distinguish himself
by his tongue, as he had already done so by his pen. The first question of deep
consideration that called forth his eloquence, was "on the impolicy of taxing
the colonies." The very first speech he made on this subject, was so much
admired, that the late Lord Chatham, who immediately followed him in the
debate, said, "he should not go any further into the detail of the business, as
that young member (alluding to Mr. Burke) had forcibly and eloquently
anticipated every thing he had to offer on the subject." This compliment was
felt by the house, and insured Mr. Burke a very patient hearing as often as he
rose to deliver his opinion. The next question that involved the consideration
of parliament, was a bill for the "total repeal of the stamp act, brought on in
the spring of 1766." This momentous question furnished Mr. Burke with a full
opportunity of bringing all his oratorial powers into the field; it must be
confessed that he conducted them with all the energy of a youthful commander,
and all the prudence of an experienced General, till victory, after a dubious
contest, at length perched on the banners of administration. The universal joy
which pervaded the nation on this occasion, cannot be better expressed than in
his own words. "I remember, Sir, (addressing himself to the speaker) with a
melancholy pleasure, the situation of the Honorable Gentleman (the late Field
Marshal Conway) who made the motion for the repeal of the stamp act. In that
crisis, when the whole trading interest of this empire, crammed into your
lobbies with a trembling and anxious expectation, waited almost to a winter's
return of light, their fate from your resolutions. When at length you had
determined in their favor, and your doors thrown open, showed them the figure
of their deliverer in well earnest triumph of his important victory, from the
whole of that grave multitude there arose an involuntary burst of gratitude and
transport. They jumped upon him like children on a long absent father; they
clung about him as captives about their redeemer; all England, all America,
joined in his applause; nor did he seem insensible to the best of all earthly
rewards, the love and admiration of his fellow-citizens; hope elevated, and joy
brightened his crest; I stood near him, and his face, to use the expression of
the scripture of the first Martyr, 'his face was as if it had been the face of
an angel.' I do not know how others feel; but if I had stood in that situation,
I never would have exchanged it for all that kings in their profusion could
bestow." -- Vide Mr. Burke's speech, 19th April, 1794, 4 to Ed. p. 36.

Hitherto matters had gone on in the most successful manner with the ministry;
they had weathered a severe, dangerous, and stormy winter; they had gained
every point they attempted in parliament; and had secured the confidence and
good will of the public in a very high degree. They had besides acquired some
credit in their foreign transactions; they had concluded an advantageous
commercial treaty with the Empress of Russia; they settled the long contested
affair of the Canada bills, to the satisfaction of the owners of them; and made
some progress in reviving the long neglected affair of the Manilla ransom.

From the time that the Right Hon. Henry Belson Leg, was discharged from the
office of Chancellor of the Exchequer, in May 1761, and Lord Temple and Mr.
Pit resigned the 18th of September that year, no less than 523 changes of
places, outs and inns, happened, by the fluctuating of ministerial influence, a
circumstance hardly to be parallelled in any annals.

Those who had not considered the fluctuating state of administration for some
years back, might have been apt to imagine, that in consequence of so fair a
beginning, they were securely fixed in their present situation.

It was then, to the great surprise of the nation, that, notwithstanding these
appearances, a sudden and unexpected change took place in the ministry. For on
the 30th of July, the Duke of Grafton was appointed to the head of the
treasury, in the room of the Marquis of Rockingham; the Earl of Shelburne,
Secretary of State, in the room of the Duke of Richmond; Lord Camden, High
Chancellor, in the room of the Earl of Northington; Right Hon. Charles
Townshend, Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the room of the Right Hon. William
Dowdeswell; and the Right Hon. William Pit, (created some days before Viscount
Pynsent and Earl of Chatham) Lord Privy Seal. Many other changes took place
both at home and subsequently in all the different departments of state.

The patriotic opinion which has been conceived of the late ministry, was much
increased by the disinterestedness they had shown upon quitting their places;
as they retired without a place, pensions, or reversion secured to themselves
or their friends. The sense which the public held of their services, was also
testified by the numerous addresses which were presented to the Marquis of
Rockingham upon that occasion. On the other hand, many of those who were most
attached to the Earl of Chatham regretted, that instead of weakening and
dividing an interest, which the public wished to be supported, and contributing
to remove a ministry, in which they had placed a confidence; he had most
rather, by coinciding and acting along with them, contributed to give them that
permanency, which was so much desired and wanted. There were other reasons
which contributed greatly to lessen the popularity of which the noble Lord had
before possessed so boundless a share; among those, his quitting the House of
Commons and accepting peerage, was not the least; and his acting alone with,
and bringing into place and power, persons who had the misfortune to be
supposed of a party, which had been long held very obnoxious, contributed its
full share Annual Register for 1766.
,

The following is Mr. Burke's own account of his introduction into public life,
as well as the share which administration took in the repeal of the stamp act.

Sir, I will answer him (Mr. Cornwall) as clearly as I am able, and with great
openness; I have nothing to conceal. In the year sixty-five, being in a very
private station, far enough from any line of business, and not having the
honor of a seat in this house, it was my fortune, unknowing and unknown to the
then ministry, by the intervention of a common friend, to become connected with
a very noble person (Marquis of Rockingham) and at the head of the treasury
department. It was indeed in a situation of little rank and no consequence,
suitable to the mediocrity of my talents and pretensions. But a situation near
enough to enable me to see, as well as others, what was going on; and I did see
in that noble person such sound principles, such an enlargement of mind, such
clear and sagacious sense, and such unshaken fortitude, as have bound me, as
well as others much better than me, by an inviolable attachment to him from
that time forward. Sir, Lord Rockingham very early in that summer received a
strong representation from many weighty English merchants and manufacturers,
from governors of provinces and commanders of men of war, against almost the
whole of the American commercial regulations, and particularly with regard to
the total ruin which was threatened to the Spanish trade. I believe, Sir, the
noble Lord soon saw his way in this business. But he did not rashly determine
against acts which it migh be supposed were the result of much deliberation.
However, Sir, he scarcely began to open the ground, when the whole veteran body
of office took the alarm. A violent outcry of all (except those who knew and
felt the mischief) was raised against any alteration. On one hand, his attempt
was a direct violation of treaties and public law. -- On the other, the act of
navigation and all the corpse of trade laws were drawn up in array against it.

"The first step the noble Lord took, was to have the opinion of his excellent,
learned, and ever lamented friend, the late Mr. York, then Attorney General,
on the point of law. When he knew that formally and officially, which in
substance he had known before, he immediately dispatched orders to redress the
grievance. But I will say it for the then minister, he is of that constitution
of mind, that I know he would have issued, on the same critical occasion, the
very same orders, if the acts of trade had been, as they were not, directly
against him; and would have cheerfully submitted to the equity of parliament
for his indemnity.

"On the conclusion of this business of the Spanish trade, the news of the
troubles, on account of the stamp act, arrived in England. It was not until the
end of October that these accounts were received. No sooner had the sound of
that mighty tempest reached us in England, than the whole of the then
opposition, instead of feeling humbled by the unhappy issue of their measures,
seemed to be infinitely elated, and cried out, that the ministry, from envy to
the glory of their predecessors, were prepared to repeal the stamp act. Near
nine years after, the honorable gentleman takes quite opposite ground, and now
(...) me to put my hand to my heart, and say, whether the ministry had resolved
on the repeal till a considerable time after the meeting of parliament. Though
I do not very well know what the honorable gentleman wishes to infer from the
admission, or from the denial of this fact, on which he so earnestly adjures
me; I do put my hand on my heart, and assure him, that they did not come to a
resolution directly to repeal. They weighed this matter as its difficulty and
importance required. They considered maturely among themselves. They consulted
with all who could give advice or information. It was not determined until a
little before the meeting of parliament; but it was determined, and the main
lines of their own plan marked out, before that meeting. Two questions arose (I
hope I am not going into a narrative troublesome to the House)

[A cry of, go on, go on.]

"The first of the two considerations was, whether the repeal should be total,
or whether only partial; taking out every thing burdensome and productive, and
reserving only an empty acknowledgment, such as a stamp on cards or dice. The
other question was, on what principle the act should be repealed? On this head
also two principles were started. One, that the legislative rights of this
country, with regard to America, were not entire, but had certain restrictions
and limitations. The other principle was, that taxes of this kind were contrary
to the fundamental principles of commerce on which the colonies were founded;
and contrary to every idea of political equity, by which equity we are bound,
as much as possible to extend the spirit and benefit of the British
constitution to every part of the British dominions. The option, both of the
measure, and of the principle of repeal, was made before the session; and I
wonder how any one can read the king's speech at the opening of that session,
without seeing in that speech both the repeal and the declaratory act very
sufficiently crayoned out. Those who cannot see this can see nothing.

Surely the honorable gentleman will not think that a great deal less time
than was then employed, ought to have been spent in deliberation; when he
considers that the news of the troubles did not arrive till toward the end of
October. The parliament sat to fill the vacancies on the 14th day of December,
and on business the 14th of the following January." -- Speech on American
Taxation.

Mr. Burke then proceeded to state the principle on which administration acted
in the repeal of this act.

"A partial repeal," says he, "or as the bon ton of the court then was, a
modification, would have satisfied a timid, unsystematic, procrastinating
ministry, as such a measure has since done such a ministry. A modification is
the constant resource of weak, undeciding minds. To repeal by a denial of our
right to tax in the preamble (and this too did not want advisers), would have
cut, in the heroic style, the Gordian knot with a sword. Either measure would
have cost no more than a day's debate. But when the total repeal was adopted,
and adopted on principles of policy, of equity, and of commerce, this plan made
it necessary to enter into many and difficult measures. It becomes necessary to
open a very large field of evidence commensurate to these extensive views. ***
I think the enquiry lasted in the committee for six weeks; and at its
conclusion this house, by an independent, noble, spirited, and unexpected
majority, -- by a majority that will redeem all the acts ever done by
majorities in parliament, -- in the teeth of all the old mercenary Swiss of
state, -- in despite of all the speculators and augurs of political events, --
in defiance of the whole embattled legion of veteran pensioners and practiced
instruments of a court, gave a total repeal to the stamp act, and (if it had
been so permitted) a lasting peace to this whole empire."

Mr. Burke then adds, "if the conduct of ministry in prop^g the repeal, had
arisen from timidity with regard to themselves, it would have been greatly to
be condemned. Interested timidity disgraces as much in this cabinet, as
personal timidity does in the field. But timidity, with regard to the well
being of our country, is heroic virtue. The noble Lord (Marquis of Rockingham)
who then conducted affairs, and his worthy colleagues, whilst trembling at the
prospects of such distresses as you have since brought upon yourselves, were
not afraid steadily to look in the face that glaring and dazzling influence, at
which the eyes of eagles have blanched. He looked in the face one of the
ablest, and let me say, not the most scrupulous oppositions that perhaps ever
was in this house, and withstood it, unaided by even one of the usual supports
of administration."

Short a time as Mr. Burke was in office, he took care to render himself master
of something more than what Mr. Canning calls the mechanical part of it, and
accordingly we find him in opposition unfold the intrigues of the new
administration with uncommon art and dexterity -- nor was he sparing of
ridicule, which he always ^ot with unerring hand; -- in short it may be said
that he brightened from collision, and gathered strength even from defeat.
Those that wrestle with us, as he says himself, strengthen us, -- nor did he
confine his attacks to the senate, for he and his brother Richard, assisted by
his relative William Burke, published several papers in defense of the
Rockingham party, in the Gazetteer, under various signatures, from the year
1766 to 1768. Some of those papers were written in answer to Mr. Scott, of
Cambridge, who appeared at the time under the signature of Antesejanus. As Mr.
Burke was naturally of an active disposition of mind, his moments were
constantly employed, either in consulting the best writers, conversing with the
most intelligent on the most useful subjects, occasionally pruning his trees,
or directing his rivulets. His own account of his studies will be preferred to
mine.

"When," said he, "I first devoted myself to the public service, I considered
how I should render myself fit for it; and this I did by endeavoring to
discover what it was, that gave this country the rank it holds in the world. I
found that our prosperity and dignity arose principally, if not solely, from
two sources -- our constitution and commerce. Both these I have spared no study
to understand, and no endeavor to support." -- Speech to the Electors of
Bristol.

In 1766, Mr. Burke paid a visit to Ireland, where he found a number of
persons, who had discovered that they were related to him, since he became a
British Senator. He did not, however, forget his old friends in the long list
of his new relations -- he visited all, received all with affability and good
nature, retraced with rapture the scenes of his boyish days -- and returned to
his duty in the latter end of March 1768; in the same year he was returned at
the general election for the borough of Malton in Yorkshire, through the
interest of the Marquis, his patron.

The session of 1768 was opened with a clouded prospect. The high price of
provisions was very severely felt by those who earned them with the sweat of
their brow; the restraining act relative to the East India company; the Nullum
Tempus Bill, afforded ample room for discussion. Mr. Burke took a very active
part in all those questions, in which he was very ably supported by Mr.
Dowdeswell, Mr. Dunning, (late Lord Ashburton) and Colonel Bar. Such union of
talents was equal to the discussion of any subject that could possibly be
advanced. Mr. Burke was always found on his post, the first on the breach, and
the last on the mine. The brilliancy of his talents was so universally felt and
acknowledged, that he was ranked as the leader of the Rockingham party.

Sometimes his zeal, and the natural warmth of his temper, would urge him to
press a point beyond its due bounds, which afforded his opponents a temporary
triumph; -- temporary indeed! for the ease and ingenuity with which he used to
recover his previous position, evinced the resources of his mind, and the
subtilty of his imagination, which induced the great Lord Chatham to say on one
of these occasions, that Burke could only be wounded by Burke.

Mr. Burke, it is true, enlisted under the banners of party, but as that party
may be called the guardian of the constitution, he was left at full liberty to
suggest such measures as would forward or secure the most patriotic objects; in
short he was left to the full display of his own powers and opinions, and
rather led than followed in almost every debate.

The Duke of Grafton was daily losing ground; an administration, "so chequered
and speckled, a piece of joinery so crossly indented, and so whimsically
dovetailed," could not support itself against the eloquence of Mr. Burke, and
the pen of Junius. Accordingly, on the 28th of January, 1770, his Grace
resigned his situation, as first Lord of the Treasury, and was succeeded by the
Right Hon. Frederick Lord North. Mr. Burke describes the situation of public
affairs at this period in the following words: --

"Nobody, I believe, will consider it merely as the language of spleen or
disappointment, if I say, that there is something particularly alarming in the
present conjuncture. There is hardly a man in or out of power who holds any
other language. That government is at once dreaded and contemned; that the laws
are despoiled of all their respect and salutary terrors; that their inaction is
a subject of ridicule, and their exertion of abhorrence; that rank, and office,
and title, and all the solemn plausibilities of the world, have lost their
reverence and effect; that our foreign politics are as much deranged as our
domestic economy; that our dependencies are slackened in their affection, and
loosened from their obedience; that we know neither how to yield nor how to
enforce; that hardly any thing above or below, abroad or at home, is sound and
entire; but that disconnexion and confusion, in office, in parties, in
families, in parliament, in the nation, prevail beyond the disorders of any
former time: -- these are facts universally admitted and lamented."

The Earl of Chatham saw things in the same alarming point of view. "At my time
of life," says that venerable statesman See Earl of Chatham's speech on the
address moved on the 9th of January, 1770, by the Duke of Ancaster.
, "loaded as I am with infirmities, I might, perhaps, have stood excused, if I
had continued in retirement, and never taken a part again in public affairs.
But the alarming state of the nation forced me to come forward, once more, and
to execute that duty which I owe to God, to my sovereign, and to my country,
and I am determined to perform it at the risk of my life;" and in these three
points of view, it must be confessed, that he performed his vow as a man, an
hereditary counselor of the crown, and a patriot, nobly falling with a falling
state; but though he raised his voice to Heaven, and poured the balm of
conciliation from his lips, that warning voice was not attended to, and his
venerable figure, and the fire of his imagination, were the only things that
seem to have made an impression on those that heard him. His Lordship's
sentiments, relative to America, were well known previous to that day.
Speaking, however, of that continent in the course of his speech, "He lamented
the unhappy measure which had divided the colonies from the mother country, and
which, he feared, had drawn them into excesses which he could not justify. He
owned his natural partiality to America, and was inclined to make allowance
even for those excesses; that they ought to be treated with tenderness; for in
his sense they were ebullitions of liberty, which broke out upon the skin, and
were a sign, if not of perfect health, at least, of a vigorous constitution,
and must not be driven in too suddenly, least they should strike to the heart.
He professed himself entirely ignorant of the present state of America,
therefore should be cautious of giving any opinion of the measures fit to be
pursued with respect to that country. That it was a maxim he had observed
through life, when he had lost way, to stop short, lest by proceeding without
knowledge, and advancing (as he feared a noble Duke had done) from one false
step to another, he should wind himself into an inextricable labyrinth, and
never be able to recover the right road again. That as the House had yet no
materials before them, by which they might judge of the proceedings of the
colonies, he strongly objected to their passing that heavy censure upon them,
which was conveyed in the word unwarrantable, contained in the proposed
address; that it was passing a sentence without hearing the cause, or being
acquainted with facts; might expose the proceedings of the House to be received
abroad with indifference or disrespect; that if unwarrantable meant any thing,
it must mean illegal, and how could their Lordships decide that proceedings,
which had not been stated to them in any shape, were contrary to law; that what
he had heard of the combinations in America, and of their success in supplying
themselves with goods of their own manufacture, had, indeed, alarmed him much
for the commercial interests of the mother country; but he could not conceive
in what sense they could be called illegal, much less how a declaration of that
House could remove the evil; that they were dangerous, indeed, and he greatly
wished to have that word substituted for unwarrantable; that the discontent of
two millions of people deserved consideration, and the foundation of it ought
to be removed; that this was the true way of putting a stop to combinations and
manufactures in that country; but that he reserved himself to give his opinion
more particularly upon this subject, when authentic information of the state of
America should be laid before the House.

"That we should be cautious how we invaded the liberties of any part of our
fellow subjects, however remote in situation, or unable to make resistance;
that liberty was a plant that deserved to be cherished; that he loved the tree,
and wished well to every branch of it; that like the vine in scripture, it had
spread from East to West, had embraced whole nations with its branches, and
sheltered them under its leaves; that the Americans had purchased their liberty
at a dear rate, since they had quitted their native country, and gone in search
of freedom to a desert."

In 1772 and 1773, the East India affairs were submitted to the attention and
consideration of parliament; two committees were appointed to examine and
report on this subject. The first was an open committee, and the second a
secret one. The former was very slow in their proceedings, and the latter very
hasty. This contrast furnished Mr. Burke with abundant pleasantry. In
discussing a subject of such magnitude, he gave evident proofs that it was not
beyond his reach; nay, that he was very intimate with the most intricate parts
of it, but majorities triumphed over arguments. The House having resolved
itself into a committee on a bill for leaving the Company in possession of
their territorial possessions in India for a time to be limited, Mr. Burke
addressed the Chairman thus: --

"Mr. Bacon, you are every thing, but what you should be; you are chairman of a
committee in the air -- we are a committee of imagination, of idea, of every
thing but reality; and we might as well be employed in building castles in the
air. But, Sir, I cannot help most seriously remarking, how amazingly the
opinions of men change! What has now taken place is a special instance of it.
When a proposition comes originally from this side of the House, it is heard
with disgust, and treated with contempt; such reasons, however, accompany it,
as convince even the antagonists of the idea: it passes through the political
elaboratory; the sun shines from the treasury-bench on it; it is given to the
House, and heard with applause. This, Sir, I have seen more than once; and any
member who will take the trouble of recollecting what I have advanced more than
once within these ten days, must also plainly perceive it now adopted, in a
manner which shows the conviction of that bench but clogged, damned, with
attendants which seem coined to destroy all the good that could result from the
other. Why will not the noble Lord at once declare, or give up the right of the
crown to the territorial acquisitions? Why is that fantastic right to hang
eternally over their heads, in order to destroy that very solidity which he
affects to give the Company?

"Sir, I was answered in a former committee, that I did not adhere to the
question; but, Sir, it was a reply of ignorance alone. If the proposers of a
motion will pass the plain road that leads to common sense, in order to wander
into a rotten bog, the man who calls them back again, and tells them they will
soon be up to the chin in that ground, is he the man who runs from the
question? The noble Lord, in order to come immediately to his motion, passes
over the previous question of right, the consequence of which is, all his
deductions are actions of absurdity -- all his propositions strings of
contradictions. Let him declare that right, on the strength of which he seizes
with the hand of power, and the House will support him. If he gives it up, it
will support him. Let him offer a purge, you will swallow it -- a vomit, it
will go down -- an alterative or astringent -- an acid or an alkali -- all one
-- down it goes. While the noble Lord finds we have such a swallow, let him
give the pill at once without gilding -- let him fairly declare the degree of
this accursed right, which hangs thus in terrorem on your trade to the east."

Mr. Burke had now shone with increasing luster as the steady advocate of civil
liberty, and, in order to complete his character as a patriot and senator, he
availed himself of the first opportunity to evince his attachment to the cause
of religious liberty.

On the eighteenth of February, 1773, Sir Harry Houghton moved for leave to
bring in a bill for the relief of Protestant Dissenters, in sundry matters
relating to subscription. It was vehemently opposed by Sir William Baggot on
two grounds, first, because the penal laws against such of the Dissenters as
did not subscribe were never put in force; and, secondly, because he believed
that the attempt to set aside the thirty-nine articles was agitated with a
design unfavourable to Christianity, Mr. Burke, in reply, spoke nearly to the
following effect:

"I propose, Sir, taking notice of what fell from the honorable gentleman's
lips, considered in a twofold view. He advanced the following positions, that
the Dissenters now enjoyed liberty by connivance, and that toleration was an
attack upon Christianity. -- The Dissenters enjoy liberty by connivance! My
good Sir, what sort of liberty is this? What, Sir, is liberty by connivance but
a temporary relaxation of slavery? Is this a sort of liberty calculated for the
meridian of England? Montesquieu places liberty in an exemption from fear. Are
persons who enjoy it by connivance only -- are they exempt from fear, and
divested of apprehension? To talk then, Sir, of a connivance, is to talk only
of a temporary suspension of tyranny. You are desirous to keep the rod hanging
over the Dissenters' heads at the very instant that you assure them they shall
never smart under its stripes. Why then at once not set their hearts at rest,
by removing the impending danger? Why not release them from the dread of these
penal statutes, the cruelty of which so shocks your generous natures, that you
think it incumbent on you to declare they never should be put in^o execution?
The question, Sir, answers itself; and to cavil at its propriety is to carp at
truth and elude conviction.

"As to what the honorable gentleman let fall concerning toleration being an
attack upon Christianity, it is an assertion so contrary to truth and history,
that it scarcely stands in need of refutation. By toleration Christianity
flourished. Whilst the eastern and western churches were tolerant, they were
illustrious; they were venerated; they were held in sacred estimation. When the
Romish Church cast aside its toleration, and had recourse to threatenings,
slaughter and persecutions; commotions ensued; ecclesiastical anarchy
prevailed; and the kingdom of darkness was erected on the ruins of
Christianity. Instead of combating the common foe, Christians combated each
other. Instead of taking arms against the grand deceivers, they strove by every
deceptious art to harrass and torment those whom they ought to have cherished
and loved as brethren. In short the want of toleration has lessened the number
of believers, and for that reason I would have all Protestants united, that we
may be the better enabled to make a common cause against infidels of every
denomination.

"The Church of England, Sir, has not a firmer friend than myself -- I wish her
illustrious -- I wish her head may reach that Heaven to which she would conduct
us -- But I would also wish her family as numerous as possible -- I would wish
a brotherly affection to prevail among her offspring -- I would have Christians
united -- I would have them join in every attempt to crush the powers of
darkness, and trample under foot the foe to God and man; like a mother, tender
of her children, I would have the Church, with wide extended arms, receive in
her bosom every believing son; not, with unnatural austerity, reproach her
offspring, and drive them to seek for ease, for pleasure, and for comfort, in
the harlot lap of infidelity."

This speech made a great impression in and out of doors, which is not to be
wondered at, if we consider the height from whence it fell; surely it was time
that Religion should cease to be a crime, and that punishment should not reach
those that were guilty of no other. Persecution, as the late Earl of Mansfield
said, may make hypocrites and martyrs, but never made a real convert; and it is
strange that some persons should imagine that the thirty-nine articles of the
Church of England should be fenced with oaths and perjuries. This would be to
plant reeds round an oak to defend it from a storm. When penal laws are
repealed in the heart, they ought not to be found on the statute books.

Sir Henry Houghton's motion was very favorably received; leave was given to
bring in the bill, which passed the Commons without a division, but was lost in
the House of Lords on the second reading, by a great majority.

An act was passed on the 25th of March, 1774, called the Boston Port Bill,
which threw the inhabitants of Massachusett's into the greatest consternation.
The town of Boston passed a resolution, expressing their sense of this
oppressive measure, and a desire that all the colonies would concur to stop all
importation from Great Britain. Most of the colonies entered into spirited
resolutions on this occasion, to unite with Massachusett's in a firm opposition
to the unconstitutional measures of the parliament. The first of June, the day
on which the Port Bill was to take place, was appointed to be kept as a day of
humiliation, fasting, and prayer, throughout the colonies, to seek the divine
direction and aid, in that critical and gloomy junction of affairs.

During the height of the consternation and confusion which the Boston Bort
Bill occasioned; at the very time when a town meeting was sitting to consider
of it, General Gage, who had been appointed to the government of
Massachusett's, arrived in the harbor. His arrival, however, did not allay the
popular ferment, or check the progress of the measure then taking to unite the
colonies, in opposition to the oppressive act of parliament.

But the port bill was not the only act that alarmed the apprehension of the
Americans. Determined to compel the province of Massachusett's to submit to
their law, parliament passed an act for the better regulating government in the
province of Massachusett's Bay. The object of this act was to alter the
government, as it stood in the charter of King William, to take the appointment
of the executive out of the hands of the people, and place it in the crown;
thus making even the judges and sheriffs dependent on the king, and removeable
only at his pleasure.

This act was soon followed by another, which ordained, that any person,
indicted for murder, or other capital offense, committed in aiding the
magistrates in executing the laws, might be sent by the governor either to
another colony, or to Great Britain, for his trial.

This was soon followed by the Quebec Bill, which extended the bounds of that
province, and granted many privileges to the Roman Catholics. The object of
this bill was, to secure the attachment of that province to the crown of
England, and prevent its joining the colonies in their resistance to the laws
of parliament.

But these measures did not intimidate the Americans. On the other hand, they
served to confirm their former apprehensions of the evil designs of government,
and to unite the colonies in their opposition.

A correspondence of opinion with respect to the unconstitutional acts of
parliament, produced a uniformity of proceedings in the colonies. The people
generally concurred in a proposition for holding a congress by deputation from
the several colonies, in order to concert measures for the preservation of
their rights. Deputies were accordingly appointed, and met at Philadelphia, on
the 26th October, 1774.

On the 19th of April, 1774, Mr. Rose Fuller, member for Rye, made the
following motion; that an act made in the seventeenth year of the reign of his
present majesty, entitled, "An act for granting certain duties in the British
colonies and plantations in America; for allowing a drawback of the duties of
customs upon the exportation from this kingdom of coffee and cocoa-nuts, of the
produce of the said colonies or plantations; for discontinuing the drawbacks
payable on china earthen ware exported to America; and for more effectually
preventing the clandestine running of goods in the said colonies and
plantations," might be read.

And the same being read accordingly; he moved, "that this house will, upon
this day se'nnight, resolve itself into a committee of the whole house, to take
into consideration the duty of 3d. per pound weight upon tea, payable in all
his majesty's dominions in America, imposed by the said act; and also the
appropriation of the said duty."

A warm and interesting debate took place on the question of American taxation,
that, perhaps, to use Mr. Burke's expression, no topic had been more familiar
to the house. Mr. Wolfran Cornwall took a wide view of it, and when it was
thought that the subject was entirely exhausted, Mr. Burke rose, and, to the
surprise of those that were in the habits of admiring his powers, poured fresh
light upon it -- not that light that misleads in proportion as it dazzles, but
the steady beam of reason and sound argument that at once vivifies, charms, and
illumines all that was dark. In speaking of the repeal of the stamp act, "I
affirm," said he, "that when departing from the maxims of that repeal, you
revived the scheme of taxation, and thereby filled the minds of the colonists
with new jealousy, and all sorts of apprehensions; then it was that they
quarrelled with the old taxes, as well as the new; then it was, and not till
then, that they questioned all the parts of your legislature; and by the
battery of such questions have shaken the solid structure of this empire to its
deepest foundations." Mr. Burke followed up this assertion with such damning
proofs arising out of the very acts, and speeches of ministers themselves,
particularly in Lord Hillsborough's Letter to the American Governors, dated May
13th, 1769, which he called the Canonical Book of Ministerial Scripture, or the
General Epistle to the Americans; well knowing that his arguments on this head
were unanswerable, he was resolved not to omit the opportunity of a personal
triumph. "Upon the principles therefore, said he, of the honorable gentleman,
(Mr. Cornwall) upon the principles of the minister himself, the minister has
nothing at all to answer. He stands condemned by himself, and by all his
associates, old and new, as a destroyer in the first trust of finance of the
revenues; and in the first rank of honor, as a betrayer of the dignity of his
country."

Mr. Burke, in the course of his speech, made the following declaration.

" I will be content to be declared infamous, if I do not, to the last hour of
my life, at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, exert every power
with which I either am, or ever shall be legally invested, in order to obtain
and maintain for the continent of America that satisfaction which I have been
authorized to promise this day, by the confidential servants of our gracious
sovereign, who to my certain knowledge rates his honor so high, that he would
rather part with his crown, than preserve it by deceit;" and it is but justice
to say, that he maintained his promise.

Having shown first on the narrow ground, which Mr. Cornwall measured, says he,
that we were like to lose nothing, by complying with the motion, except what we
had already lost, that in time of peace we flourished in commerce, and when war
required it, had sufficient aid from the colonies, as long as we pursued our
ancient policy, that the stamp act threw every thing into confusion, and that
the repeal of it restored every thing to peace and order. That the revival of
the system of taxation produced the very worst effects, and that the partial
repeal produced, not partial good, but universal evil. "Let these
considerations, said he, founded on facts, not one of which can be denied,
bring us back to our reason by the road of our experience. But alas! this was
the old beaten road which ministers did not wish to tread, it was not
sufficiently strewed with places and pensions. New paths must be struck out,
new turnpikes erected, and additional toll paid.

Mr. Burke concluded this very able and argumentative speech, with the
following passage, which many have considered as the key-stone of the arch.

"On this business of America, I confess I am serious, even to sadness. I have
had but one opinion concerning it since I sat, and before I sat in parliament.
The noble lord will, as usual, probably, attribute the part taken by me and my
friends in this business, to a desire of getting his place. Let him enjoy this
happy and original idea. If I deprived him of it, I should take away most of
his wit, and all his argument. But I had rather bear the brunt of all his wit,
and indeed blows much heavier, than stand answerable to God for embracing a
system that tends to the destruction of some of the very best and fairest of
his works. But I know the map of England, as well as the noble lord Lord North.
, or as any other person; and I know that the way I take is not the road to
preferment. My excellent and honorable friend under me on the floor Mr.
Dowdeswell.
, has trod that road with great toil for upwards of twenty years together. He
is not yet arrived at the noble lord's destination. However, the tracks of my
worthy friend are those I have ever wished to follow; because I know they lead
to honor. Long may we tread the same road together; whoever may accompany us,
or whoever may laugh at us on our journey! I honestly and solemnly declare, I
have in all seasons adhered to the system of 1766, for no other reason, than
that I think it laid deep in your truest interests -- and that, by unlimiting
the exercise, it fixes on the firmest foundations, a real, consistent,
well-grounded authority in parliament. Until you come back to that system,
there will be no peace for England."

A gentleman of talents, who had the good fortune to be present at the delivery
of this speech, has pourtrayed it thus: "In this speech he had occasion to show
the original plan of government in taxing the colonies, and of course to
exhibit the characters that were officially concerned, either in its progress
or opposition. He began with the Right Honorable George Grenville, Chancellor
of the Exchequer in 1763, and then proceeded to the characters of the late Lord
Chatham, late Right Honorable Charles Townshend, (Chancellor of the Exchequer
in 1766, and the re-producer of the taxation scheme) the Marquis of Rockingham,
and the late Field-Marshall Conway, with many others. Some of these characters,
who, when living, were in total opposition to Mr. Burke's political sentiments
on this subject; but now being dead, and their memories moreover being warmly
protected by many high personages as relatives and friends, presented a subject
very difficult and delicate to expand upon. Lord Chatham too was still living,
and though rather in the wane of his great political powers, yet, surrounded by
his former greatness, his accumulated wisdom, and great experience, he stood as
the great Mentor of opposition, to whom all the parts occasionally looked up
for advice and protection. When we add to these, that the Marquis of Rockingham
and Field-Marshall Conway were his particular friends -- the difficulties of
reproving and praising became so multiplied, that the undertaking seemed to be
one of those traps which vanity sometimes lays for great men, to show them the
extent of their own presumption.

"But Mr. Burke's mind was fully equal to the task; all the leading and
pleasing features of those great men who were his political opponents, he
praised with a manly openness that would have done honor to the warmest and
most exalted friendship; even what he thought of their defects he softened in
such a manner, by either attributing them to original opinions, or early
habits, or the cooperation of party, that those most intimately attached to
their memories could not be displeased with their general portraits."

The late Lord John Cavendish had retired with other members to the gallery
during the delivery of this speech, and at Mr. Burke's description of General
Conway's feelings -- Good God exclaimed his Lordship, "What a man is this! --
How could he acquire such transcendent powers?"

At the dissolution of the parliament on the last day of September, 1774, Mr.
Burke made his election for Malton, but scarce was he returned, when a
deputation from some of the most respectable Merchants and Dissenters in
Bristol invited him to stand for that city. He could not resist so flattering
an invitation, so that, to use George Selwyn's expression, "he resigned his
little country wench for a fine city dame, attired in the richest silks, and
showered with diamonds;" but it should not be forgotten that these ornaments
were purchased at the expense of human blood. The candidates who started on
this occasion were Lord Clare, one of the late Representatives, who declined on
the second day of the poll; Mr. Brickdale, and Mr. Cruger, an American
merchant. Mr. Burke appeared on the Hustings on the afternoon of the sixth
day's poll. His address to the electors, was manly, candid, and captivating --
and such as might be expected from one, whom neither "avarice or ambition had
justled out of the straight line of duty." The exertions of his friends were
crowned with success. It was certainly a very pleasing sight, to behold a man
of Mr. Burke's sensibility standing amidst the unbought plaudits of the
populace, dumb with gratitude, till his tears got the start of his words -- and
as a gentleman, who was present, observed it was hard to say which of the two
was the more eloquent. The opening of his address was worthy of the man void of
all affectation, it arose naturally from the circumstances of the moment, and
conveyed a fine compliment to the feelings of his colleague, Mr. Cruger -- It
ran thus:

GENTLEMEN,
I cannot avoid sympathizing strongly with the feelings of the gentleman who
has received the same honor that you have conferred on me. If he, who was bred
and passed his whole life amongst you; if he, who, through the easy gradations
of acquaintance, friendship, and esteem, has obtained the honor, which seems
of itself, naturally and almost insensibly, to meet with those, who, by the
even tenor of pleasing manners and social virtues, slide into the love and
confidence of their fellow-citizens; -- if he cannot speak but with great
emotion on this subject, surrounded as he is on all sides with his old friends;
you will have the goodness to excuse me, if my real, unaffected embarrassment
prevents me from expressing my gratitude to you as I ought.

I was brought hither under the disadvantage of being unknown, even by sight,
to any of you. No previous canvass was made for me. I was put in nomination
after the poll was opened. I did not appear until it was far advanced. If,
under all these accumulated disadvantages, your good opinion has carried me to
this happy point of success, you will pardon me, if I can only say to you
collectively, as I said to you individually, simply and plainly, I thank you --
I am obliged to you -- I am not insensible of your kindness.

Mr. Burke declared, that from the beginning to the end of the election, that
he never asked a question of a voter on the other side, or supported a doubtful
one on his own; it is also well known that he never solicited a vote in person
-- and yet it does not appear that he was deficient in election cant, from the
following humourous specimen of it which he gave in the same speech.

But how should I appear to the voters themselves? If I had gone round to the
citizens entitled to freedom, and squeezed them by the hand -- "Sir, I humbly
beg your vote -- I shall be eternally thankful -- may I hope for the honor of
your support? -- Well! -- come -- we shall see you at the council-house." -- If
I were then to deliver them to my managers, pack them into tallies, vote them
off in court, and when I heard from the bar -- "Such a one only! and such a one
for ever! -- he is my man!" -- "Thank you, good Sir -- Hah! my worthy friend!
thank you kindly -- that is an honest fellow -- how is your good family?" --
Whilst these words were hardly out of my mouth, if I should have wheeled round
at once, and told them -- "Get you gone, you pack of worthless fellows! you
have no votes -- you are usurpers! you are intruders on the rights of real
freemen! I will have nothing to do with you! you ought never to have been
produced at this election, and the sheriff's ought not to have admitted you to
poll."

Mr. Burke was extremely happy in the locality of his similes during the
election -- witness the following:

"As for the trifling petulance, which the rage of party stirs up in little
minds, though it should show itself even in this court, it has not made the
slightest impression on me. The highest flight of such clamorous birds is
winged in an inferior region of the air. We hear them, and we look upon them,
just as you, gentlemen, when you enjoy the serene air on your lofty rocks, look
down upon the gulls, that skim the mud of your river, when it is exhausted of
its tide."

In this speech Mr. Burke has drawn a picture of what he conceived to be the
duty of a representative to his constituents. The passage is too fine to be
omitted or abridged, especially as it is a point on which the ablest writers
are divided.

"I am sorry I cannot conclude, without saying a word on a topic touched upon
by my worthy colleague. I wish that topic had been passed by, at a time when I
have so little leisure to discuss it. But since he has thought proper to throw
it out, I owe you a clear explanation of my poor sentiments on that subject.

He tells you, that "the topic of instructions has occasioned much altercation
and uneasiness in this city;" and he expresses himself (if I understand him
rightly) in favor of the coercive authority of such instructions.

"Certainly, gentlemen, it ought to be the happiness and glory of a
representative, to live in the strictest union, the closest correspondence, and
the most unreserved communication with his constituents. Their wishes ought to
have great weight with him; their opinion high respect; their business
unremitted attention. It is his duty to sacrifice his repose, his pleasures,
his satisfactions, to theirs; and, above all, ever, and in all cases, to prefer
their interest to his own. But, his unbiassed opinion, his mature judgment, his
enlightened conscience, he ought not to sacrifice to you, to any man, or to any
set of men living. These he does not derive from your pleasure; no, nor from
the law and the constitution. They are a trust from Providence, for the abuse
of which he is deeply answerable. Your representative owes you, not his
industry only, but his judgment; and he betrays, instead of serving you, if he
sacrifices it to your opinion.

"My worthy colleague says, his will ought to be subservient to yours. If that
be all, the thing is innocent. If government were a matter of will upon any
side, yours, without question, ought to be superior. But government and
legislation are matters of reason and judgment, and not of inclination; and,
what sort of reason is that, in which the determination precedes the
discussion; in which one set of men deliberate, and another decide; and where
those who form the conclusion are perhaps three hundred miles distant from
those who hear the arguments?

To deliver an opinion, is the right of all men; that of constituents is a
weighty and respectable opinion, which a representative ought always to rejoice
to hear, and which he ought always most seriously to consider. But
authoritative instructions; mandates issued, which the member is bound blindly
and implicitly to obey, to vote, and to argue for, though contrary to the
clearest conviction of his judgment and conscience; these are things utterly
unknown to the laws of this land, and which arise from a fundamental mistake of
the whole order and tenor of our constitution.

Parliament is not a congress of ambassadors from different and hostile
interests; which interests each must maintain, as an agent and advocate,
against other agents and advocates; but Parliament is a deliberative assembly
of one nation, with one interest, that of the whole; where, not local purposes,
not local prejudices ought to guide, but the general good, resulting from the
general reason of the whole. You choose a member indeed; but when you have
chosen him, he is not a member of Bristol, but he is a member of Parliament. If
the local constituent should have an interest, or should form an hasty opinion,
evidently opposite to the real good of the rest of the community, the member
for that place ought to be as far, as any other, from any endeavor to get it
effect. I beg pardon for saying so much on this subject. I have been
unwillingly drawn into it; but I shall ever use a respectful frankness of
communication with you. Your faithful friend, your devoted servant, I shall be
to the end of my life: A flatterer you do not wish for. On this point of
instructions, however, I think it scarcely possible we ever can have any sort
of difference. Perhaps I may give you too much, rather than too little
trouble."

Mr. Burke having found by experience that a "strenuous resistance to every
appearance of lawless power; a spirit of independence carried to some degree of
enthusiasm; an inquisitive character to discover, and a bold one to display,
every corruption and every error of government," had recommended him to a seat
for Bristol, he was determined to persevere in the same steady course.

He had formed a most intimate friendship with Sir George Saville, that good
man, who was very justly looked up to as the landmark of the constitution,
went to Ireland about this time, for the humane purpose of meliorating the
condition of his numerous tenantry in that country. Having rode out one frosty
morning without any attendant, he espied a man at a little distance, with whom
he entered into conversation. Who does that mill belong to? I rent it, Sir. And
what is the meaning that your mill is not better thatched, and yourself better
clad? -- I cannot help it, Sir, I have a large family, and I assure you we do
not eat the bread of idleness, but I pay a high rent. Who is your landlord? An
Englishman, Sir, and one of the best men, Sir George Saville. Why, how much do
you pay an acre? Fourteen shillings. What did you pay? Ten. Then take your
bill, and write down ten, for I am your landlord. The poor man could only look
up to Heaven, as much as to say, you are dropped from thence. Sir George made
similar deductions over all his estate, but he that was "eyes to the blind, and
feet to the lame," was called too soon to receive the reward of his virtue.

The public statue of the late Sir George Saville is erected in York Cathedral.
It is fixed on an elegant marble pedestal, six feet high, on the frize of which
are introduced the emblems of Wisdom, Fortitude, and Eternity. Sir George is
represented leaning on a pillar, holding in his right hand a scroll, on which
is written, "The Petition of the Freeholders of the County of York." The back
ground is of white marble, and the whole height of the monument is sixteen
feet, and is executed in so masterly a manner as to do great credit to the
statuary. On the front of the pedestal is the following inscription, said to be
written by Mr. Burke: --

To the Memory of Will continue to be beneficial to mankind, As splendor gives
the brightest mark,
To poisoned arrows in the dark.


It Is not to be wondered at, if Mr. Burke's character as an orator and a
statesman, was attacked by all the hireling scribblers of administration, but
as he did not wish to deprive them of a dinner, he never condescended to take
any notice of their scurrility, it is a tax that every great character is doomed
to pay, as Addison says, and he was determined to contribute his share to it.
His judgment was now matured, and his fancy no longer soared on trembling
pinions, but gazed steadfastly at the sun, or built its aerie on the brow of the
most arduous precipice. The American war was the theme of every tongue and
every pen. Mr. Burke, as we have already observed, took a decided part in it.
He resolved to make one more effort to extinguish the flames of civil discord,
not even discouraged by the rejection of a bill brought into the upper House by
the Earl of Chatham, for settling the troubles in America. On the 22d of March,
1775, he brought forward his celebrated conciliatory propositions. His speech
on that occasion was conciliation indeed, in the true spirit of conciliation,
and may be truly termed his golden oration; though there is scarce a quotation
in the whole, it may be said to contain the spirit of all that ancient and
modern writers have said on the fittest means of allaying all those turbulent
passions that civil war never fails to excite. As no man was better qualified
to resort to the "witness of time, the light of truth, the life of memory, and
the messenger of antiquity," his propositions were founded on the best rules of
reason, and though they were neither dictated by the passions, nor addressed to
the passions, yet there is a certain atherial warmth that pervades all the
arguments which he adduced in support of them, and, in many instances, they
abound in all the bold relief of expression. Throughout the whole he seems to
have had the advice of a celebrated statesman in view, " Omnia sunt in
republica suavissime tractanda, art quae leniat, non exasperet: sanet, non
ulceret: moveat, no perturbeat, non perturbeat, animos civium." He put the
dignity of Great Britain in one scale, and her concession in the other, in
order to prove that conciliation would add luster to both.

In the opening of this speech Mr. Burke describes the progress of the
discontents of the Americans, and his own conduct, in that approaching storm:
--

"Surely" says he, "it is an awful subject; or there is none so on this side of
the grave. When I first had the honor of a seat in this House, the affairs of
that continent pressed themselves upon us, as the most important and most
delicate object of parliamentary attention. My little share in this great
deliberation oppressed me. I found myself a partaker in a very high trust; and
having no sort of reason to rely on the strength of my natural abilities for
the proper execution of that trust, I was obliged to take more than common
pains, to instruct myself in every thing which relates to our colonies. I was
not less under the necessity of forming some fixed ideas, concerning the
general policy of the British empire. Something of this sort seemed to be
indispensible; in order, amidst so great a fluctuation of passions and
opinions, to concentre my thoughts; to ballast my conduct; to preserve me from
being blown about by every wind of fashionable doctrine. I really did not think
it safe, or manly, to have fresh principles to seek upon every fresh mail which
should arrive from America.

"At that period, I had the fortune to find myself in perfect concurrence with
a large majority in this House. Bowing under that high authority, and
penetrated with the sharpness and strength of that early impression, I have
continued ever since, without the least deviation, in my original sentiments.
Whether this be owing to an obstinate perseverance in error, or a religious
adherence to what appears to me truth and reason, it is in your equity to
judge.

"Sir, Parliament having an enlarged view of objects, made, during this
interval, more frequent changes in their sentiments and their conduct, than
could be justified in a particular person upon the contracted scale of private
information. But though I do not hazard any thing approaching to a censure on
the motives of former Parliaments to all those alterations, one fact is
undoubted; that under them the state of America has been kept in continual
agitation. Every thing administered as a remedy to the public complaint, if it
did not produce, was at least followed by an heightening of the distemper;
until, by a variety of experiments, that important country has been brought
into her present situation; -- a situation which I will not miscall, which I
dare not name; which I scarcely know how to comprehend in the terms of any
description."

The Americans had been traduced in the ministerial prints as the spawn of
stews and gaols, as the mere purgamenta urbium New England was originally
settled by a religious sect, denominated puritans, who fled from the severe
restraints imposed upon dissenters in the reign of King James I. Placed beyond
the fear of control, they formed a system of civil ecclesiastical government,
exactly suited to their rigid notions. All their institutions were marks of an
enthusiastic zeal of religion. Removed from the tyranny of one church, they
vibrated to the other extreme, with an order to build up Christ's kingdom, in
what they quaintly call, a howling wilderness; they established a tyranny of
the severest kind over the consciences and rights of their own society, and by
arbitrary decrees banished those who differed from them upon the most
metaphysical points. It was a law of the first settlers at Boston, that none
could be free men and entitled to vote for civil rulers, who were not in full
communion with the church; and none could be admitted to full communion,
without the recommendation of a clergyman. These laws threw all the power of
the state into the hands of the clergy. It is equally astonishing and
ridiculous to the posterity of those godly people, to find the church and
state, in the infancy of the settlement of America, rent with discord upon the
simple question, whether sanctification precedes justification. Yet hundreds of
councils were held upon this or similar points, and a dissent from the common
opinion on such trifling questions, was hereby punishable with excommunication
and banishment.

But candor requires some apology to be made for them. Bigotry was not confined
to the New England settlers, it was the characteristic of the age. The first
settlers in New Jersey, Virginia and Pennsylvania, and indeed in most of the
colonies, prohibited witchcraft under penalty of death; though the laws seem
not to have been executed any where except in Massachusetts. But the same
gloomy superstition reigned in England. The statutes of Henry VIII. and James
I. making witchcraft and sorcery felony without benefit of clergy, upon which
many persons suffered death, were not repealed, till the ninth year of George
II. or about 1736. Just before the restoration in 1660, no less than thirteen
gypsies were condemned at one Suffolk assizes, and executed.

NOAH WEBSTER.
. Mr. Burke touched on this string, and with the finger of a master too. ( See
page 21.) The predominant feature of their character was a love of liberty;
they sought it in the midst of deserts; religion went before them like a pillar
of light, somewhat clouded, it is true, and the songs of Zion soothed the wild
murmurs of the Ohio.

Mr. Burke points out in what manner the education of the colonists ( See page
24 and 41) contributed to "the growth and effect of their untractable spirit,"
and that the study of the law, so prevalent in that country, rendered "men
acute, inquisitive, dextrous, prompt in attack, ready in defense, and full of
resources." He then adverts to the religion of the country ( See page 23) after
which he describes the chief branches of their religion, which ought to be
remembered as a piece of history, independent of its eloquence. "The Roman
Catholic religion," says he, "is, at least, coeval with most of the governments
where it prevails; that it has generally gone hand in hand with them, and
received great favor and every kind of support from authority. The Church of
England was formed from her cradle under the nursing care of regular
government. But the dissenting interests have sprung up in direct opposition to
all the ordinary powers of the world, and could justify that opposition only on
a strong claim to natural liberty. Their very existence depended on the
powerful and unremitted assertion of that claim. All Protestantism, even the
most cold and passive, is a sort of dissent. But the religion most prevalent in
our northern colonies, is a refinement on the principle of resistance, it is
the diffidence of dissent, and the Protestantism of Protestantism.

"The religion, under a variety of denominations, agreeing in nothing but in
the communion of the spirit of liberty, is predominant in most of the northern
provinces, where the Church of England, notwithstanding its legal rights, is,
in reality, no more than a sort of private sect, not composing, most probably,
the tenth of the people. The colonists left England when this spirit was high,
and in the emigrants was the highest of all." He then shows that the spirit of
liberty was still more high and haughty in the southern than in the northern
states, and the reasons he assigns, in support of this assertion, are not less
ingenious than true. "It is," says he, "that in Virginia and the Carolinas,
they have a vast multitude of slaves. Where this is the case in any part of the
world, those who are free, are by far the most proud and jealous of their
freedom. Freedom is to them not only an enjoyment, but a kind of rank and
privilege. Not seeing there, that freedom, as in countries where it is a common
blessing, and as broad and general as the air, may be united with much abject
toil, with great misery, with all the exterior of servitude, liberty looks,
amongst them, like something that is more noble and liberal. I do not mean,
Sir, to commend the superior morality of this sentiment, which has, at least,
as much pride as virtue in it; but I cannot alter the nature of man. The fact
is so; and these people of the southern colonies are much more strongly, and
with an higher and more stubborn spirit, attached to liberty than those to the
northward. Such were all the ancient commonwealths; such were our Gothic
ancestors; such in our days were the Poles; and such will be all masters of
slaves, who are not slaves themselves. In such a people the haughtiness of
domination combines with the spirit of freedom, fortifies it, and renders it
invincible."

He then remarks on the rapid population of the colonists ( See page 11) so
rapid that whilst they were disputing about the exaggeration of it, the
exaggeration ended, because they grew to it. Having stated what may be called
the biography of the Americans, he proceeds to the natural resources of that
country. They had prosecuted agriculture ( See page 19) with such a spirit
"that for some time past the old world had been fed by the new." Having traced
the plough into woods and wilds he indulged his imagination in the richest
description of their fisheries ( See page 20) flies after the line and harpoon
through all the "thrilling regions of thick ribbed ice, and seems to leave the
gigantic pursuit with reluctance on the coast of Brazil." The commerce of
America was a favorite theme ( See page 19) "For my part," said he, in another
place Speech on American Taxation.
, "I never cast an eye on their flourishing commerce, and their cultivated and
commodious life, but they seem to me rather ancient nations grown to perfection
through a long series of fortunate events, and a train of successful industry,
accumulating wealth in many centuries, than the colonies of yesterday; than a
set of miserable outcasts, a few years ago, not so much sent as thrown out, on
the bleak and barren shore of a desolate wilderness three thousand miles from
all civilized intercourse."

Having gone round and round the subject, and surveyed it minutely in every
possible aspect, he proceeded to take a view of the physical objects we had to
contend with in the subjugation of the colonies -- space and the ocean -- no
contrivance could shorten the one, pump the other dry, or remove the eternal
barriers of the creation ( See page 25, 27.) His sentiments on the idea of
enfranchising the American slaves, deserves to be remembered. --

"It is sometimes as hard to persuade slaves to be free, as it is to compel
freemen to be slaves; and in this auspicious scheme, we should have both these
pleasing tasks on our hands at once. But when we talk of enfranchisement, do we
not perceive that the American master may enfranchise too; and arm servile
hands in defense of freedom? A measure to which other people have had recourse
more than once, and not without success, in a desperate situation of their
affairs.

Slaves as these unfortunate black people are, and dull as all men are from
slavery, must they not a little suspect the offer of freedom from that very
nation which has sold them to their present masters? From that nation, one of
whose causes of quarrel with those masters, is their refusal to deal any more
in that inhuman traffic? An offer of freedom from England, would come rather
oddly, shipped to them in an African vessel, which is refused an entry into the
ports of Virginia or Carolina, with a cargo of three hundred Angola negroes. It
would be curious to see the Guinea captain attempting, at the same instant, to
publish his proclamation of liberty, and to advertise his sale of slaves."

Amidst the many shining passages in this speech, it would be unpardonable to
pass over one, that may be called the brightest of all. It is almost needless
to say that I mean the "picture of the rapid growth of our national
prosperity." The materials, it is true, were then abundant, and his friend, Sir
Joshua Reynolds, could not have hit it off in gayer colors. The artful manner
in which he prepared the mind of his audience for this grand sight is worthy of
remark; first he sets out in the plain figures of arithmetic, piling one year
of prosperity on the top of the other, as if he were speaking to a parcel of
clerks in a counting house. In an instant he flies off to an eminence, and
addresses the senate in language worthy of the British Cicero.

"Mr. Speaker," said he, "I cannot prevail on myself to hurry over this great
consideration, the exports to America; it is good for us to be here; we stand
where we have an immense view of what is, and what is past. Clouds, indeed, and
darkness, rest upon the future. Let us, however, before we descend from this
noble eminence, reflect that this growth of our national prosperity has
happened within the short period of the life of man. It has happened within
sixty-eight years. There are those alive whose memory might touch the two
extremities. For instance, my Lord Bathhurst might remember all the stages of
the progress. He was in 1704 of an age, at least to be made to comprehend such
things. He was then old enough acta parentum jam legere, et qua sit poterit
cognoscere virtus -- Suppose, Sir, that the angel of this auspicious youth,
foreseeing the many virtues, which made him one of the most amiable, as he is
one of the most fortunate men of his age, had opened to him in vision, that
when, in the fourth generation, the third prince of the House of Brunswick had
sat twelve years on the throne of that nation, which (by the happy issue of
moderate and healing councils) was to be made Great Britain, he should see his
son Lord Chancellor of England, turn back the current of hereditary dignity to
its fountain, and raise him to an higher rank of peerage, whilst he enriched
the family with a new one -- If amidst these bright and happy scenes of
domestic honor and prosperity, that angel should have drawn up the curtain,
and unfolded the rising glories of his country, and whilst he was gazing with
admiration on the then commercial grandeur of England, the genius should point
out to him a little speck, scarce visible in the mass of the national interest,
a small seminal principle, rather than a formed body, and should tell him --
"Young man, there is America -- which, at this day, serves for little more than
to amuse you with stories of savage men, and uncouth manners, yet shall, before
you taste of death, show itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now
attracts the envy of the world, rapidly advancing in a progressive increase of
improvement, brought in by varieties of people, by succession of civilizing
conquests and civilizing settlements, in a series of seventeen hundred years,
you shall see as much added to her by America in the course of a single life!"
If this state of his country had been foretold to him, would it not require all
the sanguine credulity of youth, and all the fervid glow of enthusiasm, to make
him believe it? Fortunate man, he has lived to see it! Fortunate, indeed, if he
lives to see nothing that shall vary the prospect, and cloud the setting of his
day!"

The Earl of Chatham, on being asked his opinion of this speech, answered, "It
is seasonable, reasonable, and eloquent;" and now that I have mentioned this
great statesman, perhaps the reader would like to see a few extracts from his
own speech on the same subject, nearly as follows:

"I therefore urge and conjure your lordships immediately to adopt this
conciliating measure. I will pledge myself for its immediately producing
conciliatory effects, by its being thus well timed: but if you delay till your
vain hope shall be accomplished, of triumphantly dictating reconciliation, you
delay for ever. But, admitting that this hope, which, in truth, is desperate,
should be accomplished, what do you gain by the imposition of your victorious
amity? You will be untrusted and unthanked. Adopt, then, the grace, while you
have the opportunity of reconcilement, or, at least, prepare the way. Allay the
ferment prevailing in America, by removing the obnoxious, hostile cause --
obnoxious and unserviceable; for the merit can be only in action: Non dimicare
et vincere, their victory can never be by exertion. Their force would be most
disproportionately exerted against a brave, generous, and united people, with
arms in their hands, and courage in their hearts: Three millions of people, the
genuine descendants of a valiant and pious ancestory, driven to those deserts
by the narrow maxims of a superstitious tyranny. And is the spirit of
persecution never to be appeased? Are the brave sons of those brave forefathers
to inherit their sufferings, as they have inherited their virtues? Are they to
sustain the infliction of the most oppressive and unexampled severity, beyond
the accounts of history, or description of poetry: " Rhadamanthus habet
durissima regna, castigatque, auditque." So says the wisest poet, and, perhaps,
the wisest statesman and politician. But our ministers say, the Americans must
not be heard. They have been condemned unheard. The indiscriminate hand of
vengeance has lumped together innocent and guilty; with all the formalities of
hostility, has blocked up the town Boston,
, and reduced to beggary and famine thirty thousand inhabitants.

"The means of enforcing this thraldom are found to be as ridiculous and weak
in practice, as they are unjust in principle. Indeed, I cannot but feel the
most anxious sensibility for the situation of General Gage, and the troops
under his command; thinking him, as I do, a man of humanity and understanding,
and entertaining, as I ever will, the highest respect, the warmest love, for
the British troops. Their situation is truly unworthy; penned up, pining in
inglorious inactivity. They are an army of impotence. You may call them an army
of safety and of guard, but they are, in truth, an army of impotence and
contempt, and, to make the folly equal to the disgrace, they are an army of
irritation and vexation.

"Trade, indeed, increases the wealth and glory of a country; but its real
strength and stamina are to be looked for among the cultivation of the land: In
their simplicity of life is found the simpleness of virtue -- the integrity and
courage of freedom. These true genuine sons of the earth are invincible: and
they surround and hem in the mercantile bodies; even if these bodies, which
supposition I totally disclaim, could be supposed disaffected to the cause of
liberty.

"This resistance to your arbitrary system of taxation might have been
foreseen; it was obvious, from the nature of things, and of mankind, and, above
all, from the whiggish spirit flourishing in that country. The spirit which now
resists your taxation in America, is the same which formerly opposed loans,
benevolences, and ship money, in England; the same spirit which called all
England on its legs, and by the bill of rights, vindicated the English
constitution; the same spirit which established the great, fundamental,
essential maxim of your liberties, that no subject of England shall be taxed
but by his own consent."

As the American war is now become a matter of history, and can be useful and
instructive only in that point of view, we shall leave it to the historian, and
only touch on it merely to show the part that Mr. Burke took in it. In all wars
a great deal is to be left to the chapter of accidents. Mr. Burke seems to have
left as little to it as possible in all his calculations on that momentous
subject. In his very outset on this question, he appears to have examined it
with great caution and judgment, and the cause only seems to have interested
him, for he says himself, in his speech at Bristol in 1780, "That the Americans
were utter strangers to him, a nation amongst whom he was not sure he had a
single acquaintance." Under these impressions, as often as this contest was
agitated, he never failed to call forth fresh arguments and additional
reprobation of it. Every aid that the human intellect and unwearied industry
could furnish, were at his devotion. Even scurrility furnished her silth, and
wit her poignant darts; every one as pointed as the Parthian arrow, and as
rapid as its flight. If the Premier chanced to nod, Mr. Burke's imagination
furnished him with dreams of splendid victories, and the interpretation of them
into the bargain. In short, he excelled the minister in every thing but good
humor and majorities. Money has been considered, but too generally, as the
sinews of war. The American coffers were exhausted, nor did Congress disguise
their situation "Without arms, ammunition, discipline, revenue, government, or
ally, and in the weakness of youth, as it were, with a staff and a sling only,
we (Americans) dared, in the name of the Lord of Hosts, to engage a gigantic
adversary, prepared at all points, boasti^ of his strength, and of whom mighty
warriors were greatly afraid." This was the real unexaggerated situation of
America at the time, as published by Congress.
. Every day witnessed the depreciation of their paper credit, 'till at length
it fell, like the leaves of their native woods in autumn. Mr. Burke saw this,
but, at the same time, he saw the buds of future credit; he did not wish to
chill them, but he wished that England should share the promised fruit, as
friends, and that they should not be plucked with the rude hand of power. In
short, so early as the year 1777, he seems to have seen with a prophetic eye,
the result of what time has confirmed: "America," said he, at that period, "is
not subdued. Not one unattacked village which was originally adverse throughout
that vast continent, has yet submitted from love or terror. You have the ground
you encamp on, and you have no more. The cantonments of your troops and your
dominions are exactly of the same extent. You spread devastation, but you do
not enlarge the sphere of authority."

At the opening of the session in October, 1776, opposition attended almost to
a man, in hopes that the minister had profitted from experience in the recess,
especially as he saw that several of his favorite plans to bring the Americans
to their senses, as he called it, had failed, were failing, and ought to be
relinquished. But it is with states as it is with individuals, there is a
season when arguments will not avail. Mr. Burke and his party felt this; their
attendance became more lax, and a secession was proposed, and, as it was not
generally approved, he states the grounds on which it was disapproved, and does
justice to those who stood on that ground; "They questioned," he says, "whether
any member could, consistently with his duty, withdraw himself individually
from the business of parliament, merely from an opinion that he would be
outvoted, and that his attendance would, therefore, be useless. They
acknowledged that a secession, collectively in a body, had not only the
sanction of precedent, but might be practiced with great advantage, and be
productive of much benefit in such cases as the present. But for this purpose,
it must be attended with the following circumstances: In the first place it
must be general, including the whole minority, against the measure that
provoked the secession; and, in the next, it should not be a silent act, but
the motives for the secession should be proclaimed, either by a remonstrance on
the journals, or a public address to the people. Under these circumstances, and
in cases of imminent danger to the constitution, a secession might operate as a
call to the nation, and awaken people to a sense of their situation."

Mr. Burke tried every means that argument and persuasion could suggest, to
point out the propriety and necessity of such a step, and to remove every
scruple on that head, and in order to hasten the unanimity, he drew up a paper
on the subject, in the shape of a remonstrance, in order that it might find its
way on the journals; we shall only say, that if it had been put and carried in
that form, it would have illumined those Belgic folios. It would have served as
a precedent on all such emergent occasions. It would have served as a faithful
record in which ministers might learn, that truth, in the end, will prevail
over venal majorities. It was thought advisable, however, to convey the
substance of it in an address to the King, and, if this proposition had been
adopted, perhaps a more respectful and affectionate address never was conveyed
to the foot of the throne. It will remain as long as the English language
lasts, as a monument of the powers and beauties of that tongue, and the use
which the writer knew how to make of them, independent of the force of the
arguments, and the happy manner in which they are arranged. The first paragraph
is filled with expressions of unfeigned loyalty, of attachment to the
sovereign, and his true interest. The second runs thus:

"A situation without example, necessitates a conduct without precedent. We are
driven in this mode of addressing your Majesty, reluctantly, to supersede those
forms which, in other circumstances, we should highly respect; and regulate
ourselves by no other rules than those of our laws, our rights, and the
profound reverence we bear to our sovereign."

The third contains an apology for the proposed secession, on the grounds of
the preservation of their (the seceders) honor, and what stood next in their
estimation, his Majesty's good opinion, and for inflexibly persevering in their
dissent from every part of those proceedings, on the experience of their
mischief, which they originally gave, from a sure foresight of their unhappy
and inevitable tendency.

"We deplore, (say they) along with your Majesty, the distractions and
disorders which prevail in your empire. But we are convinced, that the
disorders of the people, in the present time, are owing to the usual and
natural cause of such disorders at all times -- the misconduct of government;
that they are owing to plans laid in error, pursued with obstinacy, and
conducted without wisdom. We cannot attribute so much to the power of faction
at the expense of human nature, as to suppose, that a combination of men, few
in number, not considerable in rank, of no natural hereditary dependencies, of
talents, which, however respectable, appear to be no way uncommonly imposing,
should, by the efforts of their policy alone, be able to bring the people of
your American dominions into the disposition which has produced the present
troubles. We cannot conceive, that, without some powerful concurring cause, any
management should prevail on some millions of people dispersed over a whole
continent, in thirteen provinces, not only unconnected, but in many particulars
of religion, manners, government, and local interest, totally different and
adverse, voluntarily to submit themselves to a suspension of all the profits of
industry, and all the comforts of civil life, added to all the evils of an
unequal war, carried on with circumstances of the greatest asperity and rigor.
This, Sire, could never have happened but from a general sense of some
grievance, so radical in its nature, and so spreading in its effects, as to
poison all the ordinary satisfactions of life, to dislocate the frame of
society, and to convert into fear and hatred that habitual reverence ever paid
by mankind to an ancient and venerable government.

"That grievance is as simple in its nature, and as level to the most ordinary
understanding, as it is powerful in affecting the most languid passions. It is
an attempt made to dispose of the whole property of a whole people, without
their consent."

Having depreciated this scheme set up in direct opposition to the rooted and
inveterate prejudices of the whole people of America, they proceed to the
following reflections, highly worthy the consideration of every statesman.

"The sense of a whole people, most gracious Sovereign, never ought to be
contemned by wise and beneficent rulers, whatever may be the abstract claims,
or even rights of the supreme power. We have been too early instructed, and too
long habituated to believe, that the only firm seat of all authority, is in the
minds, affections, and interests of the people, to change our sentiments for
the convenience of a temporary arrangement of state. It is not consistent with
equity or wisdom, to set at defiance the general feelings of great communities,
and all the orders which compose them. Much power is tolerated, and passes
unquestioned, where much is yielded to opinion. All is disputed, where every
thing is enforced. This is the tenet we hold on the duty and policy of
conforming to the prejudices of a whole people, even where the foundation of
such prejudices may be false or disputable. But, permit us to lay at your
Majesty's feet, our deliberate judgment on the real merits of that principle,
the violation of which is the known ground and origin of these troubles. We
assure your Majesty, that, on our parts, we should think ourselves unworthy of
life, which we only value for the means of spending it in honor and virtue, if
we ever submitted to taxes, to which we did not consent, either directly, or by
a representation satisfactory to the body of the people. And we add, Sire, that
if fortune, instead of blessing us with a situation where we may have daily
access to the propitious presence of a gracious prince, had fixed us in
settlements on the remotest part of the globe, we must carry these sentiments
with us, as part of our being; pers^ded, that the distance of situation would
only render this privilege the more necessary, in the disposal of property.
Abuses of subordinate authority increase, and all means of redress lessen, as
the distance of the subject removes him from the seat of the supreme power.
What, in those circumstances, can save him from the last extremes of indignity
and oppression, but something left in his own hands, which may enable him to
conciliate the favor, and control the excesses of government? When no means
are possessed of power to awe, or to oblige, the strongest ties which connect
mankind in every relation, social and civil, and which teach them mutually to
respect each other, are broken. Independency, from that moment, virtually
exists. Its formal declaration will quickly follow. Such must be our feelings
for ourselves. We are not in possession of another rule for our brethren. When
the late attempt, practically to annihilate that privilege was made, great
disorders and tumults very unhappily and very naturally arose from it. In this
state of things, we were of opinion, that satisfaction ought instantly to be
given, or that at least the punishment of the disorder, ought to be attended
with the redress of the grievance.

"Because, whenever a disorder arises from, and is directly connected with a
grievance, to confine ourselves to the punishment of the disorder, is to
declare against the reason and justice of the complaint."

Having recapitulated the instruments which ministers employed in their
unfortunate plan, recourse was had to force, "and we saw a force" say they
"sent out enough to menace liberty, but not to awe resistance; tending to bring
odium on the civil power, and contempt on the military; at once to provoke and
encourage resistance.

"This mode of proceeding, by harsh laws and feeble armies, could not be
defended on the principle of mercy and forbearance. For mercy, as we conceive,
consists not in the weakness of the means, but in the benignity of the ends. We
apprehend, that mild measures may be powerfully enforced; and that acts of
extreme rigor and injustice may be attended with as much feebleness in the
execution, as severity in the formation."

The concluding part of this address cannot be too highly esteemed by every
lover of his king and country, particularly the following passages:

"We deprecate the effect of the doctrines which must support and countenance
the government over conquered Englishmen. It will be impossible long to resist
the powerful and equitable arguments in favor of the freedom of these unhappy
people, to be drawn from the principle of our own liberty. Attempts will be
made, attempts have been made, to ridicule and to argue away this principle,
and to inculcate into the minds of your people other maxims of government, and
other grounds of obedience than those which have prevailed at and since the
glorious revolution. By degrees, these doctrines, by being convenient, may grow
prevalent; the consequence is not certain; but a general change of principles
rarely happens among a people without leading to a change of government.

"Sire, your throne cannot stand secure upon the principles of unconditional
submission, or passive obedience, on powers exercised without the concurrence
of the people to be governed, on acts made in defiance of their prejudices and
habits, on acquiescence procured by foreign mercenary troops, and secured by
standing armies. These may possibly be the foundation of other thrones, they
must be the subversion of yours.

"It was not to passive principles in our ancestors that we owe the honor of
appearing before a sovereign, who cannot feel that he is a prince, without
knowing that we ought to be free. The revolution is a departure from the
ancient course of the descent of this monarchy. The people re-entered into
their original rights, and it was not because a positive law authorized the
act, but because the freedom and safety of the subject, the origin and cause of
all laws, required a proceeding paramount and superior to them. At that
ever-memorable and instructive period, the letter of the law was superseded in
favor of the substance of liberty. To the free choice, therefore, of the
people, without either king or parliament, we owe that happy establishment of
which both king and parliament were regenerated.

"From that great principle of liberty these statutes have originated, which
have confirmed and ratified that establishment from which your Majesty derives
your right to rule over us. These statutes have not given us our liberties; our
liberties have produced them. Every hour of your Majesty's reign, your title
stands upon the very same foundation on which it was at first laid, and we do
not know a better on which it can possibly be placed. Convinced that you cannot
have different rights, and a different security in different parts of your
dominions, we wish to lay an even platform for your throne, and to give it an
immovable stability, by laying it on the general freedom of your people, and
by securing equally to your Majesty, that confidence and affection in all parts
of your dominions, which makes your best security and dearest title in this
chief seat of your empire.

"Such, Sire, being amongst us the foundation of the monarchy itself, much more
clearly and peculiarly is it the ground of all parliamentary power. Parliament
is a security provided for the protection of freedom, and not a subtle fiction
contrived to amuse the people in its place; and the authority of both Houses
can still less than that of the Crown be supported upon different principles,
or different places, so as to be for one part of your subjects a protector of
liberty, and for another a fund of despotism, by which prerogative is extended
by occasional powers, whenever an arbitrary will finds itself streightened by
the restrictions of law."

This address, which may be considered as the creed of the Rockingham party,
was not carried into effect. Mr. Burke was, however, determined that it should
meet the public eye in some form or other. He therefore transfused the spirit of
it, in a letter which he addressed to John Far and John Harris, Esquires,
Sheriffs of Bristol, on the affairs of America in 1777. No man but himself,
perhaps, could have transfused that spirit with so much art, for every subject
seemed to be as obedient to his touch as the clay to the plastic hand of the
potter; in short, his pen, on almost every occasion, may be compared to the
fabled wand of the old magicians.

Attempts were made to drag even the private characters of those that opposed
the American war through all the filth and dirt of the ministerial prints. Mr.
Burke, in this letter, defends those that opposed those ruinous measures. He
conceived that it would be happy for us, if the colonists were taught to
believe, that there was even a formed American party in England, to whom they
could look for support. "Happy would it be for us, if in all tempers, they
might turn their eyes to the parent state, so that their very turbulence and
sedition should find vent in no other place than this." He then comes to his
own defense.

"I am charged with being an American. If warm affection toward those over
whom I claim any share of authority, be a crime, I am guilty of this charge.
But I do assure you (and they who know me publicly and privately well bear
witness to me) that if ever one man lived, more zealous than another, for the
supremacy of parliament, and the rights of this imperial crown, it was myself.
Many others, indeed, might be more knowing in the extent of the foundation of
these rights. I do not pretend to be an antiquary, a lawyer, or qualified for
the chair of professor in metaphysics. I never ventured to put your solid
interests upon speculative grounds. My having constantly declined to do so has
been attributed to my incapacity for such disquisitions; and I am inclined to
believe it is partly the cause. I never shall be ashamed to confess, that where
I am ignorant I am diffident. I am, indeed, not very solicitous to clear myself
of this imputed incapacity; because men, even less conversant than I am, in
this kind of subtleties, and placed in stations, to which I ought not to
aspire, have, by the mere force of civil discretion, often conducted the
affairs of great nations with distinguished felicity and glory."

Having given his opinion on the then state of public affairs," "I feel
warmly," said he, "on this subject, and express myself as I feel. I am too old,
too stiff, in my inveterate partialities, to be ready at all the fashionable
evolutions of opinion. I scarce know how to adapt my mind to the feelings with
which the court gazettes mean to impress the people. It is not instantly that I
can be brought to rejoice, when I hear of the slaughter and captivity of long
lists of those names, which have been familiar to my ears from my infancy, and
to rejoice that they have fallen under the sword of strangers, whose barbarous
appellations I scarcely know how to pronounce. The glory acquired at the white
plains by Colonel Roaille, has no charms for me; and I fairly acknowledge, that
I have not yet learned to delight in finding Fort Kniphausen in the heart of
the British dominions." In other instances, as often as he touched on German
mercenaries, his warmth kindled into indignation, his passions flew to arms,
and, in the conflict, it was seldom that the petty princes of Germany
themselves, escaped with a string of epithets as long as their titles.

Toward the conclusion of this letter, the writer combats, with great force
and eloquence, the doctrine which every venal minister has endeavored to
disseminate, namely, "that every man has his price;" that the reader may judge
for himself, we shall lay an extract of the passage before him.

"The common cant is no justification for taking this party (his own.) I have
been deceived, say they, by Titius and Maevius; I have been the dupe of this
pretender, or of that mountebank; and I can trust appearances no longer. But my
credulity and want of discernment cannot, as I conceive, amount to a fair
presumption against any man's integrity. A conscientious person would rather
doubt his own judgment, than condemn his species. He would say, I have observed
without attention, or judged upon erroneous maxims; I trusted to profession,
when I ought to have attended to conduct. Such a man will grow wise, not
malignant, by his acquaintance with the world. But he that accuses all mankind
of corruption, ought to remember, that he is sure to convict only one. In
truth, I should rather admit those whom at any time I have disrelished the
most, to be patterns of perfection, than seek a consolation to my own
unworthiness, in a general communion of depravity with all about me.

"That this illnatured doctrine should be preached by the missionaries of a
court I do not wonder. It answers their purpose. But that it should be heard
among those who pretend to be strong asserters of liberty, is not only
surprising, but hardly natural. This moral levelling is a servile principle. It
leads to practical passive obedience, far better than all the doctrines which
the pliant accommodation of theology to power has ever produced."

This letter found a ready reception with those who were already disposed to
subscribe to the contents of it; they did not fail to magnify it as a piece of
sound political reasoning and manly sense -- It was read with great avidity by
all parties. Lord Abingdon published some animadversions on it. Mr. Burke did
not reply, he left the public to judge -- and his Lordship did not appear to be
highly pleased with the sentence.

An increase of the civil list was the next question agitated in the Commons.
This proposition underwent a warm discussion -- it was, however, at length
carried, and when the Speaker, Sir Fletcher Norton, presented the bill at the
bar of the House of Lords, he addressed the throne in the following speech --

Most gracious Sovereign,
The bill, which it is now my duty to present to your Majesty, is entitled, An
Act for the better support of his Majesty's household, and of the honor and
dignity of the crown of Great Britain, to which your Commons humbly beg your
royal assent.

By this bill, Sir, and the circumstances which preceded and accompanied it,
your faithful Commons have given their fullest proofs and assurances to your
Majesty; for in a time of public distress, full of difficulty and danger, your
constituents laboring under burdens almost too heavy to be borne, they have
not only granted to your Majesty a large present supply, but also a very great
additional revenue, great beyond example, great beyond your Majesty's highest
expense. But all this they have done in a well-grounded confidence, that you
will apply wisely, what they have granted so liberally, and feeling what every
good subject must feel, that the affluence and grandeur of the crown will
reflect honor and dignity upon the people.

On the return of the Speaker, he received the thanks of the House for his
speech, and it was ordered to be printed. Mr. Burke, speaking of it to a
friend, said, that the constitutional sentiments which it contained were only
equalled by the dignity of the manner in which they were delivered.

Hitherto Mr. Burke had lived in the warmest friendship with the majority of
his constituents; they approved his parliamentary conduct; and this, if we may
trust his own words, was the highest meed he looked for; but a period was now
at hand that was to put that mutual friendship to trial. He had taken a decided
part in the support of two bills relative to the trade of Ireland in 1778, the
truth is, he only attempted to awaken the long neglected Irish harp, every
string of which had been once in tune Sir John Davis mentions the prosperous
state of Ireland in his days, which he ascribed to the "encouragement given to
the maritime towns and cities, as well to increase the trade of merchandise, as
to cherish mechanical arts," and the consequence of which was, says he, "that
the strings or the Irish harps were all in tune."
, not at the expense of the British lyre, but that the notes of both might flow
into all "the concord of sweet sounds," and that the hearts of both nations
might dance to the music, but his endeavors were not taken in this point of
view, the result of which was, that he wrote a letter to Samuel Span, Esquire
Master of the Society of Merchants Adventurers of Bristol, in which he
vindicated his conduct, and pointed out the advantages that his constituents
would reap from the adoption of even a more liberal system of commerce, and
that under this conviction he had given it all the support in his power. The
language was plain; he knew that he was addressing it to a body of men, the
major part of whom did not place so high a value upon tropes and figures as
they did upon the shining toys and trinkets which they exported to the coasts
of Africa.

Mr. Burke saw that America was on the verge of being lost, and he wished to
find an America nearer home. He describes the state of England, at that period,
in these lines: --

"Perhaps Gentlemen are not yet fully aware of the situation of their country,
and what its exigencies absolutely require. I find that we are still disposed
to talk at our ease, and as if all things were to be regulated by our good
pleasure. I should consider it as a fatal symptom, if, in our present
distressed and adverse circumstances, we should persist in the errors which are
natural only to prosperity. One cannot, indeed, sufficiently lament the
continuance of that spirit of delusion, by which, for a long time past, we have
thought fit to measure our necessities by our inclinations. Moderation,
prudence, and equity, are far more suitable to our condition, than lostiness,
and confidence, and rigor. We are threatened by enemies of no small magnitude,
whom, if we think fit, we may despise, as we have despised others; but they are
enemies who can only cease to be truly formidable, by our entertaining a due
respect for their power. Our danger will not be lessened by our shutting our
eyes to it; nor will our force abroad be increased by rendering ourselves
feeble, and divided at home.

"There is a dreadful schism in the British nation. Since we are not able to
reunite the empire, it is our business to give all possible vigor and
soundness to those parts of it which are still content to be governed by our
councils. Sir, it is proper to inform you, that our measures must be healing.
Such a degree of strength must be communicated to all the members of the state,
as may enable them to defend themselves, and to cooperate in the defense of
the whole. Their temper too must be managed, and their good affections
cultivated. They may then be disposed to bear the load with cheerfulness, as a
contribution toward what may be called with truth and propriety, and not by an
empty form of words, a common cause."

Having lamented that his conduct had given his constituents any uneasiness, he
declares, that he would much rather run the risque of displeasing than injuring
them. "If I am driven," says he, "to make such an option, you obligingly
lament, that you are not to have me for your advocate; but if I had been
capable of acting as an advocate in opposition to a plan so perfectly consonant
to my known principles, and to the opinions I had publicly declared on an
hundred occasions, I should only disgrace myself, without supporting, with the
smallest degree of credit or effect, the cause you wished me to undertake. I
should have lost the only thing which can make such abilities as mine of any
use to the world now or hereafter; I mean that authority which is derived from
an opinion, that a member speaks the language of truth and sincerity; and that
he is not ready to take up or lay down a great political system for the
convenience of the hour; that he is in parliament to support his opinion of the
public good, and does not form his opinion in order to get into parliament, or
to continue in it. It is, in a great measure, for your sake, that I wish to
preserve this character. Without it, I am sure, I should be ill able to
discharge, by any service, the smallest part of that debt of gratitude and
affection, which I owe you for the great and honorable trust you have reposed
in me."

He seems not to have been a little hurt at the reception which his conduct met
amongst even some of his best friends in Bristol, as in a conversation a short
time after on the mercantile interest, he exclaimed, "Don't talk to me of a
merchant, merchants are the same in every part of the world -- his God his
gold, his invoice his country, his ledger h^s Bible, his desk his altar, his
Church the Exchange, and he has faith in none but his banker."

When Mr. Burke found that ministers were determined to persevere in one of the
most disastrous wars in which this country was ever engaged, and that the
people began to bend beneath the weight of taxes, he resolved to see if it was
possible to render the public any service. It struck him that there was one
path in which he might move with some degree of success, and that was economy.
He had attempted it before, and failed, but he was determined to return to the
attack with additional force. The minister saw that it was a popular measure,
and capable of great modification. Accordingly, on the 11th of February, 1780,
he brought in a bill for "the regulation of his Majesty's civil establishments,
and of certain public offices; for the limitations of pensions, and the
suppression of sundry useless, expensive, and inconvenient places, and for
applying the moneys saved thereby to the public service." This bill was not so
formidable in its contents as in its title, and the Honorable mover took care
to soften the rigid features of it in a speech of considerable length. Lord
North received it with great seeming cordiality. He assured the House, that no
member in it was more zealous for the establishment of a permanent system of
economy than himself; but, as among the various subjects treated of, some of
them respected the King's patrimonial income, he thought the crown ought to be
consulted before the bill was admitted. Colonel Bar passed the highest
encomiums on the ability, assiduity, extensive knowledge and comprehensive
genius of his honorable friend Mr. Burke. The late Lord George Gordon thought
the house ought not to entertain it, and though he stood alone, divided the
house upon it. Mr. Burke hailed this as a lucky omen, but was prudent enough to
keep within the limits, which he had prescribed to himself in the outset. It
was not his intention even to attempt to cleanse the augean stable, or to pluck
up corruption by the root, that very corruption which he himself called the
dry-rot of the constitution.

The subject was apparently barren, and it was not expected that even Mr. Burke
could enliven it, but the house was very agreeably disappointed -- in his hand
it became so fertile, that to continue the metaphor it shot in many places into
luxuriancy. In the course of his speech it was necessary that he should point
out the use and abuse of certain offices, this was a point of great personal
delicacy, in which he was very successful; speaking of the necessity of the
proposed measure, his words are worthy of remembrance. "There is a time," said
he, "when men will not suffer bad things, because their ancestors have suffered
worse. There is a time, when the hoary head of inveterate abuse will neither
draw reverence nor obtain protection."

The king of France at that time had seriously turned his attention to a reform
in the finances of his country, joined to a reform in his court. By the edict
of the king of France, registered the 26th of August, four hundred and six
places in this court were suppressed.
Mr. Burke took notice of this, and descanted on it in the following strain:
"The Minister, (Neckar) who does these things, is a great man, -- but the king,
who desires that they should be done, is a far greater. We must do justice to
our enemies -- These are the acts of a patriot king. I am not in dread of the
vast armies of France: I am not in dread of the gallant spirit of its brave and
numerous nobility: I am not alarmed even at the great navy which has been so
miraculously created. All these things Louis the fourteenth had before. With
all these things, the French monarchy has more than once fallen prostrate at
the feet of the public faith of Great Britain. It was the want of public credit
which disabled France from recovering after her defeats, or recovering even
from her victories and triumphs. It was a prodigal court, it was an ill-ordered
revenue, that sapped the foundations of all her greatness. Credit cannot exist
under the arm of necessity. Necessity strikes at credit, I allow, with a
heavier and quicker blow under an arbitrary monarchy, than under a limited and
balanced government: but still necessity and credit are natural enemies, and
cannot be long reconciled in any situation.

"From necessity and corruption, a free state may lose the spirit of that
complex constitution which is the foundation of confidence. On the other hand,
I am far from being sure, that a monarchy, when once it is properly regulated,
may not for a long time, furnish a foundation for credit upon the solidity of
its maxims, though it affords no ground of trust in its institutions. I am
afraid I see in England, and in France, something like a beginning of both
these things. I wish I may be found in a mistake."

There are many passages in this speech highly worthy the attention of the
patriotic statesman, as long as economy is to be considered what it has been
found -- the best mine in every nation. Gravity and gaiety, perhaps, were never
more happily united in any speech or composition. The Revenue Adventures of
Knight Probert, (see p. 253,) and the Mutiny of the Household Troops, (see p.
111,) are specimens of the latter, the first is written in all the spirit of
romance, and the second threw the house into frequent bursts of laughter, which
induced Lord North to whisper, that such was the versality of Mr. Burke's
powers, that if he were to speak of an old almanac, he could set all the
planets in the same humourous commotion. Having unfolded part of his plan, he
called on the house to do him justice, if it did not tend to abolish offices
more expensive than useful, to combine duties improperly separated, to change
revenues more vexatious than productive, into ready money, to suppress offices
which stood in the way of economy, and to cut off lurking subordinate
treasurers. Mr. Burke, in a letter to a noble Lord, in 1796, speaks of this
measure thus: "My oeconomical reforms were not the suppression of a paltry
pension or employment more or less. Economy in my plan was, as it ought to be,
secondary, subordinate, instrumental. I acted on state principles. I found a
great distemper in the commonwealth; and, according to the nature of the evil
and the object, I treated it. The malady was deep; it was complicated, in the
causes and in the symptoms. Throughout it was full of contraindicants. On one
hand government, daily growing more invidious for an apparent increase of the
means of strength, was every day growing more contemptible by real weakness.
Nor was this dissolution confined to government commonly so called. It extended
to parliament; which was losing not a little in it is dignity and estimation, by
an opinion of it is not acting on worthy motives.

"A complaint was made of too much influence in the House of Commons, I reduced
it in both Houses; and I gave my reasons article by article for every
reduction, and showed why I thought it safe for the service of the state. I
heaved the lead every inch of way I made."

The parliament was suddenly dissolved on the first of September, 1780. Mr.
Burke had now faithfully served his constituents six years -- yet strange as it
may appear, when the fame of his integrity and his talents went hand in hand,
and was daily increasing, that his popularity should be on the decline in
Bristol, and it is probable that he would not have offered himself a second
time to the choice of the electors of that city, if it were not out of respect
to many worthy characters amongst the Quakers and Dissenters in it, who
promised him their support, and acted up to their promise. He accordingly
appeared on the hustings at Guildhall, in Bristol, with all the openness and
becoming confidence of a man who was conscious that he had discharged his duty.
The meeting was uncommonly numerous on that occasion. Three candidates offered
themselves at the same time. Mr. Burke, in his turn, addressed the audience in
a speech replete with arguments, conveyed in the most eloquent language, in
which he defended his parliamentary conduct. "If you call upon me," said he, "I
shall solicit the favor of the city upon manly ground. I come before you with
the plain confidence of an honest servant in the equity of a candid and
discerning master. I come to claim your approbation, not to amuse you with vain
apologies, or with professions still more vain and senseless. I have lived too
long to be served by apologies, or to stand in need of them. The part I have
acted has been in open day; and to hold out to a conduct, which stands in that
clear and steady light for all its good and all its evil, to hold out to that
conduct, the paltry winking tapers of excuses and promises -- I never will do
it. -- They may obscure it with their smoke; but they never can illumine
sunshine by such a flame as theirs."

One of the charges exhibited against him was the part which he took in Lord
Beauchamp's bill for reforming the law process for imprisonment for debt ( See
Act of Grace, page 1.) The next was his concurrence in the repeal of certain
penal laws against the Roman Catholics. His defense, on this head, was grounded
on the laws of humanity, the soundest maxims of policy and justice, and on
these points, perhaps, no man ever shone to such advantage. He wanted to snatch
the firebrand out of the hand of the furious zealot, to extinguish it for
ever, and to show that the weapons of superstition and ignorance were not to be
numbered with the celestial arms of religion, and that, notwithstanding,
various paths led to her peaceful abode, yet they all united in the center like
the rays of glory that play round her head

The part which he took relative to the trade of Ireland gave offense. All
commercial maxims are selfish and narrow. He did not wish to see the noble tide
of British trade slumber on oozy beds, or creep through crooked channels; he
wished to see it flow as bountifully as the ocean itself, so that the sister
kingdoms might mutually partake of its blessings. He was also charged with
having voted contrary to the instructions of his constituents. This was a
ground on which he defended himself with uncommon address. He said, "he knew
that he had been chosen in his place, along with others, to be a pillar of the
State, and not a weathercock on the top of the edifice, exalted for his levity
and versatility, and of no use but to indicate the shiftings of every
fashionable gale A similar charge was exhibited against Thomas Bourn, Esquire
Member of the American Convention, in consequence of which he addressed his
constituents in these words: "Fellow townsmen, the line of conduct which has
appeared to me right, I have ever wished to pursue. In the decline of life,
when a few revolving suns at most, will bring me to the bar of impartial
justice, I am unwilling to adopt a different, and less honest mode of acting.
It is true, my sentiments, at present, are not in favor of the constitution
(American); open, however, to conviction, they may be very different when the
subject is fairly discussed by able and upright men. To place myself in a
situation, where conviction could only be followed by a bigoted persistance in
error, would be extremely disagreeable to me. Under the restrictions with which
our delegates are fettered, the greatest idiot may answer your purposes as well
as the greatest man. The suffrages of our fellow men, when they neither ^mpose
confidence in our integrity, nor pay a tribute of respect to our abilities, can
never be agreeable. I am, therefore, induced positively to decline accepting a
seat in the Convention, whilst I sincerely wish you, gentlemen, and my
countrymen, every blessing which a wise and virtuous administration of a free
government can secure."
."

The picture which he drew of an informer in this speech ( See page 135) is
very highly finished. At the same instant that we are disgusted with the
subject, we are obliged to admire the pencil Dean Swift, in his excellent
Sermon on False Witnesses, says, "I number in this class all those who make a
trade of being Informers, in hope of favor and reward; and to this end employ
their time, either by listening in public places, to catch up an accidental
word, or in corrupting men's servants to discover any unwary expression of
their master; or thrusting themselves into company, and then using the most
indecent, scurrilous language; fastening a thousand falsehoods and scandals
upon a whole party, on purpose to provoke such an answer, as they may turn to
their accusation.

"And truly their ungodly race is said to be grown so numerous, that men of
different principles can hardly converse together with any security. Nor is it
any wonder at all, that their trade of informing, should be now in a
flourishing condition, since our case is manifestly thus; we are divided into
two parties, with very little charity or temper toward each other: the
prevailing side may talk of things as they please with security, and generally
do it in the most provoking words they can invent; while those who are down,
are sometimes tempted to speak in favor of a lost cause, and, therefore,
without great caution, must needs be often caught tripping, and thereby furnish
plenty of materials for informers."


. This speech was very warmly received even by those whose mental eyes were too
weak to bear the light of conviction.

Almost every thing, perhaps, that fell from his lips, or his pen, on this
occasion, are worthy of being preserved, as mixed with his feelings, or
dictated by his opinions. Soon after his arrival in Bristol, the following
address appeared in the public prints: --

To the Gentlemen, Clergy, Freeholders, and Freemen of the City of Bristol.
GENTLEMEN,
My general conduct in parliament, and my humble endeavors to serve the city
and the citizens of Bristol in these particular affairs, having been honored
by the unanimous approbation of a very large and very respectable meeting at
Guildhall this day, in conformity with the desire of that meeting, and under
the sanction of their weighty authority, I beg leave to renew to you my humble
solicitation for your votes at this election, and the favor of your early
appearance at the poll on Friday next; and if I have the honor of being again
chosen to represent you, I trust that I shall not show myself less deserving of
your favor than formerly, or less sincerely grateful for it.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect respect and esteem, gentlemen,
your most obedient and most obliged servant,

EDMUND BURKE.
Bristol, Sept. 6, 1780.
Such is the fluctuation of public opinion, that Mr. Burke felt himself under
the necessity of soliciting many who had formerly solicited him. He canvassed
in person, but there was nothing mean or unmanly either in his words or in his
manner, and notwithstanding the spirit of party ran high in the city, yet it
never found its way into the denials which he received, or rather the
apologies, for many of them were conveyed in that language, which, as he said
himself, "added to the regret." Notwithstanding all his exertions, and the
exertions of his friends, he found there was little prospect of success, which
induced him to address the electors in the following speech:

GENTLEMEN,
I decline the election. -- It has ever been my rule through life, to observe a
proportion between my efforts and my objects. I have never been remarkable for
a bold, active, and sanguine pursuit of advantages that are personal to myself.

I have not canvassed the whole of this city in form. But I have taken such a
view of it, as satisfies my own mind, that your choice will not ultimately fall
upon me. Your city, Gentlemen, is in a state of miserable distraction; and I am
resolved to withdraw whatever share my pretensions may have had in its unhappy
divisions. I have not been in haste; I have tried all prudent means; I have
waited for the effect of all contingencies. If I were fond of a contest, by the
partiality of my numerous friends (whom ye know to be among the most weighty
and respectable people of the city) I have the means of a sharp one in my
hands. But I thought it far better, with my strength unspent, and my reputation
unimpaired, to do, early and from foresight, that which I might be obliged to
do from necessity at last.

I am not in the least surprised, nor in the least angry, at this view of
things. I have read the book of life for a long time, and I have read other
books a little. Nothing has happened to me, but what has happened to men much
better than me, and in times and in nations full as good as the age and country
we live in. To say that I am no way concerned would be neither decent nor true.
The representation of Bristol was an object on many accounts dear to me: and I
certainly should very far prefer it to any other in the kingdom. My habits are
made to it; and it is in general more unpleasant to be rejected, after long
trial, than not to be chosen at all.

But, Gentlemen, I will see nothing except your former kindness, and I will
give way to no other sentiments than those of gratitude. From the bottom of my
heart I thank you for what you have done for me. You have given me a long term,
which is now expired. I have performed the conditions, and enjoyed all the
profits to the full; and I now surrender your estate into your hands, without
being in a single tile, or a single stone, impaired or wasted by my use. I have
served the public for fifteen years. I have served you in particular for six.
What is passed is well stored. It is safe, and out of the power of fortune.
What is to come, is in wiser hands than ours; and he, in whose hands it is,
best knows whether it is best for you and me, that I should be in parliament,
or even in the world.

Gentlemen, the melancholy event of yesterday The death of R. Coombe, Esquire, who
intended to offer himself a candidate for Bristol.
reads to us an awful lesson against being too much troubled about any of the
objects of ordinary ambition. The worthy gentleman, who has been snatched from
us at the moment of the election, and in the middle of the contest, whilst his
desires were as warm, and his hopes as eager as ours, has feelingly told us,
what shadows we are, and what shadows we pursue.

It has been usual for a candidate who declines, to take his leave by a letter
to the Sheriffs; but I received your trust in the face of day, and in the face
of day I accept your dismission. I am not, -- I am not at all ashamed to look
upon you; nor can my presence discompose the order of business here. I humbly
and respectfully take my leave of the Sheriffs, the Candidates, and the
Electors, wishing heartily that the choice may be for the best, at a time which
calls, if ever time did call, for service that is not nominal. It is no
plaything you are about. I tremble when I consider the trust I have presumed to
ask. I confided perhaps too much in my intentions. They were really fair and
upright; and I am bold to say, that I ask no ill thing for you, when, on
parting from this place, I pray, that whoever you choose to succeed me, may
resemble me exactly in all things, except in my abilities to serve, and my
fortune to please you.

Hope at length sunk into resignation, and Mr. Burke declined the poll, with
the following address.

To the Gentlemen, Clergy, Freeholders, and Freemen of the City of Bristol.
Bristol, Sept. 9, 1780. GENTLEMEN,
A very large and respectable meeting of the principal citizens of Bristol did,
by an unanimous vote, authorize me to offer myself once more to your service.
My deference to that authority was the sole motive for giving you one moment's
trouble. On my canvass, so far as it has proceeded, I have found that my
pretensions were well received, and even with a degree of warmth in many of the
electors.

But on a calm and very deliberate view of the state of the city, I am
convinced that no other consequence can be reasonably expected from my
continuing a candidate, than a long, vexatious, and expensive contest.
Conscious, that no difference between my service, and that of any other man,
can be worth the inconveniences of such a struggle. I decline the election.

I return you my best thanks for having, at any time, or for any period,
condescended to think of me for your representative. I have done my duty
toward you, and toward the nation, as became me. You dispose of the future
trust (as you have a right to do) according to your discretion. We have no
cause of complaint on either side. By being returned into the mass of private
citizens, my burdens are lessened, my satisfactions are not destroyed. These
are duties to be performed, and there are comforts to be enjoyed in obscurity,
for which I am not without a disposition or relish. I am sure there is nothing
in the retrospect of my public conduct, which is likely to disturb the
tranquillity of that situation, to which you restore me.

I have the honor to be, with the utmost possible respect, gentlemen, your
much obliged, and most obedient humble servant,

EDMUND BURKE.

"Obscurity and retirement" are favorite expressions on the lips of every
great man, but if Mr. Burke thought that he was sufficiently prepared to throw
himself into the arms of one or the other, he seems to have been little
acquainted with his own heart. Most of those whom he wished to please were
still alive, the circle of his friends was hourly expanding, and it would have
exhibited rather a kind of peevishness and ill humor, to throw down his sword
and buckler, because he had lost one engagement, when others of more importance
remained to be contended in. His friends exerted every nerve in support of his
cause, or rather their own, and were determined to dispute every inch of ground
to the last, but he did not wish to put them to that trouble -- he declined --
and retired amidst the plaudits of even those who had not voted for him, and
though he lost the election, it may be fairly said that he gained the victory.

Having made his election for Malton, he continued to attack Ministers
sometimes with a grossness of language, which many of his friends reprobated,
and which Lord North used to call the lava of Mr. Burke's eloquence.

Much about this time the necessity of a parliamentary reform was contended
for, as essential to the salvation of the constitution. A committee was
appointed in Yorkshire, in order to take this important subject into
consideration; a similar committee was about to be appointed for the same
purpose in Buckinghamshire. Mr. Burke addressed a letter to a gentleman of that
county, in which he gave his opinion on this weighty matter, the following
extracts are taken from it.

"The country will, in some way or other, be called upon to declare it your
opinion, that the House of Commons is not sufficiently numerous, and that the
elections are not sufficiently frequent. That an hundred new knights of the
shire ought to be added; and that we are to have a new election, once in three
years for certain, and as much oftener as the King pleases. Such will be the
state of things, if the propositions made shall take effect.

"All this may be proper; but as an honest man, I cannot possibly give my vote
for it, until I have considered it more fully. I will not deny, that our
constitution may have faults, and that those faults, when found, ought to be
corrected. It is not every thing which appears at first view to be faulty, in
such a very complicated plan as our constitution. To enable us to correct the
constitution, the whole constitution must be viewed together, and it must be
compared with the actual constitution of the people, and the circumstances of
the time. For that, which taken singly, and by itself may appear to be wrong,
when considered with relation to other things may be perfectly right, or at
least such as ought to be patiently endured, as the means of preventing
something that is much worse. So far with regard to what, at first view, may
appear a distemper in the constitution. As to the remedy of that distemper, an
equal caution ought to be used; because this latter consideration is not single
and separate, no more than the former. There are many things in reformation,
which would be proper to be done, if other things can be done along with them,
but which, if they cannot be so accompanied, ought not to be done at all. I
therefore wish, when any deep matter of this new nature is proposed to me, to
have the whole scheme distinctly in my view, and full time to consider of it.
Please God, I will walk with caution, whenever I am not able to see my way
clearly before me."

"I am now growing old. I have from very early youth been conversant in reading
and thinking upon the subjects of our laws and constitution, as well upon those
of other times and other countries. I have been for fifteen years a very
laborious Member of Parliament, and in that time have had great opportunities
of seeing with my own eyes the working of the machine of our government; of
remarking where it went smoothly, and did its business, and where it checked in
its movements, or where it damaged its work. I have also had, and used the
opportunities of conversing with men of the greatest wisdom, and fullest
experience in these matters; and I do declare to you most solemnly and most
truly, that on the result of all this reading, thinking, experience and
communication, I am not able to come to an immediate resolution in savor of a
change in the groundwork of our constitution; and in particular, that in the
present state of the country, in the present state of our representation, in
the present state of our modes and rights of electing, in the present state of
the several prevalent interests, in the present state of the affairs and
manners of this country, I am not able to vote that the addition of the hundred
knights of the shire, and the hurrying of election on election, will be things
advantageous, either to liberty or to good government.

"I most heartily wish that the deliberative sense of the kingdom on this great
subject should be known. When it is known it must be prevalent. It would be
dreadful, indeed, if there were any power in the nation capable of resisting
its unanimous desire, or even the desire of any great or very decided majority
of the people. The people may be deceived in their choice of an object, but I
can scarcely conceive that any choice they can make to be so very mischievous,
as the existence of any human force capable of resisting it. It will certainly
be the duty of every man, in the situation to which God has called him, to give
his best opinion and advice upon the matter; it will not be his duty (let him
think what he will) to use any violent or fraudulent means of counteracting the
general wish, or even of employing the legal and constructive organ of
expressing the people's sense against the sense which they so actually
entertained."

Toward the conclusion of the year 1781, Mr. Burke, and several characters in
the nation, preeminently distinguished by their rank and patriotism, their
riches and their influence, were applied to from a quarter where the sources of
a secret and important intelligence were as indubitable as the readiness to
communicate. It was fervent and unsullied, a variety of delicate circumstances
(of which not the least cogent is the present existence of several of the
illustrious parties concerned) forbids us to expatiate on the subject, whilst
we lament that we are compelled to allude to it in an exceedingly abridged
statement. Representations had been made, which, had they been followed up with
unanimous energy and perseverance, would, in all probability, have prevented
the dismemberment of America from Great Britain. What were the answers of other
individuals to an awful and pressing requisition must be passed over. We can
almost verbally affirm, that the delivered opinion of Mr. Burke was, "that he
did not entertain the least doubt of the truth of the information, but that all
his endeavors in consequence of it would prove fruitless, because the
administration explicitly manifested a rivetted determination to pursue the
same measures until they should become quite annihilated by their positive
inability to continue the war against the colonies."

On the 28th of March, 1782, Lord North assured the House, on authority, that
the present administration was no more! and that for the purpose of giving the
necessary time for new arrangements, he moved an adjournment, which was
instantly agreed to. The arrangements were as follow: The Marquis of Rockingham
First Lord of the Treasury, the Earl of Shelburne and Mr. Fox joint Secretaries
of State, Lord Camden President of the Council, Duke of Grafton Privy Seal,
Lord John Cavendish Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Burke Paymaster-General of
the Forces.

A few days after Mr. Burke was made a Privy Counselor.

The dawn of the new administration promised a refulgent day. The leading
members of it had pledged themselves to many regulations and reforms, which
they began to carry into execution as soon as the parliament met, with a degree
of alacrity and liberality unknown in the parliamentary history of this
country. The integrity and judgment of the Marquis of Rockingham justly exalted
him in the opinion of the nation, but at the very instant that his bleeding
country leaned on his honest heart, it pleased the King of Kings to call him to
himself. This illustrious patriot expired on the first of July, 1782, of a
complaint with which he had been long afflicted -- (the hydrothorax) and which
had latterly very much increased, from his unremitting attention to public
business. His loss was felt and deplored by the whole nation. Mr. Burke drew
his character when living, ( See page 484) and little did he think, perhaps, at
the time, that he should be so soon called on to pay the last sad tribute to
his memory, which he did in the following inscription, for the mausoleum
erected in Wentworth Park, and in which Earl Fitzwilliam has also placed a bust
of the writer of it.

CHARLES MARQUIS OF ROCKINGHAM.
A statesman, in whom constancy, fidelity, sincerity, and directness, were the
sole instruments of his policy. His virtues were his arts.

A clear, sound, unadulterated sense, not perplexed with intricate design, or
disturbed by ungoverned passion, gave consistency, dignity and effect to all
his measures. In opposition, he respected the principles of government; in
administration he provided for the liberties of the people. He employed his
moments of power in realizing every thing which he had proposed in a popular
situation. This was the distinguishing mark of his conduct. After twenty-four
years of service to the public, in a critical and trying time, he left no debt
of just expectation unsatisfied.

By his prudence and patience, he brought together a party, which it was the
great object of his labors to render permanent, not as an instrument of
ambition, but as a living depository of principle.

The virtues of his public and private life were not, in him, of different
characters. It was the same feeling, benevolent, liberal mind, which, in the
internal relations of life, conciliated the unfeigned love of those who see men
as they are, which made him an inflexible patriot. He was devoted to the cause
of liberty, not because he was haughty and untractable, but because he was
beneficent and humane.

Let his successors, who from this house behold this monument, reflect that
their conduct will make it their glory or their reproach; let them be persuaded
that similarity of manners, not proximity of blood, gives them an interest in
this statue.

REMEMBER, RESEMBLE, PERSEVERE.
On the death of Lord Rockingham, Lord Shelburne (now Marquis of Landsdowne)
was appointed First Lord Commissioner of the Treasury; and this giving umbrage
to the Rockingham part of the cabinet, who states, "that by this change the
measures of the former administration would be broken in upon," Mr. Fox, Lord
John Cavendish, Mr. Burke, and others, resigned their respective offices, when
Mr. Pit succeeded Lord John Cavendish as Chancellor of the Exchequer, the
present Lord Sydney Mr. Fox, as Secretary of State, and Colonel Bar Mr.
Burke, as Paymaster-General of the Forces.

By this change Mr. Burke fell once more into the ranks of opposition, and
continued so till after the peace of 1783. We have now followed Mr. Burke to
this period, and it was easy and pleasant to follow him, as the road was
direct, and he was always found in the middle of it, and though there were
alluring prospects on either side, he was never known to be drawn aside from
the rugged path of virtue and integrity.

He had traveled this road many years, and was never known to faint or lag in
the dreary journey, with many companions, it is true; rich in worth, rich in
wealth, but Mr. Burke was only rich in fame, and he had a son, the center of
his affections. Mr. Burke, at that period, shone to the highest advantage in
every point of view; even the shades of his character served to embody the
lights -- "He censures God who quarrels with the imperfections of man." He had
lost his leading star in his patron, and thus, for a moment bewildered, he fell
into the coalition, so often reprobated by members of a more extraordinary one.
The result of this junction of parties was, that the Duke of Portland was
placed at the head of the Treasury, Lord John Cavendish resumed his office as
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Lord North and Mr. Fox were appointed Secretaries
of State, Mr. Sheridan Secretary to the Treasury, and Mr. Burke
Paymaster-General of the Forces.

On the 18th of November, 1783, Mr. Fox moved for leave to bring in his
East India Bill; leave was given, and on the first of December following, when
the question was put, that the Speaker "do now leave the chair," after some
opposition to it, Mr. Burke rose, and defended the principles of the bill in a
speech, in which it may almost be said, that he surpassed himself in brilliancy
of language and richness of argument; it would not fall short of a comparison
with India itself -- such dominion of mind, such grasp of thought -- such
powers of description -- and so intimate a knowledge of the subject, that every
scene seemed to be the effect of magic instead of oratory. The peroration is
the finest in any language, for it was the character of his friend Mr. Fox (
See page 461) -- Warm from the soul, and faithful to its fires.


In the discussion of this bill, Mr. Burke noticed particularly a phrase that
had frequently been employed (by Mr. W. Pit) with a view of exciting odium
against the bill and its promoters, viz. "the chartered rights of men." The
phrase, he observed, was full of affectation and ambiguity. The rights of men,
that is, the natural rights of mankind, he said, were sacred things, and if any
public measure was sound mischievously to affect them, that circumstance ought
to be an objection fatal to the measure, but that was not the case here; the
rights the India Company's charters communicated (to speak of them in terms of
the greatest possible moderation) did, at least, suspend the natural rights of
mankind, and were liable to fall into a direct violation of them, and it was
the absolute duty of parliament, he added, to guard against such violation. A
new arrangement of ministers took place in 1783, when Mr. W. Pit was appointed
First Lord of the Treasury.

The next subject of importance that occupied the parliamentary attention of
Mr. Burke was the impeachment of Mr. Hastings. On the 17th of February, 1785,
Mr. Burke opened the accusation. "I am told," said he, "that the step I am now
about to take, is not likely to be a pleasing one to the public, and that the
good people of England wish that their old and popular member would decline it,
but there is a sentence in the best book which tingles in my ear -- Happy are
ye when men shall revile you, and speak lightly of you for my sake."

This speech was very long, but he had the happy art of rendering it
interesting. "Had Mr. Hastings," said he, "taught the pyramid to seek the sky,
had he conducted the plough into the desolate bosom of the valley, reined the
proud arch over the foaming flood, sent the sluggard to the ant, the politician
to the be, and the plunderer to prison, I should be readier to applaud him
than I am to accuse him, but instead of that, he banished science from her
natal seat, the native princes were packed up in prisons like bales of muslin,
and left to feed on the vapors of a gaol, even deprived of opium to lull their
senses into forgetfulness; the plough was arrested in its shining career, and
wherever he trod he marked his footsteps in blood and devastation." After this
he proceeded to a description of the province of Oude, the paradise of the
ancients, and having depicted the beauty and natural fertility of that country
in all the glow of a youthful poet; he adverted to the unhappy state of the
Zemindars, and the conduct of Mr. Hastings to the Rohillas. Those who heard
this speech imagined that little more could be said on the subject, but what
was their surprise when Mr. Sheridan delivered his celebrated oration on
summing up the Begum charge, on Friday, June 6, 1788, which abounded with so
many beauties, that to point out one in preference to the other, would be to
attempt to single out a star in the milky way? Ambitious, however, that some
portion of it should adorn our humble page, we insert the following, where
speaking of the calamities brought on the province of Oude by the English.

"Had a stranger, at this time (in 1782) gone into the kingdom of Oude,
ignorant of what had happened since the death of Sujah Dowla, that man, who,
with a savage heart had still great lines of character, and who, with all his
ferocity in war, had still, with a cultivating hand, preserved to his country
the riches which it derived from benignant skies and a prolific soil. If this
stranger, ignorant of all that had happened in the short interval, and
observing the wide and general devastation, and all horrors of the scene -- of
plains uncloathed and brown -- of vegetation burnt up and extinguished -- of
villages depopulated and in ruin -- of temples unroofed and perishing -- of
reservoirs broken down and dry -- he would naturally enquire what war has thus
laid waste the fertile fields of this once beautiful and opulent country --
what civil dissentions have happened thus to tear asunder, and separate the
happy societies that once possessed those villages -- what disputed succession
-- what religious rage has, with unholy violence, demolished those temples, and
disturbed fervent, but unobtruding piety, in the exercises of its duties? --
What merciless enemy has thus spread the horrors of fire and sword -- what
severe visitation of Providence has thus dried up the fountain, and taken from
the face of the earth every vestige of verdure? Or rather, what monsters have
stalked over the country, tainting and poisoning, with pestiferous breath, what
the voracious appetite could not devour? To such question, what must be the
answer? No wars have ravaged these lands and depopulated these villages -- no
civil discords have been felt -- no disputed succession -- no religious rage --
no merciless enemy -- no affliction of Providence, which, while it scourged for
the moment, cut off the sources of resuscitation -- no voracious and poisoning
monsters -- no, all this has been accomplished by the friendship, generosity,
and kindness of the English nation. They have embraced us with their protecting
arms, and, lo! those are the fruits of their alliance. What, then, shall we be
told, that under such circumstances, the exasperated feelings of a whole
people, thus goaded and spurred on to clamor and resistance, were excited by
the poor and seeble influence of the Begums! When we hear from Captain Naylor
the description that he gives of the paroxism, fever and delirium, into which
despair had thrown the natives, when on the banks of the polluted Ganges,
panting for death, they tore more widely open the lips of their gaping wounds,
to accelerate their dissolution, and while their blood was issuing presented
their ghastly eyes to Heaven, breathing their last and fervent prayer that the
dry earth might not be suffered to drink their blood, but that it might rise up
to the throne of God, and rouse the eternal Providence to avenge the wrongs of
their country. Will it be said that this was brought about by the incantations
of these Begums in their secluded Zenana? or that they could inspire this
enthusiasm and this despair into the breasts of a people who felt no grievance,
and had suffered no torture? What motive, then, could have such influence in
their bosom? What motive! That which Nature, the common parent, plants in the
bosom of man, and which, though it may be less active in the Indian than in the
Englishman, is still congenial with and makes a part of his being -- that
feeling which tells him, that man was never made to be the property of man; but
that when through pride and insolence of power, one human creature dares to
tyrannize over another, it is a power usurped, and resistance is a duty -- that
feeling which tells him that all power is delegated for the good, not for the
injury of the people, and that when it is converted from the original purpose,
the compact is broken, and the right is to be resumed -- that principle which
tells him that resistance to power usurped is not merely a duty which he owes
to himself and to his neighbor, but a duty which he owes to his God, in
asserting and maintaining the rank which he gave him in his creation! -- to
that common God, who, where he gives the form of man, whatever may be the
complexion, gives also the feelings and the rights of man -- that principle,
which neither the rudeness of ignorance can stifle, nor the enervation of
refinement extinguish! -- that principle which makes it base for a man to
suffer when he ought to act, which, tending to preserve to the species the
original designations of Providence, spurns at the arrogant distinction of man,
and vindicates the independent quality of his race." He said, that it had been
a practice with Mr. Hastings to hold himself out as a preternatural being,
gifted with good fortune, or else the peculiar favorite of Heaven, and that
Providence never failed to take up and carry, by wife but hidden means, every
project of his to its destined end. In this blasphemous way did the prisoner at
the bar libel the course of Providence. Thus, according to him, when his
corruptions and bribers were on the eve of exposure, Providence inspired the
heart of Nunducomar to commit a low, base crime, in order to save Mr. Hastings
from ruin. Thus, also, when in his attempts on Cheyt Sing, and his plunder of
the Begums, Providence stepped in, and inspired the one with resistance, and
the other with rebellion, to forward his purposes. Thus did he arrogantly hold
himself forth as a man, not only the favorite of Providence, but as one for
whose sake Providence departed from the eternal cause of its own wise
dispensations. Thus did he presume to say that he was honored and assisted in
the administration of office by inspiring felonies, heaven-born crimes, and
providential treasons! Arraigning that Providence, whose works are goodness,
and whose ways are right.

Mr. Burke's panegyric on this speech ought not to be omitted; it ran nearly as
follows: --

"He has, this day, surprised the thousands who hung with rapture on his
accents, by such an array of talents, such an exhibition of capacity, such a
display of powers, as are unparalleled in the annals of oratory; a display that
reflected the highest honor upon himself -- luster upon letters -- renown upon
parliament -- glory upon the country. Of all species of rhetoric, of every kind
of eloquence that has been witnessed or recorded, either in ancient or modern
times; whatever the acuteness of the bar, the dignity of the senate, the
solidity of the judgment seat, and the sacred morality of the pulpits, have
hitherto furnished; nothing have equalled what we have this day heard in
Westminster Hall. No holy seer of religion, no statesman, no orator, no man of
any literary description whatever, has come up, in the one instance, to the
pure sentiments of morality, or, in the other, to that variety of knowledge,
force of imagination, propriety and vivacity of allusion, beauty and elegance
of diction, strength and copiousness of style, pathos and sublimity of
conception, to which we, this day, listened with ardour and admiration. From
poetry up to eloquence, there is not a species of composition of which a
complete and perfect specimen might not, from that single speech, be called and
collected."

Those who had never read Mr. Burke's speeches, or heard him speak before,
might be easily induced to suppose that he had reserved all the stores of his
eloquence for the impeachment of Mr. Hastings, so that the beauties of those
speeches were as countless as the beauties of the fair that assembled to listen
to them. In the course of one of them he styled Mr. Hastings "The Commander and
Captain General of the Enormities in India." When he conferred this title on
him, he took care that it should not be a mere empty one; he soon furnished him
with abundance of troops, agents, etc. which he marshalled and depicted in the
most artful and eloquent manner. Having drawn the character of Congo Bulwant
Sing (a secretary employed by Mr. Hastings) in the blackest colors, he came to
that of Debi Sing, which he painted as one of the greatest villains that ever
stained the page of history. "This monster," or rather this collection of
monsters, according to Mr. Burke, "raised the rents of the inhabitants. He
crowded the prisons with persons of all ranks, and made them give bonds to what
amount he pleased, as the price of their liberty; these bonds were put in
force, and their demesnes sold at one year's purchase, to cancel the unjust
debt. This was not sufficient; he sold even the very ground destined for the
burial of the owners, and this was to them, from the nature of their education
and religion, the most heart-rending of all their losses. Having robbed the
living of their liberty, food, etc. and the dead even of a resting place, he
recollected there was another class, the poor peasantry, who, though unable to
assist in the gratification of his avarice, they could still, however,
administer to his cruelty.

"This inoffensive race was cruelly tortured; cords were drawn tight round the
fingers, until the flesh of the four on each hand was actually incorporated and
become one solid mass; the fingers were then separated by wedges of iron, and
wood driven in between them. Others were tied two and two by the feet, and
thrown across a wooden bar, upon which they hung with their feet uppermost;
they were then beat on the soals of their feet until their toe-nails dropped
off.

"They were afterward beat about the head until the blood gushed out at the
mouth, nose, and ears; they were also flogged upon the naked body with bamboo
canes and prickly bushes, and, above all, with some poisonous weeds, which were
of a most caustic nature, and burnt at every touch. The cruelty of the monster
who had ordered all this, had contrived to tear the mind as well as body; he
frequently had a father and a son tied naked to one another by the feet and
arms, and then flogged until the skin was torn from the flesh; and he had the
devilish satisfaction to know that every blow must hurt, for if one escaped the
son, his sensibility was wounded by the knowledge he had that the blow had
fallen upon his father; when the same torture was felt by the father, then he
knew that every blow that missed him had fallen upon his son.

"The treatment of the females could not be described; dragged forth from the
inmost recesses of their houses, which the religion of the country had made for
many sanctuaries, they were exposed naked to the public view; the virgins were
carried to the court of justice, where they might naturally have looked for
protection; but now they looked for it in vain, for in the face of the
ministers of justice, in the face of the spectators, in the face of the sun,
those tender and modest virgins were brutally violated.

"The only difference between their treatment and that of the mothers was, that
the former were dishonored in the face of day, the latter in the gloomy
recesses of their dungeons. Other females had the nipples of their breasts put
in a clift of bamboo, and torn off: What modesty in all nations most carefully
conceals, this monster revealed to view, and consumed by slow fires, nay, some
of the monstrous tools of this monster Debi Sing had, horrid to tell, carried
their unnatural brutality so far as to introduce death into the source of
life."

Here Mr. Burke dropped his head upon his hands, unable to proceed, so greatly
was he oppressed by the horror which he felt at this relation. The effect of it
was visible through the whole auditory; the late Mrs. Sheridan fainted away,
several ladies sunk under the agitation of their feelings, amongst others Mrs.
Siddons. Such a tragedy was never exhibited on any stage, or delivered in such
impassionate tones; and when his tongue could no longer perform its office,
indignation and pity alternately spoke from his brow.

Notwithstanding Mr. Burke could command all the figures of rhetoric, all the
flowers of fancy, all the beauties of poetry, all the fruits of experience, all
the axioms, maxims, authorities, and quotations of ancient and modern writers,
yet he could not command his temper, nor could he mention Mr. Hasting's name
without adding some degrading epithet, which he well knew he ought not to do,
out of respect to the Court, and even to himself. This involved him sometimes
in dilemmas which he might have easily avoided, if he had followed the
gentleman-like conduct of Mr. Fox, and the rest of the managers. On one of
these occasions he was rebuked by a right reverend prelate. On the 13th of
June, 1793, Mr. Francis de^ended the conduct of Mr. Burke as a manager, and
lamented that he who had written so much in favor of a certain class of men,
did not experience gentler treatment from them; the scripture had said
(continued Mr. Francis) "Put not your trust in princes," and if he might take
the liberty he would add, nor yet bishops. Mr. Burke thanked Mr. Francis, and
said, "He never did, nor would, put his trust in great men, nor in little men,
but in him that commanded him neither to trust in the one nor the other." Mr.
Fox, on the opening of the Benares charge, having occasion to mention Mr.
Burke, could not be satisfied with the bare mention of a name that was so dear
to him.

"If we are no longer in shameful ignorance of India," said he, "if India no
longer makes us blush, in the eyes of Europe, let us know and feel our
obligations to him -- whose admirable resources of opinion and affection, whose
untiring toil, sublime genius, and high aspiring honor, raised him up
conspicuous among the most beneficent worthies of mankind."

We shall not pretend to say what was the motive which induced Mr. Burke to
become the public accuser of Mr. Hastings; but his perseverance in the pursuit
undoubtedly tended to increase his fame, which was then on the decline, and if
he had abstained from all asperity of language to the accused, he would have
stood in a still fairer point of view with the public; perhaps no man ever
exhibited, even in his very countenance, tone, and gesture, a higher degree of
personal triumph than he did the day after he found himself in the majority on
the question of impeachment. Having met one of his friends, he could scarce
contain himself with rapture, "This is a proud day for England," said he, "what
a glorious prospect! her justice extending to Asia, her humanity to Africa, her
friendship to America, and her faith and good will to all Europe."

The result of the impeachment is so well known, and the whole of the
proceedings so amply detailed in various publications, that it is unnecessary
to dwell any longer on the subject.

In the debate on the commercial treaty with France, on the 23d of January,
1787, Mr. Burke opposed it with his usual eloquence and violence. Mr. Pit, he
said, with that narrowness which leads men of limited minds to look at great
objects in a confined point of view, spoke of the transaction as if it was the
affair of two little 'compting-houses, and not of two great nations. He seemed
to consider it as a contention between the sign of the Fleur-de-lis and the
sign of the old Red Lion, which should obtain the best custom.

"The love," said he "that France bears to this country has been depicted in
all the glowing rant of romance. Nay, in order to win upon our passions at the
expense of our reason, she has been personified -- decked out in all her Lilies
-- and endued with a heart incapable of infidelity, and a tongue that seems
only at a loss to convey the artless language of that heart. She desires
nothing more than to be in friendship with us. She has stretched forth her arms
to embrace us; nay more, she has stretched them through the sea -- witness
Cherbourg. Curiosity may be indulged, without danger, in surveying the pyramids
of Egypt, those monuments of human power for no human purpose. Would I could
say the same of Cherbourg. We gaze at the works now carrying on in that
harbor, like the silly Trojans, who gazed at the wooden horse, whose bowels
teemed with their destruction."

The two houses met on the 27th of November, 1787. It was stated in the speech
that the King of Prussia had taken measures to enforce his demand of
satisfaction for the insult offered to the Princess of Orange.

Mr. Burke took occasion to mention the King's speech, which he spoke of with
great humor and pleasantry; he said, it was usual to hold it out as a morsel
of finished eloquence, and as a proof of the minister's powers of composition.
The speech was certainly an extraordinary performance, but if any man was to
make it, and the facts it contained the grounds of historical narrative, he
would certainly risque a good deal of ridicule. Instead of grave history, it
partook more of the nature of an epic poem, rather resembling an agreeable
allegory, or a romance in the style of ancient chivalry. It reminded him pretty
strongly of Palmeron of England, Don Bellianis of Greece, and other books of
that romantic nature, which he formerly had lost much of his time in reading.
He was glad to find, however, that the gallantry of those kings and princes,
that had so eminently distinguished themselves when chivalry prevailed, was
revived. Let any gentleman examine the vein in which the speech proceeded, and
he would instantly perceive the strong resemblance it bore to the subjects of
ancient romance. A chivalrous king hearing that a princess had been affronted,
takes his lance, assembles his knights, and determines to do her justice. He
sets out instantly with his knights in quest of adventures, and carries all
before him, atchieving wonders in the cause of the injured princess. This
reminded him of the ancient story of a princess named Latona, who, having been
insulted by a nation, like the Dutch, appealed to Jupiter for satisfaction,
when the God, in revenge for her wrongs, turned the nation that had affronted
her into a nation of frogs, and left them to live among dykes and waters. [ The
House burst into a roar of laughter at the apt introduction of this old fable.]
Mr. Burke pursued his pleasantry with laughable comments on the speech, and
among others he remarked, that although the King of Prussia had professedly set
out merely to obtain adequate satisfaction for the injury done his sister; his
army, by accident, took Utrecht, possessed themselves of Amsterdam, restored
the Stadtholder and the former government, and all this at a stroke, and, by
the bye, which put him in mind of a verse in a sprightly song of Cowley's (his
ballad, entitled the Chronicle) that he often had read with pleasure, But when
Isabella came
Armed with resistless flame
And the artillery of her eye,
While she proudly marched about,
Greater conquests to find out,
She beat out Susan, by the bye.


Though Mr. Burke affected to despise popularity, yet no man, perhaps, was ever
more susceptible of flattery, which he always paid in kind, but a stroke of
wit, or a single paragraph in a newspaper, were sufficient to discompose his
temper, particularly when he was sinking into the vale of life. A few years
since, he happened to call on an old friend, who was very fond of collecting
prints of British patriots. Mr. Burke was not a little pleased to see one of
himself in that list, with the following rude, but pointed lines written under
it with a pencil, which he did not immediately perceive; Pelliculam veterem
retinet, ac front polite
Astutam vapido servat sub pectore vulpem.


The old gentleman saw, by Mr. Burke's countenance, that it displeased him, but
protested he was wholly ignorant of the writer, and that, as he did not
understand Latin, he thought the lines were filled with his praise, and
immediately effaced them, but they had sunk too deep in Mr. Burke's memory to
be effaced; he took a hasty leave, and never after entered the house. In the
parliamentary recess of 1788, he went to Ireland, accompanied by his son. His
arrival in that country was announced in a provincial newspaper in the
following words: "After an absence of many years, the celebrated Irish orator
and British member of parliament, Edmund Burke, has arrived in his native
country. It is not flattery to say, that he is the boast of the English senate,
and the glory of the Irish nation." One of the first poets in that kingdom
wrote some encomiastic verses on the occasion, which Mr. Burke repaid in prose,
equal in point of fancy and imagination to the tuneful effusion. It was deemed
a little extraordinary that the university of Dublin did not then present him
with the honorary degree of doctor of laws, but he was never heard to
acknowledge that he was highly indebted to the education which he received in
that seminary. Having spent some months in the south of Ireland, he returned to
England. The Reverend Doctor Campbell Author of the History of Ireland.
happened to sail in the packet with him; "I don't know any thing," said the
Doctor to a friend one day, "that gave me so much pleasure as to find that I
was to cross the Irish Hellespont in the company of a man of whom I had heard
so much. I was extremely sorry that I had not the honor of being known to any
one of the passengers who could introduce me to him, but it was not difficult
to provoke Mr. Burke to conversation. We were in sight of the hill of Howth
just as the sun began to spread his beams. Mr. Burke enjoyed the beauties of
the scenery, even the light clouds, which enveloped the top of the hill, did
not escape his attention; "I wonder, said he, that some of the Dublin milliners
do not form a head-dress in imitation of those many colored clouds, and call
it the Howth-cap." His conversation was rich and captivating; he told me he had
passed some days at Lord Kenmere's country seat, near the lakes of Killarney --
that delightful spot, which taste seems to have selected from all that is
beautiful in the volume of nature. But his description of it exceeded any thing
I had ever read or heard before, particularly when he touched on the flowery
race; good heaven! how he clothed the lilly in newborn light, and the rose in
virgin blushes; in short, it may be said, that he almost colored round.
Speaking of Lord Charlemont, he praised the gentleness of his manners, and the
mildness of his temper, and concluded by comparing him to an old picture, whose
tints were mellowed by time. When I talked of the state of learning in Ireland,
he shook his head, folded his arms, and remained silent for a few minutes. In
his person he is about five feet eight inches, remarkably straight for his
years, but his mind is more erect than his body. There is a good deal of
placidity in his countenance, but nothing of dignity, and, from his nose, I
think that no man can sneer with more ease and effect if he chooses."

A gentleman, (Mr. T --) favored me some time since with the following minutes
of a conversation with Mr. Burke: --

"December the sixth I happened to be in Mr. Townley's study; about eleven
o'clock Mr. Burke and the Reverend Doctor King came in to view Mr. Townley's
fine collection of statues. Mr. Burke seemed highly pleased with the whole,
particularly that of the Baian Homer. Having paid many just compliments to the
taste of the collector, he entered into conversation with me in so easy and
friendly a manner, that if I was charmed a few minutes before with the taste
and judicious reflection of the scholar, I was not less delighted with the man.
I showed him an old manuscript copy of Homer (written, I believe, in the tenth
century) he read a few passages in it with the greatest fluency, and criticized
some of the critics who had written on the father of immortal verse. He invited
me to breakfast with him the next morning, without so much as knowing my name.
I promised to do myself that honor. My name is Edmund Burke, said he, just as
he was going out of the door, I live in Gerard-street, Soho. I called the next
morning about nine; it was excessively cold; I was shown into the drawing room,
and in a few minutes Mr. Burke entered, and shook me by the hand in the most
friendly manner.

Mr. B. "Have you been long out of Ireland, Sir?"

T. "Some years."

Mr. B. "I paid that country a visit last summer, for the purpose of seeing a
sister, a widow (Mrs. French, I believe) I had not seen it for twenty years
before."

T. "It Is very much changed within the last twenty years."

Mr. B. "Very much for the better."

T. "A spirit of industry has pervaded almost every quarter of the kingdom; the
morals of the people are improved, the country gentlemen, in many parts, have
relinquished the favorite amusements of the chase for the plough."

Mr. B. "Not as much as I could wish, but still more than I expected. As to
agriculture, it may be called the eighth science. "We may talk what we please,"
says Cowley, of "lillies and lions rampant, and spread eagles in fields d'or or
d'argent, but if heraldry were guided by reason, a plough in a field arable
would be the most noble and ancient arms."

T. Very true, Sir, but it is said that the physical situation of Ireland is
not favorable to the progress of tillage.

Mr. B. I have often heard so, but experience proves the contrary. I saw, and I
saw it with pleasure, in my little tour through some parts of the south of
Ireland, two or three mountains clothed with luxuriant grass, that in my time
was scarcely covered with barren heath, and half-starved briars, Breakfast was
now brought in, young Mr. Burke and Dr. King were present.

T. There are many passages in the ancient laws of Ireland that evince that
agriculture flourished at a very early period in that country.

Mr. B. Do you mean in the Brehon laws? I wish they were translated.

T. I wish so too; I am sure the university of Dublin is very much obliged to
you, Sir, for the fragments which you presented of the sea-bright collection;
they are valuable, as they contain many particulars that shed light on the
manners and customs of the ancient Irish, but life is short, and, in some
respect, it would be a pity that a man of genius should waste his time in such
pursuits.

Mr. B. To set a man of genius down to such a task, would be to yoke a courser
of the sun in a mud cart. No, no, one of your cool plodding half-burnt bricks
of the creation would be the fittest person in the world for such studies.

T. Colonel Vallancy has labored hard in that mine.

Mr. B. Yes, in that race he has carried off the prize of industry from all his
competitors, and if he has done nothing more, he has wakened a spirit of
curiosity in that line, but he has built too much on etymology, and that is a
very sandy foundation.

Dr. King. Ireland was samed for piety and learning at a very early period.

Mr. B. Bid says so, and several other writers.

Dr. King. Can you speak Irish?

Mr. B. I could speak a little of it when I was a boy, and I can remember a few
words and phrases still. Poetry was highly cultivated by the ancient Irish;
some of their kings were so smitten with the love of song as to exchange the
scepter for the harp.

T. The bards were very much protected and encouraged, but having indulged too
much in satire and ribaldry, they were rather dreaded than esteemed, and, at
one time, the whole body was on the eve of being banished, if St. Columkill had
not interfered.

Mr. B. Sedulius was an excellent poet.

T. Yes, his Latin poetry is very much admired.

Mr. B. I read one of his hymns, that glowed with all the poet, the spirit of
it might be said to ascend like the spirit of a Christian martyr, in the midst
of flames, but I never could light on his works.

T. Nor I neither, but many of his verses are scattered through Colgan.

Mr. B. Wherever they are scattered they will shine like stars. There was a
poet that used to compose a little in his native language when I was a boy, I
forget his name.

T. Dignum, I suppose.

Mr. B. Yes, yes, he could neither read nor write, nor speak any language but
his own. I have seen some of his effusions translated into English, but was
assured, by judges, that they fell far short of the original, yet they
contained some graces "snatched beyond the reach of art." I remember one
thought in an address to a friend; the poet advises him to lose no time in
paying his addresses to a young lady, for that she was of age, and, as a proof
of it, "upon her cheek he saw love's letter sealed with a damask rose."
Spencer, who was himself a bard, says, that the Irish poetry was sprinkled with
many pretty flowers. I wish they were collected in one nosegay.

T. Yes, Sir, but there is no encouragement.

Mr. B. No, not in this rust of the iron age. I wish; however, that some able,
industrious, and patient pen, would give a history of that country; it is much
wanted.

T. Great expectations were formed from Doctor Leland; he had leisure, talents,
and almost every opportunity. When Lord Chesterfield was viceroy of that
kingdom, he was told that the Doctor intended to follow up a prospectus he had
published on the subject of a voluminous history, his lordship one day at levee
applauded the Doctor's intentions, but requested that he would make it a
pleasant one.

Mr. B. Your pleasant historians should be read with caution. Leland promised a
voluminous history, and so far he has kept his promise, but he has not done
justice to all.

T. It is said that he had an eye to a mitre.

Mr. B. Mitres and coronets will dazzle, but the truth is, he had an eye to his
bookseller, and, to be candid, he went over it with a heavy hand.

T. He has scarce dipped into the earlier ages.

Mr. B. He was no antiquary, but he might have said a little more on the
subject. Hooker says, "the reason why first we do admire those things which are
greatest, and secondly those things which are ancientest, is, because the one
is least distant from the infinite substance, the other from the infinite
continuance of God." Neither has he detailed with candor the feuds betwixt the
house of Desmond and Butler.

T. The implacable hatred that existed betwixt the two is astonishing.

Mr. B. Struggles for power. I remember an anecdote of one of the Desmond's, I
don't know which, who happened to be severely wounded in an engagement with a
party of the Butler's, one of the latter threw him on his shoulders to carry
him off in triumph, and as he passed along, tauntingly asked him, "Ah, Desmond,
where are you now?" though quite feeble from loss of blood, he collected all
his expiring strength, and exclaimed, "Where am I? I am where I ought to be, on
the neck of my enemy."

The conversation turned on poetry, which Mr. Burke called "the art of
substantiating shadows, and to lend existence to nothing." He praised Milton
for the judicious choice of his epithets; this led him to say a few words on
the use and abuse of those flowery adjectives, as Pontanus calls them, and
lamented that some person of taste did not collect a garland of them out of the
English poets, as Textor had out of the Latin, which laid every classical
scholar under great obligation to him, as he had plucked the fairest flowers
that sipped castalion dew.

Geography, he said, was an earthly subject, but a heavenly study. One of the
company happened to mention some gentlemen who intended to promote discoveries
in the interior parts of Africa, Mr. Burke said, the intention was truly
laudable; "Africa," he said, "was worth exploring, it seemed as if nature, in
some great convulsion or revolution of her empire, had fled to that quarter
with all her treasures, some of which she had concealed in the bowels of the
earth, but the surface exhibited such abundance and variety of the vegetable
and animal race, that a few miles would enrich the conquests of natural
history. Witness on the very shores of that continent -- the cabbage-tree, that
towered into all the sublimity of the pine, and the luxuriance of the spreading
oak, and yet so tender that a few strokes of a fabre were sufficient to lay it
prostrate on the earth. Africa was rightly called the mother of monsters, for
there was not a sufficient number of minor animals elsewhere to feed the huge
beasts that ranged the forests in that country. He was persuaded the interior
was healthy, civilized, and so fertile, that the reaper trod on the heels of
the sower.

"But the thirst of European avarice and cruelty had raised a barrier round the
coasts of that quarter, which prevented all communication with the inoffensive
inhabitants. The sight of a white face was sufficient to make their curly locks
stand on end. Death is natural to man, but slavery unnatural, and the moment
you strip a man of his liberty, you strip him of all his virtues; you convert
his heart into a dark hole, in which all the vices conspire against you."
Toward the close of the conversation, he asked me if I was acquainted with Mr.
Sheridan; I answered, that I was very sorry I could not boast that honor. I
shall have the pleasure, said he, of introducing you to him, for he is one of
the best natured men in the universe; he accompanied me, on my departure, to
the door, and told me that Dr. King was a very learned man, assured me that he
would be very happy to see me at Beconsfield, "throw yourself in a coach, said
he, come down and make my house your inn."

In 1788, several petitions were presented to the House of Commons, praying the
abolition of the slave trade, and on the 9th of May, in the same year, Mr. Pit
moved and carried a resolution founded on their petitions, the purport of which
was, to declare that the House would proceed to the investigation of that
infamous traffic early in the next session.

Mr. Burke entered into this subject with the spirit of a man who felt for all
mankind. His eloquence was never poured forth in a better cause -- it was the
cause of humanity. As he knew that he had interest and prejudice to contend
with, he took the question even on these grounds; he clearly evinced the
impolicy of it, raised the African from that low scale of creation into which
he had been thrown, up to the dignity of man, vindicated the wisdom, goodness,
and providence of God, in the formation, situation, and order of all his
beings. His description of a slave ship, and the unhappy wretches that were
piled together in its womb, drew tears from many that heard him. He then ran
out into an eulogy on humanity, in order to show that man, divested of feeling,
may be classed with the greatest monster. -- The part which he took during his
Majesty's indisposition in 1788, is sufficiently known. Mr. Burke's best
friends must lament that he did not abstain from some expressions on that
melancholy occasion, which have subtracted from the sincerity of subsequent
professions. His sovereign, however, treated him in a very different manner
when he was afflicted by the hand of Providence. During the discussion of this
business in parliament, Mr. Pit addressed a letter to the Prince of Wales,
dated 30th December, which stated, "that it was the opinion of his Majesty's
faithful servants, that His Royal Highness should be empowered to exercise the
royal authority during the illness, and in the name of his father; provided
nevertheless, that the care of the King's person, with the disposition of his
household, should be committed to the Queen; and that the power to be exercised
by the Prince, should not extend to the personal property of his father; to the
granting of any office, reversion or pension, except where the law absolutely
required it, as in the case of the judges, for any other term than during the
King's pleasure; nor to the conferring of any peerage, unless upon such persons
of the royal issue as should have attained the age of twenty one years." The
Prince of Wales's answer was written by Mr. Burke, is dated Jan. 29, 1789. It
is worthy of being presented as a pure model of the epistolary style, and
expressive of the sentiments of the Prince on a subject of the highest and most
natural concern, and personal delicacy. After acknowledging the receipt of Mr.
Pitt's letter, "Nothing," he said, "done by the two Houses of Parliament, could
be a proper subject of his animadversion; but when, previously to any
discussion in parliament, the outline of a scheme of government, in which it
was proposed that he should be personally and principally concerned, and by
which the royal authority and the public welfare might be deeply affected, were
sent to him for his consideration, it would be unjustifiable in him to withhold
an explicit declaration of his sentiments. His silence might be construed into
a previous approbation of a plan, the accomplishment of which every motive of
duty to his father and sovereign, as well as of regard for the public interest,
obliged him to consider as injurious to both. He did not expect that a plan, by
which government was to be rendered difficult, if not impracticable, would be
offered to his consideration, at a moment when government, deprived of its
chief energy and support, seemed peculiarly to need the cordial and united aid
of all descriptions of good subjects. He forbore to remark on the several parts
of the sketch laid before him. It was not probable that any argument of his
would produce an alteration of sentiment in the projectors of it. But he
trusted to the wisdom and justice of parliament, when the subject should come
under their deliberation. It was with deep regret that he perceived in the
contents of Mr. Pitt's paper a project for introducing weakness, disorder,
insecurity into every branch of political business; -- a project for dividing
the royal family from each other; for separating the court from the state; and
depriving government of its natural and accustomed support; -- a scheme for
disconnecting the authority to command service, from the power of animating it
by reward; and for allotting to the prince all the invidious duties of
government, without the means of softening them to the public by any one act of
grace, favor, or benignity. His feelings were rendered more painful by
observing, that the plan was not founded in any general principle, but was
calculated to infuse jealousies and suspicions in that quarter, whose
confidence it would ever be the first pride of his life to merit and obtain. On
the motives and object of the restriction he had little to observe. Ministers
had only informed him what the powers were which they meant to refuse, not why
they were withheld. As the powers and prerogatives of the crown were vested
there in trust for the benefit of the people, and were secured only because
necessary to preserve the point and balance of the constitution, the plea of
public utility ought to be strong, manifest, and urgent, which called for the
extinction or suspension of any one of those essential rights in the supreme
power or its representatives, or which could justify the prince in consenting,
that in his person an experiment should be made, to ascertain with how small a
portion of the kingly power the executive government of the country might be
carried on. If security for the king's repossessing his rightful government
were any part of the object of the proposed plan, the prince had only to be
convinced that any measure was necessary, or even conducive to that end, to be
the first to urge it, as the preliminary and paramount consideration of any
settlement, in which he would consent to share. If attention to what it was
presumed might be the king's feelings and wishes on the happy day of his
recovery were the object, it was with the truest sincerity the prince expressed
his firm conviction, that no event could be more repugnant to the feelings of
his royal father, than to know, that the government of his son and
representative had exhibited the sovereign power in a state of degradation, of
curtailed authority, and diminished energy -- a state, hurtful in practice to
the prosperity and good government of his people, and injurious in its
precedent to the security of the monarch, and the rights of his family. The
prince also felt himself compelled to remark, that it was not necessary for Mr.
Pit, nor proper, to suggest a restraint on his granting away the king's real
and personal property: he did not conceive that he was by law entiled to make
any such grant; and he was sure, that he never had shown the smallest
inclination to possess any such power. He had discharged his duty in thus
giving his free opinion of the plan. Yet, his conviction of the evils which
might arise from the government of the country, remained longer in a maimed and
debilitated state, outweighed in his mind every other consideration, and would
determine him to undertake the painful trust imposed upon him by the present
melancholy necessity (which of all the king's subjects he deplored the most) in
full confidence, that the affection and loyalty to the king, the experienced
attachment to the House of Brunswick, and the generosity which had always
distinguished the nation, would carry him through the many difficulties,
inseparable from so critical a situation, with comfort to himself, with honor
to the king, and with advantage to the public."

Mr. Burke is also said to have been the author of a speech intended to have
been delivered by the Duke of York in the upper House on certain provisions in
the regency bill It is now in print.
. It abounds with eloquence and argument, and does not appear to have
diminished the writer's stock either of the one or the other, in the discussion
of every stage of the bill. Mr. Burke sometimes ruffled even the placid temper
of Mr. Pit in these debates. The latter called the former to order several
times. Mr. Burke was not very fond of being interrupted in his flights,
especially when he mounted his fiery footed courser, and dealt out his arrows
in almost every direction, which happened to be one night the case; the first
time he was arrested in his career in a tone little less impassionate than his
own, which did not escape his observation. "The Right Honorable Gentleman (Mr.
Pit) said he, calls me to order in so mild a voice, that it reminds me of two
lines which I once read in an old poet: -- There roared the prophet of the
northern nation,
Scorched in a flaming speech on moderation.
He had not proceeded very far when he was called to order again by Mr. Pit,
with a smile, which Mr. Burke said, reminded him of a line in another poet:
There madness laughed in ireful mood.


The asperities which passed betwixt these two gentlemen throughout the
discussion of this bill, lest little room to expect for that coalition which
afterward took place.

On the 7th of March, 1788, Mr. Steel brought up the report of Mr. Pitt's East
India Declaratory Bill. Mr. Burke declared, on the introduction of this bill
that he would resist it in every stage; he kept his word, and having exhausted
all his arguments, he flew to those that were inexhaustible in his hands --
satyr and pleasantry. He was particularly severe on Mr. Dundas. He compared the
bill itself to a Polypus of preambles; it came forward, he said, like other
insects, in the humble form of an egg, then a caterpillar, then a fly, etc. He
then changed the simile, and said, when it was first brought in it was shown
about like an abortion in a bottle. Such was the severity of some of his
remarks, that even Mr. Dundas evidently evinced that he felt sore.

On the 2d of March, 1790, Mr. Fox moved for leave to bring in a bill to repeal
the Corporation and Test Acts. Mr. Burke opposed the motion in a speech of
considerable length, in the course of which he read several extracts from the
political writings of Dr. Priestley, and commented on them with great acerbity
and personal rancour.

Mr. Gray, actuated by the purest motives of humanity, brought in a bill for
the relief of unfortunate debtors. Mr. Burke paid many handsome compliments to
the Honorable Mover, and the pains which he had taken to distinguish the
unfortunate from the criminal. His (Mr. B's) description of the first class was
extremely pathetic and affecting. The facility of credit in this country, he
observed, gave the creditor a rash resort to the person of debtor. The mind of
the latter might be said to be imprisoned even before his person was immured in
the walls of a gaol. The sight of a strange face filled him with alarm, the
appearance of a letter shook his nerves, and a knock at the door filled his
breast with anxiety, suspense, and fear: and after he had pined for some years
in misery and distress, if enlarged by an act of grace or insolvency, he
returned from the bare walls of a prison to the bare walls of a gloomy
apartment and a famished family, with his credit blasted, and every ray of hope
tinged with despair.

On the 27th of February, 1790, Mr. Flood gave notice that he intended, on the
4th of the next month, to move for leave to bring in a bill to reform the
representation in parliament. Mr. Burke requested his Honorable Friend (Mr.
F.) would recall the notice he had just given, and abstain from all discussion
on the subject; the fire of liberty, as it was falsely called, had been kindled
in a neighboring country, and he did not wish that one of the sparks of that
flame should fall in this, for it was not that mild temperate flame that might
be called the emanation of reason, religion, and prudence; but a devouring
fire, at which the ferocious demagogue lighted his brand. This was the first
time that he mentioned the revolution of France in the House of Commons. As he
had touched on this subject, he scarce ever missed to introduce it in the most
trivial debate. As Mr. Sheridan and Mr. Fox did not accompany him to the full
extent of all those Philippics, it was easy to observe, from his countenance
and some expressions which he dropped, that he meditated an attack on those two
gentlemen, which he carried partly into execution on the report of the army
estimates on the 5th of February, 1790. The manly openness and candor of Mr.
Fox, and the mildness of his reply to what had fallen from Mr. Burke on that
occasion, seemed to have some effect in soothing his temper for the time, so
that he did not pour out all the vials of his wrath; but on the 9th of the same
month he came down to the House, fully prepared to renew the attack; he began
with a detail of the French revolution from what he called the blood-bud of it
to the time he was speaking; he then entered into a history of the authors of
it. Such a biographical sketch was never exhibited; scarce could the
imagination of a Shakespeare call such a bloody, tyrannical, proscribing,
ferocious, crew into existence; such a catalogue of crimes, such a list of
vices, were never cast in the mint of human depravity: "Those wretches," he
said, "had lost all pretension to the name of man; they, like Herod and Nero,
looked on humanity to be weakness, virtue a prejudice; their hearts could be
only warmed with the sacrilegious flames that devoured priests and altars; they
naturalized murder, croaked and thirsted for blood and power, attempted to
invert the very decrees of nature, and called on confusion as the order of the
day.

Throughout the whole of this speech Mr. Burke did not so much as touch on
lettres de cachet, the Bastile, or the farmers general, who drank the tears of
the widows and orphans out of cups of gold.

Mr. Fox complimented Mr. Burke on his eloquence, but repeated his former
declaration, that if ever he could look at a standing army with less
constitutional jealousy than before, it was now, since, during the late
transactions in France, the army had manifested, that on becoming soldiers they
did not cease to continue citizens, and would not act as the mere instruments
of a despot. This expression renewed Mr. Burke's choler, and as his brain was
well known to be a mint of phrases, he attacked the French revolution with
redoubled rage, nor was he choice of the epithets which he applied to Mr. Fox.
They passed by him, it is true, like "the idle wind which he respected not,"
but his heart was so full to think of the conduct of a man who held so dear a
place in it, that he burst into tears. Mr. Sheridan rose, and commented on Mr.
Burke's speech with such irresistible force of argument, eloquence, and
poignancy of wit, that Mr. Burke immediately threw off the mask, burst into an
open declaration of hostilities, and declared that his Honorable Friend and he
were from that moment separated in their politics for ever. His gesture and
countenance on pronouncing these words, were compared by a gentleman in the
gallery to the soldier mentioned in Lucan's Pharsalia, who was bit by a serpent
in the desert of Lybia Tendit cutem, pereunte figuta,
Miscens cuncta tumor; toto jam corpore major,
Humanumque egressa modum, super omnia membra
Efflatur sanies: late pollente veneno,
Ipse latet penitus congesto corpore mersus.

. Mr. Burke's conduct on this occasion gave birth to various conjectures. It
was supposed by some that he envied the talents of Mr. Fox and Mr. Sheridan,
but truth is the daughter of time, and she has since brought the whole to light.

Mr. Burke was amongst the first to praise the revolution in Poland, but he was
scarce ever heard to lament the fate of it. When he saw the foundation of that
glorious edifice laid, he rejoiced at it, but when he saw it buried in ruins,
he never was known to shed a tear over it. In commemoration of that promising
event, in which, to use his own words, "every thing was kept in its place and
order, but in that place and order every thing was bettered," the Poles struck
a medal of the late unfortuate Poniatouski, his majesty sent one of those warm
from the mint to Mr. Burke, with a letter in his own hand writing in the
English language, as he said, he thought it the most copious and energetic to
convey the high sense which he entertained of Mr. Burke's patriotism and
talents. Mr. Burke returned a very polite answer, stating that so high a mark
of esteem might be supposed to awaken his vanity, but it tended rather to
increase his veneration and esteem for the character of a prince whom he had
long admired. He said, he had no cabinet of medals, but that if he had the
richest in the universe he was persuaded he would be at a loss in what
illustrious series he would place that of his majesty. It must be placed as the
first of a new one; he had a son, and happy would it be for him if he lived to
be able to add a second to it. He then launched out in praise of the Polish
revolution, the origin and progress of which he ascribed to the king; "You,"
said he, "that may be truly called the father and not the proprietor of your
people." He entreated his majesty to pardon the length of the letter, as the
language of command was brevity, but he was grown old, and fond of dwelling on
a theme so dear to his heart, besides it was the very nature of gratitude, that
it thought it never could say enough.

On the 30th of April, 1792, Mr. Gray brought forward the question of
parliamentary reform. Mr. Burke rose immediately after Mr. Fox had delivered
his opinion on this momentous question. He claimed the indulgence of the House
as one that did not trouble them often, and one who was not to be impelled by a
small exigency. "He knew himself unfit for the general duties of the House, and
was not like the archbishop of Grenada, who, contrary to the motives and
remonstrances of his best friends, would not be persuaded that his faculties
were on the decline, when found no longer fit for the situation he held, he
could, without great concern, obey the voice that warned him to retire; yet,
after serving in that House for twenty-seven years, he might still be of some
use in defending it is borders, as invalids, after wearing out their youth, and
compacted manhood, are placed in garrison, when discharged from the active
duties of military life." He insisted that a remedy should not be resorted to
till the disease was pointed out, and that the grievances pointed out and
exaggerated, did not exist, and that the attempt was merely to ensnare people
by the gingle of the word reform, a word of five letters, and worth little more
than the sounds they conveyed.

Mr. Burke still affected a kind of whining friendship for Mr. Fox; he did not
rise so often as usual, and when he did, it was merely to introduce the French
revolution. Almost every speech which he delivered on this subject, might be
divided into three parts, the tragic, the comic, and the farcical. In the last
he often sunk to mere buffoonery, but the whole was eloquent in general. It was
in the first of these divisions that he introduced the dagger scene; this was a
practical trope, as Mr. Sheridan called it, and as he had declared a few
minutes before, he drew that weapon from his bosom that neutrality was his
motto. Mr. Courtenay humourously called it an armed neutrality as soon as he
saw it in his hand. In one of his antigallican speeches he drew a humourous
picture of the metaphysicians, rhetoricians, and politicians of France, in the
course of which he illustrated the new lights of that country with the
following quotation: -- So have I seen in larder dark,
Of veal a lucid loin,
Replete with many a brilliant spark,
(As wise philosophers remark)
At once both stink and shine.


On the 18th of February, 1793, Mr. Fox brought forward a motion relative to
the war. As Mr. Burke was at war with the French, at war with Mr. Fox; etc.
etc. and at war with himself, this motion furnished him with an opportunity of
pouring out all that he had bottled up on the subject. Toward the conclusion
of his speech, he entered into a character of all the individuals in France,
with whom a minister from this country might be supposed to treat. From Roland
down to Santerre he protested that the hangman was the only honest man in
France; and that every man, woman, and child in that country were murderers. He
was extremely angry with Mr. Fox for calling the late King of Prussia a despot
with respect to the part which he took in the plunder of Poland. He said, he
could buy a parrot for a shilling that could be taught to say despot, despot,
from morn till night. Mr. Gray answered, that a parrot could be also taught to
say murderer, banditti, Brissot, etc. etc. On the 4th of March, 1793, Mr.
Sheridan moved for a committee to enquire into the seditious practices alleged
to exist in the country. Mr. Burke continued to sit in the opposition bench,
but as soon as Mr. Sheridan had handed his motion to the Speaker, Mr. Burke
started up, ran toward the Treasury Bench, and when he got to the middle of
the floor, he turned round, looked with an eye full of indignation on those he
had left behind him, and exclaimed, " I quit the camp, I quit the camp." Mr.
Sheridan said, "He hoped, as the Honorable Gentleman had quitted the camp as a
deserter, that he would not return as a spy."

In 1792, Mr. Burke addressed a letter to his friend, Sir H. Langrishe, "on the
Roman Catholics of Ireland, and the propriety of admitting them to the elective
franchise consistently with the principles of the constitution, as established
at the revolution." As this question had occupied his attention from his
earliest days, so it exhibits all the marks of the different stages of his life
-- the toys of childhood, the fire of youth, the vigor of manhood, and the
cool collected judgment of old age. He has endeavored to prove in this
pamphlet, that the ascendancy of humanity, justice, and sound policy ought to
rise superior to the ascendancy of any religious sect or party -- Religionis
non est cogere religionem.

On the 28th of February, 1793, Mr. Burke and his son withdrew their names from
the Whig Club.

Mr. Burke's writings on the French revolution have been so universally read,
that it is needless to make any remarks on them, and though they abound with
many splendid passages, there is scarce an original thought in the whole. The
first pamphlet which he published on that subject is chiefly taken from the
writings of Mallet du Pan. Having now retired on a pension, it was thought that
he would have laid down the pen, and enjoyed himself in the conversation of a
few select friends, or in reading such writers as teach us to wean our
affections from all sublunary matters, especially as he had lost his son, the
prop of his old age. In this situation, it was expected that he would have
exclaimed with the poet on a similar occasion: Know all the distant din the
world can keep,
Rolls over my grotto, and but sooths my sleep.


But his passions accompanied him whithersoever he went, and in that very
retirement he attacked the Duke of Bedford, because that young nobleman
discharged his public duty. The privileged class, however, we believe will not
consider that attack as a trophy that ought to be hung on the Corinthian pillar
of polished society. His conduct to Mr. Fox was rather mysterious, but his
pension explained it. He might have parted with his old friend in a more decent
and dignified manner. He was envious of his great talents undoubtedly, and
though artful enough in every other respect, he could not conceal it, for he
complained in the House of Commons that Mr. Fox's speeches were detailed at
greater length and with more fidelity than his own. It was still more visible
one day with a man of letters, who made the following remark: -- In Tullio
omnes linguam mirantur, pectus non aeque: In Aristotele pectus omnes, linguam
non item: In Foxio, pectus et linguam aeque. His irritability might be said to
have grown with his growth, and to have gathered strength with his weakness,
and there was scarce a shaft leveled at him in the public prints or other
medium that he did not read. Some years since at dinner at Lord Tankerville's,
the conversation turned on caricatures; a gentleman observed, that he believed
Mr. Fox had been oftener exhibited in that line than any other man in the
kingdom. "I beg your pardon,' said Mr. Burke, "I think I may put in my claim to
a greater number and variety of exhibitions in that way than my honorable
friend." "I hope," said Mr. Fox, "they give you no uneasiness." "Not in the
least," replied Mr. Burke, "I have seen them all, and I remember them all, and
if it would not be trespassing on the indulgence of the company, I could repeat
the different characters in which I have been represented, obedient to the
mimic powers of the pencil." Accordingly he began and described them all in so
humourous a manner as to set the table on a roar.

Mr. Burke had only one child, a son; he was educated at Oxford, and returned
for the borough of Malton, but never took his seat. As his health was visibly
on the decline, his father took lodgings for him at Brompton for the benefit of
the air. He was attended by Doctor Brocklsby. His father was inconsolable, and
in the agony of his grief wrung his hands one morning, and sighed so deeply
that his son overheard him, which induced him to rise, dress, and walk down
stairs, with the assistance of his servant. When he came to the door he paused
to collect strength, walked in without any help, and seated himself on the
sopha between his father and mother; the day was fine; he rose and repeated
Milton's morning hymn, sat down, rose a second time to repeat it again, but had
scarce uttered a few lines when he sunk into the arms of his parents, and
expired without a sigh, in the thirty-seventh year of his age.

Soon after Mr. Burke published his Reflections on the Revolution in France, it
was intended to present him with the freedom of the university of Dublin and
other academic honors, but the warm part which he took in the question of the
emancipation of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, prevented that intention, it is
said, from being carried into effect, and if it even had it could not increase
his fame as a writer or speaker. He did not trust to his pen in promoting the
cause of the Catholics, he sent his son to Ireland for that purpose, who
received a thousand pounds for his mission. This induced many to believe that
the zeal which was exhibited on that occasion flowed from his attachment to the
Romish Church, and the old erroneous story of his being bred at St. Omers was
revived. This question being put one day to Dr. Doctor Goldsmith, "I don't
see," said the Doctor, "that he had any occasion to be bred there." To repel
those charges, he wrote a letter to Thomas Burgh, Esquire of Old Town, in Ireland,
in which he stated, at full length, the reasons which induced him to become the
advocate of the Irish Catholics. When Mr. Burke was a young man it is said that
he attempted to write a tragedy, but that having shown a few passages of it to
a friend, he was persuaded to turn his attention to some other literary line,
in which he would shine to more advantage. His Essay on the Sublime and
Beautiful was the first production of his pen that drew the attention of the
learned. When the late Lord Chesterfield first read it, he said the sublime was
beautiful, and the beautiful sublime. As an orator Mr. Burke paid very little
attention to the graces, as his utterance was in general vehement, his
gesticulation partook of the same passion. His reading was various, and he had
the happy art of making every thing he read his own, so that his plagiarism
often escaped in the peculiar flow and modification of his words. His memory
was tenacious, his imagination so fervid and head strong, that it could scarce
be restrained by his judgment, but swelled "due on, and scarce ever knew
retiring ebb." The solidity of his judgment was often lost in the brilliancy of
his fancy, as the solidity of the sun is often lost in the splendor of his
beams. In the heat and whirlwind of his passions he fell at times into low
expressions, as the rapid showers in South America when they wash down gold
mingle it with common sand. He was a great lover of agriculture, abstemious in
his diet, and plain in his dress. His favorite maxim was, that the passions
ought to instruct the reason; this, perhaps, may account for his conduct in the
evening of his life. If he had paid more attention to his private affairs, his
friends and admirers, perhaps, would not have to lament that he died a
pensioner.

"Grandeur of soul" says a celebrated writer, "that haughtily struggles with
poverty, and will neither yield to, nor make terms with misfortunes; which
through every situation reposes a noble confidence in itself, and has an
immovable view to future glory and honor, astonishes the world with
admiration and delight. We, as it were, lean forward with surprise and
trembling joy to behold the human soul collecting its strength, and asserting a
right to superior fates." During his last illness, Mr. Burke was attended by
Doctor Lynn, of Windsor. A cancerous abscess had been long gathering in his
side, which at last came to a suppuration. He was perfectly collected and sound
in his intellects to the last moment, and a few hours before his death
conversed with some of his friends on political subjects. His enmity to the
French republic continued to burn 'till the fuel was quite exhausted. Having
read one of Addison's papers in the Spectator, he felt himself so weak that he
beckoned to be removed, and expired as his domestics were conveying him to his
bed.

Character of Mr. Burke by an anonymous writer.
As a senator he was uniformly attached to the party he set out with, and
though his private fortune was far from being established, and though different
administrations would be proud to detach him, he rose and fell with his party.

He has been charged with not being always constant to his own declarations and
definitions; but before he is judged on this ground, times and circumstances
should be well weighed. In our mixed constitution there are times when the
power of the prince, or the people, may be alternately too much or too little,
and the politician who now speaks in favor of the one, and then of the other,
may be equally consistent. There was a period, not very remote from the
present, when the power of the crown was thought "to have increased, was
increasing, and ought to be diminished;" but now that democracy is taking such
hideous strides in Europe, every Englishman feels it his duty to rally round
the throne, as the best support of freedom, subordination, and liberty.

He was a firm professor of the Christian religion, and exercised its
principles in its duties; wisely considering, "that whatever disunites man from
God, disunites man from man." He looked within himself for the regulation of
his conduct, which was exemplary in all the relations of life; he was warm in
his affections, simple in his manners, plain in his table, arrangements, etc.
etc. and so little affected with the follies and dissipations of what is called
"the higher classes," that he was totally ignorant of them; so that this great
man, with all his talents, would be mere lumber in a modern drawing room; not
but he excelled in all the refinements as well as strength of conversation, and
could, at times, badinage with great skill and natural ease; but what are such
qualifications to a people where cards and dice constitute their business, and
fashionable vices their conversation.

Character of Mr. Burke by Thomas Burgh, Esquire
"Take him for all in all," Edmund Burke must be considered as a man of great
and extraordinary talents, who justly acquired in his own day the applauses of
his countrymen, and who will always hold an elevated rank amongst the statesmen
and philosophers of Europe.

A character that would be, indeed, generally imitated if it had not arrived at
a height discouraging to human nature; that yielded to none of any age or
country, as every virtue, public and private, every ability, had raised it to
the highest point of perfection of which our nature was found to be capable;
which stood, indeed, not only distinguished above those of modern times, but
added to the greatness of the greatest of antiquity, the accumulated knowledge
and accumulated wisdom of the ages that have elapsed, and the worlds that have
been since discovered, I cannot but lament that in a country distinguished by
the birth and education of such a person, a country for which had risqued his
most near, his most advantageous interests, some had been found who affected to
regard him as an alien, and to deny him the rank of a friend and citizen. He
disdained to think any vindication necessary, but should have no difficulty in
telling his countrymen what was told to the greatest people of the earth in
behalf of a character much inferior in every of consideration: Eum cum sit
civis non modo non segregandum a numero civium, verum etiam, si non esset
civis, adsciscendum fuisse.

Character of Mr. Burke by the Rev. Thomas Campbell, Author of the History of
Ireland.
His learning is so various and extensive, that we might praise it for its
range and compass, were it not still more praiseworthy for its solidity and
depth. His imagination is so lively and so creative, that he may justly be
called the child of fancy; and therefore his enemies, for even he is not
without them, would persuade us, that his fancy overbears his judgment. --
Whereas, this fine frenzy is, as it ought to be, only a secondary ingredient in
the high composition of a man, who not only reflects honor on his native
country, but elevates the dignity of human nature. In his most eccentric
flights, in his most seemingly wild excursions, in the most boisterous tempest
of his passion, there is always a guardian angel which rides in the whirlwind,
and directs the storm. His grand characteristic is genius, and ruling faculty
his judgment, though certainly not of that cold kind which the low world call
prudence; but his reason is enlightened by intuition, and whilst he persuades
as an orator, he instructs as a philosopher.

A nobleman of the highest station and abilities in England, though of an
opposite party in politics, when he heard the petty minions of the day decry
his powers, stopped them short, and said: "Come, come, hold your tongue, the
next age could not know that there was oratory in this, if Edmund Burke had not
printed his speeches." And Dr. Johnson, generally a niggard in panegyric,
speaking of that parity of talents which is generally distributed to the sons
of men, has been heard to say, that during his acquaintance with life, he knew
but two men who had risen considerably above the common standard; the one was
Lord Chatham, the other was Edmund Burke.

THE BEAUTIES OF BURKE.
ACT OF GRACE.
I NEVER relished Acts of Grace, nor ever submitted to them but from despair of
better. They are a dishonorable invention, by which, not from humanity, not
from policy, but merely because we have not room enough to hold these victims
of the absurdity of our laws, we turn loose upon the public three or four
thousand naked wretches, corrupted by the habits, debased by the ignominy, of a
prison. If the creditor had a right to those carcases, as a natural claim for
his property, I am sure we have no right to deprive him of that security. But
if the few pounds of flesh were not necessary to his security, we had not a
right to detain the unfortunate debtor, without any benefit at all to the
person that confined him.

Speech previous to the Election at Bristol. ACCOUNTANTS (PUBLIC.)
As the extent of our wars has scattered the accountants under the Paymaster
into every part of the globe, the grand and sure paymaster, Death, in all his
shapes, calls these accountants to another reckoning. Death, indeed, domineers
over every thing but the forms of the Exchequer. Over these he has no power;
they are impassive and immortal. The audit of the Exchequer, more severe than
the audit to which the accountants are gone, demands proofs which in the nature
of things are difficult, sometimes impossible to be had. In this respect too,
rigor, as usual, defeats itself. Then, the Exchequer never gives a particular
receipt, or clears a man of his account, as far as it goes. A final
acquittance, (or a quietus, as they term it) is scarcely ever to be obtained.
Terrors and ghosts of unlaid accountants haunt the houses of their children
from generation to generation. Families, in the course of succession, fall into
minorities; the inheritance comes into the hands of females; and very perplexed
affairs are often delivered over into the hands of negligent guardians and
faithless stewards. So that the demand remains, when the advantage of the money
is gone, if ever any advantage at all has been made of it. This is a cause of
infinite distress to families; and becomes a source of influence to an extent
that can scarcely be imagined, but by those who have taken some pains to trace
it. The mildness of Government in the employment of useless and dangerous
powers, furnishes no reason for their continuance.

Oecon. Reform. ABUSE OF OFFICE.
IT is necessary, ^n all matters of public complaint, where men frequently feel
right and argue wrong, to separate prejudice from reason; and to be very sure,
in attempting the redress of a grievance, that we hit upon its real seat, and
its true nature. Where there is an abuse in office, the first thing that occurs
in heat is to censure the officer. Our natural disposition leads all our
inquiries rather to persons than to things. But this prejudice is to be
corrected by maturer thinking. -- Ibid.

ABUSE (INVETERATE.)
BUT there is a time, when men will not suffer bad things because their
ancestors have suffered worse. There is a time, when the hoary head of
inveterate abuse will neither draw reverence nor obtain protection. -- Ibid.

AMBASSADORS.
THE foreign Ministers are the links of our connection with other nations. --
Ibid.

ADDRESSERS.
THERE are many circumstances in the zeal shown for civil war, which seem to
discover little of real magnanimity. The addressers offer their own persons,
and they are satisfied with hiring Germans; they promise their private
fortunes, and they mortgage their country. They have all the merit of
volunteers, without risque of person, or charge of contribution; and when the
unfeeling arm of a foreign soldiery pours out their kindred blood like water,
they exult and triumph, as if they themselves had performed some notable
exploit.

Speech on Conciliation with America. ARBITRARY POWER.
I should be sorry, that any thing framed in contradiction to the spirit of our
constitution, did not instantly produce, in fact, the grossest of the evils
with which it was pregnant in its nature. It is by lying dormant a long time,
or being first very rarely exercised, that arbitrary power steals upon a
people. On the next unconstitutional act, all the fashionable world will be
ready to say, Your prophecies are ridiculous, your fears are vain, you see how
little of the mischiefs which you formerly foreboded are come to pass. Thus, by
degrees, that artful softening of all arbitrary power, the alleged
unfrequency, or narrow extent of its operations, will be received as a sort of
aphorism; and Mr. Hume will not be singular in telling us, that the felicity of
mankind is no more disturbed by it, than by earthquakes, or thunder, or the
more universal accidents of nature. -- Ibid.

AMBITION.
GOD has planted in man a sense of ambition, and a satisfaction arising from
the contemplation of his excelling his fellows in something deemed valuable
amongst them. It is this passion that drives men to all the ways we see in use
of signalizing themselves, and that tends to make whatever excites in a man the
idea of this distinction so very pleasant. It has been so strong as to make
very miserable men take comfort, that they were supreme in misery; and certain
it is, that where we cannot distinguish ourselves by something excellent, we
begin to take a complacency in some singular infirmities, follies, or defects
of one kind or other. It is on this principle that flattery is so prevalent;
for flattery is no more than what raises in a man's mind an idea of a
preference which he has not. Now, whatever, either on good or upon bad grounds,
tends to raise a man in his own opinion, produces a sort of swelling and
triumph, that is extremely grateful to the human mind; and this swelling is
never more perceived, nor operates with more force, than when without danger we
are conversant with terrible objects, the mind always claiming to itself some
part of the dignity and importance of the things which it contemplates. Hence
proceeds what Longinus has observed of that glorying and sense of inward
greatness, that always fills the reader of such passages in poets and orators
as are sublime; it is what every man must have felt in himself upon such
occasions. -- Ibid.

ARISTOCRACY AND DESPOTISM.
IT is now found, by abundant experience, that an aristocracy and a despotism
differ but in name, and that a people who are in general excluded from any
share of the legislative, are to all intents and purposes, as much slaves, when
twenty, independent of them, govern, as when but one domineers. The tyranny is
even more felt, as every individual of the nobles has the haughtiness of a
sultan; the people are more miserable, as they seem on the verge of liberty,
from which they are for ever debarred; this fallacious idea of liberty, whilst
it presents a vain shadow of happiness to the subject, binds faster the chains
of his subjection. What is left undone, by the natural avarice and pride of
those who are raised above the others, is completed by their suspicions, and
their dread of losing an authority, which has no support in the common utility
of the nation.

Vindic. of Not. Society. ATHENIAN DEGENERACY DESCRIBED.
THE Athenians made a very rapid progress to the most enormous excesses; the
people under no restraint soon grew dissipated, luxurious, and idle. They
renounced all labor, and began to subsist themselves from the public revenues.
They lost all concern for their common honor or safety, and could bear no
advice that tended to reform them. At this time truth became offensive to those
lords the people, and most highly dangerous to the speaker. The orators no
longer ascended the rostrum, but to corrupt them further with the most fulsome
adulation. These orators were all bribed by foreign princes on the one side or
the other. And besides its own parties, in this city there were parties, and
avowed ones too, for the Persians, Spartans, and Mac donians, supported each of
them by one or more demagogues pensioned and bribed to this iniquitous service.
The people, forgetful of all virtue and public spirit, and intoxicated with the
flatteries of their orators, (these courtiers of republics, and endowed with
the distinguishing characteristics of all other courtiers) this people, I say,
at last arrived at that pitch of madness, that they coolly and deliberately, by
an express law, made it capital for any man to propose an application of the
immense sums squandered in public shows, even to the most necessary purposes of
the state. When you see the people of this republic banishing or murdering
their best and ablest citizens, dissipating the public treasure with the most
senseless extravagance, and spending their whole time, as spectators or actors,
in playing, fiddling, dancing, and singing, does it not, my Lord, strike your
imagination with the image of a sort of a complex Nero? And does it not strike
you with the greater horror, when you observe, not one man only, but a whole
city, grown drunk with pride and power, running with a rage of folly into the
same mean and senseless debauchery and extravagance?

The whole history of this celebrated republic is but one tissue of rashness,
folly, ingratitude, injustice, tumult, violence, and tyranny; and indeed of
every species of wickedness that can well be imagined. -- This was a city of
wise men, in which a minister could not exercise his functions; a warlike
people, amongst whom a general did not dare either to gain or lose a battle; a
learned nation, in which a philosopher could not venture on a free inquiry.
This was the city which banished Themistocles, starved Aristides, forced into
exile Miltiades, drove out Anaxagoras, and poisoned Socrates. This was a city
which changed the form of its government with the moon; eternal conspiracies,
revolutions daily, nothing fixed and established. A republic, as an ancient
philosopher has observed, is no one species of government, but a magazine of
every species; here you find every sort of it, and that in the worst form. As
there is a perpetual change, one rising and the other falling, you have all the
violence and wicked policy, by which a beginning power must always acquire its
strength, and all the weakness by which falling states are brought to a
complete destruction.

Vindic. Not. Society. AMERICAN WAR (EFFECTS OF).
THE act of which I speak is among the fruits of the American war: a war, in my
humble opinion, productive of many mischiefs, of a kind which distinguish it
from all others. Not only our policy is deranged, and our empire distracted,
but our laws and our legislative spirit appear to have been totally perverted
by it. We have made war on our colonies, not by arms only, but by laws. As
hostility and law are not very concordant ideas, every step we have taken in
this business, has been made by trampling on some maxim of justice, or some
capital principle of wise government. What precedents were established, and
what principles overturned, (I will not say of English privilege but of general
justice) in the Boston Port, the Massachuset's Charter, the Military Bill, and
all that long array of hostile acts of parliament, by which the war with
America has been begun and supported! Had the principles of any of these acts
been first exerted on English ground, they would probably have expired as soon
as they touched it. But by being removed from our persons, they have rooted in
our laws; and the latest posterity will taste the fruits of them.

Nor is it the worst effect of this unnatural contention, that our laws are
corrupted. Whilst manners remain entire, they will correct the vices of law,
and soften it at length to their own temper. But we have to lament, that in
most of the late proceedings we see very few traces of that generosity,
humanity, and dignity of mind which formerly characterized this nation. War
suspends the rules of moral obligation, and what is long suspended is in danger
of being totally abrogated. Civil wars strike deepest of all into the manners
of the people. They vitiate their politics; they corrupt their morals; they
pervert even the natural taste and relish of equity and justice. By teaching us
to consider our fellow-citizens in an hostile light, the whole body of our
nation becomes gradually less dear to us. The very names of affection and
kindred, which were the bond of charity whilst we agreed, become new incentives
to hatred and rage, when the communion of our country is dissolved. We may
flatter ourselves that we shall not fall into this misfortune. But we have no
charter of exemption, that I know of, from the ordinary frailties of our nature.

What but that blindness of heart which arises from the phrensy of civil
contention, could have made any persons conceive the present situation of the
British affairs as an object of triumph to themselves, or of congratulation to
their sovereign? Nothing, surely, could be more lamentable to those who
remember the flourishing days of this kingdom, than to see the insane joy of
several unhappy people, amidst the sad spectacle which our affairs and conduct
exhibit to the scorn of Europe. We behold, (and it seems some people rejoice in
beholding) our native land, which used to sit the envied arbiter of all her
neighbors, reduced to a servile dependence on their mercy; acquiescing in
assurances of friendship which she does not trust; complaining of hostilities
which she dares not resent; deficient to her allies; lofty to her subjects, and
submissive to her enemies; whilst the liberal government of this free nation is
supported by the hireling sword of German boors and vassals; and three millions
of the subjects of Great Britain are seeking for protection to English
privileges in the arms of France!

Indeed our affairs are in a bad condition. I do assure those gentlemen who
have prayed for war, and obtained the blessing they have sought, that they are,
at this instant, in very great straits. -- Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol.

AMERICAN WAR (MINISTERS WHO CONDUCTED THE).
BELIEVE me, gentlemen, the way still before you is intricate, dark, and full
of perplexed and treacherous mazes. Those who think they have the clue, may
lead us out of this labyrinth. We may trust them as amply as we think proper;
but as they have most certainly a call for all the reason which their stock can
furnish, why should we think it proper to disturb its operation by inflaming
their passions? I may be unable to lend an helping hand to those who direct the
state; but I should be ashamed to make myself one of a noisy multitude to
hollow and hearten them into doubtful and dangerous courses. A conscientious
man would be cautious how he dealt in blood. He would feel some apprehension at
being called to a tremendous account for engaging in so deep a play, without
any sort of knowledge of the game. It is no excuse for presumptuous ignorance,
that it is directed by insolence or passion. The poorest being that crawls on
earth, contending to save itself from notice and oppression, is an object
respectable in the eyes of God and Man, but I cannot conceive any existence
under heaven (which in the depth of its wisdom tolerates all sorts of things)
that is more odious and disgusting than an impotent helpless creature, without
civil wisdom or military skill, without a consciousness of any other
qualification for power but his servility to it; bloated with pride and
arrogance, calling for battles, which he is not to sight, contending for a
violent dominion, which he can never exercise, and satisfied to be himself mean
and miserable, in order to render others contemptible and wretched. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN COWARDICE.
I am really ashamed of the fashionable language which has been held for some
time past; which to say the best of it, is full of levity. You know, that I
allude to the general cry against the cowardice of the Americans, as if we
despised them for not making the king's soldiery purchase the advantage they
have obtained, at a dearer rate. It is not, gentlemen, it is not, to respect
the dispensations of Providence, nor to provide any decent retreat in the
mutability of human affairs. It leaves no medium between insolent victory and
infamous defeat. It tends to alienate our minds further and further from our
natural regards, and to make an eternal rent and schism in the British nation.
Those who do not wish for such a separation, would not dissolve that cement of
reciprocal esteem and regard, which can alone bind together the parts of this
great fabric. It ought to be our wish, as it is our duty, not only to forbear
this style of outrage ourselves, but to make every one as sensible as we can of
the impropriety and unworthiness of the tempers which give rise to it, and
which designing men are laboring with such malignant industry to diffuse
amongst us. It is our business to counteract them, if possible; if possible to
awake our natural regards; and to revive the old partiality to the English
name. Without something of this kind I do not see how it is ever practicable
really to reconcile with those, whose affection, after all, must be the surest
hold of our government; and which is a thousand times more worth to us, than
the mercenary zeal of all the circles of Germany. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN WAR (PARTISANS OF THE).
ALL this rage against unresisting dissent, convinces me, that at bottom, they
are far from satisfied they are in the right. For what is it they would have? A
war? They certainly have at this moment the blessing of something that is very
like one; and if the war they enjoy at present be not sufficiently hot and
extensive, they may shortly have it as warm and as spreading as their hearts
can desire. Is it the force of the kingdom they call for? They have it already;
and if they choose to fight their battles in their own person, no body prevents
their setting sail to America in the next transports. Do they think, that the
service is stinted for want of liberal supplies? Indeed they complain without
reason. The table of the House of Commons will glut them, let their appetite
for expense be never so keen. And I assure them further, that those who think
with them in the House of Commons are full as easy in the control, as they are
liberal in the vote of these expenses. If this be not supply or confidence
sufficient, let them open their own private purse-strings, and give from what
is left to them, as largely and with as little care as they think proper. --
Ibid.

AMERICAN ASSEMBLIES.
AT the first designation of these assemblies, they were probably not intended
for any thing more (nor perhap, did they think themselves much higher) than the
municipal corporations within this island, to which some at present love to
compare them. But nothing in progression can rest on its original plan. We may
as well think of rocking a grown man in the cradle of an infant. Therefore, as
the colonies prospered and increased to a numerous and mighty people, spreading
over a very great tract of the globe, it was natural that they should attribute
to assemblies, so respectable in their formal constitution, some part of the
dignity of the great nations which they represented. No longer tied to bylaws,
these assemblies made acts of all sorts, and in all cases whatsoever. They
levied money, not for parochial purposes, but upon regular grants to the crown,
following all the rules and principles of a parliament, to which they
approached every day more and more nearly. Those who think themselves wiser
than Providence, and stronger than the course of nature, may complain of all
this variation, on the one side or the other, as their several humors and
prejudices may lead them. But things could not be otherwise; and English
colonies must be had on these terms, or not had at all. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN WAR (STATE OF ENGLAND AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE.)
I know, and have long felt, the difficulty of reconciling the unwieldy
haughtiness of a great ruling nation, habituated to command, pampered by
enormous wealth, and confident from a long course of prosperity and victory, to
the high spirit of free dependencies, animated with the first glow and activity
of juvenile heat, and assuming to themselves as their birthright, some part of
that very pride which oppresses them. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN WAR (EFFECT OF THE, ON OUR NATIONAL CHARACTER)
THERE never, gentleman, was a period in which the stedfastness of some men has
been put to so sore a trial. It is not very difficult for well-formed minds to
abandon their interest; but the separation of same and virtue is an harsh
divorce. Liberty is in danger of being made unpopular to Englishmen. Contending
for an imaginary power we begin to acquire the spirit of domination and to lose
the relish of honest equality. The principles of our forefathers become
suspected to us, because we see them animating the present opposition of our
children. The faults which grow out of the luxuriance of freedom, appear much
more shocking to us, than the base vices which are generated from the rankness
of servitude. Accordingly the least resistance to power appears more
inexcusable in our eyes than the greatest abuses of authority. All dread of a
standing military force is looked upon as a superstitious panic. All shame of
calling in foreigners and savages in a civil contest is worn off. We grow
indifferent to the consequences inevitable to ourselves from the plan of ruling
half he empire by a mercenary sword. We are taught to believe that a desire of
domineering over our countrymen is love to our country; that those who hate
civil war abet rebellion, and that the amiable and conciliatory virtues of
lenity, moderation, and tenderness to the privileges of those who depend on
this kingdom are a sort of treason to the state.

It is impossible that we should remain long in a situation, which breeds such
notions and dispositions, without some great alteration in the national
character. Those ingenuous and feeling minds who are so fortified against all
other things, and so unarmed to whatever approaches in the shape of disgrace,
finding these principles, which they considered as sure means of honor to be
grown into disrepute, will retire disheartened and disgusted. Those of a more
robust make, the bold, able, ambitious men, who pay some of their court to
power through the people, and substitute the voice of transient opinion in the
place of true glory, will give into the general mode; and those superior
understandings which ought to correct vulgar prejudice, will confirm and
aggravate its errors. Many things have been long operating toward a gradual
change in our principles. But this American war has done more in a very few
years than all the other causes could have effected in a century. It is
therefore not on its own separate account, but because of its attendant
circumstances that I consider its continuance, or its ending in any way but
that of an honorable and liberal accommodation, as the greatest evils which
can befall us. -- Ibid.

AMERICA. Effect of the Victory in Long Island.
YOU remember, that in the beginning of this American war (that era of
calamity, disgrace and downfall, an era which no feeling mind will ever
mention without a tear for England) you were greatly divided; and a very strong
body, if not the strongest, opposed itself to the madness which every art and
every power were employed to render popular, in order that the errors of the
rulers might be lost in the general blindness of the nation. This opposition
continued until after our great, but most unfortunate victory at Long Island.
Then all the mounds and banks of our constancy were borne down at once; and the
phrensy of the American war broke in upon us like a deluge. This victory, which
seemed to put an immediate end to all difficulties, perfected us in that spirit
of domination, which our unparalleled prosperity had but too long nurtured. We
had been so very powerful, and so very prosperous, that even the humblest of us
were degraded into the vices and follies of kings. We lost all measure between
means and ends; and our headlong desires became our politics and our morals.
All men who wished for peace, or retained any sentiments of moderation, were
overborne or silenced; and this city was led by every artifice (and probably
with the more management, because I was one of your members) to distinguish
itself by its zeal for that fatal cause. In this temper of yours and of my
mind, I should have sooner fled to the extremities of the earth, than have
shown myself here. I, who saw in every American victory (for you have had a
long series of these misfortunes) the germ and seed of the naval power of
France and Spain, which all our heat and warmth against America was only
hatching into life, I should not have been a welcome visitant with the brow and
the language of such feelings.

When afterward, the other face of your calamity was turned upon you, and
showed itself in defeat and distress, I shunned you full as much. I felt sorely
this variety in our wretchedness; and I did not wish to have the least
appearance of insulting you with that show of superiority, which, though it may
not be assumed, is generally suspected in a time of calamity, from those whose
previous warnings have been despised. I could not bear to show you a
representative whose face did not reflect that of his constituents; a face that
could not joy in your joys, and sorrow in your sorrows. But time at length has
made us all of one opinion; and we have all opened our eyes on the true nature
of the American war, to the true nature of all its successes and all its
failures. -- Ibid.

AMERICA. Proposition of Peace with America.
THE proposition is peace. Not peace through the medium of war; not peace to be
hunted through the labyrinth of intricate and endless negociations; not peace
to arise out of universal discord, fomented, from principle, in all parts of
the empire; not peace to depend on the juridical determination of perplexing
questions; or the precise marking the shadowy boundaries of a complex
government. It is simply peace; sought in its natural course, and its ordinary
haunts. -- It is peace sought in the spirit of peace; and laid in principles
purely pacific. I propose, by removing the ground of the difference, and by
restoring the former unsuspecting confidence of the colonies in the mother
country, to give permanent satisfaction to your people; and (far from a scheme
of ruling by discord) to reconcile them to each other in the same act, and by
the bond of the very same interest, which reconciles them to British government.

My idea is nothing more. Refined policy ever has been the parent of confusion;
and ever will be so, as long as the world endures. Plain good intention, which
is as easily discovered at the first view, as fraud is surely detected at last,
is, let me say, of no mean force in the government of mankind. Genuine
simplicity of heart is an healing and cementing principle. My plan, therefore,
being formed upon the most simple grounds imaginable, may disappoint some
people, when they hear it. It has nothing to recommend it to the pruriency of
curious ears. There is nothing at all new and captivating in it. It has nothing
of the splendour of the project, which has been lately laid upon your table by
the noble lord in the blue ribband. "That when the governor, council, or
assembly, or general court, of any of his majesty's provinces or colonies in
America, shall propose to make provision, according to the condition,
circumstances, and situation, of such province or colony, for contributing
their proportion to the common defense (such proportion to be raised under the
authority of the general court, or general assembly, of such province or
colony, and disposable by parliament) and shall engage to make provision also
for the support of the civil government, and the administration of justice, in
such province or colony, it will be proper, if such proposal shall be approved
of by his majesty, and the two houses of parliament, and for so long as such
provision shall be made accordingly, to forbear, in respect of such province or
colony, to levy any duty, tax, or assessment, or to impose any farther duty,
tax, or assessment, except such duties as it may be expedient to continue to
levy or impose, for the regulation of commerce; the nett produce of the duties
last mentioned to be carried to the account of such province or colony
respectively." Resolution moved by Lord North in the committee, and agreed to
by the house, 27 Feb. 1775.
It does not propose to fill your lobby with squabbling colony agents, who will
require the interposition of your mace, at every instant, to keep the peace
amongst them. It does not institute a magnificent auction of finance, where
captivated provinces come to general ransom by bidding against each other,
until you knock down the hammer, and determine a proportion of payments, beyond
all the powers of algebra to equalize and settle.

Speech on Conciliation with America. AMERICA. Rapid Population of the Colonies.
THE first thing that we have to consider with regard to the nature of the
object is -- the number of people in the colonies. I have taken for some years
a good deal of pains on that point. I can by no calculation justify myself in
placing the number below two millions of inhabitants of our own European blood
and color; besides at least 500,000 others, who form no inconsiderable part of
the strength and opulence of the whole. This, Sir, is, I believe, about the
true number. There is no occasion to exaggerate, where plain truth is of so
much weight and importance.

But whether I put the present numbers too high or too low, is a matter of
little moment. Such is the strength with which population shoots in that part
of the world, that state the numbers as high as we will, whilst the dispute
continues, the exaggeration ends. Whilst we are discussing any given magnitude,
they are grown to it. Whilst we spend our time in deliberating on the mode of
governing two millions, we shall find we have millions more to manage. Your
children do not grow faster from infancy to manhood, than they spread from
families to communities, and from villages to nations. -- Ibid.

STRENGTH OF THAT POPULATION.
I put this consideration of the present and the growing numbers in the front
of our deliberation; because, Sir, this consideration will make it evident to a
blunter discernment than yours, that no partial, narrow, contracted, pinched,
occasional system will be at all suitable to such an object. It will show you,
that it is not to be considered as one of those minima which are out of the eye
and consideration of the law; not a paltry excrescence of the state; not a mean
dependant, who may be neglected with little damage, and provoked with little
danger. It will prove, that some degree of care and caution is required in the
handling such an object; it will show, that you ought not, in reason, to trifle
with so large a mass of the interests and feelings of the human race. You could
at no time do so without guilt; and be assured you will not be able to do it
long with impunity. -- Ibid.

AMERICA. Commerce with our American Colonies.
WHEN we speak of the commerce with our colonies, fiction lags after truth,
invention is unfruitful, and imagination cold and barren. -- Ibid.

IMPORTS FROM AMERICA.
IF I were to detail the imports, I could show how many enjoyments they
procure, which deceive the burden of life; how many materials which invigorate
the springs of national industry, and extend and animate every part of our
foreign and domestic commerce. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN AGRICULTURE.
I pass therefore to the colonies in another point of view, their agriculture.
This they have prosecuted with such a spirit, that besides feeding plentifully
their own growing multitude, their annual export of grain, comprehending rice,
has some years ago exceeded a million in value. Of their last harvest, I am
persuaded they will export much more. At the beginning of the century, some of
these colonies imported corn from the northern country. For some time past the
old world has been fed from the new. The scarcity which you have felt would
have been a desolating famine. That if this child of your old age, with a true
filial piety, with a Roman charity, had not put the full breast of its youthful
exuberance to the mouth of its exhausted parent. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN FISHERIES.
AS to the wealth which the colonies have drawn from the sea by their
fisheries, you had all that matter fully opened at your bar. You surely thought
those acquisitions of value; for they seemed even to excite your envy; and yet
the spirit, by which that enterprizing employment has been exercised, ought
rather, in my opinion, to have raised your esteem and admiration. And pray,
Sir, what in the world is equal to it? Pass by the other parts, and look at the
manner in which the people of New England have of late carried on the whale
fishery. Whilst we follow them among the tumbling mountains of ice, and behold
them penetrating into the deepest frozen recesses of Hudson's Bay, and Davis's
Streights, whilst we are looking for them beneath the arctic circle, we hear
that they have pierced into the opposite region of polar cold, that they are at
the antipodes, and engaged under the frozen serpent of the south. Falkland
Island, which seemed too remote and romantic an object for the grasp of
national ambition, is but a stage and resting place in the progress of their
victorious industry. Nor is the equinoctial heat more discouraging to them,
than the accumulated winter of both the poles. We know that whilst some of them
draw the line and strike the harpoon on the coast of Africa, others run the
longitude, and pursue their gigantic game along the coast of Brazil. No sea but
what is vexed by their fisheries. No climate that is not witness to their
toils. Neither the perseverance of Holland, nor the activity of France, nor the
dexterous and firm sagacity of English enterprise, ever carried this most
perilous mode of hardy industry to the extent to which it has been pushed by
this recent people; a people who are still, as it were, but in the gristle, and
not yet hardened into the bone of manhood. When I contemplate these things;
when I know that the colonies in general owe little or nothing to any care of
ours, and that they are not squeezed into this happy form by the constraints of
watchful and suspicious government, but that through a wise and salutary
neglect, a generous nature has been suffered to take her own way to perfection:
when I reflect upon these effects, when I see how profitable they have been to
us, I feel all the pride of power sink, and all presumption in the wisdom of
human contrivances melt, and die away within me. My rigor relents. I pardon
something to the spirit of liberty. -- Ibid.

AMERICANS. Love of Freedom.
IN this character of the Americans a love of freedom is the predominating
feature, which marks and distinguishes the whole: and as an ardent is always a
jealous affection, your colonies become suspicious, restive, and untractable,
whenever they see the least attempt to wrest from them by force, or shuffle
from them by chicane, what they think the only advantage worth living for. This
fierce spirit of liberty is stronger in the English colonies probably than in
any other people of the earth; and this from a great variety of powerful
causes; which, to understand the true temper of their minds, and the direction
which this spirit takes, it will not be amiss to lay open somewhat more
largely. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN DESCENT.
FIRST, the people of the colonies are descendants of England. England, Sir, is
a nation, which still I hope respects, and formerly adored, her freedom. The
colonists emigrated from you, when this part of your character was most
predominant; and they took this biass and direction the moment they parted from
your hands. They are therefore not only devoted to liberty, but to liberty
according to English ideas, and on English principles. Abstract liberty, like
other mere abstractions, is not to be found. Liberty inheres in some sensible
object; and every nation has formed to itself some favorite point, which by
way of eminence becomes the criterion of their happiness. It happened, you
know, Sir, that the great contests for freedom in this country were from the
earliest times chiefly upon the question of taxing. Most of the contests in the
ancient commonwealths turned primarily on the right of election of magistrates;
or on the balance among the several orders of the state. The question of money
was not with them so immediate. But in England it was otherwise. On this point
of taxes the ablest pens, and most eloquent tongues, have been exercised; the
greatest spirits have acted and suffered. In order to give the fullest
satisfaction concerning the importance of this point, it was not only necessary
for those who in argument defended the excellence of the English constitution,
to insist on this privilege of granting money as a dry point of fact, and to
prove, that the right had been acknowledged in ancient parchments, and blind
usages, to reside in a certain body called an house of commons. They went much
further; they attempted to prove, and they succeeded, that in theory it ought
to be so, from the particular nature of a house of commons, as an immediate
representative of the people; whether the old records had delivered this oracle
or not. They took infinite pains to inculcate, as a fundamental principle,
that, in all monarchies, the people must in effect themselves mediately or
immediately possess the power of granting their own money, or no shadow of
liberty could subsist. The colonies draw from you, as with their lifeblood,
these ideas and principles. Their love of liberty, as with you, fixed and
attached on this specific point of taxing. Liberty might be safe, or might be
endangered in twenty other particulars, without their being much pleased or
alarmed. Here they felt its pulse; and as they found that beat, they thought
themselves sick or sound. I do not say whether they were right or wrong in
applying your general arguments to their own case. It is not easy indeed to
make a monopoly of theorems and corollaries. The fact is, that they did thus
apply those general arguments; and your mode of governing them, whether through
lenity or indolence, through wisdom or mistake, confirmed them in the
imagination, that they, as well as you, had an interest in these common
principles. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN GOVERNMENT.
THEY were further confirmed in this pleasing error by the form of their
provincial legislative assemblies. Their governments are popular in an high
degree; some are merely popular; in all, the popular representative is the most
weighty; and this share of the people in their ordinary government never fails
to inspire them with losty sentiments, and with a strong aversion from whatever
tends to deprive them of their chief importance. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN RELIGION.
IF any thing were wanting to this necessary operation of the form of
government, religion would have given it a complete effect. Religion, always a
principle of energy, in this new people, is no way worn out or impaired; and
their mode of professing it is also one main cause of this free spirit. The
people are protestants, and of that kind, which is the most adverse to all
implicit submission of mind and opinion. This is a persuasion not only
favorable to liberty, but built upon it. I do not think, Sir, that the reason
of this averseness in the dissenting churches from all that looks like absolute
government is so much to be sought in their religious tenets, as in their
history. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN EDUCATION.
PERMIT me, Sir, to add another circumstance in our colonies, which contributes
no mean part toward the growth and effect of this untractable spirit. I mean
their education. In no country perhaps in the world is the law so general a
study. The profession itself is numerous and powerful; and in most provinces it
takes the lead. The greater number of the deputies sent to the congress were
lawyers. But all who read, and most do read, endeavor to obtain some
smattering in that science. I have been told by an eminent bookseller, that in
no branch of his business, after tracts of public devotion, were so many books
as those on the law exported to the plantations. The colonists have now fallen
into the way of printing them for their own use. I hear that they have sold
nearly as many of Blackstone's Commentaries in America as in England. General
Gage marks out this disposition very particularly in a letter on your table. He
states, that all the people in his government are lawyers, or smatterers in
law, and that in Boston they have been enabled, by successful chicane, wholly
to evade many parts of one of your capital penal constitutions. The smartness
of debate will say, that this knowledge ought to teach them more clearly the
rights of legislature, their obligations to obedience, and the penalties of
rebellion. All this is mighty well. But my The Attorney General.
honourabe and learned friend on the floor, who condescends to mark what I say
for animadversion, will disdain that ground. He has heard, as well as I, that
when great honors and great emoluments do not win over this knowledge to the
service of the state, it is a formidable adversary to government. If the spirit
be not tamed and broken by these happy methods, it is stubborn and litigious.
Abeunt studia in mores. This study renders men acute, inquisitive, dexterous,
prompt in attack, ready in defense, full of resources. In other countries, the
people, more simple and of a less mercurial cast, judge of an ill principle in
government only by an actual grievance; here they anticipate the evil, and
judge of the pressure of the grievance by the badness of the principle. They
augur misgovernment at a distance; and snuff the approach of tyranny in every
tainted breeze. -- Ibid.

REMOTENESS OF SITUATION FROM THE FIRST MOVER OF GOVERNMENT.
THE last cause of this disobedient spirit in the colonies is hardly less
powerful than the rest, as it is not merely moral, but laid deep in the natural
constitution of things. Three thousand miles of ocean lie between you and them.
No contrivance can prevent the effect of this distance, in weakening
government. Seas roll, and months pass, between the order and the execution:
and the want of a speedy explanation of a single point, is enough to defeat an
whole system. You have, indeed, winged ministers of vengeance, who carry your
bolts in their pounces to the remotest verge of the sea. But there a power
steps in, that limits the arrogance of raging passions and furious elements,
and says, "So far shall thou go, and no farther." Who are you, that should fret
and rage, and bite the chains of nature? -- Nothing worse happens to you, than
does to all nations, who have extensive empire; and it happens in all the forms
into which empire can be thrown. In large bodies, the circulation of power must
be less vigorous at the extremities. Nature has said it. The Turk cannot govern
Egypt, and Arabia, and Curdistan, as he governs Thrace; nor has he the same
dominion in Crimea and Algiers, which he has at Brusa and Smyrna. Despotism
itself is obliged to truck and huckster. The Sultan gets such obedience as he
can. He governs with a loose rein, that he may govern at all; and the whole of
the force and vigor of his authority in his center, is derived from a prudent
relaxation in all his borders. Spain, in her provinces, is, perhaps, not so
well obeyed, as you are in yours. She complies too; she submits; she watches
times. This is the immutable condition; the eternal law of extensive and
detached empire. -- Ibid.

AMERICA (PLAN TO CHECK THE POPULATION OF THE COLONIES).
AS the growing population in the colonies is evidently one cause of their
resistance, it was last session mentioned in both houses, by men of weight, and
received not without applause, that, in order to check this evil, it would be
proper for the crown to make no further grants of land. But to this scheme,
there are two objections. The first, that there is already so much unsettled
land in private hands, as to afford room for an immense future population,
although the crown not only withheld its grants, but annihilated its soil. If
this be the case, then the only effect of this avarice of desolation, this
hoarding of a royal wilderness, would be to raise the value of the possessions
in the hands of the great private monopolists, without any adequate check to
the growing and alarming mischief of population.

But, if you stopped your grants, what would be the consequence? The people
would occupy without grants. They have already so occupied in many places. You
cannot station garrisons in every part of these deserts. If you drive the
people from one place, they will carry on their annual tillage, and remove with
their flocks and herds to another. Many of the people in the back settlements
are already little attached to particular situations. Already they have topped
the Apalachian mountains. From thence they behold before them an immense plain,
one vast, rich, level meadow; a square of five hundred miles. Over this they
would wander, without a possibility of restraint; they would change their
manners with the habits of their life; would soon forget a government, by which
they were disowned; would become hordes of English Tartars; and, pouring down
upon your unfortified frontiers a fierce and irresistible cavalry, become
masters of your governors and your counselors, your collectors and
comptrollers, and of all the slaves that adhered to them. Such would, and, in
no long time, must be, the effect of attempting to forbid as a crime, and to
suppress as an evil, the command and blessing of Providence, "Increase and
multiply." Such would be the happy result of an endeavor to keep as a lair of
wild beasts, that earth, which God, by an express charter, has given to the
children of men. -- Ibid.

AMERICA (THE OCEAN.)
BUT let us suppose all these moral difficulties got over. The ocean remains.
You cannot pump this dry; and as long as it continues in its present bed, so
long all the causes which weaken authority by distance will continue. "Ye gods,
annihilate but space and time, and make two lovers happy!" -- was a pious and
passionate prayer; -- but just as reasonable, as many of the serious wishes of
very grave and solemn politicians. -- Ibid.

AMERICA. Conduct of Ministers with Respect to the Repeal of the American Stamp
Act.
IT is not a pleasant consideration; but nothing in the world can read so awful
and so instructive a lesson, as the conduct of ministry in this business, upon
the mischief of not having large and liberal ideas in the management of great
affairs. Never have the servants of the state looked at the whole of your
complicated interests in one connected view. They have taken things, by bits
and scraps, some at one time and one pretense, and some at another, just as
they pressed, without any sort of regard to their relations or dependencies.
They never had any kind of system, right or wrong; but only invented
occasionally some miserable tale for the day, in order meanly to sneak out of
difficulties, into which they had proudly strutted. And they were put to all
these shifts and devices, full of meanness and full of mischief, in order to
pilfer piecemeal a repeal of an act, which they had not the generous courage,
when they found and felt their error, honorably and fairly to disclaim. By
such management, by the irresistible operation of feeble councils, so paltry a
sum as threepence in the eyes of a financier, so insignificant an article as
tea in the eyes of a philosopher, have shaken the pillars of a commercial
empire that circled the whole globe. -- Speech on American Taxation.

AMERICAN TAX ON TEA.
IT is through the American trade of tea that your East India conquests are to
be prevented from crushing you with their burden. They are ponderous indeed;
and they must have that great country to lean upon, or they tumble upon your
head. It is the same folly that has lost you at once the benefit of the west
and of the east. This folly has thrown open folding-doors to contraband; and
will be the means of giving the profits of the trade of your colonies, to every
nation but yourselves. Never did a people suffer so much for the empty words of
a preamble. It must be given up. For on what principle does it stand? This
famous revenue stands, at this hour, on all the debate, as a description of
revenue not as yet known in all the comprehensive (but too comprehensive!)
vocabulary of finance -- a preambulary tax. It is indeed a tax of sophistry, a
tax of pedantry, a tax of disputation, a tax of war and rebellion, a tax for
any thing but benefit to the imposers, or satisfaction to the subject. -- Ibid.

AMERICA (FEELINGS OF THE COLONIES.)
THE feelings of the colonies were formerly the feelings of Great Britain.
Theirs were formerly the feelings of Mr. Hampden when called upon for the
payment of twenty shillings. Would twenty shillings have ruined Mr. Hampden's
fortune? No; but the payment of half twenty shillings, on the principle it was
demanded, would have made him a slave. It is the weight of that preamble, of
which you are so fond, and not the weight of the duty, that the Americans are
unable and unwilling to bear. -- Ibid.

AMERICA (HOUSE OF COMMONS.)
IT was in America that your resolutions were pre-declared. It was from thence
that we knew to a certainty, how much exactly, and not a scruple more or less,
we were to repeal. We were unworthy to be let into the secret of our own
conduct. The assemblies had confidential communications from his majesty's
confidential servants. We were nothing but instruments. Do you, after this,
wonder, that you have no weight and no respect in the colonies? After this, are
you surprised, that parliament is every day and every where losing (I feel it
with sorrow, I utter it with reluctance) that reverential affection, which so
endearing a name of authority ought ever to carry with it; that you are obeyed
solely from respect to the bayonet; and that this house, the ground and pillar
of freedom, is itself held up only by the treacherous under-pinning and clumsy
buttresses of arbitrary power? -- Ibid.

AMERICA (FALSE STATEMENTS.)
IT is remarkable, Sir, that the persons who formerly trumpeted forth the most
loudly, the violent resolutions of assemblies; the universal insurrections; the
seizing and burning the stamped papers; the forcing stamp officers to resign
their commissions under the gallows; the rifling and pulling down of the houses
of magistrates; and the expulsion from their country of all who dared to write
or speak a single word in defense of the powers of parliament; these very
trumpeters are now the men that represent the whole as a mere trifle; and
choose to date all the disturbances from the repeal of the stamp act, which put
an end to them. Hear your officers abroad, and let them refute this shameless
falsehood, who, in all their correspondence, state the disturbances as owing to
their true causes, the discontent of the people, from the taxes. You have this
evidence in your own archives -- and it will give you complete satisfaction; if
you are not so far lost to all parliamentary ideas of information, as rather to
credit the lie of the day, than the records of your own house.

Sir, this vermin of court reporters, when they are forced into day upon one
point, are sure to burrow in another, but they shall have no refuge: I will
make them bolt out of all their holes. Conscious that they must be baffled,
when they attribute a precedent disturbance to a subsequent measure, they take
other ground, almost as absurd, but very common in modern practice, and very
wicked; which is, to attribute the ill effect of ill-judged conduct to the
arguments which had been used to dissuade us from it. They say, that the
opposition made in parliament to the stamp act at the time of its passing,
encouraged the Americans to their resistance. This has even formally appeared
in print in a regular volume, from an advocate of that faction, a Dr. Tucker.
This Dr. Tucker is already a dean, and his earnest labors in his vineyard
will, I suppose, raise him to a bishopric. -- Ibid.

AMERICA (LENITY TO.)
FOR my own part, I should choose (If I could have my wish) that the proposition
of the Honorable Gentleman (Mr. Fuller) for the repeal, could go to America
without the attendance of the penal bills. Alone I could almost answer for its
success. I cannot be certain of its reception in the bad company it may keep.
In such heterogeneous assortments, the most innocent person will lose the
effect of his innocence. Though you should send out this angel of peace, yet
you are sending out a destroying angel too; and what would be the effect of the
conflict of these two adverse spirits, or which would predominate in the end,
is what I dare not say: whether the lenient measures would cause American
passion to subside, or the severe would increase its fury -- All this is in the
hand of Providence; yet now, even now, I should confide in the prevailing
virtue, and efficacious operation of lenity, though working in darkness, and in
chaos, in the midst of all this unnatural and turbid combination. I should hope
it might produce order and beauty in the end. -- Ibid.

AMERICAN TAXATION.
LET us, Sir, embrace some system or other before we end this session. Do you
mean to tax America, and to draw a productive revenue from thence? If you do,
speak out: name, fix, ascertain this revenue; settle its quantity; define its
objects; provide for its collection; and then fight when you have something to
fight for. If you murder -- rob! If you kill, take possession: and do not
appear in the character of madmen, as well as assassins, violent, vindictive,
bloody, and tyrannical, without an object. But may better counsels guide you!
-- Ibid.

AMERICAN REPRESENTATION.
A noble lord, (Carmarthen) who spoke some time ago, is full of the fire of
ingenuous youth; and when he has modelled the ideas of a lively imagination by
further experience, he will be an ornament to his country in either house. He
has said, that the Americans are our children, and how can they revolt against
their parent? He says, that if they are not free in their present state,
England is not free; because Manchester, and other considerable places, are not
represented. So then, because some towns in England are not represented,
America is to have no representative at all. They are "our children;" but when
children ask for bread, we are not to give a stone. It is because the natural
resistance of things, and the various mutations of time, hinders our
government, or any scheme of government, from being any more than a sort of
approximation to the right, is it therefore that the colonies are to recede
from it infinitely? When this child of ours wishes to assimilate to its parent,
and to reflect with a true filial resemblance the beauteous countenance of
British liberty; are we to turn to them the shameful parts of our constitution?
are we to give them our weakness for their strength; our opprobrium for their
glory; and the slough of slavery, which we are not able to work off, to serve
them for their freedom?

If this be the case, ask yourselves this question, Will they be content in
such a state of slavery? If not, look to the consequences. Reflect how you are
to govern a people, who think they ought to be free, and think they are not.
Your scheme yields no revenue; it yields nothing but discontent, disorder,
disobedience; and such is the state of America, that after wading up to your
eyes in blood, you could only end just where you begun; that is, to tax where
no revenue is to be found, to -- my voice fails me; my inclination, indeed,
carries me no further -- all is confusion beyond it.

Well, Sir, I have recovered a little, and before I sit down I must say
something to another point with which gentlemen urge us. What is to become of
the declaratory act, asserting the entireness of British legislative authority,
if we abandon the practice of taxation?

For my part I look upon the rights stated in that act, exactly in the manner
in which I viewed them on its very first proposition, and which I have often
taken the liberty, with great humility, to lay before you. I look, I say, on
the imperial rights of Great Britain, and the privileges which the colonists
ought to enjoy under these rights, to be just the most reconcilable things in
the world. The parliament of Great Britain sits at the head of her extensive
empire in two capacities: one as the local legislature of this island,
providing for all things at home, immediately, and by no other instrument than
the executive power. -- The other, and I think her nobler capacity, is what I
call her imperial character; in which, as from the throne of heaven, she
superintends all the several inferior legislatures, and guides, and controls
them all without annihilating any. As all these provincial legislatures are
only coordinate to each other, they ought all to be subordinate to her; else
they can neither preserve mutual peace, nor hope for mutual justice, nor
effectually afford mutual assistance. It is necessary to coerce the negligent,
to restrain the violent, and to aid the weak and deficient, by the overruling
plenitude of her power. She is never to intrude into the place of the others,
whilst they are equal to the common ends of their institution. But in order to
enable parliament to answer all these ends of provident and beneficient
superintendance, her powers must be boundless. -- Ibid.

ANGLES.
INDEED there is nothing more prejudicial to the grandeur of buildings, than to
abound in angles; a fault obvious in many; and owing to an inordinate thirst
for variety, which, whenever it prevails, is sure to leave very little true
taste. -- Sublime and Beautiful.

ARTIST.
A true artist should put a generous deceit on the spectators, and effect the
noblest designs by easy methods. -- Ibid.

ART.
NO work of art can he great, but as it deceives; to be otherwise is the
prerogative of nature only. A good eye will fix the medium betwixt an excessive
length or height (for the same objection lies against both), and a short or
broken quantity: and perhaps it might be ascertained to a tolerable degree of
exactness, if it was my purpose to descend far into the particulars of any art.
-- Ibid.

ANIMALS (CRIES OF.)
SUCH sounds as imitate the natural inarticulate voices of men, or any animals
in pain or danger, are capable of conveying great ideas; unless it be the
well-known voice of some creature, on which we are used to look with contempt.
The angry tones of wild beasts are equally capable of causing a great and awful
sensation.

Hinc exaudiri gemitus, iroeque leonum
Vincla recusantum, et sera sub nocte rudentum;
Setigerique sues, atque in praesepibus ursi
Saevire; et formae magnorum ululare luporum.
It might seem that these modulations of sound carry some connection with the
nature of the things they represent, and are not merely arbitrary; because the
natural cries of all animals, even of those animals with whom we have not been
acquainted, never fail to make themselves sufficiently understood; this cannot
be said of language. The modifications of sound, which may be productive of the
sublime, are almost infinite. Those I have mentioned, are only a few instances
to show on what principles they are all built. -- Ibid.

ALLY.
THERE are very few in the world who will not prefer an useful ally to an
insolent master. -- Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol.

AGE (CHARACTER OF.)
NEVER expecting to find perfection in men, and not looking for divine
attributes in created beings, in my commerce with my cotemporaries, I have
found much human virtue. I have seen not a little public spirit; a real
subordination of interest to duty; and a decent and regulated sensibility to
honest fame and reputation. The age unquestionable produces (whether in a
greater or less number than former times, I know not) daring profligates, and
insidious hypocrites. What then? Am I not to avail myself of whatever good is
to be found in the world, because of the mixture of evil that will always be in
it? The smallness of the quantity in currency only heightens the value. They,
who raise suspicions on the good on account of the behavior of ill men, are of
the party of the latter. -- Ibid.

ACTION AND MOTIVES.
VIRTUE will catch as well as vice by contact; and the public stock of honest
manly principle will daily accumulate. We are not too nicely to scrutinize
motives as long as action is irreproachable. It is enough, (and for a worthy
man perhaps too much) to deal out its infamy to convicted guilt and declared
apostasy. -- Ibid.

ADMINISTRATION. Consequences of an exterior Administration.
AN exterior administration, chosen for its impotency, or after it is chosen
purposely rendered impotent, in order to be rendered subservient, will not be
obeyed. The laws themselves will not be respected, when those who execute them
are despised; and they will be despised, when their power is not immediate from
the crown, or natural in the kingdom. Never were ministers better supported in
parliament. Parliamentary support comes and goes with office, totally
regardless of the man or the merit. Is government strengthened? It grows weaker
and weaker. The popular torrent gains upon it every hour. Let us learn from our
experience. It is not support that is wanting to government, but reformation.
When ministry rests upon public opinion, it is not, indeed, built upon a rock
of adamant; it has, however, some stability. But when it stands upon private
humor, its structure is of stubble, and its foundation is on quicksand. I
repeat it again -- He that supports every administration, subverts all
government. The reason is this: The whole business in which a court usually
takes an interest goes on at present equally well, in whatever hands, whether
high or low, wise or foolish, scandalous or reputable; there is nothing,
therefore, to hold it firm to any one body of men, or to any one consistent
scheme of politics. Nothing interposes, to prevent the full operation of all
the caprices and all the passions of a court upon the servants of the public.
The system of administration is open to continual shocks and changes, upon the
principles of the meanest cabal, and the most contemptible intrigue. Nothing
can be solid and permanent. All good men, at length, sly with horror from such
a service. Men of rank and ability, with the spirit which ought to animate such
men in a free state, while they decline the jurisdiction of dark cabal on their
actions and their fortunes, will, for both, cheerfully put themselves upon
their country. They will trust an inquisitive and distinguishing parliament;
because it does enquire, and does distinguish. If they act well, they know,
that in such a parliament, they will be supported against any intrigue; if they
act ill, they know that no intrigue can protect them. This situation, however
awful, is honorable. But in one hour, and in the self-same assembly, without
any assigned or assignable cause, to be precipitated from the highest authority
to the most marked neglect, possibly into the greatest peril of life and
reputation, is a situation full of danger, and destitute of honor. It will be
shunned equally by every man of prudence, and every man of spirit. -- Cause of
the Discontents of the Nation.

ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY.
TO be enabled to acquire, the people, without being servile, must be tractable
and obedient. The magistrate must have his reverence, the laws their authority.
The body of the people must not find the principles of natural subordination by
art rooted out of their minds. They must respect that property of which they
cannot partake. They must labor to obtain what by labor can be obtained; and
when they find, as they commonly do, the success disproportioned to the
endeavor, they must be taught their consolation in the final proportions of
eternal justice. Of this consolation, whoever deprives them, deadens their
industry, and strikes at the root of all acquisition as of all conservation. He
that does this is the cruel oppressor, the merciless enemy of the poor and
wretched; at the same time that by his wicked speculations he exposes the
fruits of successful industry, and the accumulations of fortune, to the plunder
of the negligent, the disappointed, and the unprosperous. -- Reflections on the
Revolution in France.

ASSIGNATS.
THE assembly took no notice of his recommendation. They were in this dilemma
-- If they continued to receive the assignats, cash must become an alien to
their treasury: If the treasury should refuse those paper amulets, or should
discountenance them in any degree, they must destroy the credit of their sole
resource. They seem, then, to have made their option; and to have given some
sort of credit to their paper by taking it themselves; at the same time in
their speeches they made a sort of swaggering declaration, something, I rather
think, above legislative competence; that is, that there is no difference in
value between metallic money and their assignats. This was a good stout proof
article of faith, pronounced under an anathema, by the venerable fathers of
this philosophic synod. Credat who will -- certainly not Judoeus Appella. --
Ibid.

ATHEISM.
WE know, and it is our pride to know, that man is by his constitution a
religious animal; that atheism is against, not only our reason but our
instincts; and that it cannot prevail long. -- Ibid.

ABUSES.
CONTROULED depravity is not innocence; and that it is not the labor of
delinquency in chains, that will correct abuses. Never did a serious plan of
amending of any old tyrannical establishment propose the authors and abettors
of the abuses as the reformers of them. -- Speech on Mr. Fox's East India Bill.

BEAUTY DEFINED.
BY beauty I mean that quality, or those qualities in bodies, by which they
cause love, or some passion similar to it. I confine this definition to the
merely sensible qualities of things, for the sake of preserving the utmost
simplicity in a subject which must always distract us, whenever we take in
those various causes of sympathy which attach us to any persons or things from
secondary considerations, and not from the direct force which they have merely
on being viewed. -- Sublime and Beautiful.

BEAUTY.
THE passion which belongs to generation, merely as such, is lust only. This is
evident in brutes, whose passions are more unmixed, and which pursue their
purposes more directly than ours. The only distinction they observe with regard
to their mates, is that of sex. It is true, that they stick severally to their
own species in preference to all others. But this preference, I imagine, does
not arise from any sense of beauty which they find in their species, as Mr.
Addison supposes, but from a law of some other kind, to which they are subject;
and this we may fairly conclude, from their apparent want of choice amongst
those objects to which the barriers of their species have confined them. But
man, who is a creature adapted to a greater variety and intricacy of relation,
connects with the general passion, the idea of some social qualities, which
direct and heighten the appetite which he has in common with all other animals;
and as he is not designed, like them, to live at large, it is fit that he
should have something to create a preference, and fix his choice; and this, in
general, should be some sensible quality; as no other can so quickly, so
powerfully, or so surely produce its effect. The object, therefore, of this
mixed passion, which we call love, is the beauty of the sex. Men are carried to
the sex in general, as it is the sex, and by the common law of nature; but they
are attached to particulars by personal beauty. I call beauty a social quality;
for where women and men, and not only they, but when other animals give us a
sense of joy and pleasure in beholding them (and there are many that do so),
they inspire us with sentiments of tenderness and affection toward their
persons; we like to have them near us, and we enter willingly into a kind of
relation with them, unless we should have strong reasons to the contrary. But
to what end, in many cases, this was designed, I am unable to discover; for I
see no greater reason for a connection between man and several animals who are
attired in so engaging a manner, than between him and some others who entirely
want this attraction, or possess it in a far weaker degree. But it is probable,
that Providence did not make even this distinction, but with a view to some
great end, though we cannot perceive distinctly what it is, as his wisdom is
not our wisdom, nor our ways his ways. -- Ibid.

FEMALE BEAUTY.
OBSERVE that part of a beautiful woman where she is, perhaps, the most
beautiful, about the neck and breasts; the smoothness; the softness; the easy
and insensible swell; the variety of the surface, which is never for the
smallest space the same; the deceitful maze, through which the unsteady eye
slides giddily, without knowing where to fix, or whither it is carried. Is not
this a demonstration of that change of surface, continual, yet hardly
perceptible at any point, which forms one of the great constituents of beauty?
It gives me no small pleasure to find that I can strengthen my theory in this
point, by the opinion of the very ingenious Mr. Hogarth; whose idea of the line
of beauty I take in general to be extremely just. But the idea of variation,
without attending so accurately to the manner of the variation, has led him to
consider angular figures as beautiful; these figures, it is true, vary greatly;
yet they vary in a sudden and broken manner; and I do not find any natural
object which is angular, and at the same beautiful. Indeed few natural objects
are entirely angular. -- Ibid.

BEAUTY OF THE SEX.
I NEED here say little of the fair sex, where I believe the point will be
easily allowed me. The beauty of women is considerably owing to their weakness
or delicacy, and so even enhanced by their timidity, a quality of mind
analogous to it. I would not here be understood to say, that weakness betraying
very bad health has any share in beauty; but the ill effect of this is not
because it is weakness, but because the ill state of health which produces such
weakness, alters the other conditions of beauty; the parts in such a case
collapse; the bright color, the lumen purpureum juventae, is gone; and the
fine variation is lost in wrinkles, sudden breaks, and right lines. -- Ibid.

BIRD. Description of a beautiful one.
THE view of a beautiful bird will illustrate this observation. Here we see the
head increasing insensibly to the middle, from whence it lessens gradually
until it mixes with the neck; the neck loses itself in a larger swell, which
continues to the middle of the body, when the whole decreases again to the
tail; the tail takes a new direction; but it soon varies its new course: it
blends again with the other parts; and the line is perpetually changing, above,
below, upon every side. In this description I have before me the idea of a
dove; it agrees very well with most of the conditions of beauty. It is smooth
and downy; its parts are (to use that expression) melted into one another; you
are represented with no sudden protuberance through the whole, and yet the
whole is continually changing. -- Ibid.

BRITISH FREEDOM.
This act, therefore, has this distinguished evil in it, that it is the first
partial suspension of the Habeas Corpus that has been made. The precedent,
which is always of very great importance, is now established. For the first
time a distinction is made among the people within this realm. Before this act,
every man putting his foot on English ground, every stranger owing only a local
and temporary allegiance, even negro slaves, who had been sold in the colonies
and under an act of parliament, became as free as every other man who breathed
the same air with them. -- Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol.

BRISTOL (CHARACTER OF THE ELECTORS OF.)
BY the favor of my fellow-citizens, I am the representative of an honest,
well ordered, virtuous city; of a people, who preserve more of the original
English simplicity, and purity of manners, than perhaps any other. You possess
among you several men and magistrates of large and cultivated understandings,
fit for any employment in any sphere. I do, to the best of my power, act so as
to make myself worthy of so honorable a choice. -- Ibid.

BOARD OF TRADE.
THERE is, Sir, another office, which was not long since closely connected with
this of the American secretary; but has been lately separated from it for the
very same purpose for which it had been conjoined; I mean the sole purpose of
all the separations and all conjunctions that have been lately made -- a job. I
speak, Sir, of the Board of Trade and Plantations. This board is a sort of
temperate bed of influence; a sort of gently ripening hot-house, where eight
members of parliament receive salaries of a thousand a year, for a certain
given time, in order to mature, at a proper season, a claim to two thousand,
granted for doing less, and on the credit of having toiled so long in that
inferior laborious department. -- Oecon. Reform.

BRITISH STATE.
THE British state is, without question, that which pursues the greatest
variety of creeds, and is the least disposed to sacrifice any one of them to
another, or to the whole. It aims at taking in the whole circle of human
desires, and securing for them their fair enjoyment. Our Legislature has been
very closely connected in its most efficient part with individual feeling and
with individual interest. Personal liberty, the most lively of these feelings,
and the most important of these interests, which in other European countries
has rather arisen from the system of measures, and the habitudes of life, than
from the laws of the state, (in which it flourished more from neglect than
attention) in England, has been a direct object of Government. -- Regicide
Peace.

BANK PAPER.
AT present the state of their treasury (France) sinks every day more and more
in cash, and swells more and more in fictitious representation. When so little
within or without is now found but paper, the representative not of opulence
but of want, the creature not of credit but of power, they imagine that our
flourishing state in England is owing to that bank paper, and not the bank
paper to the flourishing condition of our commerce, to the solidity of our
credit, and to the total exclusion of all idea of power from any part of the
transaction. They forget that, in England, not one shilling of paper-money of
any description is received but of choice; that the whole has had its origin in
cash actually deposited; and that it is convertible, at pleasure, in an
instant, and without the smallest loss, into cash again. Our paper is of value
in commerce, because in law it is of none. It is powerful on 'Change, because
in Westminsterhall it is not. -- Reflect. on the Revolution in France.

BISHOPS AND CANONS.
WITH regard to the estates possessed by bishops and canons, and commendatory
abbots, I cannot find out for what reason some landed estates may not be held
otherwise than by inheritance. Can any philosophy spoiler undertake to
demonstrate the positive or the comparative evil of having a certain, and that
too a large portion of landed property, passing in succession through persons
whose title to it is, always in theory, and often in fact, an eminent degree of
piety, morals, and learning; a property which, by its destination, in their
turn, and on the score of merit, gives to the noblest families renovation and
support, to the lowest the means of dignity and elevation; a property, the
tenure of which is the performance of some duty, (whatever value you may choose
to set upon that duty) and the character of whose proprietors demands at least
an exterior decorum and gravity of manners; who are to exercise a generous but
temperate hospitality; part of whose income they are to consider as a trust for
charity; and who, even when they fail in their trust, when they slide from
their character, and degenerate into a mere common secular nobleman or
gentleman, are in no respect worse than those who may succeed them in their
forfeited possessions? Is it better that estates should be held by those who
have no duty, than by those who have one? -- by those whose character and
destination point to virtues, than by those who have no rule and direction in
the expenditure of their estates but their own will and appetite? Nor are these
estates held altogether in the character or with the evils supposed inherent in
mortmain. They pass from hand to hand with a more rapid circulation than any
other. No excess is good; and therefore too great a proportion of landed
property may be held officially for life; but it does not seem to me of
material injury to any commonwealth, that there should exist some estates that
have a chance of being acquired by other means than the previous acquisition of
money. -- Ibid.

BOARD OF WORKS.
THE Board of Works, which in the seven years preceding 1777, has cost toward
400,000 l. and (if I recollect rightly) has not cost less in proportion from
the beginning of the reign, is under the very same description of all the other
ill-contrived establishments, and calls for the very same reform. We are to
seek for the visible signs of all this expense. -- For all this expense, we do
not see a building of the size and importance of a pigeon-house.
Buckinghamhouse was reprised by a bargain with the public, for one hundred
thousand pounds; and the small house at Windsor has been, if I mistake not,
undertaken since that account was brought before us. The good works of that
board of works are as carefully concealed as other good works ought to be; they
are perfectly invisible. But though it is the perfection of charity to be
concealed, it is, Sir, the property and glory of magnificence to appear, and
stand forward to the eye. -- Oecon. Reform.

BISHOPRICS.
I know well enough that the bishoprics and cures, under kingly and seignoral
patronage, as now they are in England, and as they have been lately in France,
are sometimes acquired by unworthy methods. -- Reflections on the Revolution in
France.

BRITISH LIBERTY, AN ENTAILED INHERITANCE.
FROM Magna Charta to the Declaration of Rights, it has been the uniform policy
of our constitution to claim and assist our liberties, as an entailed
inheritance derived to us from our forefathers, and to be transmitted to our
posterity, as an estate specially belonging to the people of this kingdom,
without any reference whatever to any other more general or prior right. By
this means our constitution preserves an unity in so great a diversity of its
parts. We have an inheritable crown; an inheritable peerage; and an house of
commons and a people inheriting privileges, franchises, and liberties, from a
long line of ancestors.

This policy appears to me to be the result of profound reflection, or rather
the happy effect of following nature, which is wisdom without reflection, and
above it. A spirit of innovation is generally the result of a selfish temper
and confined views. People will not look forward to posterity, who never look
backward to their ancestors. Besides, the people of England well know, that the
idea of inheritance furnishes a sure principle of conservation, and a sure
principle of transmission, without at all excluding a principle of improvement.
It leaves acquisition free, but it secures what it acquires. Whatever
advantages are obtained by a state proceeding on these maxims, are locked fast
as in a sort of family settlement; grasped as in a kind of mortmain for ever.
By a constitutional policy, working after the pattern of nature, we receive, we
hold, we transmit our government and our privileges, in the same manner in
which we enjoy and transmit our property and our lives. The institutions of
policy, the goods of fortune, the gifts of Providence, are handed down to us
and from us, in the same course and order. Our political system is placed in a
just correspondence and symmetry with the order of the world, and with the mode
of existence decreed to a permanent body composed of transitory parts; wherein,
by the disposition of a stupendous wisdom, moulding together the great
mysterious incorporation of the human race, the whole, at one time, is never
old, or middle-aged, or young, but in a condition of unchangeable constancy,
moves on through the varied tenor of perpetual decay, fall, renovation, and
progression. -- Thus, by preserving the method of nature in the conduct of the
state, in what we improve we are never wholly new; in what we retain, we are
never wholly obsolete. By adhering in this manner and on these principles to
our forefathers, we are guided not by the superstition of antiquarians, but by
the spirit of philosophic analogy. In this choice of inheritance we have given
to our frame of polity the image of a relation in blood; binding up the
constitution of our country with our dearest domestic ties; adopting our
fundamental laws into the bosom of our family affections; keeping inseparable,
and cherishing with the warmth of all their combined and mutually reflected
charities, our state, our hearths, our sepulchers, and our altars.

Through the same plan of a conformity to nature in our artificial
institutions, and by calling in the aid of her unerring and powerful instincts,
to fortify the fallible and feeble contrivances of our reason, we have derived
several other, and those no small benefits, from considering our liberties in
the light of an inheritance. Always acting as if in the presence of canonized
forefathers, the spirit of freedom, leading in itself to misrule and excess, is
tempered with an awful gravity. This idea of a liberal descent inspires us with
a sense of habitual native dignity, which prevents that upstart insolence
almost inevitably adhering to and disgracing those who are the first acquirers
of any distinction. By this means our liberty becomes a noble freedom. It
carries an imposing and majestic aspect; it has a pedigree and illustrating
ancestors; it has its bearings and its ensigns armorials; it has its gallery of
portraits; its monumental inscriptions; its records, evidences, and titles. We
procure reverence to our civil institutions on the principle upon which nature
teaches us to revere individual men; on account of their age; and on account of
those from whom they are descended. -- Ibid.

CAUTION. Great Caution to be used in the Consideration of any complex Matter.
THE characters of nature are legible, it is true; but they are not plain
enough to enable those who run, to read them. We must make use of a cautious, I
had almost said, a timorous method of proceeding. We must not attempt to fly,
when we can scarcely pretend to creep. In considering any complex matter, we
ought to examine every distinct ingredient in the composition, one by one, and
reduce every thing to the utmost simplicity; since the condition of our nature
binds us to a strict law and very narrow limits. We ought afterward to
re-examine the principles by the effect of the composition, as well as the
composition by that of the principles: we ought to compare our subject with
things of a similar nature, and even with things of a contrary nature; for
discoveries may be and often are made by the contrast, which would escape us on
the single view. -- Sublime and Beautiful.

CONSTITUTION. Spirit of the British Constitution.
DO not entertain so weak an imagination, as that your register and your bonds,
your affidavits and your sufferances, your cockets and your clearances, are
what form the great securities of your commerce. Do not dream that your letters
of office, and your instructions, and your suspending clauses, are the things
that hold together the great contexture of this mysterious whole. These things
do not make your government. Dead instruments, passive tools as they are, it is
the spirit of the English communion, which, infused through the mighty mass,
pervades, feeds, unites, invigorates, vivisies every part of the empire, even
down to the minutest member. -- Speech on Conciliation with America.

COLORS MOST APPROPRIATE TO BEAUTY.
THOSE colors which seem most appropriated to beauty, are the milder of every
sort; light greens, soft blues, weak whites, pink reds, and violets. If the
colors be strong and vivid, they are always diversified, and the object is
never of one strong color; there are almost always such a number of them, (as
in variegated flowers) that the strength and glare of each is considerably
abated. In a fine complexion, there is not only some variety in the coloring,
but the colors; neither the red nor the white are strong and glaring. Besides,
they are mixed in such a manner, and with such gradations, that it is
impossible to fix the bounds. On the same principle it is, that the dubious
color in the necks and tails of peacocks, and about the heads of drakes, is so
very agreeable. In reality, the beauty both of shape and coloring are as
nearly related, as we can well suppose it possible for things of such different
natures to be. -- Sublime and Beautiful.

CHRISTENDOM. The States of the Christian World.
THE States of the Christian World have grown up to their present magnitude in
a great length of time, and by a great variety of accidents. They have been
improved to what we see them with greater or less degrees of felicity and
skill. Not one of them has been formed upon a regular plan, or with any unity
of design. As their constitutions are not systematical, they have not been
directed to any peculiar end, eminently distinguished, and superseding every
other. The objects which they embrace are of the greatest possible variety, and
have become in a manner infinite. In all these old countries the state has been
made to the people, and not the people conformed to the state. Every state has
pursued, not only every sort of social advantage, but it has cultivated the
welfare of every individual. His wants, his wishes, even his tastes have been
consulted. This comprehensive scheme, virtually produced a degree of personal
liberty in forms the most adverse to it. That was found, under monarchies
styled absolute, in a degree unknown to the ancient commonwealths. From hence
the powers of all our modern states meet, in all their movements, with some
obstruction. It is therefore no wonder, that when these states are to be
considered as machines to operate for some one great end, that this dissipated
and balanced force is not easily concentred, or made to bear upon one point. --
Regicide Peace.

CONSTITUTION AND COMMERCE.
When I (Mr. Burke) first devoted myself to the public service, I considered
how I should render myself fit for it; and this I did by endeavoring to
discover what it was, that gave this country the rank it holds in the world. I
found that our prosperity and dignity arose principally, if not solely, from
two sources; our constitution and commerce. Both these I have spared no study
to understand, and no endeavor to support.

The distinguishing part of our constitution is its liberty. To preserve that
liberty inviolate, seems the particular duty and proper trust of a member of
the House of Commons. But the liberty, the only liberty I mean, is a liberty
connected with order; that not only exists along with order and virtue, but
which cannot exist at all without them. It inheres in good and steady
government, as in its substance and vital principle.

The other source of our power is commerce, of which you are so large a part,
and which cannot exist, no more than your liberty, without a connection with
many virtues. -- Speech to the Electors of Bristol.

CIVIL DISSENTIONS.
AT this proposition, I must pause a moment. The thing seems a great deal too
big for my ideas of jurisprudence. It should seem, to my way of conceiving such
matters, that there is a very wide difference in reason and policy, between the
mode of proceeding on the irregular conduct of scattered individuals, or even
of bands of men, who disturb order within the state, and the civil dissentions
which may, from time to time, on great questions, agitate the several
communities which compose a great empire. It looks to me to be narrow and
pedantic, to apply the ordinary ideas of criminal justice to this great public
contest. I do not know the method of drawing up an indictment against an whole
people. I cannot insult and ridicule the feelings of millions of my fellow
creatures, as Sir Edward Coke insulted one excellent individual (Sir Walter
Raleigh) at the bar. I am not ripe to pass sentence on the gravest public
bodies, entrusted with magistracies of great authority and dignity, and charged
with the safety of their fellow-citizens, upon the very same title that I am. I
really think, that for wise men, this is not judicious; for sober men, not
decent; for minds tinctured with humanity, not mild and merciful. -- Speech on
Conciliation with America.

CLERGY.
IF your clergy, or any clergy, should show themselves vicious beyond the fair
bounds allowed to human infirmity, and to those professional faults which can
hardly be separated from professional virtues, though their vices never can
countenance the exercise of oppression, I do admit, that they would naturally
have the effect of abating very much of our indignation against the tyrants who
exceed measure and justice in their punishment. I can allow in clergymen,
through all their divisions, some tenaciousness of their own opinion; some
overflowings of zeal for its propagation; some predilection to their own state
and office; some attachment to the interest of their own corpse; some preference
to those who listen with docility to their doctrines, beyond those who scorn
and deride them. I allow all this, because I am a man who have to deal with
men, and who would not, through a violence of toleration, run into the greatest
of all intolerance. I must bear with infirmities until they fester into crimes.
-- Reflect. on the Revolution in France.

CHURCH ESTABLISHMEMT.
FIRST, I beg leave to speak of our church establishment, which is the first of
our prejudices, not a prejudice destitute of reason, but involving in it
profound and extensive wisdom. I speak of it first. It is first, and last, and
midst in our minds. For, taking ground on that religious system, of which we
are now in possession, we continue to act on the early received, and uniformly
continued sense of mankind. That sense not only, like a wise architect, has
built up the august fabric of states, but like a provident proprietor, to
preserve the structure from profanation and ruin, as a sacred temple, purged
from all the impurities of fraud, and violence, and injustice, and tyranny,
has solemnly and for ever consecrated the commonwealth, and all that officiate
in it. This consecration is made, that all who administer in the government of
men, in which they stand in the person of God himself, should have high and
worthy notions of their function and destination; that their hope should be
full of immortality; that they should not look to the paltry pelf of the
moment, nor to the temporary and transient praise of the vulgar, but to a
solid, permanent existence, in the permanent part of their nature, and to a
permanent fame and glory, in the example they leave as a rich inheritance to
the world.

Such sublime principles ought to be infused into persons of exalted
situations; and religious establishments provided, that may continually revive
and enforce them. Every sort of moral, every sort of civil, every sort of
politic institution, aiding the rational and natural ties that connect the
human understanding and affections to the divine, are not more than necessary,
in order to build up that wonderful structure, Man; whose prerogative it is, to
be in a great degree a creature of his own making; and who when made as he
ought to be made, is destined to hold no trivial place in the creation. But
whenever man is put over men, as the better nature ought ever to preside, in
that case more particularly, he should as nearly as possible be approximated to
his perfection. -- Ibid.

CHURCH AND STATE.
THE consecration of the state, by a state religious establishment, is
necessary also to operate with an wholesome awe upon free citizens; because, in
order to secure their freedom, they must enjoy some determinate portion of
power. To them therefore a religion connected with the state, and with their
duty toward it, becomes even more necessary than in such societies, where the
people by the terms of their subjection are confined to private sentiments, and
the management of their own family concerns. All persons possessing any portion
of power ought to be strongly and awfully impressed with an idea that they act
in trust; and that they are to account for their conduct in that trust to the
one great master, author and founder of society. -- Ibid.

COUNCIL.
SUCH a body kings generally have as a council. A monarchy may exist without
it; but it seems to be in the very essence of a republican government. It holds
a sort of middle place between the supreme power exercised by the people, or
immediately delegated from them, and the mere executive. -- Ibid.

CONSCIENCE.
IT is thus, and for the same end, that they (the regicides) endeavor to
destroy that tribunal of conscience which exists independently of edicts and
decrees. Your despots govern by terror. They know, that he who fears God fears
nothing else; and therefore they eradicate from the mind, through their
Voltaire, their Helvetius, and the rest of that infamous gang, hat only sort of
fear which generates true courage. Their object is, that their fellow citizens
may be under the dominion of no awe, but that of their committee of research,
and of their lantern -- Ibid.

COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN.
THE power of the House of Commons, direct or indirect, is indeed great; and
long may it be able to preserve its greatness, and the spirit belonging to true
greatness, at the full; and it will do so, as long as it can keep the breakers
of law in India from becoming the makers of law for England. -- Ibid.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE NATURE AND CHARACTER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, (SEE KING'S
MEN.
I HAVE my eye chiefly on the House of Commons. I hope I shall be indulged in a
few observations on the nature and character of that assembly; not with regard
to its legal form and power, but to its spirit, and to the purposes it is meant
to answer in the constitution.

The House of Commons was supposed originally to be no part of the standing
government of this country. It was considered as a control, issuing
immediately from the people, and speedily to be resolved into the mass from
whence it arose. In this respect it was in the higher part of government what
juries are in the lower. The capacity of a magistrate being transitory, and
that of a citizen permanent, the latter capacity it was hoped would of course
preponderate in all discussions, not only between the people and the standing
authority of the crown, but between the people and the fleeting authority of
the House of Commons itself. It was hoped that, being of a middle nature
between subject and government, they would feel with a more tender and a nearer
interest every thing that concerned the people, than the other remoter and more
permanent parts of legislature.

Whatever alterations time and the necessary accommodation of business may have
introduced, this character can never be sustained, unless the House of Commons
shall be made to bear some stamp of the actual disposition of the people at
large. It would (among public misfortunes) be an evil more natural and
tolerable, that the House of Commons should be infected with every epidemical
phrensy of the people, as this would indicate some consanguinity, some sympathy
of nature with their constituents, than that they should in all cases be wholly
untouched by the opinions and feelings of the people out of doors. By this want
of sympathy they would cease to be an House of Commons. For it is not the
derivation of the power of that House from the people, which makes it in a
distinct sense their representative. The King is the representative of the
people; so are the lords; so are the judges. They all are trustees for the
people, as well as the Commons; because no power is given for the sole sake of
the holder; and although government certainly is an institution of divine
authority, yet its forms, and the persons who administer it, all originate from
the people.

A popular origin cannot therefore be the characteristical distinction of a
popular representative. This belongs equally to all parts of government, and in
all forms. The virtue, spirit, and essence of a House of Commons consists in
its being the express image of the feelings of the nation. It was not ^ed to be
a control upon the people, as of late (...) been taught, by a doctrine of the
most pernicious tendency. It was designed as a control for the people. Other
institutions have been formed for the purpose of checking popular excesses; and
they are, I apprehend, fully adequate to their object. If not, they ought to be
made so. The House of Commons, as it was never intended for the support of
peace and subordination, is miserably appointed for that service; having no
stronger weapon than its mace, and no better officer than its sergeant at arms,
which it can command of its own proper authority. A vigilant and jealous eye
over executory and judicial magistracy; an anxious care of public money, an
openness, approaching toward facility, to public complaint: these seem to be
the true characteristics of an House of Commons. But an addressing House of
Commons, and a petitioning nation; an House of Commons full of confidence, when
the nation is plunged in despair; in the utmost harmony with ministers, whom
the people regard with the utmost abhorrence; who vote thanks, when the public
opinion calls upon them for impeachments; who are eager to grant, when the
general voice demands account; who, in all disputes between the people and
administration, presume against the people; who punish their disorders, but
refuse even to inquire into the provocations to them; this is an unnatural, a
monstrous state of things in this constitution. Such an assembly may be a
great, wise, awful senate; but it is not to any popular purpose an House of
Commons. -- Thoughts on the Cause of the present Discontents.

CARNATIC, (SEE INDIA.) History of Hyder Ali's irruption into the Eastern
Carnatic.
WHEN at length Hyder Ali found that he had to do with men who either would
sign no convention, or whom no treaty, and no signature could bind, and who
were the determined enemies of human intercourse itself, he decreed to make the
country possessed by these incorrigible and predestined criminals a memorable
example to mankind. He resolved, in the gloomy recesses of a mind capacious of
such things, to leave the whole Carnatic an everlasting monument of vengeance;
and to put perpetual desolation as a barrier between him and those against whom
the faith which holds the moral elements of the world together was no
protection. He became at length so confident of his force, so collected in his
might, that he made no secret whatsoever of his dreadful resolution. Having
terminated his disputes with every enemy, and every rival, who buried their
mutual animosities in their common detestation against the creditors of the
Nabob of Arcot, he drew from every quarter whatever a savage ferocity could add
to his new rudiments in the arts of destruction; and compounding all the
materials of fury, havoc, and desolation, into one black cloud, he hung for a
while on the declivities of the mountains. Whilst the authors of all these
evils were idly and stupidly gazing on this menacing meteor, which blackened
all their horizon, it suddenly burst, and poured down the whole of its contents
upon the plains of the Carnatic. Then ensued a scene of woe, the like of which
no eye had seen, no heart conceived, and which no tongue can adequately tell.
All the horrors of war before known or heard of, were mercy to that new havoc.
A storm of universal fire blasted every field, consumed every house, destroyed
every temple. The miserable inhabitants flying from their flaming villages, in
part were slaughtered; others, without regard to sex, to age, to the respect of
rank, or sacredness of function; fathers torn from children, husbands from
wives, enveloped in a whirlwind of cavalry, and amidst the goading spears of
drivers, and the trampling of pursuing horses, were swept into captivity, in an
unknown and hostile land. Those who were able to evade this tempest, fled to
the walled cities. But escaping from fire, sword, and exile, they fell into the
jaws of famine.

The alms of the settlement, in this dreadful exigency, were certainly liberal;
and all was done by charity that private charity could do: but it was a people
in beggary; it was a nation which stretched out its hands for food. For months
together these creatures of sufferance, whose very excess and luxury in their
most plenteous days, had fallen short of the allowance of our austerest fasts,
silent, patient, resigned, without sedition or disturbance, almost without
complaint, perished by an hundred a day in the streets of Madras; every day
seventy at least laid their bodies in the streets, or on the glacis of Tanjore,
and expired of famine in the granary of India. I was going to awake your
justice toward this unhappy part of our fellow citizens, by bringing before
you some of the circumstances of this plague of hunger. Of all the calamities
which beset and waylay the life of man, this comes the nearest to our heart,
and is that wherein the proudest of us all feels himself to be nothing more
than he is: but I find myself unable to manage it with decorum; these details
are of a species of horror so nauseous and disgusting; they are so degrading to
the sufferers and to the hearers; they are so humiliating to human nature
itself, that, on better thoughts, I find it more advisable to throw a pall
over this hideous object, and to leave it to your general conceptions.

Appendix No. 4, Report of the Committee of assigned Revenue.
For eighteen months, without intermission, this destruction raged from the
gates of Madras to the gates of Tanjore; and so completely did these masters in
their art, Hyder Ali, and his more ferocious son, absolve themselves of their
impious vow, that when the British armies traversed, as they did the Carnatic
for hundreds of miles in all directions, through the whole line of their march
they did not see one man, not one woman, not one child, not one four-footed
beast of any description whatever. One dead uniform silence reigned over the
whole region. With the inconsiderable exceptions of the narrow vicinage of some
few forts, I wish to be understood as speaking literally. I mean to produce to
you more than three witnesses, above all exception, who will support this
assertion in its full extent. That hurricane of war passed through every part
of the central provinces of the Carnatic. Six or seven districts to the north
and to the south (and these not wholly untouched) escaped the general ravage.
-- Speech on the Nabob of Arcot's Debts.

CARNATIC DESCRIBED.
THE Carnatic is a country not much inferior in extent to England. Figure to
yourself, Mr. Speaker, the land in whose representative chair you sit; figure
to yourself the form and fashion of your sweet and cheerful country from Thames
to Trent, north and south, and from the Irish to the German sea east and west,
emptied and embowelled (May God avert the omen of our crimes!) by so
accomplished a desolation. Extend your imagination a little further, and then
suppose your ministers taking a survey of this scene of waste and desolation;
what would be your thoughts if you should be informed, that they were computing
how much had been the amount of the excises, how much the customs, how much the
land and malt tax, in order that they should charge (take it in the most
favorable light) for public service, upon the relics of the satiated vengeance
of relentless enemies, the whole of what England had yielded in the most
exuberant seasons of peace and abundance? What would you call it? To call it
tyranny, sublimed into madness, would be too faint an image; yet this very
madness is the principle upon which the ministers at your right hand have
proceeded in their estimate of the revenues of the Carnatic, when they were
providing, not supply for the establishments of its protection, but rewards for
the authors of its ruin.

Every day you are fatigued and disgusted with this cant, "the Carnatic is a
country that will soon recover, and become instantly as prosperous as ever."
They think they are talking to innocents, who will believe that by sowing of
dragons teeth, men may come up ready grown and ready armed. They who will give
themselves the trouble of considering (for it requires no great reach of
thought, no very profound knowledge) the manner in which mankind are increased,
and countries cultivated, will regard all this raving as it ought to be
regarded. In order that the people, after a long period of vexation and
plunder, may be in a condition to maintain government, government must begin by
maintaining them. Here the road to economy lies not through receipt, but
through expense; and in that country nature has given no short cut to your
object. Men must propagate, like other animals, by the mouth. Never did
oppression light the nuptial torch; never did extortion and usury spread out
the genial bed.

Does any of you think that England, so wasted, would, under such a nursing
attendance, so rapidly and cheaply recover? But he is meanly acquainted with
either England or India, who does not know that England would a thousand times
sooner resume population, fertility, and what ought to be the ultimate
secretion from both, revenue, than such a country as the Carnatic.

The Carnatic is not by the bounty of nature a fertile soil. The general size
of its cattle is proof enough that it is much otherwise. It is some days since
I moved, that a curious and interesting map, kept in the India House, should be
laid before you. The India House is not yet in readiness to send it; I have
therefore brought down my own copy, and there it lies for the use of any
gentleman who may think such a matter worthy of his attention. It is indeed a
noble map, and of noble things; but it is decisive against the golden dreams
and sanguine speculations of avarice run mad. In addition to what you know must
be the case in every part of the world (the necessity of a previous provision
of habitation, seed, stock, capital) that map will show you, that the use of
the influences of Heaven itself, are in that country a work of art. The
Carnatic is refreshed by few or no living brooks or running streams, and it has
rain only at a season; but its product of rice exacts the use of water subject
to perpetual command. This is the national bank of the Carnatic, on which it
must have a perpetual credit, or it perish irretrievably. For that reason, in
the happier times of India, a number almost incredible of reservoirs have been
made in chosen places throughout the whole country; they are formed, for the
greater part, of mounds of earth and stones, with sluices of solid masonry; the
whole constructed with admirable skill and labor, and maintained at a mighty
charge. In the territory contained in that map (Mr. Barnard's map of the
Jaghire) alone, I have been at the trouble of reckoning the reservoirs, and
they amount to upwards of eleven hundred, from the extent of two or three acres
to five miles in circuit. From these reservoirs currents are occasionally drawn
over the fields, and these watercourse again call for a considerable expense
to keep them properly scoured and duly levelled. Taking the district in that
map as a measure, there cannot be in the Carnatic and Tanjore fewer than ten
thousand of these reservoirs of the larger and middling dimensions, to say
nothing of those for domestic services, and the use of religious purification.
These are not the enterprises of your power, nor in a style of magnificence
suited to the taste of your minister. These are the monuments of real kings,
who were the fathers of their people; testators to a posterity which they
embraced as their own. These are the grand sepulchers built by ambition; but by
the ambition of an unsatiable benevolence, which, not contented with reigning
in the dispensation of happiness during the contracted term of human life, had
strained, with all the reachings and graspings of a vivacious mind, to extend
the dominion of their bounty beyond the limits of nature, and to perpetuate
themselves through generations of generations, the guardians, the protectors,
the nourishers of mankind.

What, Sir, would a virtuous and enlightened ministry do on the view of the
ruins of such works before them? On the view of such a chasm of desolation as
that which yawned in the midst of those countries to the north and south, which
still bore some vestiges of cultivation? They would have reduced all their most
necessary establishments; they would have suspended the justest payments; they
would have employed every shilling derived from the producing to re-animate the
powers of the unproductive parts. While they were performing this fundamental
duty, whilst they were celebrating these mysteries of justice and humanity,
they would have told the corpse of fictitious creditors, whose crimes were their
claims, that they must keep an awful distance; that they must silence their
inauspicious tongues; that they must hold off their profane unhallowed paws
from this holy work; they would have proclaimed with a voice that should make
itself heard, that on every country the first creditor is the plow; that this
original, indefeasible claim supersedes every other demand.

This is what a wise and virtuous ministry would have done and said. This,
therefore, is what our minister could never think of saying or doing. A
ministry of another kind would have first improved the country, and have thus
laid a solid foundation for future opulence and future force. But on this grand
point of the restoration of the country, there is not one syllable to be found
in the correspondence of our ministers, from the first to the last; they felt
nothing for a land desolated by fire, sword, and famine; their sympathies took
another direction; they were touched with pity for bribery, so long tormented
with a fruitless itching of its palms; their bowels yearned for usury, that had
long missed the harvest of its returning months; they f^lt for peculation which
had been for so many years ^ing in the dust of an empty treasury; they were ^ed
into compassion for rapine and oppression, ^king their dry, parched, unbloody
jaws. These were the necessities for which they were studious to provide. --
Ibid.

CONTRIBUTIONS, (VOLUNTARY.)
AND what is the soil or climate, where experience has not uniformly proved
that the voluntary flow of heaped up plenty, bursting from the weight of its
own rich luxuriance, has ever run with a more copious stream of revenue, than
could be squeezed from the dry husks of oppressed indigence, by the straining
of all the politic machinery in the world. -- Speech on Conciliation with
America.

CRIMES.
IS confounding the order of crimes, which, whether by putting them from a
higher part of the scale to the lower, or from the lower to the higher, is
never done without dangerously disordering the whole frame of jurisprudence. --
Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol.

CONVOCATION OF THE CLERGY.
WE know, that the convocation of the clergy had formerly been called, and sat
with nearly as much regularity to business as parliament itself. It is now
called for form only. It sits for the purpose of making some polite
ecclesiastical compliments to the king; and when that grace is said, retires
and is heard of no more. It is however a part of the constitution, and may be
called out into act and energy, whenever there is occasion; and whenever those,
who conjure up that spirit, will choose to abide the consequences. It is wise
to permit its legal existence; it is much wiser to continue it a legal
existence only. So truly has prudence, (constituted as the god of this lower
world) the entire dominion over every exercise of power, committed into its
hands; and yet I have lived to see prudence and conformity to circumstances,
wholly set at naught in our late controversies, and treated as if they were the
most contemptible and irrational of all things. I have heard it an hundred
times very gravely alleged, that in order to keep power in wind, it was
necessary, by preference, to exert it in those very points in which it was most
likely to be resisted, and the least likely to be productive of any advantage.
-- Ibid.

CABINET (THE DOUBLE.)
IT must be remembered, that since the revolution, until the period we are
speaking of, the influence of the crown had been always employed in supporting
the ministers of state, and in carrying on the public business according to
their opinions. But the party now in question is formed upon a very different
idea. It is to intercept the favor, protection and confidence of the crown in
the passage to its ministers; it is to come between them and their importance
in parliament; it is to separate them from all their natural and acquired
dependencies; it is intended as control, not the support, of administration.
The machinery of this system is perplexed in its movements, and false in its
principle. It is formed on a supposition that the king is something external to
his government; and that he may be honored and aggrandized, even by its
debility and disgrace. The plan proceeds expressly on the idea of enfeebling
the regular executory power. It proceeds on the idea of weakening the state in
order to strengthen the court. The scheme depending entirely on distrust, on
disconnection, on mutability by principle, on systematic weakness in every
particular member; it is impossible that the total result should be substantial
strength of any kind.

As a foundation of their scheme, the cabal have established a sort of rota in
the court. All sorts of parties, by this means, have been brought into
administration, from whence few have had the good fortune to escape without
disgrace; none at all without considerable losses. In the beginning of each
arrangement no professions of confidence and support are wanting, to induce the
leading men to engage. But while the ministers of the day appear in all the
pomp and pride of power, while they have all their canvas spread out to the
wind, and every sail filled with the fair and prosperous gale of royal favor,
in a short time they find, they know not how, a current, which sets directly
against them; which prevents all progress; and even drives them backwards. They
grow ashamed and mortified in a situation, which, by its vicinity to power,
only serves to remind them the more strongly of their insignificance. They are
obliged either to execute the orders of their inferiors, or to see themselves
opposed by the natural instruments of their office. With the loss of their
dignity they lose their temper. In their turn they grow troublesome to that
cabal, which, whether it supports or opposes, equally disgraces and equally
betrays them. It is soon found necessary to get rid of the heads of
administration; but it is of the heads only. As there always are many rotten
members belonging to the best connections, it is not hard to persuade several
to continue in office without their leaders. By this means the party goes out
much thinner than it came in; and is only reduced in strength by its temporary
possession of power. Besides, if by accident, or in course of changes, that
power should be recovered, the junto have thrown up a retrenchment of these
carcases, which may serve to cover themselves in a day of danger. They
conclude, not unwisely, that such rotten members will become the first objects
of disgust and resentment to their ancient connexions.

They contrive to form in the outward administration two parties at the least;
which, whilst they are tearing one another to pieces, are both competitors for
the favor and protection of the cabal; and, by their emulation, contribute to
throw every thing more and more into the hands of the interior managers.

A minister of state will sometimes keep himself totally estranged from all his
colleagues; will differ from them in their councils, will privately traverse,
and publicly oppose, their measures, He will, however, continue in his
employment. Instead of suffering any mark of displeasure, he will be
distinguished by an unbounded profusion of court rewards and caresses; because
he does what is expected, and all that is expected, from men in office. He
helps to keep some form of administration in being, and keeps it at the same
time as weak and divided as possible.

However, we must take care not to be mistaken, or to imagine that such persons
have any weight in their opposition. When, by them, administration is convinced
of its insignificancy, they are soon to be convinced of their own. They never
are suffered to succeed in their opposition. They and the world are to be
satisfied, that, neither office, nor authority, nor property, nor ability,
eloquence, counsel, skill, or union, are of the least importance; but that the
mere influence of the court, naked of all support, and destitute of all
management, is abundantly sufficient for all its own purposes.

When any adverse connection is to be destroyed, the cabal seldom appear in the
work themselves. They find out some person of whom the party entertains an high
opinion. Such a person they endeavor to delude with various pretenses. They
teach him first to distrust, and then to quarrel with his friends; among whom,
by the same arts, they excite a similar diffidence of him; so that, in this
mutual fear and distrust, he may suffer himself to be employed as the
instrument in the change which is brought about. Afterward they are sure to
destroy him in his turn, by setting up in his place some person in whom he had
himself reposed the greatest confidence, and who serves to carry off a
considerable part of his adherents.

As in destroying their enemies they make use of instruments not immediately
belonging to their corpse, so in advancing their own friends they pursue exactly
the same method. To promote any of them to considerable rank or emolument, they
commonly take care that the recommendation shall pass through the hands of the
oftensible ministry: such a recommendation might however appear to the world,
as some proof of the credit of ministers, and some means of increasing their
strength. To prevent this, the persons so advanced are directed, in all
companies, industriously to declare, that they are under no obligations
whatsoever to administration; that they have received their office from another
quarter; that they are totally free and independent.

When the faction has any job of lucre to obtain, or of vengeance to
perpetrate, their way is, to select, for the execution, those very persons to
whose habits, friendships, principles, and declarations, such proceedings are
publicly known to be the most adverse; at once to render the instruments the
more odious, and therefore the more dependent, and to prevent the people from
ever reposing a confidence in any appearance of private friendship, or public
principle.

If the administration seem now and then, from remissness, or from fear of
making themselves disagreeable, to suffer any popular excesses to go
unpunished, the cabal immediately sets up some creature of theirs to raise a
clamor against the ministers, as having shamefully betrayed the dignity of
government. Then they compel the ministry to become active in conferring
rewards and honors on the persons who have been the instruments of their
disgrace; and, after having first vilified them with the higher orders for
suffering the laws to sleep over the licentiousness of the populace, they drive
them (in order to make amends for their former inactivity) to some act of
atrocious violence, which renders them completely abhorred by the people.

They who remember the riots which attended the Middlesex election; the opening
of the present parliament; and the transactions relative to Saint George's
Fields, will not be at a loss for an application of these remarks.

That this body may be enabled to compass all the ends of its institution, its
members are scarcely ever to aim at the high and responsible offices of the
state. They are distributed with art and judgment through all the secondary,
but efficient, departments of office, and through the households of all the
branches of the royal family: so as on one hand to occupy all the avenues to
the throne; and on the other to forward or frustrate the execution of any
measure, according to their own interests. For with the credit and support
which they are known to have, though for the greater part in places which are
only a genteel excuse for salary, they possess all the influence of the highest
posts; and they dictate publicly in almost every thing, even with a parade of
superiority. Whenever they dissent (as it often happens) from their nominal
leaders, the trained part of the senate, instinctively in the secret, is sure
to follow them; provided the leaders, sensible of their situation, do not of
themselves recede in time from their most declared opinions. This latter is
generally the case. It will not be conceivable to any one who has not seen it,
what pleasure is taken by the cabal in rendering these heads of office
thoroughly contemptible and ridiculous. And when they are become so, they have
then the best chance for being well supported.

The members of the court faction are fully indemnified for not holding places
on the slippery heights of the kingdom, not only by the lead in all affairs,
but also by the perfect security in which they enjoy less conspicuous, but very
advantageous situations. Their places are, in express legal tenure, or in
effect, all of them for life. Whilst the first and most respectable persons in
the kingdom are tossed about like tennis balls, the sport of a blind and
insolent caprice, no minister dares even to cast an oblique glance at the
lowest of their body. If an attempt be made upon one of this corpse, immediately
he flies to sanctuary, and pretends to the most inviolable of all promises. No
convenience of public arrangement is available to remove any one of them from
the specific situation he holds; and the slightest attempt upon one of them, by
the most powerful minister, is a certain preliminary to his own destruction.

Conscious of their independence, they bear themselves with a lofty air to the
exterior ministers. Like Janissaries, they derive a kind of freedom from the
very condition of their servitude. They may act just as they please; provided
they are true to the great ruling principle of their institution. It is,
therefore, not at all wonderful, that people should be so desirous of adding
themselves to that body, in which they may possess and reconcile satisfactions
the most alluring, and seemingly the most contradictory; enjoying at once all
the spirited pleasure of independence, and all the gross lucre and sat
emoluments of servitude.

Here is a sketch, though a slight one, of the constitution, laws, and policy
of this new court corporation. The name by which they choose to distinguish
themselves, is that of king's men, or the king's friends, by an invidious
exclusion of the rest of his Majesty's most loyal and affectionate subjects.
The whole system, comprehending the exterior and interior administrations, is
commonly called in the technical language of the court, double cabinet; in
French or English, as you choose to pronounce it. -- Thoughts on the Cause of
the Discontents of the Nation.

CHARTERS.
CHARTERS are kept when their purposes are maintained: they are violated when
the privilege is supported against its end and its object. -- Speech on Mr.
Fox's East India Bill.

CONNECTION AND FACTION.
CONNECTION and faction are equivalent terms, is an opinion which has been
carefully inculcated at all times by unconstitutional statesmen. The reason is
evident. Whilst men are linked together, they easily and speedily communicate
the alarm of any evil design. They are enabled to fathom it with common
counsel, and to oppose it with united strength. Whereas, when they lie
dispersed, without concert, order, or discipline, communication is uncertain,
counsel difficult, and resistance impracticable. Where men are not acquainted
with each other's principles, nor experienced in each other's talents, nor at
all practiced in their mutual habitudes and dispositions by joint efforts in
business; no personal confidence, no friendship, no common interest, subsisting
among them; it is evidently impossible that they can act a public part with
uniformity, perseverance, or efficacy. In a connection, the most inconsiderable
man, by adding to the weight of the whole, has his value, and his use; out of
it, the greatest talents are wholly unserviceable to the public. No man, who is
not inflamed by vainglory into enthusiasm, can flatter himself that his
single, unsupported, desultory, unsystematic endeavors are of power to defeat
the subtle designs and united cabals of ambitious citizens. When bad men
combine, the good must associate, else they will fall, one by one, an unpitied
sacrifice in a contemptible struggle. -- Thoughts on the Cause of the present
Discontents.

CHARACTER.
THOSE who quit their proper character, to assume what does not belong to them,
are, for the greater part, ignorant both of the character they leave, and of
the character they assume. -- Ibid.

DIFFICULTY.
THIS it has been the glory of the great masters in all the arts to confront,
and to overcome; and when they had overcome the first difficulty, to turn it
into an instrument for new conquests over new difficulties; thus to enable them
to extend the empire of their science; and even to push forward beyond the
reach of their original thoughts, the landmarks of the human understanding
itself. Difficulty is a severe instructor, set over us by the supreme ordinance
of a parental guardian and legislator, who knows us better than we know
ourselves, as he loves us better too. Pater ipse colendi haud sacilem esse viam
voluit. He that wrestles with us, strengthens our nerves, and sharpens our
skill. Our antagonist is our helper. This amicable conflict with difficulty
obliges us to an intimate acquaintance with our object, and compels us to
consider it in all its relations. It will not suffer us to be superficial. --
Reflections on the Revolution in France.

DELUSION.
DELUSION and weakness produce not one mischief the less, because they are
universal. -- Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol.

DEATH.
BUT as pain is stronger in its operations than pleasure, so death is in
general a much more affecting idea than pain; because there are very few pains,
however equisite, which are not preferred to death; nay, what generally make
pain itself, if I may say so, is, that it is considered as an emissary of this
king of terrors. -- Sublime and Beautiful.

DARKNESS.
DARKNESS is more productive of sublime ideas than light. Our great poet was
convinced of this; and indeed so full was he of this idea, so entirely
possessed with the power of a well-managed darkness, that in describing the
appearance of the Deity, amidst that profusion of magnificent images which the
grandeur of his subject provokes him to pour out upon every side, he is far
from forgetting the obscurity which surrounds the most incomprehensible of all
beings, but -- With the majesty of darkness round
Circles his throne.
And what is no less remarkable, our author had the secret of preserving this
idea, even when he seemed to depart the farthest from it, when he describes the
light and glory which flows from the divine presence; a light which by its very
excess is converted into a species of darkness.

Dark with excessive light thy skirts appear.
Here is an idea not only poetical in an high degree, but strictly and
philosophically just. Extreme light, by overcoming the organs of sight,
obliterates all objects, so as in its effect exactly to resemble darkness.
After looking for some time at the sun, two black spots, the impression which
it leaves, seem to dance before our eyes. Thus are two ideas as opposite as can
be imagined reconciled in the extremes of both; and both in spite of their
opposite nature brought to concur in producing the sublime. And this is not the
only instance wherein the opposite extremes operate equally in favor of the
sublime, which in all things abhors mediocrity. -- Ibid.

DIGNITY.
DIGNITY, hitherto, has belonged to the mode of proceeding, not to the matter
of a treaty. Never before has it been mentioned as the standard for rating the
conditions of peace; no, never by the most violent of conquerors. Indemnity is
capable of some estimate; dignity has no standard. -- Regicide Peace.

DEBT (CIVIL).
THERE are two capital faults in our law with relation to civil debts. One is,
that every man is presumed solvent. A presumption, in innumerable cases,
directly against truth. Therefore the debtor is ordered, on a supposition of
ability and fraud, to be coerced his liberty until he makes payment. By this
means, in all cases of civil insolvency without a pardon from his creditor, he
is to be imprisoned for life: -- and thus a miserable mistaken invention of
artificial science, operates to change a civil into a criminal judgment, and to
scourge misfortune or indiscretion with a punishment which the law does not
inflict on the greatest crimes.

The next fault is, that the inflicting of that punishment is not on the
opinion of an equal and public judge; but is referred to the arbitrary
discretion of a private, nay interested, and irritated individual. He, who
formally is, and substantially ought to be, the judge, is in reality no more
than ministerial, a mere executive instrument of a private man, who is at once
judge and party. Every idea of judicial order is subverted by this procedure.
If the insolvency be no crime, why is it punished with arbitrary imprisonment?
If it be a crime, why is it delivered into private hands to pardon without
discretion, or to punish without mercy and without measure? -- Speech previous
to the Election at Bristol.

DISCONTENTS (NATIONAL.)
TO complain of the age we live in, to murmur at the present possessors of
power, to lament the past, to conceive extravagant hopes of the future, are the
common dispositions of the greatest part of mankind; indeed the necessary
effects of the ignorance and levity of the vulgar. Such complaints and humors
have existed in all times; yet as all times have not been alike, true political
sagacity manifests itself, in distinguishing that complaint which only
characterizes the general infirmity of human nature, from those which are
symptoms of the particular distemperature of our own air and season. --
Thoughts on the Cause of the present Discontents.

EMPIRE DEFINED.
AN empire is the aggregate of many states, under one common head; whether this
head be a monarch, or a presiding republic. -- Speech on Conciliation with
America.

ESTABLISHMENTS (OLD).
THESE old establishments were formed also on a third principle, still more
adverse to the living economy of the age. They were formed, Sir, on the
principle of purveyance, and receipt in kind. In former days, when the
household was vast, and the supply scanty and precarious, the royal purveyors,
sallying forth from under the gothic portcullis, to purchase provision with
power and prerogative, instead of money, brought home the plunder of an hundred
markets, and all that could be seized from a flying and hiding country, and
deposited their spoil in an hundred caverns, with each its keeper. There, every
commodity, received in its rawest condition, went through all the process which
fitted it for use. This inconvenient receipt produced an economy suited only
to itself. It multiplied offices beyond all measure; buttery, pantry, and all
that rabble of places, which, though profitable to the holders and expensive to
the state, are almost too mean to mention. -- Oeconomical Reform.

ENGLISH YOUTH IN INDIA.
THE natives scarcely know what it is to see the gray head of an Englishman.
Young men (boys almost) govern there, without society, and without sympathy
with the natives. They have no more social habits with the people, than if they
still resided in England; nor indeed any species of intercourse but that which
is necessary to making a sudden fortune, with a view to a remote settlement.
Animated with all the avarice of age, and all the impetuosity of youth, they
roll in one after another, wave after wave, and there is nothing before the
eyes of the natives but an endless, hopeless prospect of new flights of birds
of prey and passage, with appetites continually renewing for a food that is
continually wasting.

There is nothing in the boys we send to India worse than the boys whom we are
whipping at school, or that we see trailing a pike, or bending over a desk at
home. But as English youth in India drink the intoxicating draught of authority
and dominion before their heads are able to bear it, and as they are full grown
in fortune long before they are ripe in principle, neither nature nor reason
have any opportunity to exert themselves for remedy of the excesses of their
premature power. The consequences of their conduct, which in good minds, (and
many of theirs are probably such) might produce penitence or amendment, are
unable to pursue the rapidity of their flight. Their prey is lodged in England;
and the cries of India are given to seas and winds, to be blown about, in every
breaking up of the monsoon, over a remote and unhearing ocean. -- Speech on Mr.
Fox's East India Bill.

EXTENSION DEFINED.
EXTENSION is either in length, height, or depth. Of these the length strikes
least; an hundred yards of even ground will never work such an effect as a
tower an hundred yards high, or a rock or mountain of that altitude. I am apt
to imagine likewise, that height is less grand than depth; and that we are more
struck at looking down from a precipice, than looking up at an object of equal
height; but of that I am not very positive. A perpendicular has more force in
forming the sublime, than an inclined plain; and the effects of a rugged and
broken surface seem stronger than where it is smooth and polished. It would
carry us out of our way to enter in this place into the cause of these
appearances; but certain it is they afford a large and fruitful field of
speculation. However, it may not be amiss to add to these remarks upon
magnitude, that, as the great extreme of dimension is sublime, so the last
extreme of littleness is in some measure sublime likewise; when we attend to
the infinite divisibility of matter, when we pursue animal life into these
excessively small, and yet organized beings, that escape the nicest inquisition
of the sense, when we push our discoveries yet downward, and consider those
creatures so many degrees yet smaller, and the still diminishing scale of
existence, in tracing which the imagination is lost as well as the sense, we
become amazed and confounded at the wonders of minuteness; nor can we
distinguish in its effect this extreme of littleness from the vast itself. For
division must be infinite as well as addition; because the idea of a perfect
unity can no more be arrived at, than that of a complete whole, to which
nothing can be added. -- Sublime and Beautiful.

EYE.
I think then, that the beauty of the eye consists, first, in its clearness;
what colored eye shall please most, depends a good deal on particular fancies;
but none are pleased with an eye whose water (to use that term) is dull and
muddy. We are pleased with the eye in this view, on the principle upon which we
like diamonds, clear water, glass, and such like transparent substances.
Secondly, the motion of the eye contributes to its beauty, by continually
shifting its direction; but a slow and languid motion is more beautiful than a
brisk one; the latter is enlivening; the former lovely. Thirdly, with regard to
the union of the eye with the neighboring parts, it is to hold the same rule
that is given of other beautiful ones; it is not to make a strong deviation
from the line of the neighboring parts; nor to verge into any exact
geometrical figure. -- Ibid.

ECCLESIASTICS.
OUR education is in a manner wholly in the hands of ecclesiastics, and in all
stages from infancy to manhood. Even when our youth, leaving schools and
universities, enter that most important period of life which begins to link
experience and study together, and when with that view they visit other
countries, instead of old domestics whom we have seen as governors to principal
men from other parts, three-fourths of those who go abroad with our young
nobility and gentlemen are ecclesiastics; not as austere masters, nor as mere
followers; but as friends and companions of a graver character, and not seldom
persons as well born as themselves. With them, as relations, they most commonly
keep up a close connection through life. By this connection we conceive that we
attach our gentlemen to the church; and we liberalize the church by an
intercourse with the leading characters of the country. -- Reflections on the
Revolution in France.

ENGLISH CHARACTER.
FOUR hundred years have gone over us; but I believe we are not materially
changed since that period. Thanks to our sullen resistance to innovation,
thanks to the cold sluggishness of our national character, we still bear the
stamp of our forefathers. We have not (as I conceive) lost the generosity and
dignity of thinking of the fourteenth century; nor as yet have we subtilized
ourselves into savages. We are not the converts of Rousseau; we are not the
disciples of Voltaire; Helvetius has made no progress amongst us. Atheists are
not our preachers; madmen are not our lawgivers. We know that we have made no
discoveries; and we think that no discoveries are to be made in morality; nor
many in the great principles of government, nor in the ideas of liberty, which
were understood long before we were born, altogether as well as they will be
after the grave has heaped its mould upon our presumption, and the silent tomb
shall have imposed its law on our pert loquacity. In England we have not yet
been completely embowelled of our natural entrails; we still feel within us,
and we cherish and cultivate those inbred sentiments which are the faithful
guardians, the active monitors of our duty, the true supporters of all liberal
and manly morals. We have not been drawn and trussed, in order that we may be
filled, like stuffed birds in a museum, with chaff and rags, and paltry blurred
shreds of paper about the rights of man. We preserve the whole of our feelings
still native and entire, unsophisticated by pedantry and infidelity. We have
real hearts of flesh and blood beating in our bosoms. We fear God; we look up
with awe to kings; with affection to parliaments; with duty to magistrates;
with reverence to priests; and with respect to nobility The English are, I
conceive, misrepresented in a Letter published in one of the papers, by a
gentleman thought to be a dissenting minister. -- When writing to Dr. Price, of
the spirit which prevails at Paris, he says, "The spirit of the people in this
place has abolished all the proud distinctions which the king and nobles had
usur^ed in their minds; whether they talk of the king, the noble, or the
priest, their whole language is that of the most enlightened and liberal
amongst the English." If this gentleman means to confine the terms enlightened
and liberal to one set of men in England, it may be true. It is not generally
so.
. Because when such ideas are brought before our minds, it is natural to be so
affected: because all other feelings are false and spurious, and tend to
corrupt our minds, to vitiate our primary morals, to render us unfit for
rational liberty; and by teaching us a servile, licentious, and abandoned
insolence, to be our low sport for a few holidays, to make us perfectly fit
for, and justly deserving of slavery, through the whole course of our lives.

You see, Sir, that in this enlightened age I am bold enough to confess, that
we are generally men of untaught feelings; that instead of casting away all our
old prejudices, we cherish them to a very considerable degree, and, to take
more shame to ourselves, we cherish them because they are prejudices; and the
longer they have lasted, and the more generally they have prevailed, the more
we cherish them. We are afraid to put men to live and trade each on his own
private stock of reason; because we suspect that this stock in each man is
small, and that the individuals would do better to avail themselves of the
general bank and capital of nations, and of ages. Many of our men of
speculation, instead of exploding general prejudices, employ their sagacity to
discover the latent wisdom which prevails in them. If they find what they seek,
and they seldom fail, they think it more wise to continue the prejudice, with
the reason involved, than to cast away the coat of prejudice, and to leave
nothing but the naked reason; because prejudice, with its reason, has a motive
to give action to that reason, and an affection which will give it permanence.
Prejudice is of ready application in the emergency; it previously engages the
mind in a steady course of wisdom and virtue, and does not leave the man
hesitating in the moment of decision, skeptical, puzzled, and unresolved.
Prejudice renders a man's virtue his habit; and not a series of unconnected
acts. Through just prejudice his duty becomes a part of his nature. -- Ibid.

FRANCE. Old Constitution of France -- Consequences of the Revolution.
YOU might, if you pleased, have profited of our example, and have given to
your recovered freedom a correspondent dignity. Your privileges, though
discontinued, were not lost to memory. Your constitution, it is true, whilst
you were out of possession, suffered waste and dilapidation; but you possessed
in some parts the walls, and in all the foundations of a noble and venerable
castle. You might have repaired those walls; you might have built on those old
foundations. Your constitution was suspended before it was perfected; but you
had the elements of a constitution very nearly as good as could be wished. In
your old states you possessed that variety of parts corresponding with the
various descriptions of which your community was happily composed; you had all
that combination, and all that opposition of interests, you had that action and
counteraction which, in the natural and in the political world, from the
reciprocal struggle of discordant powers, draws out the harmony of the
universe. These opposed and conflicting interests, which you considered as so
great a blemish in your old and in our present constitution, interpose a
salutary check to all precipitate resolutions. They render deliberation a
matter not of choice, but of necessity; they make all change a subject of
compromise, which naturally begets moderation; they produce temperaments,
preventing the sore evil of harsh, crude, unqualified reformations; and
rendering all the headlong exertions of arbitrary power, in the few or in the
many, for ever impracticable. Through that diversity of members and interests,
general liberty had as many securities as there were separate views in the
several orders; whilst by pressing down the whole by the weight of a real
monarchy, the separate parts would have been prevented from warping and
starting from their allotted places.

You had all these advantages in your ancient states; but you chose to act as
if you had never been molded into civil society, and had every thing to begin
anew. You began ill, because you began by despising every thing that belonged
to you. You set up your trade without a capital. If the last generations of
your country appeared without much luster in your eyes, you might have passed
them by, and derived your claims from a more early race of ancestors, Under a
pious predilection for those ancestors, your imaginations would have realized
in them a standard of virtue and wisdom, beyond the vulgar practice of the
hour: and you would have risen with the example to whose imitation you aspired.
Respecting your forefathers, you would have been taught to respect yourselves.
You would not have chosen to consider the French as a people of yesterday, as a
nation of low-born servile wretches until the emancipating year of 1789. In
order to furnish, at the expense of your honor, an excuse to your apologists
here for several enormities of yours, you would not have been content to be
represented as a gang of Maroon slaves, suddenly broke loose from the house of
bondage, and therefore to be pardoned for your abuse of the liberty to which
you were not accustomed, and ill fitted. Would it not, my worthy friend, have
been wiser to have you thought, what I, for one, always thought you, a generous
and gallant nation, long misled to your disadvantage by your high and romantic
sentiments of fidelity, honor, and loyalty; that events had been unfavourable
to you, but that you were not enslaved through any illiberal or servile
disposition; that in your most devoted submission, you were actuated by a
principle of public spirit, and that it was your country you worshipped, in the
person of your king? Had you made it to be understood, that in the delusion of
this amiable error you had gone further than your wise ancestors; that you were
resolved to resume your ancient privileges, whilst you preserved the spirit of
your ancient and your recent loyalty and honor; or, if diffident of
yourselves, and not clearly discerning the almost obliterated constitution of
your ancestors, you had looked to your neighbors in this land, who had kept
alive the ancient principles and models of the old common law of Europe
meliorated and adapted to its present state -- by following wise examples you
would have given new examples of wisdom to the world. You would have rendered
the cause of liberty venerable in the eyes of every worthy mind in every
nation. You would have shamed despotism from the earth, by showing that freedom
was not only reconcilable, but as, when well disciplined, it is auxiliary to
law. You would have had an unoppressive but a productive revenue. You would
have had a flourishing commerce to feed it. You would have had a free
constitution; a potent monarchy; a disciplined army; a reformed and venerated
clergy; a mitigated but spirited nobility, to lead your virtue, not to overlay
it; you would have had a liberal order of commons, to emulate and to recruit
that nobility; you would have had a protected, satisfied, laborious, and
obedient people, taught to seek and to recognize the happiness that is to be
found by virtue in all conditions; in which consists the true moral equality of
mankind, and not in that monstrous fiction, which, by inspiring false ideas and
vain expectations into men destined to travel in the obscure walk of laborious
life, serves only to aggravate and imbitter that real inequality, which it
never can remove; and which the order of civil life establishes as much for the
benefit of those whom it must leave in an humble state, as those whom it is
able to exalt to a condition more splendid, but not more happy. You had a
smooth and easy career of felicity and glory laid open to you, beyond any thing
recorded in the history of the world; but you have shown that difficulty is
good for man.

Compute your gains: see what is got by those extravagant and presumptuous
speculations which have taught your leaders to despise all their predecessors,
and all their contemporaries, and even to despise themselves, until the moment
in which they became truly despicable. By following those false lights, France
has bought undisguised calamities at a higher price than any nation has
purchased the most unequivocal blessings! France has bought poverty by crime!
France has not sacrificed her virtue to her interest; but she has abandoned her
interest, that she might prostitute her virtue. All other nations have begun
the fabric of a new government, or the reformation of an old, by establishing
originally, or by enforcing with greater exactness some rites or other of
religion. All other people have laid the foundations of civil freedom in
severer manners, and a system of a more austere and masculine morality. France,
when she let loose the reins of regal authority, doubled the license, of a
ferocious dissoluteness in manners, and of an insolent irreligion in opinions
and practices; and has extended through all ranks of life, as if she were
communicating some privilege, or laying open some secluded benefit, all the
unhappy corruptions that usually were the disease of wealth and power. This is
one of the new principles of equality in France.

France, by the perfidy of her leaders, has utterly disgraced the tone of
lenient council in the cabinets of princes, and disarmed it of its most potent
topics. She has sanctified the dark suspicious maxims of tyrannous distrust;
and taught kings to tremble at (what will hereafter be called) the delusive
plausibilities of moral politicians. Sovereigns will consider those who advise
them to place an unlimited confidence in their people, as subverters of their
thrones; as traitors who aim at their destruction, by leading their easy
goodnature, under specious pretenses, to admit combinations of bold and
faithless men into a participation of their power. This alone (if there were
nothing else) is an irreparable calamity to you and to mankind. Remember that
your parliament of Paris told your king, that in calling the states together,
he had nothing to fear but the prodigal excess of their zeal in providing for
the support of the throne. It is right that these men should hide their heads.
It is right that they should bear their part in the ruin which their counsel
has brought on their sovereign and their country. Such sanguine declarations
tend to lull authority asleep; to encourage it rashly to engage in perilous
adventures of untried policy; to neglect those provisions, preparations, and
precautions, which distinguish benevolence from imbecility; and without which
no man can answer for the salutary effect of any abstract plan of government or
of freedom. For want of these, they have seen the medicine of the state
corrupted into its poison. They have seen the French rebel against a mild and
lawful monarch, with more fury, outrage, and insult, than ever any people has
been known to rise against the most illegal usurper, or the most sanguinary
tyrant. Their resistance was made to concession; their revolt was from
protection; their blow was aimed at an hand holding out graces, favors, and
immunities.

This was unnatural. The rest is in order. They have found their punishment in
their success. Laws overturned; tribunals subverted; industry without vigor;
commerce expiring; the revenue unpaid, ye the people impoverished; a church
pillaged, and a state not relieved; civil and military anarchy made the
constitution of the kingdom; every thing human and divine sacrificed to the
idol of public credit, and national bankruptcy the consequence; and to crown
all, the paper securities of new, precarious, tottering power, the discredited
paper securities of impoverished fraud, and beggared rapine, held out as a
currency for the support of an empire, in lieu of the two great recognized
species that represent the lasting conventional credit of mankind, which
disappeared and hid themselves in the earth from whence they came, when the
principle of poverty, whose creatures and representatives they are,
systematically subverted. -- Reflections on the Revolution in France.

FRENCH BISHOPS.
YOU had before your revolution about one hundred and twenty bishops. A few of
them were men of eminent sanctity. When we talk of the heroic, of course we
talk of rare virtue. I believe the instances of eminent depravity may be as
rare amongst them as those of transcendent goodness. Examples of avarice and of
licentiousness may be picked out, I do not question it, by those who delight in
the investigation which leads to such discoveries. A man, as old as I am, will
not be astonished that several, in every description, do not lead that perfect
life of self-denial, with regard to wealth or to pleasure, which is wished for
by all, by some expected, but by none exacted with more rigor, than by those
who are the most attentive to their own interests, or the most indulgent to
their own passions. When I was in France, I am certain that the number of
vicious prelates was not great. Certain individuals among them, not
distinguishable for the regularity of their lives, made some amends for their
want of the severe virtues, in their possession of the liberal; and were
endowed with qualities which made them useful in the church and state. I am
told, that with few exceptions, Louis the Sixteenth had been more attentive to
character, in his promotions to that rank, than his immediate predecessor; and
I believe, (as some spirit of reform has prevailed through the whole reign)
that it may be true. But the present ruling power has shown a disposition only
to plunder the church. It has punished all prelates; which is to favor the
vicious, at least, in point of reputation. It has made a degrading pensionary
establishment, to which no man, of liberal ideas, or liberal condition will
destine his children. It must settle into the lowest classes of the people. As
with you the inferior clergy are not numerous enough for their duties; as these
duties are, beyond measure, minute and toilsome; as you have left no middle
classes of clergy at their ease, in future nothing of science or erudition can
exist in the Gallican church. To complete the project, without the least
attention to the rights of patrons, the assembly has provided in future an
elective clergy; an arrangement which will drive out of the clerical profession
all men of sobriety; all who can pretend to independence in their function or
their conduct; and which will throw the whole direction of the public mind into
the hands of a set of licentious, bold, crafty, factious, flattering wretches,
of such condition and such habits of life as will make their contemptible
pensions (in comparison of which the stipend of an exciseman is lucrative and
honorable) an object of low and illiberal intrigue. Those officers, whom they
still call bishops, are to be elected to a provision comparatively mean,
through the same arts, (that is, electioneering arts) by men of all religious
tenets that are known or can be invented. The new lawgivers have not
ascertained any thing whatsoever concerning their qualifications, relative
either to doctrine or to morals; no more than they have done with regard to the
subordinate clergy; nor does it appear but that both the higher and the lower
may, at their discretion, practice or preach any mode of religion or irreligion
that they please. I do not yet see what the jurisdiction of bishops over their
subordinates is to be; or whether they are to have any jurisdiction at all. --
Ibid.

FRENCH CLERGY.
WHEN my occasions took me into France, toward the close of the late reign,
the clergy, under all their forms, engaged a considerable part of my curiosity.
So far from finding (except from one set of men, not then very numerous, though
very active) the complaints and discontents against that body, which some
publications had given me reason to expect, I perceived little or no public or
private uneasiness on their account. On further examination, I found the clergy
in general, persons of moderate minds and decorous manners; I include the
seculars, and the regulars of both sexes. I had not the good fortune to know a
great many of the parochial clergy; but in general I received a perfectly good
account of their morals, and of their attention to their duties. With some of
the higher clergy I had a personal acquaintance; and of the rest in that class,
very good means of information. They were, almost all of them, persons of noble
birth. They resembled others of their own rank; and where there was any
difference, it was in their favor. They were more fully educated than the
military noblesse; so as by no means to disgrace their profession by ignorance,
or by want of fitness for the exercise of their authority. They seemed to me,
beyond the clerical character, liberal and open; with the hearts of gentlemen,
and men of honor; neither insolent nor servile in their manners and conduct.
They seemed to me rather a superior class; a set of men, amongst whom you would
not be surprised to find a Fenelon. I saw among the clergy in Paris (many of
the description are not to be met with any where) men of great learning and
candor; and I had reason to believe, that this description was not confined to
Paris. What I found in other places, I know was accidental; and therefore to be
presumed a fair sample. I spent a few days in a provincial town, where, in the
absence of the bishop, I passed my evenings with three clergymen, his vicars
general, persons who would have done honor to any church. They were all well
informed; two of them of deep, general, and extensive erudition, ancient and
modern, oriental and western; particularly in their own profession. They had a
more extensive knowledge of our English divines than I expected; and they
entered into the genius of those writers with a critical accuracy. One of these
gentlemen is since dead, the Abbe Morangis. I pay this tribute, without
reluctance, to the memory of that noble, reverend, learned, and excellent
person; and I should do the same, with equal cheerfulness, to the merits of the
others, who, I believe, are still living, if I did not fear to hurt those whom
I am unable to serve.

Some of these ecclesiastics of rank, are, by all titles, persons deserving of
general respect. They are deserving of gratitude from me, and from many
English. If this letter should ever come into their hands, I hope they will
believe there are those of our nation who feel for their unmerited fall, and
for the cruel confiscation of their fortunes, with no common sensibility. What
I say of them is a testimony, as far as one feeble voice can go, which I owe to
truth. Whenever the question of this unnatural persecution is concerned, I will
pay it. No one shall prevent me from being just and grateful. The time is
fitted for the duty; and it is particularly becoming to show our justice and
gratitude, when those who have deserved well of us and of mankind are laboring
under popular obloquy and the persecutions of oppressive power. -- Ibid.

FRENCH NOBILITY.
BUT the nobility of France are degenerated since the days of Henry the Fourth.
-- This is possible. But it is more than I can believe to be true in any great
degree. I do not pretend to know France as correctly as some others; but I have
endeavored through my whole life to make myself acquainted with human nature:
otherwise I should be unfit to take even my humble part in the service of
mankind. In that study I could not pass by a vast portion of our nature, as it
appeared modified in a country but twenty-four miles from the shore of this
island. On my best observation, compared with my best enquiries, I found your
nobility for the greater part composed of men of an high spirit, and of a
delicate sense of honor, both with regard to themselves individually, and with
regard to their whole corpse, over whom they kept, beyond what is common in
other countries, a censorial eye. They were tolerably well-bred; very
officious, humane, and hospitable; in their conversation frank and open; with a
good military tone; and reasonably tinctured with literature, particularly of
the authors in their own language. Many had pretensions far above this
description. I speak of those who were generally met with. -- Ibid.

FRENCH GENTLEMEN.
THE great object of your tyrants is to destroy the gentlemen of France; and
for that purpose they destroy, to the best of their power, all the effect of
those relations which may render considerable men powerful or even safe. To
destroy that order, they vitiate the whole community. That no means may exist
of confederating against their tyranny, by the false sympathies of this
Nouvelle Eloise, they endeavor to subvert those principles of domestic trust
and fidelity, which form the discipline of social life. They propagate
principles by which every servant may think it, if not his duty, at least his
privilege, to betray his master. By these principles, every considerable father
of a family loses the sanctuary of his house. Debet sua cuique domus esse
perfugium tu tissimum, says the law, which your legislators have taken so much
pains first to decry, then to repeal. They destroy all the tranquillity and
security of domestic life; turning the asylum of the house into a gloomy
prison, where the father of the family must drag out a miserable existence,
endangered in proportion to the apparent means of his safety; where he is worse
than solitary in a crowd of domestics, and more apprehensive from his servants
and inmates, than from the hired blood-thirsty mob without doors, who are ready
to pull him to the lantern. -- Ibid.

FRENCH MANNERS.
IT is not clear, whether in England we learned those grand and decorous
principles and manners, of which considerable traces yet remain, from you, or
whether you took them from us. But to you, I think, we trace them best. You
seem to me to be -- gentis incunabula nostrae. France has always more or less
influenced manners in England; and when your fountain is choked up and
polluted, the stream will not run long, or not run clear with us, or perhaps
with any nation. This gives all Europe, in my opinion, but too close and
connected a concern in what is done in France. Excuse me, therefore, if I have
dwelt too long on the atrocious spectacle of the sixth of October, 1789, or
have given too much scope to the reflections which have arisen in my mind on
occasion of the most important of all revolutions, which may be dated from that
day, I mean a revolution in sentiments, manners, and moral opinions. As things
now stand, with every thing respectable destroyed without us, and an attempt to
destroy within us every principle of respect, one is almost forced to apologize
for harboring the common feelings of men. -- Ibid.

FRENCH ASSEMBLY.
ALREADY there appears a poverty of conception, a coarseness and vulgarity in
all the proceedings of the assembly and of all their instructors. Their liberty
is not liberal; their science is presumptuous ignorance; their humanity is
savage and brutal.

The assembly, their organ, acts before them the farce of deliberation with as
little decency as liberty. They act like the comedians of a fair before a
riotous audience; they act amidst the tumultuous cries of a mixed mob of
ferocious men, and of women lost to shame, who, according to their insolent
fancies, direct, control, applaud, explode them; and sometimes mix and take
their seats amongst them; domineering over them with a strange mixture of
servile petulance and proud presumptuous authority. As they have inverted order
in all things, the gallery is in the place of the house. This assembly, which
overthrows kings and kingdoms, has not even the physiognomy and aspect of a
grave legislative body -- nec color imperii, nec frons erat ulla senatus. They
have a power given to them, like that of the evil principle, to subvert and
destroy, but none to construct, except such machines as may be fitted for
further subversion and further destruction. -- Ibid.

FRENCH CLUBS.
IN these meetings of all sorts, every counsel, in proportion as it is daring,
and violent, and perfidious, is taken for the mark of superior genius. Humanity
and compassion are ridiculed as the fruits of superstition and ignorance.
Tenderness to individuals is considered as treason to the public. Liberty is
always to be estimated perfect as property is rendered insecure. Amidst
assassination, massacre, and confiscation, perpetrated or meditated, they are
forming plans for the good order of future society. Embracing in their arms the
carcases of base criminals, and promoting their relations on the title of their
offenses, they drive hundreds of virtuous persons to the same end, by forcing
them to subsist by beggary or by crime. -- Ibid.

FRENCH FACTION.
THE faction is not local or territorial. It is a general evil. Where it least
appears in action, it is still full of life. In its sleep it recruits its
strength, and prepares its exertion; its spirit lies deep in the corruptions of
our common nature. The social order which restrains it, feeds it. It exists in
every country in Europe; and among all orders of men in every country, who look
up to France as to a common head. The center is there. The circumference is the
world of Europe, wherever the race of Europe may be settled. Every where else
the faction is militant; in France it is triumphant; in France is the bank of
deposit, and the bank of circulation, of all the pernicious principles that are
forming in every state. It will be a folly scarcely deserving of pity, and too
mischievous for contempt, to think of restraining it in any other country
whilst it is predominant there. -- Regicide Peace.

FRENCH PHILOSOPHERS.
THE politicians soon found that they could not do without the philosophers;
and the philosophers soon made them sensible, that the destruction of religion
was to supply them with means of conquest first at home, and then abroad. The
philosophers were the active internal agitators, and supplied the spirit and
principles; the second gave the general direction. -- Sometimes the one
predominated in the composition, sometimes the other. The only difference
between them was in the necessity of concealing the general design for a time,
and in dealing with foreign nations; the fanatics going straight forward and
openly, the politicians by the surer mode of zig-zag. In the course of events,
this, among other causes, produced fierce and bloody contentions between them;
but at the bottom they thoroughly agreed in all the objects of ambition and
irreligion, and substantially in all the means of promoting these ends. -- Ibid.

FRANCE (ANCIENT.)
YOU may call this France, if you please; but of the ancient France nothing
remains but its dangerous and central geography, its iron frontier, its spirit
of ambition, its audacity of enterprise, its perplexing intrigue. These, and
these alone remain; and they remain heightened in their principle and augmented
in their means. All the old correctives, whether of virtue or of weakness,
which existed in the old monarchy, are gone. No single corrective is to be
foung in the whole body of the new institutions. -- How should such a thing be
found there, when every thing has been chosen with care and selection to
forward all those ambitious designs and dispositions, not to control them? The
whole is a body of ways and means for the supply of dominion, without one
heterogeneous particle in it. -- Ibid.

FRANCE (STATE OF) IN THE YEAR 1780.
WHEN I look to the other side of the water, I cannot help recollecting what
Pyrrhus said on reconnoitring the Roman camp, "These barbarians have nothing
barbarous in their discipline." When I look, as I have pretty carefully looked,
into the proceedings of the French king, I am sorry to say it, I see nothing of
the character and genius of arbitrary finance; none of the bold frauds of
bankrupt power; none of the wild struggles and plunges of despotism in
distress; no lopping off from the capital of debt; no suspension of interest;
no robbery under the name of loan; no raising the value, no debasing the
substance of the coin. I see neither Louis the Fourteenth nor Louis the
Fifteenth. On the contrary, I behold with astonishment, rising before me, by
the very hands of arbitrary power, and in the very midst of war and confusion,
a regular, methodical system of public credit; I behold a fabric laid on the
natural and solid foundations of trust and confidence among men, and rising, by
fair gradations, order over order, according to the just rules of symmetry and
art. What a reverse of things! Principle, method, regularity, economy,
frugality, justice to individuals, and care of the people, are the resources
with which France makes war upon Great Britain. God avert the omen! But if we
should see any genius in war and politics arise in France, to second what is
done in the bureau! -- I turn my eyes from the consequences. -- Oecon. Reform.

FRANCE (BODY POLITIC OF.)
THE body politic of France existed in the majesty of its throne; in the
dignity of its nobility; in the honor of its gentry; in the sanctity of its
clergy; in the reverence of its magistracy; in the weight and consideration due
to its landed property; in the respect due to its moveable substance
represented by the corporations of the kingdom in all countries. All these
particular moleculae united, form the great mass of what is truly the body
politic. They are so many deposits and receptacles of justice; because they can
only exist by justice. Nation is a moral essence, not a geographical
arrangement, or a denomination of the nomenclator. France, though out of her
territorial possession, exists; because the sole possible claimant, I mean the
proprietary, and the government to which the proprietary adheres, exists and
claims. God forbid, that if you were expelled from your house by ruffians and
assassins, that I should call the material walls, doors, and windows of --, the
ancient and honorable family of --. Am I to transfer to the intruders, who,
not content to turn you out naked to the world, would rob you of your very
name, all the esteem and respect I owe to you? -- Reflections on the Revolution
in France.

FRANCE. Republics of Algiers and France compared.
I KNOW something of the constitution and composition of this very
extraordinary republic. It has a constitution, I admit, similar to the present
tumultuous military tyranny of France, by which an handful of obscure russians
domineer over a fertile country and a brave people. For the composition, too, I
admit, the Algerine community resembles that of France, being the very scum,
scandal, disgrace, and pest of the Turkish Asia. The Grand Seignior, to
disburthen the country, suffers the Dey to recruit, in his dominions, the corpse
of Janissaries, or Asaphs which form the Directory, or Council of Elders of the
African Republic, one and indivisible. But notwithstanding this resemblance,
which I allow, I never shall so far injure the Janissarian republic of Algiers,
as to put it in comparison for every sort of crime, turpitude, and oppression,
with the Jacobin republic of Paris. There is no question with me to which of
the two I should choose to be a neighbor or a subject. But situated as I am, I
am in no danger of becoming to Algiers either the one or the other. It is not
so in my relation to the atheistical fanatics of France. Have the gentlemen,
who borrowed this happy parallel, no idea of the different conduct to be held
with regard to the very same evil at an immense distance, and when it is at
your door? when its power is enormous, as when it is comparatively as feeble as
its distance is remote? and when there is a barrier of languages and usages,
which prevents your being corrupted through certain old correspondences and
habitudes, which cannot for a long time be so wholly taken away, as not to make
many of your people susceptible of contagion from horrible novelties that are
introduced into every thing else? I can contemplate, without horror, a royal or
a national tiger on the borders of Pegu. I can look at him, with an easy
curiosity, as prisoner within bars in the menagerie of the Tower. But if, by
Habeas Corpus, or otherwise, he was to come into the lobby of the House of
Commons, whilst your door was open, any of you would be more stout than wise,
who would not gladly make his escape out of the back windows. This ambassador
from Bengal would disperse you sooner than a dissolution by Royal prerogative.
I certainly should dread more from a wild cat in my bedchamber, than from all
the lions that roar in the deserts behind Algiers. But in this parallel it is
the cat that is at a distance, and the lions and tigers that are in our
anti-chambers and our lobbies. Algiers is not near; Algiers is not powerful;
Algiers is not our neighbor; Algiers is not infectious. Algiers, whatever it
may be, is not an old creation; and we have good data to calculate all the
mischief to be expected from it. When I find Algiers transferred to Calais, I
will tell you what I think of that point. In the mean time, the case quoted
from the Algerine reports will not apply as authority. We shall put it out of
court; and so far as that goes, let the counsel for the Jacobin peace take
nothing by their motion. -- Regicide Peace.

FRANCE. President of the French Directory.
A STRANGE uncouth thing, a theatrical figure of the opera, his head shaded
with three colored plumes, his body fantastically habited, strutted from the
back scenes, and after a short speech, in the mock-heroic falsetto of stupid
tragedy, delivered the gentleman who came to make the representation into the
custody of a guard, with directions not to lose sight of him for a moment; and
then ordered him to be sent from Paris in two hours. -- Ibid.

FRANCE (THEATRICAL AMUSEMENTS IN).
WHILST courts of justice were thrust out by revolutionary tribunals, and
silent churches were only the funeral monuments of departed religion, no fewer
than ten theaters were kept open at public expense. At one time I have reckoned
fourteen of their advertisements of public diversion. Among the gaunt, haggard
forms of famine and nakedness, amidst the yells of murder, the tears of
affliction, and the cries of despair, the song, the dance, the mimic scene, the
buffoon laughter, went on as regularly as in the gay hour of festive peace. I
have it from good authority, that under the scaffold of judicial murder, and
the gaping planks that poured down blood on the spectators, the space was hired
out for a show of dancing dogs. I think, without conceit, we made the very same
remark on reading some of their pieces, which being written for other purposes,
let us into a view of their social life. -- Ibid.

FRENCH REVOLUTION COMPARED TO A NUISANCE.
IN describing the nuisance erected by so pestilential a manufactory, by
constructing so infamous a brothel, by digging a night-cellar for such thieves,
murderers, and housebreakers, as never infested the world, I am so far from
aggravating, that I have fallen infinitely short of the evil. No man who has
attended to the particulars of what has been done in France, and combined them
with the principles there asserted, can possibly doubt it. When I compare with
this great cause of nations, the trifling points of honor, the still more
contemptible points of interest, the light ceremonies, the undefinable
punctilios, the disputes about precedence, the lowering or the hoisting of a
sail, the dealing in a hundred or two of wild cat-skins on the other side of
the globe, which have often kindled up the flames of war between nations, I
stand astonished at those persons who do not feel a resentment, not more
natural than politic, at the atrocious insults that this monstrous compound
offers to the dignity of every nation, and who are not alarmed with what it
threatens to their safety. -- Ibid.

FRANCE. Previous to the Revolution.
WHEN I consider the face of the kingdom of France; the multitude and opulence
of her cities; the useful magnificence of her spacious high roads and bridges;
the opportunity of her artificial canals and navigations opening the
conveniences of maritime communication through a solid continent of so immense
an extent; when I turn my eyes to the stupendous works of her ports and
harbors, and to her whole naval apparatus, whether for war or trade; when I
bring before my view the number of her fortifications, constructed with so bold
and masterly a skill, and made and maintained at so prodigious a charge,
presenting an armed front and impenetrable barrier to her enemies upon every
side; when I recollect how very small a part of that extensive region is
without cultivation, and to what complete perfection the culture of many of the
best productions of the earth have been brought in France; when I reflect on
the excellence of her manufactures and fabrics, second to none but ours, and in
some particulars not second; when I contemplate the grand foundations of
charity, public and private; when I survey the state of all the arts that
beautify and polish life; when I reckon the men she has bred for extending her
same in war, her able statesmen, the multitude of her profound lawyers and
theologians, her philosophers, her critics, her historians and antiquaries, her
poets, and her orators, sacred and profane, I behold in all this something
which awes and commands the imagination, which checks the mind on the brink of
precipitate and indiscriminate censure, and which demands that we should very
seriously examine what and how great are the latent vices that could authorize
us at once to level so spacious a fabric with the ground. -- Ibid.

FINANCIER.
THE objects of a financier are, then, to secure an ample revenue; to impose it
with judgment and equality; to employ it oeconomically; and when necessity
obliges him to make use of credit, to secure its foundations in that instance,
and for ever, by the clearness and candor of his proceedings, the exactness of
his calculations, and the solidity of his funds. On these heads we may take a
short and distinct view of the merits and abilities of those in the National
Assembly, who have taken to themselves the management of this arduous concern.
Far from any increase of revenue in their hands, I find, by a report of M.
Vernier, from the Committee of Finances, of the second of August last, that the
amount of the national revenue, as compared with its produce before the
revolution, was diminished by the sum of two hundred millions, or eight
millions sterling of the annual income, considerably more than one-third of the
whole. -- Reflections on the Revolution in France.

FOREFATHERS.
A politic caution, a guarded circumspection, a moral rather than a
complexional timidity, were among the ruling principles of our forefathers in
their most decided conduct. Not being illuminated with the light of which the
gentlemen of France tell us they have got so abundant a share, they acted under
a strong impression of the ignorance and fallibility of mankind. He that had
made them thus fallible, rewarded them for having in their conduct attended to
their nature. Let us imitate their caution, if we wish to deserve their
fortune, or to retain their bequests. Let us add, if we please, but let us
preserve what they have left; and, standing on the firm ground of the British
constitution, let us be satisfied to admire rather than attempt to follow in
their desperate flights the aeronauts of France. -- Ibid.

FANATICISM.
OF all things, wisdom is the most terrified with epidemical fanaticism,
because, of all enemies it is that against which she is the least able to
furnish any kind of resource. -- Ibid.

FREEDOM (CIVIL.)
CIVIL freedom is not, as many have endeavored to persuade us, a thing that
lies hid in the depth of abstruse science. It is a blessing and a benefit, not
an abstract speculation; and all the just reasoning that can be upon it, is of
so coarse a texture, as perfectly to suit the ordinary capacities of those who
are to enjoy, and of those who are to defend it. Far from any resemblance to
those propositions in geometry and metaphysics, which admit no medium, but must
be true or false in all their latitude; social and civil freedom, like all
other things in common life, are variously mixed and modified, enjoyed in very
different degrees, and shaped into an infinite diversity of forms, according to
the temper and circumstances of every community. The extreme of liberty (which
is its abstract perfection, but its real fault) obtains no where, nor ought to
obtain any where. Because extremes, as we all know, in every point which
relates either to our duties or satisfactions in life, are destructive both to
virtue and enjoyment. Liberty too must be limited in order to be possessed. The
degree of restraint it is impossible in any case to settle precisely. But it
ought to be the constant aim of every wise public counsel, to find out by
cautious experiments, and rational, cool endeavors, with how little, not how
much of this restraint, the community can subsist. -- Letter to the Sheriffs of
Bristol.

FREEDOM.
WHILST freedom is true to itself, every thing becomes subject to it; and its
very adversaries are an instrument in its hands. -- Speech at Bristol, previous
to the Election.

FRUGALITY.
FRUGALITY is founded on the principle, that all riches have limits. --
Oeconomical Reform.

FRENZY.
DOES not become a slighter distemper on account of the number of those who may
be infected with it. -- Ibid.

FRANCHISE AND OFFICE, (DIFFERENCE BETWEEN.)
OUR constitution is not made for great, general, and proscriptive exclusions;
sooner or later, it will destroy them, or they will destroy the constitution.
In our constitution, there has always been a difference made, a Franchise and
an Office, and between the capacity for the one and for the other. Franchises
were supposed to belong to the subject, as a subject, and not as a member of
the governing part of the State. The policy of government has considered them
as things very different; for whilst parliament excluded by the test acts, (and
for a while these test acts were not a dead letter, as now they are in England)
protestant dissenters from all civil and military employments, they never
touched their right of voting for members of Parliament, or sitting in either
House; a point, I state, not as approving or condemning, with regard to them,
the measure of exclusion from employments, but to prove that the distinction
has been admitted in legislature, as, in truth, it is founded in reason. --
Letter to Sir H. Langrishe.

GAMING.
GAMING is a principle inherent in human nature. It belongs to us all. --
Oeconomical Reform.

GRAVE.
THE common treasury to which we must all be taxed. -- Ibid.

GOOD.
IN doing good, we are generally cold, and languid and sluggish; and of all
things afraid of being too much in the right. But the works of malice and
injustice are quite in another style. They are finished with a bold masterly
hand; touched as they are with the spirit of those vehement passions that call
forth all our energies whenever we oppress and persecute. -- Speech at Bristol,
previous to the Election.

GOVERNMENT.
GOVERNMENT is deeply interested in every thing which, even through the medium
of some temporary uneasiness, may tend finally to compose the minds of the
subject, and to conciliate their affections. I have nothing to do here with the
abstract value of the voice of the people. But as long as reputation, the most
precious possession of every individual, and as long as opinion, the great
support of the state, depend entirely upon that voice, it can never be
considered as a thing of little consequence either to individuals or to
government. Nations are not primarily ruled by laws; less by violence. Whatever
original energy may be supposed either in force or regulation; the operation of
both is, in truth, merely instrumental. Nations are governed by the same
methods, and on the same principles, by which an individual without authority
is often able to govern those who are his equals or his superiors; by a
knowledge of their temper, and by a judicious management of it; I mean, when
public affairs are steadily and quietly conducted; not when government is
nothing but a continued scuffle between the magistrate and the multitude; in
which sometimes the one and sometimes the other is uppermost; in which they
alternately yield and prevail, in a series of contemptible victories, and
scandalous submissions. The temper of the people amongst whom he presides ought
therefore to be the first study of a statesman. -- Thoughts on the Cause of the
present Discontents.

GOVERNMENT. Founded in Justice.
BUT let government in what form it may be, comprehend the whole in its
justice, and restrain the suspicions by its vigilance; let it keep watch and
ward; let it discover by its sagacity, and punish by its firmness, all
delinquency against its power, whenever delinquency exists in the overt acts,
and then it will be as safe as ever God and nature intended it should be. --
Speech at Bristol, previous to the Election.

GOVERNMENT.
ALL government, indeed every human benefit and enjoyment, every virtue, and
every prudent act, is founded on compromise and barter. We balance
inconveniences; we give and take; we remit some rights, that we may enjoy
others; and, we choose rather to be happy citizens, than subtle disputants. As
we must give away some natural liberty, to enjoy civil advantages; so we must
sacrifice some civil liberties, for the advantages to be derived from the
communion and fellowship of a great empire. But in all fair dealings, the thing
bought, must bear some proportion to the purchase paid. None will barter away
the immediate jewel of his soul. Though a great ^ouse is apt to make slaves
haughty, yet it is purchasing a part of the artificial importance of a great
empire too dear, to pay for it all essential rights, and all the intrinsic
dignity of human nature. None of us who would not risque his life, rather than
fall under a government purely arbitrary. But, although there are some amongst
us who think our constitution wants many improvements, to make it a complete
system of liberty, perhaps none who are of that opinion, would think it right
to aim at such improvement, by disturbing his country, and risquing every thing
that is dear to him. In every arduous enterprise, we consider what we are to
lose, as well as what we are to gain; and the more and better stake of liberty
every people possess, the less they will hazard in a vain attempt to make it
more. These are the cords of man. Man acts from adequate motives relative to
his interest; and not on metaphysical speculations. Aristotle, the great master
of reasoning, cautions us, and with great weight and propriety, against this
species of delusive geometrical accuracy in moral arguments, as the most
fallacious of all sophistry. -- Speech on Conciliation with America.

GRIEVANCES. Necessity of removing the first Cause of them.
I AM quite clear, that if we do not go to the very origin and first ruling
cause of grievances, we do nothing. What does it signify to turn abuses out of
one door, if we are to let them in at another? What does it signify to promote
economy upon a measure, and to suffer it to be subverted in the principle? --
Oeconomical Reform.

GRIEF, (NATURE OF.)
IT is the nature of grief to keep its object perpetually in its eye, to
present it in its most pleasurable views, to repeat all the circumstances that
attend it, even to the last minuteness; to go back to every particular
enjoyment, to dwell upon each, and to find a thousand new perfections in all,
that were not sufficiently understood before; in grief, the pleasure is still
uppermost; and the affliction we suffer has no resemblance to absolute pain,
which is always odious, and which we endeavor to shake off as soon as
possible. The Odyssey of Homer, which abounds with so many natural and
affecting images, has none more striking than those which Menelaus raises of
the calamitous fate of his friends, and his own manner of feeling it. He owns,
indeed, that he often gives himself some intermission from such melancholy
reflections; but he observes, too, that melancholy as they are, they give him
pleasure. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Still in short intervals of pleasing woe,
Regardful of the friendly dues I owe,
I to the glorious dead, for ever dear,
Indulge the tribute of a grateful tear.
HOM. Od. iv. Sublime and Beautiful.

HISTORY.
WE do not draw the moral lessons we might from history. On the contrary,
without care it may be used to vitiate our minds and to destroy our happiness.
In history a great volume is unrolled for our instruction, drawing the
materials of future wisdom from the past errors and infirmities of mankind. It
may, in the perversion, serve for a magazine, furnishing offensive and
defensive weapons for parties in church and state, and supplying the means of
keeping alive, or reviving dissentions and animosities, and adding fuel to
civil fury. History consists, for the greater part, of the miseries brought
upon the world by price, ambition, avarice, revenge, lust, sedition, hypocrisy,
ungoverned zeal, and all the train of disorderly appetites, which shake the
public with the same -- Troublous storms that toss
The private state, and render life unsweet.
These vices are the causes of those storms. Religion, morals, laws,
prerogatives, privileges, liberties, rights of men, are the pretexts. The
pretexts are always found in some specious appearance of a real good. You would
not secure men from tyranny and sedition, by rooting out of the mind the
principles to which these fraudulent pretexts apply? If you did, you would root
out every thing that is valuable in the human breast. As these are the
pretexts, so the ordinary actors and instruments in great public evils are
kings, priests, magistrates, senates, parliaments, national assemblies, judges,
and captains. You would not cure the evil by resolving, that there should be no
more monarchs, nor ministers of state, nor of the gospel; no interpreters of
law; no general officers; no public councils. You might change the names. The
things in some shape must remain. A certain quantum of power must always exist
in the community, in some hands, and under some appellation. Wise men will
apply their remedies to vices, not to names; to the causes of evil which are
permanent, not to the occasional organs by which they act, and the transitory
modes in which they appear. Otherwise you will be wise historically, a fool in
practice. Seldom have two ages the same fashion in their pretexts and the same
modes of mischief. Wickedness is a little more inventive. Whilst you are
discussing fashion, the fashion is gone by. The very same vice assumes a new
body. The spirit transmigrates; and, far from losing its principle of life by
the change of its appearance, it is renovated in its new organs with the fresh
vigor of a juvenile activity. It walks abroad; it continues its ravages;
whilst you are gibbeting the carcass, or demolishing the tomb. You are
terrifying yourself with ghosts and apparitions, whilst your house is the haunt
of robbers. It is thus with all those, who, attending only to the shell and
husk of history, think they are waging war with intolerance, pride, and
cruelty, whilst, under color of abhorring the ill principles of antiquated
parties, they are authorizing and feeding the same odious vices in different
factions, and perhaps in worse.

Your citizens of Paris formerly had lent themselves as the ready instruments
to slaughter the followers of Calvin, at the infamous massacre of St.
Bartholomew. What should we say to those who could think of retaliating on the
Parisians of this day the abominations and horrors of that time? They are
indeed brought to abhor that massacre. Ferocious as they are, it is not
difficult to make them dislike it; because the politicians and fashionable
teachers have no interest in giving their passions exactly the same direction.
Still however they find it their interest to keep the same savage dispositions
alive. It was but the other day that they caused this very massacre to be acted
on the stage for the diversion of the descendants of those who committed it. In
this tragic farce they produced the cardinal of Lorraine in his robes of
function, ordering general slaughter. Was this spectacle intended to make the
Parisians abhor persecution, and loath the effusion of blood? -- No, it was to
teach them to persecute their own pastors; it was to excite them, by raising a
disgust and horror of their clergy, to an alacrity in hunting down to
destruction an order, which, if it ought to exist at all, ought to exist not
only in safety, but in reverence: It was to stimulate their cannibal appetites
(which one would think had been gorged sufficiently) by variety and seasoning;
and to quicken them to an alertness in new murders and massacres, if it should
suit the purpose of the Guises of the day. An assembly, in which fat a
multitude of priests and prelates, was obliged to suffer this indignity at its
door. The author was not sent to the galleys, nor the players to the house of
correction. Not long after this exhibition, those players came forward to the
assembly to claim the rites of that very religion which they had dared to
expose, and to show their prostituted faces in the senate, whilst the
archbishop of Paris, whose function was known to his people only by his prayers
and benedictions, and his wealth only by his alms, is forced to abandon his
house, and to fly from his flock (as from ravenous wolves) because, truly, in
the sixteenth century, the cardinal of Lorraine was a rebel and a murderer.

Such is the effect of the perversion of history, by those, who, for the same
nefarious purposes, have perverted every other part of learning. But those who
will stand upon that elevation of reason, which places centuries under our eye,
and brings things to the true point of comparison, which obscures little names,
and effaces the colors of little parties, and to which nothing can ascend but
the spirit and moral quality of human actions, will say to the teachers of the
Palais Royal, -- the cardinal of Lorraine was the murderer of the sixteenth
century, you have the glory of being the murderers in the eighteenth; and this
is the only difference between you. But history, in the nineteenth century,
better understood, and better employed, will, I trust, teach a civilized
posterity to abhor the misdeeds of both these barbarous ages. -- Reflections on
the Revolution in France.

HUMILITY.
HUMANITY cannot be degraded by humiliation. It is it is very character to
submit to such things. There is a consangunity between benevolence and
humility. They are virtues of the same stock. -- Regicide Peace.

HOUSEHOLD TROOPS, (MEETING OF.)
THE household troops form an army, who will be ready to mutiny for want of
pay, and whose mutiny will be really dreadful to a commander in chief. A
rebellion of the thirteen lords of the bedchamber would be far more terrible to
a minister, and would probably affect his power more to the quick, than a
revolt of thirteen colonies. What an uproar such an event would create at
court! What petitions, and committees, and associations, would it not produce!
Bless me! what a clattering of white sticks and yellow sticks would be about
his head -- what a storm of gold keys would fly about the ears of the minister
-- what a shower of Georges, and Thistles, and medals, and collars of S. S.
would assail him at his first entrance into the antichamber, after an
insolvent Christmas quarter. A tumult which could not be appeased by all the
harmony of the New Year's Ode. Rebellion it is certain there would be; and
rebellion may not now indeed be so critical an event to those who engage in it,
since its price is so correctly ascertained at just a thousand pound. -- Oecon.
Reform.

IMAGINATION DESCRIBED.
BESIDES the ideas, with their annexed pains and pleasures, which are presented
by the sense; the mind of man possesses a sort of creative power of its own;
either in representing at pleasure the images of things in the order and manner
in which they were received by the senses, or in combining those images in a
new manner, and according to a different order. This power is called
imagination; and to this belongs whatever is called wit, fancy, invention, and
the like. But it must be observed, that the power of the imagination is
incapable of producing any thing absolutely new; it can only vary the
disposition of those ideas which it has received from the senses. Now the
imagination is the most extensive province of pleasure and pain, as it is the
region of our fears and our hopes, and of all our passions that are connected
with them; and whatever is calculated to affect the imagination with these
commanding ideas, by force of any original natural impression, must have the
same power pretty equally over all men. For since the imagination is only the
representation of the senses, it can only be pleased or displeased with the
images, from the same principle on which the sense is pleased or displeased
with the realities; and consequently there must be just as close an agreement
in the imaginations as in the senses of men. A little attention will convince
us that this must of necessity be the case.

But in the imagination, besides the pain or pleasure arising from the
properties of the natural object, a pleasure is perceived from the resemblance,
which the imitation has to the original. The imagination, I conceive, can have
no pleasure but what revolts from one or the other of these causes; and these
causes operate pretty uniformly upon all men, because they operate by
principles of nature, and are not derived from any particular habits or
advantages. -- Sublime and Beautiful.

INDIA COMPANY. Conduct to the Polygars, or native Princes of the Carnatic.
(See CARNATIC.)
IT is only to complete the view I proposed of the conduct of the company, with
regard to the dependent provinces, that I shall say any thing at all of the
Carnatic, which is the scene, if possible, of greater disorder than the
northern provinces. Perhaps it were better to say of this center and metropolis
of abuse, whence all the rest in India and in England diverge; from whence they
are sed and methodized, what was said of Carthage -- de Carthagine satius est
silere quam parum dicere. This country, in all its denominations, is about
46,000 square miles. It may be affirmed universally, that not one person of
substance or property, landed, commercial, or monied, excepting two or three
bankers, who are necessary deposits and distributors of the general spoil, is
left in all that region. In that country the moisture, the bounty of Heaven, is
given but at a certain season. Before the era of our influence, the industry
of man carefully husbanded that gift of God. The Gentus preserved, with a
provident and religious care, the precious deposit of the periodical rain in
reservoirs, many of them works of royal grandeur; and from these, as occasion
demanded, they fructified the whole country. To maintain these reservoirs, and
to keep up an annual advance to the cultivators, for seed and cattle, formed a
principal object of the piety and policy of the priests and rulers of the Gentu
religion.

This object required a command of money; and there was no pollam, or castle,
which in the happy days of the Carnatic was without some hoard of treasure, by
which the governors were enabled to combat with the irregularity of the
seasons, and to resist or to buy off the invasion of an enemy. In all the
cities were multitudes of merchants and bankers, for all occasions of monied
assistance; and on the other hand, the native princes were in condition to
obtain credit from them. The manufacturer was paid by the return of
commodities, or by imported money, and not, as at present, in the taxes that
had been originally exacted from his industry. In aid of casual distress, the
country was full of choultries, which were inns and hospitals, where the
traveller and the poor were relieved. All ranks of people had their place in
the public concern, and their share in the common stock and common prosperity;
but the chartered rights of men, and the right which it was thought proper to
set up in the Nabob of Arcot, introduced a new system. It was their policy to
consider hoards of money as crimes; to regard moderate rents as frauds on the
sovereign; and to view, in the lesser princes, any claim of exemption from more
than settled tribute, as an act of rebellion. Accordingly all the castles were,
one after the other, plundered and destroyed. The native princes were expelled;
the hospitals fell to ruin; the reservoirs of water went to decay; the
merchants, bankers, and manufacturers disappeared; and sterility, indigence,
and depopulation, overspread the face of these once flourishing provinces.

The company was very early sensible of these mischiefs, and of their true
cause. They gave precise orders, "that the native princes, called polygars,
should not be extirpated. -- That the rebellion [so they choose to call it] of
the polygars, may (they fear) with too much justice, be attributed to the
maladministration of the Nabob's collectors." That "they observe with concern,
that their troops have been put to disagreeable services." They might have used
a stronger expression without impropriety. But they make amends in another
place. Speaking of the polygars, the directors say, that "it was repugnant to
humanity to force them to such dreadful extremeties as they underwent." That
some examples of severity might be necessary, "when they fell into the Nabob's
hands," and not by the destruction of the country. "That they fear his
government is none of the mildest; and that there is great oppression in
collecting his revenues." They state, that the wars in which he has involved
the Carnatic, had been a cause of its distresses. "That these distresses have
been certainly great; but those by the Nabob's oppressions we believe to be
greater than all." Pray, Sir, attend to the reason for their opinion that the
government of this their instrument is more calamitous to the country than the
ravages of war. -- Because, say they, his oppressions are " without
intermission. -- The others are temporary; by all which oppressions we believe
the Nabob has great wealth in store." From this store neither he nor they could
derive any advantage whatsoever, upon the invasion of Hyder Ali in the hour of
their greatest calamity and dismay.

It is now proper to compare these declarations with the company's conduct. The
principal reason which they assigned against the extirpation of the polygars
was, that the weavers were protected in their fortresses. They might have
added, that the company itself, which slung them to death, had been warmed in
the bosom of these unfortunate princes: for, on the taking of Madras by the
French, it was in their hospitable pollams, that most of the inhabitants found
refuge and protection. But, notwithstanding all these orders, reasons, and
declarations, they at length gave an indirect sanction, and permitted the use
of a very direct and irresistible force, to measures which they had, over and
over again, declared to be false policy, cruel, inhuman, and oppressive.
Having, however, forgot all attention to the princes and the people, they
remembered that they had some sort of interest in the trade of the country; and
it is matter of curiosity to observe the protection which they afforded to this
their natural object.

Full of anxious cares on this head, they direct, "that in reducing the
polygars they (their servants) were to be cautious, not to deprive the weavers
and manufacturers of the protection they often met with in the strong holds of
the polygar countries;" -- and they write to their instrument, the Nabob of
Arcot, concerning these poor people in a most pathetic strain. "We entreat your
excellency (say they) in particular, to make the manufacturers the object of
your tenderest care; particularly when you root out the polygars, you do not
deprive the weavers of the protection they enjoyed under them." When they root
out the protectors in favor of the oppressor, they show themselves religiously
cautious of the rights of the protected. When they extirpate the shepherd and
the shepherd's dogs, they piously recommend the helpless flock to the mercy,
and even to the tenderest care, of the wolf. -- Speech on Mr. Fox's East India
Bill.

INDIA PROVINCES (STATE OF). Bengal.
BENGAL, and the provinces that are united to it, are larger than the kingdom
of France; and once contained, as France does contain, a great and independent
landed interest, composed of princes, of great lords, of a numerous nobility
and gentry, of freeholders, of lower tenants, of religious communities, and
public foundations. So early as 1769, the company's servants perceived the
decay into which these provinces had fallen under English administration, and
they made a strong representation upon this decay, and what they apprehended to
be the causes of it. Soon after this representation, Mr. Hastings became
president of Bengal. Instead of administering a remedy to this melancholy
disorder, upon the heels of a dreadful famine, in the year 1772, the succor
which the new president and the council lent to this afflicted nation was --
shall I be believed in relating it? -- the landed interest of a whole kingdom,
of a kingdom to be compared to France, was set up to public auction! They set
up (Mr. Hastings set up) the whole nobility, gentry, and freeholders, to the
highest bidder. No preference was given to the ancient proprietors. They must
bid against every usurer, every temporary adventurer, every jobber and schemer,
every servant of every European, or they were obliged to content themselves, in
lieu of their extensive domains, with their house, and such a pension as the
state-auctioneers thought fit to assign. In this general calamity, several of
the first nobility thought (and in all appearance justly) that they had better
submit to the necessity of this pension, than continue, under the name of
zemindars, the objects and instruments of a system, by which they ruined their
tenants, and were ruined themselves. Another reform has since come upon the
back of the first; and a pension having been assigned to these unhappy persons,
in lieu of their hereditary lands, a new scheme of economy has taken place,
and deprived them of that pension.

The menial servants of Englishmen, persons (to use the emphatical phrase of a
ruined and patient eastern chief) " whose fathers they would not have set with
the dogs of their flock," entered into their patrimonial lands. Mr. Hastings's
banian was, after this auction, sound possessed of territories yielding a rent
of one hundred and forty thousand pounds a year.

Such an universal proscription, upon any pretense, has few examples. Such a
proscription, without even a pretense of delinquency, has none. It stands by
itself. It stands as a monument to astonish the imagination, to confound the
reason of mankind. I confess to you, when I first came to know this business in
its true nature and extent, my surprise did a little suspend my indignation. I
was in a manner stupefied by the desperate boldness of a few obscure young men,
who having obtained, by ways which they could not comprehend, a power of which
they saw neither the purposes nor the limits, tossed about, subverted, and tore
to pieces, as if it were in the gambols of a boyish unluckiness and malice, the
most established rights, and the most ancient and most revered institutions, of
ages and nations. Sir, I will not now trouble you with any detail with regard
to what they have since done with these same lands and land-holders; only to
inform you, that nothing has been suffered to settle for two seasons together
upon any basis; and that the levity and inconstancy of these mock legislators
were not the least afflicting parts of the oppressions suffered under their
usurpation; nor will any thing give stability to the property of the natives,
but an administration in England at once protecting and stable. The country
sustains, almost every year, the miseries of a revolution. At present, all is
uncertainty, misery, and confusion. There is to be found through these vast
regions no longer one landed man, who is a resource for voluntary aid, or an
object for particular rapine. Some of them were, not long since, great princes;
they possessed treasures, they levied armies. There was a zemindar in Bengal (I
forget his name) that, on the threat of an invasion, supplied the soubah of
these provinces with the loan of a million sterling. The family this day wants
credit for a breakfast at the bazar. -- Ibid.

MADRAS.
MADRAS, with its dependencies, is the second (but with a long interval, the
second) member of the British empire in the east. The trade of that city, and
of the adjacent territory, was, not very long ago, among the most flourishing
in Asia. But since the establishment of the British power, it has wasted away
under an uniform gradual decline; insomuch that in the year 1779 not one
merchant of eminence was to be found in the whole country Mr. Smith's
Examination before the select committee, Appendix No. 2.
. During this period of decay, about six hundred thousand sterling pounds a
year have been drawn off by English gentlemen on their private account, by the
way of China alone Appendix No. 2.
. If we add four hundred thousand, as probably remitted through other channels,
and in other mediums, that is, in jewels, gold, and silver directly brought to
Europe, and in bills upon the British and foreign companies, you will scarcely
think the matter overrated. If we fix the commencement of this extraction of
money from the Carnatic at a period no earlier than the year 1760, and close it
in the year 1780, it probably will not amount to a great deal less than twenty
millions of money.

During the deep silent flow of this steady stream of wealth, which set from
India into Europe, it generally passed on with no adequate observation; but
happening at some periods to meet rifts of rocks that checked its course, it
grew more noisy, and attracted more notice. The pecuniary discussions caused by
an accumulation of part of the fortunes of their servants in a debt from the
Nabob of Arcot, was the first thing which very particularly called for, and
long engaged, the attention of the court of directors. This debt amounted to
eight hundred and eighty thousand pounds sterling, and was claimed, for the
greater part, by English gentlemen, residing at Madras. This grand capital,
settled at length by order, at ten per cent. afforded an annuity of
eighty-eight thousand pounds Fourth report, Mr. Dundas's committee, p. 4.
.

Whilst the directors were digesting their astonishment at this information, a
memorial was presented to them from three gentlemen, informing them that their
friends had lent likewise, to merchants of Canton in China, a sum of not more
than one million sterling. In this memorial they called upon the company for
their assistance and interposition with the Chinese government for the recovery
of the debt. This sum lent to Chinese merchants, was at 24 per cent. which
would yield, if paid, an annuity of two hundred and forty thousand pounds A
witness examined before the Committee of Secrecy says, that eighteen per cent
was the usual interest; but he had heard that more had been given. The above is
the account which Mr. B. received.
.

Perplexed as the directors were with these demands, you may conceive, Sir,
that they did not find themselves very much disembarrassed, by being made
acquainted that they must again exert their influence for a new reserve of the
happy parsimony of their servants, collected into a second debt from the Nabob
of Arcot, amounting to two millions four hundred thousand pounds, settled at an
interest of 12 per cent. This is known by the name of the Consolidation of
1777, as the former of the nabob's debts was by the title of the Consolidation
of 1767. To this was added, in a separate parcel, a little reserve called the
Cavalry debt, of one hundred and sixty thousand pounds, at the same interest.
The whole of these four capitals, amounting to four millions four hundred and
forty thousand pounds, produced at their several rates, annuities amounting to
six hundred and and twenty-three thousand pounds a year; a good deal more than
one third of the clear land tax of England, at four shillings in the pound; a
good deal more than double the whole annual dividend of the East India company,
the nominal masters to the proprietors in these funds. Of this interest, three
hundred and eighty-three thousand two hundred pounds a year stood chargeable on
the public revenues of the Carnatic. -- Speech on the Nabob of Arcot's Debts.

INDIA DEBT AND PECULATORS.
SIR, at this moment, it will not be necessary to consider the various
operations which the capital and interest of this debt have successively
undergone. I shall speak to these operations when I come particularly to answer
the right honorable gentleman (Mr. Dundas) on each of the heads, as he has
thought proper to divide them. But this was the exact view in which these debts
first appeared to the court of directors, and to the world. It varied
afterward. But it never appeared in any other than a most questionable shape.
When this gigantic phantom of debt first appeared before a young minister, (Mr.
Pit) it naturally would have justified some degree of doubt and apprehension.
Such a prodigy would have filled any common man with superstitious fears. He
would exorcise that shapeless, nameless form, and by every thing sacred would
have adjured it to tell by what means a small number of slight individuals, of
no consequence or situation, possessed of no lucrative offices, without the
command of armies, or the known administration of revenues, without profession
of any kind, without any sort of trade sufficient to employ a pedlar, could
have, in a few years (as to some even in a few months) have amassed treasures
equal to the revenues of a respectable kingdom? Was it not enough to put these
gentlemen, in the noviciate of their administration, on their guard, and to
call upon them for a strict enquiry (if not to justify them in a reprobation of
those demands without any enquiry at all) that when all England, Scotland, and
Ireland, had for years been witness to the immense sums laid out by the
servants of the company in stocks of all denominations, in the purchase of
lands, in the buying and building of houses, in the securing quiet seats in
parliament, or in the tumultuous riot of contested elections, in wandering
throughout the whole range of those variegated modes of inventive prodigality;
which sometimes have excited our wonder, sometimes roused our indignation; that
after all India was four millions still in debt to them? India in debt to them!
For what? Every debt for which an equivalent of some kind or other is not
given, is on the face of it a fraud. What is the equivalent they have given?
What equivalent had they to give? What are the articles of commerce, or the
branches of manufacture which those gentlemen have carried hence to enrich
India? What are the sciences they b^ed out to enlighten it? What are the arts
they introduced to cheer and to adorn it? What are the religious, what the
moral institutions they have taught among that people as a guide to life, or as
a consolation when life is to be no more, that there is an eternal debt, a debt
"still paying, still to owe," which must be bound on the present generation in
India, and entailed on their mortgaged posterity for ever? A debt of millions,
in favor of a set of men, whose names, with few exceptions, are either buried
in the obscurity of their origin and talents, or dragged into light by the
enormity of their crimes?

In my opinion the courage of the minister was the most wonderful part of the
transaction, especially as he must have read, or rather the right honorable
gentleman says, he has read for him, whole volumes upon the subject. The
volumes, by the way, are not by one tenth part so numerous as the right
honorable gentleman has thought proper to pretend, in order to frighten you
from enquiry; but in these volumes, such as they are, the minister must have
found a full authority for a suspicion (at the very least) of every thing
relative to the great fortunes made at Madras. What is that authority? Why no
other than the standing authority for all the claims which the ministry has
thought fit to provide for -- the grand debtor -- the nabob of Arcot himself.
Hear that prince, in the letter written to the court of directors, at the
precise period, whilst the main body of these debts were contracting. In this
letter he states himself to be, what undoubtedly he is, a most competent
witness to this point. After speaking of the war with Hyder Ali in 1768 and
1769, and of other measures which he censures (whether right or wrong it
signifies nothing) and into which he says he had been led by the company's
servants; he proceeds in this manner -- "If all these things were against the
real interests of the company, they are ten thousand times more against mine,
and against the prosperity of my country, and the happiness of my people; for
your interests and mine are the same. What were they owing to then? to the
private views of a few individuals, who have enriched themselves at the expense
of your influence, and of my country; for your servants HAVE NO TRADE IN THIS
COUNTRY; neither do you pay them high wages; yet in a few years they return to
England, with many lacks of pogodas. How can you or I account for such immense
fortunes, acquired in so short a time, without any visible means of getting
them?"

When he asked this question, which involves its answer, it is extraordinary
that curiosity did not prompt the chancellor of the exchequer to that enquiry
which might come in vain recommended to him by his own act of parliament. Does
not the nabob of Arcot tell us in so many words, that there was no fair way of
making the enormous sums sent by the company's servants to England? And do you
imagine that there was or could be more honesty and good faith in the demands,
for what remained behind in India? Of what nature were the transactions with
himself? If you follow the train of his information you must see, that if these
great sums were at all lent, it was not property, but spoil that was lent; if
not lent, the transaction was not a contract, but a fraud. Either way, if light
enough could not be furnished to authorize a full condemnation of these
demands, they ought to have been left to the parties who best knew and
understood each others proceedings. It was not necessary that the authority of
government should interpose in favor of claims, whose very foundation was a
defiance of that authority, and whose object and end was its entire subversion.

It may be said that this letter was written by the nabob of Arcot in a moody
humor, under the influence of some chagrin. Certainly it was; but it is in
such humors that truth comes out. And when he tells you from his own
knowledge, what every one must presume, from the extreme probability of the
thing, whether he told it or not, one such testimony is worth a thousand that
contradict that probability, when the parties have a better understanding with
each other, and when they have a point to carry, that may unite them in a
common deceit.

If this body of private claims of debt, real or devised, were a question, as
it is falsely pretended, between the nabob of Arcot as debtor, and Paul
Benfield and his associates as creditors, I am sure I should give myself but
little trouble about it. If the hoards of oppression were the fund for
satisfying the claims of bribery and peculation, who would wish to interfere
between such litigants? If the demands were confined to what might be drawn
from the treasures which the company's records uniformly assert that the nabob
is in possession of; or if he had mines of gold or silver, or diamonds (as we
know that he has none) these gentlemen might break open his hoards, or dig in
his mines, without any disturbance from me. But the gentlemen on the other side
of the house know as well as I do, and they dare not contradict me, that the
nabob of Arcot and his creditors are not adversaries, but collusive parties,
and that the whole transaction is under a false color, and false names. The
litigation is not, nor ever has been, between their rapacity and his hoarded
riches. No; it is between him and them combining and confederating on one side,
and the public revenues, and the miserable inhabitants of a ruined country, on
the other. These are the r^l plaintiffs and the real defendants in the suit.
Refusing a shilling from his hoards for the satisfaction of any demand, the
nabob of Arcot is always ready, nay, he earnestly, and with eagerness and
passion, contends for delivering up to these pretended creditors his territory
and his subjects. It is therefore not from treasuries and mines, but from the
food of your unpaid armies, from the blood withheld from the veins, and whipped
out of the backs of the most miserable of men, that we are to pamper extortion,
usury, and peculation, under the false names of debtors and creditors of state.
-- Ibid.

INDIA COMPANY (POLICY OF.)
THE invariable course of the company's policy is this: Either they set up some
prince too odious to maintain himself without the necessity of their
assistance, or they soon render him odious, by making him the instrument of
their government. In that case troops are bountifully sent to him to maintain
his authority. That he should have no want of assistance, a civil gentleman,
called a resident, is kept at his court, who, under pretense of providing duly
for the pay of these troops, gets assignments on the revenue into his hands.
Under his provident management, debts soon accumulate; new assignments are made
for these debts; until, step by step, the whole revenue, and with it the whole
power of the country, is delivered into his hands. The military do not behold
without a virtuous emulation the moderate gains of the civil department. They
feel that, in a country driven to habitual rebellion by the civil government,
the military is necessary; and they will not permit their services to go
unrewarded. Tracts of country are delivered over to their discretion. Then it
is found proper to convert their commanding officers into farmers of revenue.
Thus, between the well paid civil, and well rewarded military establishment,
the situation of the natives may be easily conjectured. The authority of the
regular and lawful government is every where and in every point extinguished.
Disorders and violences arise; they are repressed by other disorders and other
violences. Wherever the collectors of the revenue, and the farming colonels and
majors move, ruin is about them, rebellion before and behind them. The people
in crowds fly out of the country; and the frontier is guarded by lines of
troops, not to exclude an enemy, but to prevent the escape of the inhabitants.
-- Speech on Mr. Fox's East India Bill.

INDIA. Fate of the Natives of India.
WORSE, far worse, has been the fate of the poor creatures, the natives of
India, whom the hypocrisy of the company has betrayed into complaint of
oppression, and discovery of peculation. The first woman in Bengal, the ranni
of Rajeshahi, the ranni of Burdwan, the ranni of Amboa, by their weak and
thoughtless trust in the company's honor and protection, are utterly ruined:
the first of these women, a person of princely rank, and once of correspondent
fortune, who paid above two hundred thousand a year quit-rent to the state, is,
according to very credible information, so completely beggared as to stand in
need of the relief of alms. Mahomed Reza Khan, the second Mussulman in Bengal,
for having been distinguished by the ill-omened honor of the countenance and
protection of the court of directors, was, without the pretense of any enquiry
whatsoever into his conduct, stripped of all his employments, and reduced to
the lowest condition. His ancient rival for power, the rajah Nundcomar was, by
an insult on every thing which India holds respectable and sacred, hanged in
the face of all his nation, by the judges you sent to protect that people;
hanged for a pretended crime, upon an ex post facto British act of parliament,
in the midst of his evidence against Mr. Hastings. The accuser they saw hanged.
The culprit, without acquittal or enquiry, triumphs on the ground of that
murder: a murder not of Nundcomar only, but of all living testimony, and even
of evidence yet unborn. From that time not a complaint has been heard from the
natives against their governors. All the grievances of India have found a
complete remedy. -- Ibid.

INDIA. British Dominions in India described.
IN the northern parts it is a solid mass of land, about eight hundred miles in
length, and four or five hundred broad. As you go southward, it becomes
narrower for a space. It afterward dilates; but narrower or broader, you
possess the whole eastern and north-eastern coast of that vast country, quite
from the borders of Pegu. -- Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa, with Benares (now
unfortunately in our immediate possession) measure 161,978 square English
miles; a territory considerably larger than the whole kingdom of France. Oude,
with its dependant provinces, is 53,286 square miles, not a great deal less
than England. The Carnatic, with Tanjour and the Circars, is 65,948 square
miles, very considerably larger than England; and the whole of the company's
dominions, comprehending Bombay and Salsette, amounts to 281,412 square miles;
which forms a territory larger than any European dominion, Russia and Turkey
excepted. Through all that vast extent of country there is not a man who eats a
mouthful of rice but by permission of the East India company. -- So far with
regard to the extent. The population of this great empire is not easy to be
calculated. When the countries, of which it is composed, came into our
possession, they were all eminently peopled, and eminently productive; though
at that time considerably declined from their ancient prosperity. But since
they are come into our hands! --! However, if we take the period of our
estimate immediately before the utter desolation of the Carnatic, and if we
allow for the havoc which our government had even then made in these regions,
we cannot, in my opinion, rate the population at much less than thirty millions
of souls; more than four times the number of persons in the island of Great
Britain.

My next enquiry to that of the number, is the quality and description of the
inhabitants. This multitude of men does not consist of an abject and barbarous
populace; much less of gangs of savages, like the Guaranies and Chiquitos, who
wander on the waste borders of the river of Amazons, or the Plate; but a people
for ages civilized and cultivated; cultivated by all the arts of polished life,
whilst we were yet in the woods. There, have been (and still the skeletons
remain) princes once of great dignity, authority, and opulence. There, are to
be found the chiefs of tribes and nations. There, is to be found an ancient and
venerable priesthood, the depository of their laws, learning, and history, the
guides of the people whilst living, and their consolation in death; a nobility
of great antiquity and renown; a multitude of cities, not exceeded in
population and trade by those of the first class in Europe; merchants and
bankers, individual houses of whom have once vied in capital with the Bank of
England; whose credit had often supported a tottering state, and preserved
their governments in the midst of war and desolation; millions of ingenious
manufacturers and mechanics; millions of the most diligent, and not the least
intelligent, tillers of the earth. Here are to be found almost all the
religions professed by men, the Bramincal, the Mussulmen, the Eastern and the
Western Christians.

If I were to take the whole aggregate of our possessions there, I should
compare it, as the nearest parallel I can find, with the empire of Germany. Our
immediate possessions I should compare with the Austrian dominions, and they
would not suffer in the comparison. The nabob of Oude might stand for the king
of Prussia; the nabob of Arcot I would compare, as superior in territory, and
equal in revenue, to the elector of Saxony. Cheyt Sing, the rajah of Benares,
might well rank with the prince of Hesse, at least; and the rajah of Tanjore
(though hardly equal in extent of dominion, superior in revenue) to the elector
of Bavaria. The Polygars and the northern Zemindars, and other great chiefs,
might well class with the rest of the princes, dukes, counts, marquisses, and
bishops in the empire; all of whom I mention to honor, and surely without
disparagement to any or all of those most respectable princes and grandees.

All this vast mass, composed of so many orders and classes of men, is again
infinitely diversified by manners, by religion, by hereditary employment,
through all their possible combinations. This renders the handling of India a
matter in an high degree critical and delicate. But oh! it has been handled
rudely indeed. Even some of the reformers seem to have forgot that they had any
thing to do but to regulate the tenants of a manor, or the shopkeepers of the
next county town.

It is an empire of this extent, of this complicated nature, of this dignity
and importance, that I have compared to Germany, and the German government; not
for an exact resemblance, but as a sort of a middle term, by which India might
be approximated to our understandings, and if possible to our feelings; in
order to awaken something of sympathy for the unfortunate natives, of which I
am afraid we are not perfectly susceptible, whilst we look at this very remote
object through a false and cloudy medium. -- Ibid.

INDIA DIRECTORS.
A Director's qualification may be worth about two thousand five hundred pounds
-- and the interest, at eight per cent. is about one hundred and sixty pounds a
year. Of what value is that, whether it rise to ten, or fall to six, or to
nothing, to him whose son, before he is in Bengal two months, and before he
descends the steps of the council chamber, sells the grant of a single contract
for forty thousand pounds? Accordingly the stock is bought up in
qualifications. The vote is not to protect the stock, but the stock is bought
to acquire the vote; and the end of the vote is to cover and support, against
justice, some man of power who has made an obnoxious fortune in India; or to
maintain in power those who are actually employing it in the acquisition of
such a fortune; and to avail themselves in return of his patronage, that he may
shower the spoils of the east, "barbaric pearl and gold," on them, their
families, and dependents. So that all the relations of the Company are not only
changed, but inverted. The servants in India are not appointed by the
Directors, but the Directors are chosen by them. The trade is carried on with
their capitals; to them the revenues of the country are mortgaged. The seat of
the supreme power is in Calcutta. The house in Leadenhall-street is nothing
more than a 'change for their agents, factors, and deputies to meet in, to take
care of their affairs, and support their interests; and this so avowedly, that
we see the known agents of the delinquent servants marshalling and disciplining
their forces, and the prime spokesmen in all their assemblies. -- Ibid.

JACOBINISM.
JACOBINISM is the revolt of the enterprising talents of a country against its
property. When private men form themselves into associations for the purpose of
destroying the pre-existing laws and institutions of their country; when they
secure to themselves an army, by dividing amongst the people of no property the
estates of the ancient and lawful proprietors; when a state recognizes those
acts; when it does not make confiscations for crimes, but makes crimes for
confiscations; when it has its principal strength, and all its resources in
such a violation of property; when it stands chiefly upon such a violation;
massacreing by judgments, or otherwise, those who make any struggle for their
old legal government, and their legal, hereditary, or acquired possessions, I
call this Jacobinism by establishment. -- Regicide Peace.

JACOBINS.
I HAVE a good opinion of the general abilities of the Jacobins; not that I
suppose them better born than others; but strong passions awake the faculties:
they suffer not a particle to be lost; the spirit of enterprise gives them the
full use of all their native energies. -- Ibid.

JACOBINS. Character of the British Jacobins.
IT cannot be concealed. We are a divided people. But in divisions, where a
part is to be taken, we are to make a muster of our strength. I have often
endeavored to class those who, in any political view, are to be called the
people. Without doing something of this sort we must proceed absurdly. We
should presume as absurdly, if we pretended to very great accuracy in our
estimate. But I think, in the calculation I have made, the error cannot be very
material. In England and Scotland, I compute that those of adult age, not
declining in life, of tolerable leisure for such discussions, and of some means
of information, more or less, and who are above menial dependence, (or what
virtually is such) may amount to about four hundred thousand. In this number I
include the women that take a concern in those transactions, who cannot exceed
twenty thousand. There is such a thing as a natural representative of the
people. This body is that representative; and on this body, more than on the
legal constituent, the artificial representative depends. This is the British
public, and it is a public very numerous. The rest, when feeble, are the
objects of protection; when strong, the means of force. They who affect to
consider that part of us in any other light, insult while they cajole us; they
do not want us for counselors in deliberation, but to list us as soldiers for
battle.

Of these four hundred thousand political citizens, I look upon one fifth, or
about eighty thousand, to be pure Jacobins, utterly incapable of amendment;
objects of eternal vigilance; and when they break out, of legal constraint. On
these, no reason, no argument, no example, no venerable authority, can have the
slightest influence. They desire a change, and they will have it if they can.
If they cannot have it by English cabal, they will make no sort of scruple of
having it by the cabal of France, into which already they are virtually
incorporated.

This minority is great and formidable. I do not know whether if I aimed at the
total overthrow of a kingdom, I should wish to be encumbered with a larger body
of partisans. These, by their spirit of intrigue, and by their restless
agitating activity, are of a force far superior to their numbers; and if times
grew the least critical, have the means of debauching or intimidating many of
those who are now sound, as well as of adding to their force large bodies of
the more passive part of the nation. This minority is numerous enough to make a
mighty cry for peace, or for war, or for any object they are led vehemently to
desire. By passing from place to place with a velocity incredible, and
diversifying their character and description, they are capable of mimicking the
general voice. We must not always judge of the generality of the opinion by the
noise of the acclamation.

The majority, the other four-fifths, is perfectly sound, and of the best
possible dispositions to religion, to government, to the true and undivided
interest of their country. Such men are naturally disposed to peace. They who
are in possession of all they wish, are languid and improvident. With this
fault, (and I admit its existence in all its extent) they would not endure to
hear of a peace that led to the ruin of every thing for which peace is dear to
them. However, the desire of peace is essentially the weak side of all such
men. All men that are ruined, are ruined on the side of their natural
propensities. There they are unguarded. They do not suspect that their
destruction is attempted through their virtues. This their enemies are
perfectly aware of, and accordingly they, the most turbulent of mankind, who
never made a scruple to shake the tranquillity of their country to its center,
raise a continual cry for peace with France. Peace with regicides, and war with
the rest of the world, is their true motto. From the beginning, and even whilst
the French gave the blows, and we hardly opposed the vis inertiae to their
efforts, from that day to this hour, like importunate Guinea-fowls crying one
note day and night, they have called Peace, peace!! -- Ibid.

JUDGMENT AND SENSIBILITY.
A rectitude of judgment in the arts, which may be called a good taste, does in
a great measure depend upon sensibility; because if the mind has no bent to the
pleasures of the imagination, it will never apply itself sufficiently to works
of that species to acquire a competent knowledge in them. But though a degree
of sensibility is requisite to form a good judgment, yet a good judgment does
not necessarily arise from a quick sensibility of pleasure; it frequently
happens that a very poor judge, merely by force of a greater complexional
sensibility, is more affected by a very poor piece, than the best judge by the
most perfect; for as every thing new, extraordinary, grand, or passionate, is
well calculated to affect such a person, and that the faults do not affect him,
his pleasure is more pure and unmixed; and as it is merely a pleasure of the
imagination, it is much higher than any which is derived from a rectitude of
the judgment; the judgment is for the greater part employed in throwing
stumbling blocks in the way of the imagination, in dissipating the scenes of
its enchantment, and in tying us down to the disagreeable yoke of our reason;
for almost the only pleasure that men have in judging better than others,
consists in a sort of conscious pride and superiority, which arises from
thinking rightly; but then, this is an indirect pleasure, a pleasure which does
not immediately result from the object which is under contemplation. In the
morning of our days, when the senses are unworn and tender, when the whole man
is awake in every part, and the gloss of novelty fresh upon all the objects
that surround us, how lively at that time are our sensations, but how false and
inaccurate the judgments we form of things? I despair of ever receiving the
same degree of pleasure from the most excellent performances of genius which I
felt at that age, from pieces which my present judgment regards as trifling and
contemptible. Every trivial cause of pleasure is apt to affect the man of too
sanguine a complexion: his appetite is too keen to suffer his taste to be
delicate; and he is in all respects what Ovid says of himself in love, Molle
meum levibus cor est violabile telis,
Et semper causa est, cur ego semper amem.
One of this character can never be a refined judge; never what the comic poet
calls elegans formarum spectator. The excellence and force of a composition
must always be imperfectly estimated from its effect on the minds of any,
except we know the temper and character of those minds. The most powerful
effects of poetry and music have been displayed, and perhaps are still
displayed, where these arts are but in a very low and imperfect state. The rude
hearer is affected by the principles which operate in these arts even in their
rudest condition; and he is not skilful enough to perceive the defects. But as
arts advance toward their perfection, the science of criticism advances with
equal pace, and the pleasure of judges is frequently interrupted by the faults
which are discovered in the most finished compositions. -- Introduction on
Taste.

INFORMER DESCRIBED.
A mercenary informer knows no distinction. -- Under such a system, the
obnoxious people are slaves, not only to the Government, but they live at the
mercy of every individual; they are at once the slaves of the whole community,
and of every part of it; and the worst and most unmerciful men are those on
whose goodness they most depend.

In this situation, men not only shrink from the frowns of the stern
Magistrate, but they are obliged to fly from their very places. The seeds of
destruction are sown in civil intercourse, in social habitudes. The blood of
wholesome kindred is infected; their tables and beds are surrounded with
snares; all the means given by Providence to make life safe and comfortable,
are perverted into instruments of terror and torment. This species of universal
subserviency, that makes the very servant who waits behind your chair the
arbiter of your life and fortune, has such a tendency to degrade and debase
mankind, and to deprive him of that assured and liberal state of mind, which
alone can make us what we ought to be, that I vow to God I would sooner bring
myself to put a man to immediate death for opinions I disliked, and so to get
rid of the man and his opinions at once, than to fret him with a feverish
being, tainted with the gaol distemper of a contagious servitude, to keep him
above ground, an animated mass of putrefaction, corrupted himself, and
corrupting all about him. -- Speech at Bristol previous to the Election.

JURISDICTIONS.
ALL jurisdictions, which furnish more matter of expense, more temptation to
oppression, or more means or instruments of corrupt influence, than advantage
to justice or political administration, ought to be abolished. -- Oecon. Reform.

JUDGES.
IT is the public justice that holds the community together; the ease,
therefore, and independence of the Judges, ought to supersede all other
considerations, and they ought to be the very last to feel the necessities of
the State, or to be obliged either to court or bully a Minister for their
right; they ought to be as weak solicitors on their own demands, as strenuous
assertors of the rights and liberties of others. The Judges are, or ought to
be, of a reserved and retired character, and wholly unconnected with the
political world. -- Ibid.

INSTITUTION (POLITICAL.)
WHEN any political institution is praised, in spite of great and prominent
faults of every kind, and in all its parts, it must be supposed to have
something excellent in its fundamental principles. It must be shown that it was
right, though imperfect; that it is not only by possibility susceptible of
improvement, but that it contains a principle tending to its melioration. --
Appeal from the new to the old Whigs.

JUSTICE.
JUSTICE is itself the great standing policy of civil society; and any eminent
departure from it, under any circumstance, lies under the suspicion of being no
policy at all. -- Reflections on the Revolution in France.

IRISH CATHOLICS. Conduct of the Irish Catholics in London during the Riots in
1780.
THERE was a circumstance (justice will not suffer me to pass it over) which,
if any thing could enforce the reasons I have given, would fully justify the
act of relief, and render a repeal, or any thing like a repeal, unnatural,
impossible. It was the behavior of the persecuted Roman Catholics under the
acts of violence and brutal insolence which they suffered. I suppose there are
not in London less than four or five thousand of that persuasion from my
country, who do a great deal of the most laborious works in the metropolis; and
they chiefly inhabit those quarters which were the principal theater of the
fury of the bigoted multitude. They are known to be men of strong arms and
quick feelings, and more remarkable for a determined resolution, than clear
ideas, or much foresight. But though provoked by every thing that can stir the
blood of men, their houses and chapels in flames, and with the most atrocious
profanations of every thing which they hold sacred before their eyes, not a
hand was moved to retaliate, or even to defend. -- Speech at Bristol, previous
to the Election.

IRISH CATHOLICS. Object and Effect of the Popery Laws.
SETTING, therefore, this case out of the question, it becomes an object of
very serious consideration, whether, because wicked men of various descriptions
are engaged in seditious courses, the rational, sober, and valuable part of one
description should not be indulged in their sober and rational expectations?
You, who have looked deeply into the spirit of the popery laws, must be
perfectly sensible, that a great part of the present mischief, which we abhor
in common, if it at all exists, has arisen from them. Their declared object was
to reduce the Catholics of Ireland to a miserable populace, without property,
without estimation, without education. The professed object was to deprive the
few men who, in spite of those laws, might hold or obtain any property amongst
them, of all sort of influence or authority over the rest. They divided the
nation into two distinct bodies, without common interest, sympathy, or
connection. One of these bodies was to possess all the franchises, all the
property, all the education: the other was to be composed of drawers of water
and cutters of turf for them. Are we to be astonished, when, by the efforts of
so much violence in conquest, and so much policy in regulation, continued
without intermission for near an hundred years, we had reduced them to a mob;
that whenever they came to act at all, many of them would act exactly like a
mob, without temper, measure, or foresight? Surely it might be just now a
matter of temperate discussion, whether you ought not apply a remedy to the
real cause of the evil. If the disorder you speak of be real and considerable,
you ought to raise an aristocratic interest; that is, an interest of property
and education amongst them; and to strengthen, by every prudent means, the
authority and influence of men of that description. It will deserve your best
thoughts, to examine whether this can be done without giving such persons the
means of demonstrating to the rest, that something more is to be got by their
temperate conduct, than can be expected from the wild and senseless projects of
those who do not belong to their body, who have no interest in their well
being, and only wish to make them the dupes of their turbulent ambition. --
Letter to Sir H. Langrishe, M. P.

IRISH CATHOLICS (STATE OF THE.)
THE Protestants of Ireland are not alone sufficiently the people to form a
democracy; and they are too numerous to answer the ends and purposes of an
aristocracy. Admiration, that first source of obedience, can be only the claim
or the imposture of the few. I hold it to be absolutely impossible for two
millions of plebeians, (Catholics) composing certainly, a very clear and
decided majority in that class, to become so far in love with six or seven
hundred thousand of their fellow-citizens (to all outward appearance plebeians
like themselves, and many of them tradesmen, servants, and otherwise inferior
to some of them) as to see with satisfaction, or even with patience, an
exclusive power vested in them, by which constitutionally they become the
absolute masters; and by the manners derived from their circumstances, must be
capable of exercising upon them, daily and hourly, an insulting and vexatious
superiority. Neither are the majority of the Irish indemnified (as in some
aristocracies) for this state of humiliating vassalage (often inverting the
nature of things and relations) by having the lower walks of industry wholly
abandoned to them. They are rivalled, to say the least of the matter, in every
laborious and lucrative course of life: while every franchise, every honor,
every trust, every place down to the very lowest and least confidential
(besides whole professions) is reserved for the master cast. -- Ibid.

IRISH CATHOLICS EXCLUDED THE ELECTIVE FRANCHISE The right of election has
been since extended to the Irish Catholics.
.
I WILL not here examine, whether the principles of the British [the Irish]
constitution, be wise or not. I must assume that they are; and that those who
partake the franchises which make it, partake of a benefit. They who are
excluded from votes (under proper qualifications inherent in the constitution
that gives them) are excluded, not from the state, but from the British
constitution. They cannot by any possibility, whilst they hear its praises
continually rung in their ears, and are present at the declaration which is so
generally and so bravely made by those who possess the privilege -- that the
best blood in their veins ought to be shed, to preserve their share in it;
they, the disfranchised part, cannot, I say, think themselves in an happy
state, to be utterly excluded from all its direct and all its consequential
advantages. The popular part of the constitution must be to them, by far the
most odious part of it. To them it is not on actual, and, if possible, still
less a virtual representation. It is, indeed, the direct contrary. It is power
unlimited, placed in the hands of an adverse description, because it is an
adverse description. And if they who compose the privileged body have not an
interest, they must but too frequently have motives of pride, passion,
petulance, peevish jealousy, or tyrannic suspicion, to urge them to treat the
excluded people with contempt and rigor.

Then, since our oldest fundamental laws follow, or rather couple, freehold
with franchise; since no principle of the revolution shakes these liberties;
since the oldest and one of the best monuments of the consti^tion, demands for
the Irish the privilege which they supplicate; since the principles of the
revolution coincide with the declarations of the Great Charter; since the
practice of the revolution, in this point, did not contradict its principles;
since, from that event, twenty-five years had elapsed, before a domineering
party, on a party principle, had ventured to disfranchise, without any proof
whatsoever of abuse, the greater part of the community; since the king's
coronation oath does not stand in his way to the performance of his duty to all
his subjects; since you have given to all other dissenters these privileges
without limit, which are hitherto withheld, without any limitation whatsoever,
from the Catholics; since no nation in the world has ever been known to exclude
so great a body of men (not born slaves) from the civil state, and all the
benefits of its constitution; the whole question comes before parliament, as a
matter for its prudence. I do not put the thing on a question of right. That
discretion which in judicature is well said by Lord Coke to be a crooked cord,
in legislature is a golden rule. Supplicants ought not to appear too much in
the character of litigants. If the subject thinks so highly and reverently of
the sovereign authority, as not to claim any thing of right, so that it may
seem to be independent of the power and free choice of its government: and if
the sovereign, on his part, considers the advantages of the subjects as their
right, and all their reasonable wishes as so many claims; in the fortunate
conjunction of these mutual dispositions are laid the foundations of a happy
and prosperous commonwealth. For my own part, desiring of all things that the
authority of the legislature under which I was born, and which I cherish, not
only with a dutiful awe, but with a partial and cordial affection, to be
maintained in the utmost possible respect, I never will suffer myself to
suppose, that, at bottom, their discretion will be found to be at variance with
their justice. -- Ibid.

IRISH CATHOLIC. Possesses no virtual Representation. (See Representation
Virtual.)
THE Irish Catholic, as a Catholic and belonging to a description, has no
virtual relation to the representative; but the contrary. There is a relation
in mutual obligation. Gratitude may not always have a very lasting power; but
the frequent recurrence of an application for favors will revive and refresh
it; and will necessarily produce some degree of mutual attention. It will,
produce, at least, acquaintance. The several descriptions of people will not be
kept so much apart as they now are, as if they were not only separate nations,
but separate species. The stigma and reproach, the hideous mask will be taken
off, and men will see each other as they are. Sure I am, that there have been
thousands in Ireland, who have never conversed with a Roman Catholic in their
whole lives, unless they happened to talk to their gardener's workmen, or to
ask their way, when they had lost it in their sports; or, at best, who had
known them only as footmen, or other domestics of the second and third order:
and so averse were they, some time ago, to have them near their persons, that
they would not employ even those who could never find their way beyond the
stable. I well remember a great, and, in many respects, a good man, who
advertised for a blacksmith; but, at the same time, added, he must be a
Protestant. It is impossible that such a state of things, though natural
goodness in many persons will undoubtedly make exceptions, must not produce
alienation on the one side, and pride and insolence on the other.

Reduced to a question of discretion, and that discretion exercised solely upon
what will appear best for the conservation of the state on its present basis, I
should recommend it to your serious thoughts, whether the narrowing of the
foundation is always the best way to secure the building? The body of
disfranchised men will not be perfectly satisfied to remain always in that
state. If they are not satisfied, you have two millions of subjects in your
bosom, full of uneasiness; not that they cannot overturn the act of settlement,
and put themselves and you under an arbitrary master; or, that they are not
permitted to fpawn an hydra of wild republics, on principles of a pretended
natural equality in man; but, because you will not suffer them to enjoy the
ancient, fundamental, tried advantages of a British constitution: that you will
not permit them to profit of the protection of a common father, or the freedom
of common citizens: and that the only reason which can be assigned for this
disfranchisement, has a tendency more deeply to ulcerate their minds than the
act of exclusion itself. What the consequence of such feelings must be, it is
for you to look to. To warn is not to menace. -- Ibid.

IRISH CATHOLICS. Repeal of the Test Act in Ireland, etc.
SO far as to England. In Ireland you have outran us. Without waiting for an
English example, you have totally, and without any modification whatsoever,
repealed the test as to Protestant Dissenters. Not having the repealing act by
me, I ought not to say positively that there is no exception in it; but if it
be what I suppose it is, you know very well, that a Jew in religion, or a
Mohammedan, or even a public, declared atheist, and blasphemer, is perfectly
qualified to be lord lieutenant, a lord justice, or even keeper of the king's
conscience; and by virtue of his office (if with you it be as it is with us)
administrator to a great part of the ecclesiastical patronage of the crown.

Now let us deal a little fairly. We must admit, that Protestant dissent was
one of the quarters from which danger was apprehended at the revolution, and
against which a part of the coronation oath was peculiarly directed. By this
unqualified repeal, you certainly did not mean to deny that it was the duty of
the crown to preserve the church against Protestant Dissenters; or taking this
to be the true sense of the two revolution acts of king William, and of the
previous and subsequent union acts of queen Anne, you did not declare by this
most unqualified repeal, by which you broke down all the barriers, not
invented, indeed, but carefully preserved at the revolution; you did not then
and by that proceeding declare, that you had advised the king to perjury
toward God, and persidy toward the church. No! far, very far from it! you
never would have done it, if you did not think it could be done with perfect
repose to the royal conscience, and perfect safety to the national established
religion. You did this upon a full consideration of the circumstances of your
country. Now, if circumstances required it, why should it be contrary to the
king's oath, his parliament judging on those circumstances, to restore to his
Catholic people, in such measure, and with such modifications as the public
wisdom shall think proper to add, some part in these franchises which they
formerly had held without any limitation at all, and which, upon no sort of
urgent reason at the time, they were deprived of? If such means can with any
probability be shown, from circumstances, rather to add strength to our mixed
ecclesiastical and secular constitution than to weaken it; surely they are
means infinitely to be preferred to penalties, incapacities, and proscriptions
continued from generation to generation. They are perfectly consistent with the
other parts of the coronation oath, in which the king swears to maintain "the
laws of God and the true profession of the gospel, and to govern the people
according to the statutes in Parliament agreed upon, and the laws and customs
of the realm." In consenting to such a statute, the crown would act, at least,
as agreeable to the laws of God, and to the true profession of the gospel, and
to the laws and customs of the kingdom, as George I. did when he passed the
statute which took from the body of the people, every thing which, to that
hour, and even after the monstrous acts of the 2d and 8th of Anne (the objects
of our common hatred) they still enjoyed inviolate. -- Ibid.

IRELAND. Irish Catholic Clergy. (See PROTESTANT CLERGY.)
WHEN we are to provide for the education of any body of men, we ought
seriously to consider the particular functions they are to perform in life. A
Roman Catholic clergyman is the minister of a very ritual religion: and by his
profession, subject to many restraints. His life is a life full of strict
observances, and his duties are of a laborious nature toward himself, and of
the highest possible trust toward others. The duty of confession alone is
sufficient to set in the strongest light the necessity of his having an
appropriated mode of education. The theological opinions and peculiar rites of
one religion never can be properly taught in universities, founded for the
purposes and on the principles of another, which in many points are directly
opposite. If a Roman Catholic clergyman, intended for celibacy, and the
function of confession, is not strictly bred in a seminary where these things
are respected, inculcated and enforced, as sacred, and not made the subject of
derision and obloquy, he will be ill fitted for the former, and the latter will
be indeed in his hands a terrible instrument.

There is a great resemblance between the whole frame and constitution of the
Greek and Latin churches. The secular clergy in the former, by being married,
living under little restraint, and having no particular education suited to
their function, are universally fallen into such contempt, that they are never
permitted to aspire to the dignities of their own church. It is not held
respectful to call them papas, their true and ancient appellation, but those
who wish to address them with civility, always call them hieromonachi. In
consequence of this disrespect, which I venture to say, in such a church, must
be the consequence of a secular life, a very great degeneracy from reputable
christian manners has taken place throughout almost the whole of that great
member of the christian church.

It was so with the Latin church, before the restraint on marriage. Even that
restraint gave rise to the greatest disorders before the council of Trent,
which together with the emulation raised, and the good examples given by the
reformed churches, wherever they were in view of each other, has brought on
that happy amendment, which we see in the Latin communion, both at home and
abroad.

The council of Trent has wisely introduced the discipline of seminaries, by
which priests are not trusted for a clerical institution, even to the severe
discipline of their colleges; but after they pass through them, are frequently,
if not for the greater part, obliged to pass through peculiar methods, having
their particular ritual function in view. It is in a great measure to this, and
to similar methods used in foreign education, that the Roman Catholic clergy of
Ireland, miserably provided for, living among low and ill-regulated people,
without any discipline of sufficient force to secure good manners, have been
prevented from becoming an intolerable nuisance to the country, instead of
being, as I conceive they generally are, a very great service to it. -- Letter
on the penal Laws against Irish Catholics.

IRELAND. Genius and Policy of the English Government in Ireland; Revolution,
etc. (See IRISH CATHOLICS.)
I CANNOT possibly confound in my mind all the things which were done at the
revolution, with the principles of the revolution. As in most great changes,
many things were done from the necessities of the time, well or ill understood
from passion or from vengeance, which were not only not perfectly agreeable to
its principles, but in the most direct contradiction to them. I shall not think
that the deprivation of some millions of people of all the rights of citizens,
and all interest in the constitution, in and to which they were born, was a
thing conformable to the declared principles of the revolution. This, I am
sure, is true relatively to England (where the operation of these
anti-principles comparatively were of little extent) and some of our late laws,
in repealing acts made immediately after the revolution, admit that some things
then done were not done in the true spirit of the revolution. But the
revolution operated differently in England and Irelend, in many, and these
essential particulars. Supposing the principles to have been altogether the
same in both kingdoms, by the application of those principles to very different
objects, the whole spirit of the system was changed, not to say reversed. In
England it was the struggle of the great body of the people for the
establishment of their liberties, against the efforts of a very small faction,
who would have oppressed them. In Ireland it was the establishment of the power
of the smaller number, at the expense of the civil liberties and properties of
the far greater part; and at the expense of the political liberties of the
whole. It was, to say the truth, not a revolution, but a conquest; which is not
to say a great deal in its favor. To insist on every thing done in Ireland at
the revolution, would be to insist on the severe and jealous policy of a
conqueror, in the crude settlement of his new acquisition, as a permanent rule
for its future government. This, no power, in no country that ever I heard of,
has done or professed to do -- except in Ireland; where it is done, and
possibly by some people will be professed. Time has, by degrees, in all other
places and periods, blended and coalited the conquered with the conquerors. So,
after some time, and after one of the most rigid conquests that we read of in
history, the Normans softened into the English. I wish you to turn your
recollection to the fine speech of Cerealis to the Gauls, made to dissuade them
from revolt. Speaking of the Romans, -- " Nos quamvis toties lacessiti, jure
victoriae id solum vobis addidimus, quo pacem tueremur; nam neque quies gentium
sine armis; neque arma sine stipendiis; neque stipendia sine tributis, haberi
queant. Coetera in communi sita sunt: ipsi plerumque nostris exercitibus
proesidetis: ipsi has aliasque provincias regitis: nil seperatum clausumve --
Proinde pacem et urbem, quam victores victique eodem jure obtinemus, amate,
colite." You will consider, whether the arguments used by that Roman to these
Gauls, would apply to the case in Ireland; and whether you could use so
plausible a preamble to any severe warning you might think it proper to hold
out to those who should resort to sedition instead of supplication, to obtain
any object that they may pursue with the governing power.

For a much longer period than that which had sufficed to blend the Romans with
the nation to which of all others they were the most adverse, the Protestants
settled in Ireland, considered themselves in no other light than that of a sort
of colonial garrison, to keep the natives in subjection to the other state of
Great Britain. The whole spirit of the revolution in Ireland, was that of not
the mildest conqueror. In truth, the spirit of those proceedings did not
commence at that era, nor was religion, of any kind, their primary object.
What was done, was not in the spirit of a contest between two religious
factions; but between two adverse nations. The statutes of Kilkenny show, that
the spirit of the popery laws, and some even of their actual provisions, as
applied between Englishry and Irishry, had existed in that harassed country
before the words Protestant and Papist were heard of in the world. If we read
baron Finglas, Spenser, and Sir John Davis, we cannot miss the true genius and
policy of the English government there before the revolution, as well as during
the whole reign of queen Elizabeth. Sir John Davis boasts of the benefits
received by the natives, by extending to them the English law, and turning the
whole kingdom into shire ground. But the appearance of things alone was
changed. The original scheme was never deviated from for a single hour.
Unheard Of confiscations were made in the northern parts, upon grounds of plots
and conspiracies, never proved upon their supposed authors. The war of chicane
succeeded to the war of arms and of hostile statutes; and a regular series of
operations were carried on, particularly from Chichester's time, in the
ordinary courts of justice, and by special commissions and inquisitions; first,
under pretense of tenures, and then of titles in the crown, for the purpose of
the total extirpation of the interest of the natives in their own soil -- until
this species of subtle ravage, being carried to the last excess of oppression
and insolence under Lord Strafford, it kindled the flames of that rebellion
which broke out in 1641. By the issue of that war, by the turn which the Earl
of Clarendon gave to things at the restoration, and by the total reduction of
the kingdom of Ireland in 1691, the ruin of the native Irish, and in a great
measure too, of the first races of the English, was completely accomplished.
The new English interest was settled with as solid a stability as any thing in
human affairs can look for. All the penal laws of that unparalleled code of
oppression, which were made after the last event, were manifestly the effects
of national hatred and scorn toward a conquered people; whom the victors
delighted to trample upon, and were not at all afraid to provoke. They were not
the effect of their fears but of their security. They who carried on this
system, looked to the irresistible force of Great Britain for their support in
their acts of power. They were quite certain, that no complaints of the natives
would be heard on this side of the water, with any other sentiments than those
of contempt and indignation. Their cries served only to augment their torture.
Machines, which could answer their purposes so well, must be of an excellent
contrivance. Indeed, in England, the double name of the complainants, Irish and
Papists (it would be hard to say, singly, which singly was the most odious)
shut up the hearts of every one against them. Whilst that temper prevailed, and
it prevailed in all its force to a time within our memory, every measure was
pleasing and popular, just in proportion as it tended to harass and ruin a set
of people, who were looked upon as enemies to God and man; and, indeed, as a
race of bigoted savages, who were a disgrace to human nature itself.

However, as the English in Ireland began to be domiciliated, they began also
to recollect that they had a country. The English interest, at first by ^aint
and almost insensible degrees, but at length openly and avowedly, became an
independent Irish interest; full as independent as it could ever have been, if
it had continued in the persons of the native Irish; and it was maintained with
more skill, and more consistency than probably it would have been in theirs.
With their views, the Anglo-Irish changed their maxims -- it was necessary to
demonstrate to the whole people that there was something at least, of a common
interest, combined with the independency, which was to become the object of
common exertions. The mildness of government produced the first relaxation
toward the Irish; the necessities, and, in part too, the temper that
predominated at this great change, produced the second and the most important
of these relaxations. English government, and Irish legislature, felt jointly
the propriety of this measure. The Irish parliament and nation became
independent.

The true revolution to you, that which most intrinsically and substantially
resembled the English revolution of 1688, was the Irish revolution of 1782. The
Irish parliament of 1782 bore little resemblance to that which sat in that
kingdom, after the period of the first of these revolutions. It bore a much
nearer resemblance to that which sat under king James. The change of the
parliament in 1782 from the character of the parliament which, as a token of
its indignation, had burned all the journals indiscriminately of the former
parliament in the council chamber, was very visible. The address of king
William's parliament, the parliament which assembled after the revolution,
amongst other causes of complaint (many of them sufficiently just) complains of
the repeal by their predecessors of Poyning's law; no absolute idol with the
parliament of 1782.

Great Britain finding the Anglo-Irish highly animated with a spirit, which
had, indeed, shown itself before, though with little energy, and many
interruptions, and therefore suffered a multitude of uniform precedents to be
established against it, acted, in my opinion, with the greatest temperance and
wisdom. She saw that the disposition of the leading part of the nation would
not permit them to act any longer the part of a garrison. She saw that true
policy did not require that they ever should have appeared in that character;
or if it had done so formerly, the reasons had now ceased to operate. She saw
that the Irish of her race, were resolved to build their constitution and their
polites upon another bottom. With those things under her view, she instantly
complied with the whole of your demands, without any reservation whatsoever.
She surrendered that boundless superiority, for the preservation of which, and
the acquisition, she had supported the English colonies in Ireland for so long
a time, and at so vast an expense (according to the standard of those ages) of
her blood and treasure.

When we bring before us the matter which history affords for our selection, it
is not improper to examine the spirit of the several precedents, which are
candidates for our choice. Might it not be as well for your statesmen, on the
other side of the water, to take an example from this latter, and surely more
conciliatory revolution, as a pattern for your conduct toward your own
fellow-citizens, than from that of 1688, when a paramount sovereignty over both
you and them, was more loftily claimed, and more sternly exerted, than at any
former, or at any subsequent period? Great Britain in 1782, rose above the
vulgar ideas of policy, the ordinary jealousies of state, and all the
sentiments of national pride and national ambition. If she had been more
disposed than, I thank God for it, she was, to listen to the suggestions of
passion, than to the dictates of prudence; she might have urged the principles,
the maxims, the policy, the practice of the revolution, against the demands of
the leading description in Ireland, with full as much plausibility, and full as
good a grace, as any amongst them can possibly do, against the supplications of
so vast and extensive a description of their own people.

A good deal too, if the spirit of domination and exclusion had prevailed in
England, might have been excepted against some of the means then employed in
Ireland, whilst her claims were in agitation. They were, at least, as much out
of the ordinary course, as those which are now objected against admitting your
people to any of the benefits of an English constitution. Most certainly,
neither with you, nor here, was any one ignorant of what was at that time said,
written, and done. But on all sides we separated the means from the end; and we
separated the cause of the moderate and rational, from the ill-intentioned and
seditious; which on such occasions are so frequently apt to march together. At
that time, on your part, you were not afraid to review what was done at the
revolution of 1688, and what had been continued during the subsequent
flourishing period of the British empire. The change then made was a great and
fundamental alteration. In the execution, it was an operose business on both
sides of the water. It required the repeal of several laws; the modification of
many, and a new course to be given to an infinite number of legislative,
judicial, and official practices and usages in both kingdoms. This did not
frighten any of us. You are now asked to give, in some moderate measure, to
your fellow-citizens, what Great Britain gave to you, without any measure at
all. Yet notwithstanding all the difficulties at the time, and the
apprehensions which some very well-meaning people entertained, through the
admirable temper in which this revolution (or restoration in the nature of a
revolution) was conducted in both kingdoms, it has hitherto produced no
inconvenience to either; and I trust, with the continuance of the same temper,
that it never will. I think that this small inconsiderable change relative to
an exclusive statute not made at the revolution, for restoring the people to
the benefits, from which the green soreness of a civil war had not excluded
them, will be productive of no sort of mischief whatsoever. Compare what was
done in 1782 with what is wished in 1792; consider the spirit of what has been
done at the several periods of reformation; and weigh maturely, whether it be
exactly true that conciliatory concessions are of good policy only in
discussions between nations; but that among descriptions in the same nation,
they must always be irrational and dangerous. What have you suffered in your
peace, your prosperity, or, in what ought ever to be dear to a nation, your
glory, by the last act by which you took the property of that people under the
protection of the laws? What reason have you to dread the consequences of
admitting the people possessing that property to some share in the protection
of the constitution? -- Letter to Sir H. Langrishe, M. P.

IRELAND. The English Parliament early communicated to Ireland.
IRELAND, before the English conquest, though never governed by a despotic
power, had no parliament. How far the English parliament itself was at that
time modelled according to the present form, is disputed among antiquarians.
But we have all the reason in the world to be assured, that a form of
parliament, such as England then enjoyed, she instantly communicated to
Ireland; and we are equally sure that almost every successive improvement in
constitutional liberty, as fast as it was made here, was transmitted thither.
The feudal baronage, and the feudal knighthood, the roots of our primitive
constitution, were early transplanted into that soil; and grew and flourished
there. Magna Charta, if it did not give us originally the house of commons,
gave us at least an house of commons of weight and consequence. But your
ancestors did not churlishly sit down alone to the feast of Magna Charta.
Ireland was made immediately a partaker. This benefit of English laws and
liberties, I confess, was not at first extended to all Ireland. Mark the
consequence. English authority and English liberties had exactly the same
boundaries. Your standard could never be advanced an inch before your
privileges. Sir John Davis shows beyond a doubt, that the refusal of a general
communication of these rights, was the true cause why Ireland was five hundred
years in subduing; and after the vain projects of a military government,
attempted in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was soon discovered, that nothing
could make that country English, in civility and allegiance, but your laws and
your forms of legislature. It was not English arms, but the English
constitution, that conquered Ireland. From that time, Ireland has ever had a
general parliament, as she had before a partial parliament. You changed the
people; you altered the religion; but you never touched the form or the vital
substance of free government in that kingdom. You deposed kings; you restored
them; you altered the succession to theirs, as well as to your own crown; but
you never altered their constitution; the principle of which was respected by
usurpation; restored with the restoration of monarchy, and established, I
trust, for ever, by the glorious Revolution. This has made Ireland the great
and flourishing kingdom that it is; and from a disgrace and a burden
intolerable to this nation, has rendered a principal part of our strength and
ornament. This country cannot be said to have ever formally taxed her. The
irregular things done in the confusion of mighty troubles, and on the hinge of
great revolutions, even if all were done that is said to have been done, form
no example. If they have any effect in argument, they make an exception to
prove the rule. None of your own liberties could stand a moment if the casual
deviations from them, at such times, were suffered to be used as proofs of
their nullity. By the lucrative amount of such casual breaches in the
constitution, judge what the stated and fixed rule of supply has been in that
kingdom. Your Irish pensioners would starve, if they had no other fund to live
on than taxes granted by English authority. Turn your eyes to those popular
grants from whence all your great supplies are come; and learn to respect that
only source of public wealth in the British empire -- Speech on Conciliation
with America.

IRELAND. State of Ireland in 1780.
THE first concessions to Ireland, by being (much against my will) mangled and
stripped of the parts which were necessary to make out their just
correspondence and connection in trade, were of no use. The next year a feeble
attempt was made to bring the thing into better shape. This attempt
(countenanced by the minister Lord North.
) on the very first appearance of some popular uneasiness, was, after a
considerable progress through the house, thrown out by him.

What was the consequence? The whole kingdom of Ireland was instantly in a
flame. Threatened by foreigners, and, as they thought, insulted by England,
they resolved at once to resist the power of France, and to cast off yours. As
for us, we were able neither to protect nor to restrain them. Forty thousand
men were raised and disciplined without commission from the crown. Two illegal
armies were seen with banners displayed at the same time, and in the same
country. No executive magistrate, no judicature, in Ireland, would acknowledge
the legality of the army which bore the king's commission; and no law, or
appearance of law, authorized the army commissioned by itself. In this
unexampled state of things, which the least error, the least trespass on the
right or left, would have hurried down the precipice into an abyss of blood and
confusion, the people of Ireland demand a freedom of trade with arms in their
hands. They interdict all commerce between the two nations. They deny all new
supply in the house of commons, although in time of war. They stint the trust
of the old revenue, given for two years to all the king's predecessors, to six
months. The British parliament, in a former session frightened into a limited
concession by the menaces of Ireland, frightened out of it by the menaces of
England, was now frightened back again, and made an universal surrender of all
that had been thought the peculiar, reserved, uncommunicable rights of England;
-- the exclusive commerce of America, of Africa, of the West Indies -- all the
enumerations of the acts of navigation -- all the manufactures, -- iron, glass,
even the last pledge of jealousy and pride, the interest hid in the secret of
our hearts, the inveterate prejudice molded into the constitution of our
frame, even the sacred fleece itself, all went together. No reserve; no
exception; no debate; no discussion. A sudden light broke in upon us all. It
broke in, not through well-contrived and well-disposed windows, but through
flaws and breaches; through the yawning chasms of our ruin. We were taught
wisdom by humiliation. No town in England presumed to have a prejudice; or
dared to mutter a petition. What was worse, the whole Parliament of England,
which retained authority for nothing but surrenders, was despoiled of every
shadow of its superintendance. It was, without any qualification, denied in
theory, as it had been trampled upon in practice. This scene of shame and
disgrace has, in a manner whilst I am speaking, ended by the perpetual
establishment of a military power, in the dominions of this crown, without
consent of the British legislature Irish perpetual mutiny act.
, contrary to the policy of the constitution, contrary to the declaration of
right: and by this your liberties are swept away along with your supreme
authority -- and both, linked together from the beginning, have, I am afraid,
both together perished for ever.

What! gentlemen, was I not to foresee, or foreseeing, was I not to endeavor
to save you from all these multiplied mischiefs and disgraces? Would the
little, silly, canvass prattle of obeying instructions, and having no opinions
but yours, and such idle senseless tales, which amuse the vacant ears of
unthinking men, have saved you from "the pelting of that pitiless storm," to
which the loose improvidence, the cowardly rashness of those who dare not look
danger in the face, so as to provide against it in time, and therefore throw
themselves headlong into the midst of it, have exposed this degraded nation,
beat down and prostrate on the earth, unsheltered, unarmed, unresisting? Was I
an Irishman on that day, that I boldly withstood our pride? or on the day that
I hung down my head, and wept in shame and silence over the humiliation of
Great Britain? I became unpopular in England for the one, and in Ireland for
the other. What then? What obligation lay on me to be popular? I was bound to
serve both kingdoms. To be pleased with my service, was their affair, not mine.
-- Speech previous to the Election at Bristol.

INFLUENCE (CORRUPT.)
CORRUPT influence is itself the perennial spring of all prodigality, and of
all disorder; which loads us, more than millions of debt; which takes away
vigor from our arms, wisdom from our councils, and every shadow of authority
and credit from the most venerable parts of our constitution. -- Oecon. Reform.

INDIVIDUALS.
INDIVIDUALS pass like shadows; but the commonwealth is fixed and stable. The
difference therefore of today and tomorrow, which to private people is
immense, to the state is nothing. -- Ibid.

KINGS.
KINGS are naturally lovers of low company. -- They are so elevated above all
the rest of mankind, that they must look upon all their subjects as on a level.
They are rather apt to hate than to love their nobility, on account of the
occasional resistance to their will, which will be made by their virtue, their
petulance, or their pride. It must indeed be admitted, that many of the
nobility are as perfectly willing to act the part of flatterers, tale-bearers,
parasites, pimps, and bussoons, as any of the lowest and vilest of mankind can
possibly be. But they are not properly qualified for this object of their
ambition. The want of a regular education, and early habits, and some lurking
remains of their dignity, will never permit them to become a match for an
Italian eunuch, a mountebank, a fiddler, a player, or any regular practitioner
of that tribe. The Roman Emperors, almost from the beginning, threw themselves
into such hands, and the mischief increased every day till its decline, and its
final ruin. It is therefore of very great importance (provided the thing is not
overdone) to contrive such an establishment as must, almost whether a prince
will or not, bring into daily and hourly offices about his person, a great
number of his first nobility; and it is rather an useful prejudice that gives
them a pride in such a servitude. Though they are not much the better for a
court, a court will be much the better for them. I have therefore not attempted
to reform any of the offices of honor about the king's person. -- Ibid.

KINGS (ADULATORY ADDRESSES TO).
Dr. Price, in this sermon Page 22, 23, 24.
, condemns very properly the practice of gross, adulatory addresses to kings.
Instead of this fulsome style, he proposes that his majesty should be told, on
occasions of congratulation, that "he is to consider himself as more properly
the servant than the sovereign of his people." For a compliment, this new form
of address does not seem to be very soothing. Those who are servants, in name,
as well as in effect, do not like to be told of their situation, their duty,
and their obligations. The slave, in the old play, tells his master, " Haec
commemoratio est quafi exprobratio." It is not pleasant as compliment, it is
not wholesome as instruction. After all, if the king were to bring himself to
echo this new kind of address, to adopt it in terms, and even to take the
appellation of Servant of the People as his royal style, how either he or we
should be much mended by it, I cannot imagine. I have seen very assuming
letters, signed, Your most obedient, humble servant. The proudest domination
that ever was endured on earth took a title of still greater humility than that
which is now proposed for sovereigns by the Apostle of Liberty. Kings and
nations were trampled upon by the foot of one calling himself "the Servant of
Servants;" and mandates for deposing sovereigns were sealed with the signet of
"the Fisherman."

I should have considered all this as no more than a sort of slippant vain
discourse, in which, as in an unsavory fume, several persons suffer the spirit
of liberty to evaporate, if it were not plainly in support of the idea, and a
part of the scheme of "cashiering kings for misconduct." In that light it is
worth some observation.

Kings, in one sense, are undoubtedly the servants of the people, because their
power has no other rational end than that of the general advantage; but it is
not true that they are, in the ordinary sense (by our constitution at least)
any thing like servants; the essence of whose situation is to obey the commands
of some other, and to be removeable at pleasure. -- But the King of Great
Britain obeys no other person; all other persons are individually, and
collectively too, under him, and owe to him a legal obedience. The law, which
knows neither to flatter nor to insult, calls this high magistrate, not our
servant, as this humble Divine calls him, but " our sovereign lord the King;"
and we, on our parts, have learned to speak only the primitive language of the
law, and not the confused jargon of their Babylonian pulpits.

As he is not to obey us, but as we are to obey the law in him, our
constitution has made no sort of provision toward rendering him, as a servant,
in any degree responsible. Our constitution knows nothing of a magistrate like
the Justicia of Arragon; nor of any court legally appointed, nor of any process
legally settled for submitting the king to the responsibility belonging to all
servants. In this he is not distinguished from the Commons and the Lords; who,
in their several public capacities, can never be called to an account for their
conduct; although the Revolution Society chooses to assert, in direct opposition
to one of the wisest and most beautiful parts of our constitution, that "a king
is no more than the first servant of the public, created by it, and responsible
to it." -- Reflections on the Revolution in France.

KING'S MEN.
TO reconcile the minds of the people to all these movements, principles
correspondent to them had been preached up with great zeal. Every one must
remember that the cabal set out with the most astonishing prudery, both moral
and political. Those who in a few months after soused over head and ears into
the deepest and dirtiest pits of corruption, cried out violently against the
indirect practices in the electing and managing of parliaments, which had
formerly prevailed. This mavelous abhorrence which the Court had suddenly
taken to all influence, was not only circulated in conversation through the
kingdom, but pompously announced to the public, with many other extraordinary
things, in a pamphlet which had all the appearance of a manifesto preparatory
to some considerable enterprise. Throughout, it was a satire, though in terms
managed and decent enough, on the politics of the former reign. It was indeed
written with no small art and address.

In this piece (Sentiments of an honest Man) appeared the first dawning of the
new system; there first appeared the idea (then only in speculation) of
separating the court from the administration; of carrying every thing from
national connection to personal regards; and of forming a regular party for
that purpose, under the name of king's men.

To recommend this system to the people, a perspective view of the Court,
gorgeously painted, and finely illuminated from within, was exhibited to the
gaping multitude. Party was to be totally done away, with all its evil works.
Corruption was to be cast down from Court, as Ate was from Heaven. Power was
thenceforward to be the chosen residence of public spirit; and no one was to be
supposed under any sinister influence, except those who had the misfortune to
be in disgrace at court, which was to stand in lieu of all vices and all
corruptions. A scheme of perfection to be realized in a monarchy far beyond the
visionary republic of Plato. The whole scenery was exactly disposed to
captivate those good souls, whose credulous morality is so invaluable a
treasure to crafty politicians. Indeed there was wherewithal to charm every
body, except those few who are not much pleased with professions of
supernatural virtue, who know of what stuff such professions are made, for what
purposes they are designed, and in what they are sure constantly to end. Many
innocent gentlemen, who had been talking prose all their lives without knowing
any thing of the matter, began at last to open their eyes upon their own
merits, and to attribute their not having been Lords of the Treasury and Lords
of Trade many years before, merely to the prevalence of party, and to the
ministerial power, which had frustrated the good intentions of the Court in
favor of their abilities. Now was the time to unlock the sealed fountain of
royal bounty, which had been infamously monopolized and huckstered, and to let
it flow at large upon the whole people. The time was come to restore royalty to
its original splendour. Mettre le Roy horse de page, became a sort of watchword;
and it was constantly in the mouths of all the runners of the Court, that
nothing could preserve the balance of the constitution from being overturned by
the rabble, or by a faction of the nobility, but to free the sovereign
effectually from that ministerial tyranny under which the royal dignity had
been oppressed in the person of his Majesty's grandfather.

These were some of the many artifices used to reconcile the people to the
great change which was made in the persons who composed the ministry, and the
still greater which was made and avowed in its constitution. As to individuals,
other methods were employed with them; in order so thoroughly to disunite every
party, and even every family, that no concert; order, or effect, might appear
in any future opposition. And in this manner an Administration, without
connection with the people, or with one another, was first put in possession of
government. What good consequences followed from it; we have all seen; whether
with regard to virtue, public or private; to the ease and happiness of the
sovereign; or to the real strength of government. But as so much stress was
then laid on the necessity of this new project, it will not be amiss to take a
view of the effects of this royal servitude and vile durance, which was so
deplored in the reign of the late monarch, and was so carefully to be avoided
in the reign of his successor. -- Thoughts on the Cause of the present
Discontents.

KINGS.
KINGS will be tyrants from policy, when subjects are rebels from principle. --
Ibid.

KING OF GREAT BRITAIN. Crown of England hereditary. (See KING'S MEN, PRINCES,
MINISTERS, CABINET (DOUBLE), REVOLUTION SOCIETY, etc.
THERE is ground enough for the opinion that all the kingdoms of Europe were,
at a remote period, elective, with more or fewer limitations in the objects of
choice; but whatever kings might have been here or elsewhere, a thousand years
ago, or in whatever manner the ruling dynasties of England or France may have
begun, the King of Great Britain is at this day king by a fixed rule of
succession, according to the laws of his country; and whilst the legal
conditions of the compact of sovereignty are performed by him (as they are
performed) he holds his crown in contempt of the choice of the Revolution
Society, who have not a single vote for a king amongst them, either
individually or collectively; though I make no doubt they would soon erect
themselves into an electoral college, if things were ripe to give effect to
their claim. His Majesty's heirs and successors, each in his time and order,
will come to the crown with the same contempt of their choice with which his
Majesty has succeeded to that he wears.

Whatever may be the success of evasion in explaining away the gross error of
fact, which supposes that his Majesty (though he holds it in concurrence with
the wishes) owes his crown to the choice of his people, yet nothing can evade
their full explicit declaration, concerning the principle of a right in the
people to choose, which right is directly maintained, and tenaciously adhered
to. All the oblique insinuations concerning election bottom in this
proposition, and are referable to it. Lest the foundation of the king's
exclusive legal title should pass for a mere rant of adulatory freedom, the
political divine (Dr. Price) proceeds dogmatically to assert P. 34, Discourse
on the Love of our Country.
, that by the principles of the revolution, the people of England have acquired
three fundamental rights, all which, with him, compose one system, and lie
together in one short sentence; namely, that we have acquired a right 1. "To
choose our own governors." 2. "To cashier them for misconduct." 3. "To frame a
government for ourselves."
This new, and hitherto unheard of bill of rights, though made in the name of
the whole people, belongs to those gentlemen (Revolution Society) and their
faction only. The body of the people of England have no share in it; they
utterly disclaim it; they will resist the practical assertion of it with their
lives and fortunes. They are bound to do so by the laws of their country, made
at the time of that very revolution, which is appealed to in favor of the
fictitious rights claimed by the society which abuses its name.

These gentlemen of the Old Jewry, in all their reasonings on the revolution of
1688, have a revolution which happened in England about forty years before, and
the late French revolution, so much before their eyes, and in their hearts,
that they are constantly confounding all the three together. It is necessary
that we should separate what they confound. We must recall their erring fancies
to the acts of the revolution which we revere, for the discovery of its true
principles. If the principles of the revolution of 1688 are any where to be
found, it is in the statute called the Declaration of Right. In that most wise,
sober, and considerate declaration, drawn up by great lawyers and great
statesmen, and not by warm and inexperienced enthusiasts, not one word is said,
nor one suggestion made, of a general right "to choose our own governors; to
cashier them for misconduct; and to form a government for ourselves."

This declaration of right (the act of the 1st of William and Mary, sess. 2.
chapter 2.) is the cornerstone of our constitution, as reinforced, explained,
improved, and in its fundamental principles for ever settled. It is called "An
act for declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, and for settling the
succession of the crown." You will observe, that these rights and this
succession are declared in one body, and bound indissolubly together.

A few years after this period, a second opportunity offered for asserting a
right of election to the crown. On the prospect of a total failure of issue
from King William, and from the Princess, afterward Queen Anne, the
consideration of the settlement of the crown, and of a further security for the
liberties of the people, again came before the Legislature. Did they this
second time make any provision for legalizing the crown on the spurious
revolution principles of the Old Jewry? No. They followed the principles which
prevailed in the Declaration of Right; indicating with more precision the
persons who were to inherit in the Protestant line. -- This act also
incorporated, by the same policy, our liberties, and an hereditary succession
in the same act. Instead of a right to choose our own governors, they declared
that the succession in that line (the Protestant line drawn from James the
First) was absolutely necessary "for the peace, quiet, and security of the
realm," and that it was equally urgent on them "to maintain a certainty in the
succession thereof, to which the subjects may safely have recourse for their
protection." Both these acts, in which are heard the unerring, unambiguous
oracles of revolution policy, instead of countenancing the delusive, gipsey
predictions of a "right to choose our governors," prove to a demonstration how
totally adverse the wisdom of the nation was from turning a case of necessity
into a rule of law.

Unquestionably there was at the revolution, in the person of King William, a
small and a temporary deviation from the strict order of a regular hereditary
succession; but it is against all genuine principles of jurisprudence to draw a
principle from a law made in a special case, and regarding an individual
person. Privilegium non transit in exemplum. If ever there was a time
favorable for establishing the principle, that a king of popular choice was
the only legal king, without all doubt it was at the revolution. Its not being
done at that time is a proof that the nation was of opinion it ought not to be
done at any time. There is no person so completely ignorant of our history, as
not to know that the majority in Parliament of both parties were so little
disposed to any thing resembling that principle, that at first they were
determined to place the vacant crown, not on the head of the Prince of Orange,
but on that of his wife Mary, daughter of King James, the eldest born of the
issue of that king, which they acknowledged as undoubtedly his. It would be to
repeat a very trite story, to recall to your memory all those circumstances
which demonstrated that their accepting King William was not properly a choice;
but to all those who did not wish, in effect, to recall King James, or to
deluge their country in blood, and again to bring their religion, laws, and
liberties into the peril they had just escaped, it was an act of necessity, in
the strictest moral sense in which necessity can be taken.

In the very act, in which, for a time, and in a single case, Parliament
departed from the strict order of inheritance, in favor of a prince, who,
though not next, was however very near in the line of succession, it is curious
to observe how Lord Summers, who drew the bill, called the Declaration of Right,
has comported himself on that delicate occasion. It is curious to observe with
what address this temporary solution of continuity is kept from the eye; whilst
all that could be found in this act of necessity to countenance the idea of an
hereditary succession is brought forward, and fostered, and made the most of,
by this great man, and by the Legislature who followed him. Quitting the dry,
imperative style of an act of Parliament, he makes the Lords and Commons fall
to a pious, legislative ejaculation, and declare, that they consider it "as a
mavelous providence, and merciful goodness of God to this nation, to preserve
their said Majesty's royal persons, most happily to reign over us on the throne
of their ancestors, for which, from the bottom of their hearts, they return
their humblest thanks and praises." The Legislature plainly had in view the act
of recognition of the first of Queen Elizabeth, chap. 3d, and of that of James
the First, chap. 1st, both acts strongly declaratory of the inheritable nature
of the crown, and in many parts they follow, with a nearly literal precision,
the words, and even the form of thanksgiving, which is found in these old
declaratory statutes.

The two houses, in the act of King William, did not thank God that they had
found a fair opportunity to assert a right to choose their own governors, much
less to make an election the only lawful title to the crown. Their having been
in a condition to avoid the very appearance of it, as much as possible, was by
them considered as a providential escape. They threw a politic, well-wrought
veil over every circumstance tending to weaken the rights, which in the
meliorated order of succession they meant to perpetuate; or which might furnish
a precedent for any future departure from what they had then settled for ever.
Accordingly, that they might not relax the nerves of their monarchy, and that
they might preserve a close conformity to the practice of their ancestors, as
it appeared in the declaratory statutes of Queen Mary 1st Mary, sess. 3. chapter 1.
and Queen Elizabeth, in the next clause they vest, by recognition, in their
majesty's, all the legal prerogatives of the crown, declaring, "that in them
they are most fully, rightfully, and entirely invested, incorporated, united,
and annexed." In the clause which follows, for preventing questions, by reason
of any pretended titles to the crown, they declare (observing also in this the
traditionary language, along with the traditionary policy of the nation, and
repeating as from a rubric the language of the preceding acts of Elizabeth and
James) that on the preserving "a certainty in the SUCCESSION thereof, the
unity, peace, and tranquillity of this nation does, under God, wholly depend."

They knew that a doubtful title of succession would but too much resemble an
election; and that an election would be utterly destructive of the "unity,
peace, and tranquillity of this nation," which they thought to be
considerations of some moment. To provide for these objects, and therefore to
exclude for ever the Old Jewry doctrine of "a right to choose our own
governors," they follow with a clause, containing a most solemn pledge, taken
from the preceding act of Queen Elizabeth, as solemn a pledge as ever was or
can be given in favor of an hereditary succession, and as solemn a
renunciation as could be made of the principles by this society imputed to
them. "The lords spiritual and temporal, and commons, do, in the name of all
the people aforesaid, most humbly and faithfully submit themselves, their heirs
and posterities for ever; and do faithfully promise, that they will stand to,
maintain, and defend their said majesty's, and also the limitation of the
crown, herein specified and contained, to the utmost of their powers," etc. etc.

So far is it from being true, that we acquired a right by the revolution to
elect our kings, that if we had possessed it before, the English nation did at
that time most solemnly renounce and abdicate it, for themselves, and for all
their posterity for ever. These gentlemen may value themselves as much as they
please on their whig principles; but I never desire to be thought a better whig
than Lord Summers; or to understand the principles of the revolution better than
those by whom it was brought about; or to read in the declaration of right any
mysteries unknown to those whose penetrating style has engraved in our
ordinances, and in our hearts, the words and spirit of that immortal law.

It is true that, aided with the powers derived from force and opportunity, the
nation was at that time, in some sense, free to take what course it pleased for
filling the throne; but only free to do so upon the same grounds on which they
might have wholly abolished their monarchy, and every other part of their
constitution. However they did not think such bold changes within their
commission. It is indeed difficult, perhaps impossible, to give limits to the
mere abstract competence of the supreme power, such as was exercised by
parliament at that time; but the limits of a moral competence, subjecting, even
in powers more indisputably sovereign, occasional will to permanent reason, and
to the steady maxims of faith, justice, and fixed fundamental policy, are
perfectly intelligible, and perfectly binding upon those who exercise any
authority, under any name, or under any title, in the state. The house of
lords, for instance, is not morally competent to dissolve the house of commons;
no, nor even to dissolve itself, nor to abdicate, if it would, its portion in
the legislature of the kingdom. Though a king may abdicate for his own person,
he cannot abdicate for the monarchy. By as strong, or by a stronger reason, the
house of commons cannot renounce its share of authority. The engagement and
pact of society, which generally goes by the name of the constitution, forbids
such invasion and such surrender. The constituent parts of a state are obliged
to hold their public faith with each other, and with all those who derive any
serious interest under their engagements, as much as the whole state is bound
to keep its faith with separate communities. Otherwise competence and power
would soon be confounded, and no law be left but the will of a prevailing
force. On this principle the succession of the crown has always been what it
now is, an hereditary succession by law: in the old line it was a succession by
the common law; in the new by the statute law, operating on the principles of
the common law, not changing the substance, but regulating the mode, and
describing the persons. Both these descriptions of law are of the same force,
and are derived from an equal authority, emanating from the common agreement
and original compact of the state, communi sponsione reipublicae, and as such
are equally binding on king and people too, as long as the terms are observed,
and they continue the same body politic.

It is far from impossible to reconcile, if we do not suffer ourselves to be
entangled in the mazes of metaphysic sophistry, the use both of a fixed rule
and an occasional deviation; the sacredness of an hereditary principle of
succession in our government, with a power of change in its application in
cases of extreme emergency. Even in that extremity (if we take the measure of
our rights by our exercise of them at the revolution) the change is to be
confined to the peccant part only; to the part which produced the necessary
deviation; and even then it is to be effected without a decomposition of the
whole civil and political mass, for the purpose of originating a new civil
order out of the first elements of society.

A state without the means of some change is without the means of its
conservation. Without such means it might even risk the loss of that part of
the constitution which it wished the most religiously to preserve. The two
principles of conservation and correction operated strongly at the two critical
periods of the restoration and revolution, when England found itself without a
king. At both those periods the nation had lost the bond of union in their
ancient edifice; they did not, however, dissolve the whole fabric. On the
contrary, in both cases they regenerated the deficient part of the old
constitution through the parts which were not impaired. They kept these old
parts exactly as they were, that the part recovered might be suited to them.
They acted by the ancient organized states in the shape of their old
organization, and not by the organic moleculoe of a disbanded people. At no
time, perhaps, did the sovereign legislature manifest a more tender regard to
that fundamental principle of British constitutional policy, than at the time
of the revolution, when it deviated from the direct line of hereditary
succession. The crown was carried somewhat out of the line in which it had
before moved; but the new line was derived from the same stock. It was still a
line of hereditary descent; still an hereditary descent in the same blood,
though an hereditary descent qualified with protestantism. When the legislature
altered the direction, but kept the principle, they showed that they held it
inviolable.

On this principle, the law of inheritance had admitted some amendment in the
old time, and long before the era of the revolution. Some time after the
conquest, great questions arose upon the legal principles of hereditary
descent. It became a matter of doubt, whether the heir per capita or the heir
per stirpes was to succeed; but whether the heir per capita gave way when the
heirdom per stirpes took place, or the catholic heir when the protestant was
preferred, the inheritable principle survived with a sort of immortality
through all transmigrations -- multosque per annos slat fortuna domus et avi
numerantur avorum. This is the spirit of our constitution, not only in its
settled course, but in all its revolutions. Whoever came in, or however he came
in, whether he obtained the crown by law, or by force, the hereditary
succession was either continued or adopted.

The gentlemen of the society for revolutions see nothing in that of 1688 but
the deviation from the constitution; and they take the deviation from the
principle for the principle. They have little regard to the obvious
consequences of their doctrine, though they must see, that it leaves positive
authority in very few of the positive institutions of this country. When such
an unwarrantable maxim is once established, that no throne is lawful but the
elective, no one act of the princes who preceded their era of fictitious
election can be valid. Do these theorists mean to imitate some of their
predecessors, who dragged the bodies of our ancient sovereigns out of the quiet
of their tombs? Do they mean to attaint and disable backwards all the kings
that have reigned before the revolution, and consequently to stain the throne
of England with the blot of a continual usurpation? Do they mean to invalidate,
annul, or to call into question, together with the titles of the whole line of
our kings, that great body of our statute law which passed under those whom
they treat as usurpers? to annul laws of inestimable value to our liberties --
of as great value at least as any which have passed at or since the period of
the revolution? If kings, who did not owe their crown to the choice of their
people, had no title to make laws, what will become of the statute de tullagio
non concedendo? -- of the petition of right? -- of the act of habeas corpus? Do
these new doctors of the rights of men presume to assert, that King James the
Second, who came to the crown as next of blood, according to the rules of a
then unqualified succession, was not to all intents and purposes a lawful king
of England, before he had done any of those acts which were justly construed
into an abdication of his crown? If he was not; much trouble in parliament
might have been saved at the period these gentlemen commemorate. But King James
was a bad king with a good title, and not an usurper. The princes who succeeded
according to the act of parliament which settled the crown on the electress
Sophia and on her descendants, being protestants, came in as much by a title of
inheritance as King James did. He came in according to the law, as it stood at
his accession to the crown; and the princes of the house of Brunswick came to
the inheritance of the crown, not by election, but by the law, as it stood at
their several accessions of protestant descent and inheritance, as I hope I
have shown sufficiently.

The law by which this royal family is specifically destined to the succession,
is the act of the 12th and 13th of King William. The terms of this act bind "us
and our heirs, and our posterity, to them, their heirs, and their posterity,"
the declaration of right had bound us to the heirs of King William and Queen
Mary. It therefore secures both an hereditary crown and an hereditary
allegiance. On what ground, except the constitutional policy of forming an
establishment to secure that kind of succession which is to preclude a choice
of the people for ever, could the legislature have fastidiously rejected the
fair and abundant choice which our own country presented to them, and searched
in strange lands for a foreign princess, from whose womb the line of our future
rulers were to derive their title to govern millions of men through a series of
ages?

The Princess Sophia was named in the act of settlement of the 12th and 13th of
King William, for a stock and root of inheritance to our kings, and not for her
merits as a temporary administratrix of a power, which she might not, and, in
fact, did not, herself ever exercise. She was adopted for one reason, and for
one only, because, says the act, "the most excellent Princess Sophia, Electress
and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, is daughter of the most excellent Princess
Elizabeth, late Queen of Bohemia, daughter of our late sovereign lord King
James the First, of happy memory, and is hereby declared to be the next in
succession in the Protestant line," etc. etc.; "and the crown shall continue to
the heirs of her body, being Protestants." This limitation was made by
parliament, that through the Princess Sophia an inheritable line, not only was
to be continued in future, but (what they thought very material) that through
her it was to be connected with the old stock of inheritance in King James the
First; in order that the monarchy might preserve an unbroken unity through all
ages, and might be preserved (with safety to our religion) in the old approved
mode by descent, in which, if our liberties had been once endangered, they had
often, through all storms and struggles of prerogative and privilege, been
preserved. They did well. No experience hrs taught us, that in any other course
or method than that of an hereditary crown, our liberties can be regularly
perpetuated and preserved sacred as our hereditary right. An irregular,
convulsive movement may be necessary to throw off an irregular, convulsive
disease. But the course of succession is the healthy habit of the British
constitution. Was it that the legislature wanted, at the act for the limitation
of the crown in the Hanoverian line, drawn through the female descendants of
James the First, a due sense of the inconveniences of having two or three, or
possibly more, foreigners in succession to the British throne? No! -- they had
a due sense of the evils which might happen from such foreign rule, and more
than a due sense of them. But a more decisive proof cannot be given of the full
conviction of the British nation, that the principles of the revolution did not
authorize them to elect kings at their pleasure, and without any attention to
the ancient fundamental principles of our government, than their continuing to
adopt a plan of hereditary Protestant succession in the old line, with all the
dangers and all the inconveniences of its being a foreign line full before
their eyes, and operating with the utmost force upon their minds. --
Reflections on the Revolution in France.

KINGS Ought to bear the Freedom of Subjects that are obnoxious to them.
KINGS, even such as are truly kings, may and ought to bear the freedom of
subjects that are obnoxious to them. They may too, without derogating from
themselves, bear even the authority of such persons if it promotes their
service. Louis the XIIIth mortally hated the cardinal de Richlieu; but his
support of that minister against his rivals was the source of all the glory of
his reign, and the solid foundation of his throne itself. Louis the XIVth, when
come to the throne, did not love the cardinal Mazarin; but for his interests he
preserved him in power. When old, he detested Louvois; but for years, whilst he
faithfully served his greatness, he endured his person. When George II. took
Mr. Pit, who certainly was not agreeable to him, into his councils, he did
nothing which could humble a wise sovereign. But these ministers, who were
chosen by affairs, not by affections, acted in the name of, and in trust for,
kings; and not as their avowed, constitutional, and ostensible masters. -- Ibid.

LAWS.
LAWS are commanded to hold their tongues amongst arms; and tribunals fall to
the ground with the peace they are no longer able to uphold. -- Ibid.

END OF VOL. I.

