ANNUAL ORATION, Delivered March 8 th, 1790, BEFORE THE MEDICAL SOCIETY, BOLT
COURT, FLEET STREET, LONDON, BY GEORGE WALLIS, M. D. ONE OF THE FELLOWS, AND
LECTURER ON THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.

Medico diligenti, priusquam conetur aegro adhibere Medicinam, non solum Morbus
ejus cui mederi volet, sed etiam CONSUETUDO VALENTIS, and NATURA CORPORIS,
cognoscenda est.

CICER. ORAT. LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER ROW.

M.DCC.XC.

PREFACE.
WHEN the members of the Medical Society, on the day of my delivering this
Oration before them, did me the honor to request its publication, I considered
the request as a complimentary custom usual on that occasion, and as such
received it; however, on a second and third application, by order of their
Council, amongst whom freedom of debate on any subject is expected, and all
compliment and ceremony incompatible with their characters in that department,
I was induced to believe that they might have perceived some hints, at least,
not unworthy further consideration; and, notwithstanding, I had at first asked
permission to make such additions, as to me appeared requisite, on finding they
would be infinitely too diffusive for a work of this nature, and as I could
claim protection only by adhering strictly to those sentiments and opinions
which were to them delivered, and upon which they could alone found a wish for
my making them more public; in that state I now offer them without alteration,
reserving the elucidation of several parts for some future occasion, as they
form the basis of a larger work, which I have an intention of completing as I
can find opportunity.

Should therefore the following sheets, which now make their appearance to the
world, in compliance with the desire of the Medical Society, fortunately add
the slightest ray of consequence to that collective Body, and afford the candid
Reader satisfaction, my labor will be amply compensated; particularly as, at
the same time, it will evince the deference I pay to the Impartiality --
Judgment -- and Abilities of several Members of that institution -- as well as
the sense of that duty I owe to the Community in general.

G. W.

ADDENDUM.
After "heart," in Page 37, line 7, insert "muscular fibers."

ANNUAL ORATION.
Gentlemen, and Fellow-Associates!
AS I consider this institution formed on the broad basis of universal good,
the parent of general utility, not of selfish ostentation; and as this, with
its sister kingdoms, may be justly styled the emporium of medical knowledge,
where many of its members, the brightest luminaries of the Hippocratic school,
have not disdained to convey their discoveries to the world in the common
language of this country -- a language, if not esteemed so concise and elegant,
yet full as comprehensive, full as replete with descriptive powers, as any of
which Greece or Rome could ever boast; and as it must be allowed, that opinions
in any art ought to be delivered in modes divested of all ambiguity and
embarrassment, certainly, considering our own vernacular language possessed of
these advantages, as being the most familiar to a very great majority of this
audience, though learned, before which I have the honor to present myself, and
perfectly understood by all -- it will not, I hope, be construed want of
respect, or a careless inattention to the consequence and dignity ever annexed
to professional bodies thus associated, that I have presumed to deviate from
some of my predecessors, dropping the tinselled trappings of Roman grace, for
the plain, but more useful ornament of English perspicuity; and making use of a
vehicle, easy, as common, to communicate my observations, in order that I
might, through the whole of them, be readily followed, and not in any part
misunderstood.

For however familiar may be the Latin idiom to readers conversant in that
language -- however easy to comprehend in its nicest points -- to auditors, not
constantly habituated to that style of delivery, the familiarity, and ready
comprehension, would be defective.

On these considerations I found some small claim to your approbation; and,
considering the arduousness of the present undertaking, I flatter myself, I
shall still farther experience your indulgence. Unimpressed with this idea,
insurmountable indeed would have been the difficulties which presented
themselves to my reflection; but conscious that liberality of sentiment, with
men of erudition, directs the judgment, and softens the severity of criticism,
every obstacle vanished, and diffidence gave way to duty. For it has ever been,
with me, a fixed principle, and laid down as a law immutable; That, as every
individual in the medical hemisphere is so closely, and so necessarily united
to the welfare of mankind, he is bound by the strongest ties, natural and
social, to exert his abilities, however weak, when called to promote any
laudable purpose.

Connected therefore as I am with the members of this medical institution --
with you, who actuated by philanthropy, make science the pleasurable labor of
your lives -- and that part of science your particular study, the most noble
which can engage the pursuit of man -- framed by Divine Wisdom for the relief
and preservation of the human species -- preventing, mitigating, and subduing
many of their corporal calamities -- your wishes I considered as a mandate --
and, as you have thought proper to elect me to this office of honor -- an
office, which would have been far better supplied by many of your associates --
It became me, therefore, to reflect, what there was in my power to offer, which
might in some, though perhaps too small a degree, compensate for your loss of
time and attention to the consequential avocation of your profession, which
candor would subject you to on this occasion.

Conversant as you are with, assiduously engaged in, the acquisition of medical
knowledge, and happy in the promulgation, two points fell only to my election;
either to furnish something new, for the improvement: or something to clear
what might retard and clog the progress of the healing art.

Of the former, I fear, I have little to lay before you worthy of your
attention; even vanity cannot suggest to, or persuade, me, that any thing has
occurred to my observation, with which you may not, perhaps, have been long
acquainted -- My animadversions must therefore, in a great measure, be confined
to the latter; wherein I shall only presume to offer some hints, which taken
into the consideration of superior abilities, may assist, so am I led to hope,
in extending our particular art to that goal of perfection, at which human
exertions are limited only to arrive.

And, as many obstacles have been thrown in the way, which have prevented us
from rising to that achme, as much as human endeavors, united with strong
mental powers and indefatigable assiduity, judiciously conducted, would have
accomplished; the greatest of which has been the thirst after theoretic
knowledge -- it might appear necessary to take a survey of the progress of the
medic art, from the time of the divine old man, the first founder of systematic
physic, to the present era, in which some possess no less merited, no less
exalted characters. But to an audience like this, so well versed in the history
of physic, and all its branches, it would properly be considered, a work of
presumption and supererogation.

I shall therefore only, as it is necessarily connected with my subject, take a
concise view of the means by which HIPPOCRATES acquired his knowledge,
extensive as it was, considering the period in which he lived -- in the same
manner, show how his successors rather retarded than promoted the utility of
the Aesculapian Art, particularly as some of our Professors steer not
altogether clear of similar errors; and then attempt to point out, where some
of our present modes require the aid of correction.

HIPPOCRATES enriched his mind from observation, and founded his practice on
facts, simply as they appeared to him; who being blessed with quick perception,
nice discrimination, and profound sagacity, made such discoveries -- deduced
such certain consequences -- and raised his superstructures on so solid a
foundation, that he left behind him stupendous monuments of great abilities; --
Abilities, so superior to his predecessors, and cotemporaries, that future ages
pursued with avidity, and retained with confidence, many documents framed in
the infancy of his art -- and happy had it been for later times, had his plan,
simple and easy as it was, been religiously observed. But, alas! Man, as if
unconscious of his own weakness, vain enough to suppose he could discover the
arcana naturae -- investigate first causes -- and carry his curious eye into
the darkest labyrinths, began to prefer ingenuity to observation; and mounted
on the wings of false fame, disregarded the humble paths of modest inquiry, and
built on vain and conjectural hypothesis; -- and what the result? Theory arose
after theory; and each succeeding one, though it corrected the errors of that
which had been before adopted, still, like its predecessor, sunk into oblivion;
leaving behind few remains worthy of practical pursuit. --

Nor is it difficult to account for the cause, why such different consequences
awaited these different modes.

HIPPOCRATES, it is said, by the most rigid observation of every action and
motion of nature, of things which did in reality exist, acquired a wonderful
knowledge of the genuine disposition of Diseases; and by carefully comparing
the same sort of distempers, and their various minute motions in different
Patients, and all the circumstances and accidents, which usually preceded, and
attended them; he could readily foretell an approaching malady, and after its
invasion give a right judgment of its progress and event.

As Nature terminated diseases, when left to herself, he observed her mode,
first tracing the manner in which the symptoms, in those that were acute,
succeeded one another; hence arose his art of presaging, and thus he formed his
method of curing them, by imitating Nature when she proved herself defective.
-- From these observations, he discovered the use of Bleeding -- Scarifications
-- Issues -- Setons, where, in similar complaints, Nature supplied
HAEMORRHAGES, and ABSCESSES -- Artificial Diarrhoeas, -- Sudorifics -- Emetics
-- Diaphoretics -- Diuretics, etc. because he found she, by some of these
means, relieved the constitution under particular circumstances: hence then he
became her humble imitator, conscious, that she alone was the most judicious
directress.

But the Theorists, forming of themselves a set of principles, PRINCIPLES, the
mere coinage of distempered reason, from them deduced all their arguments,
supported all their practice, and endeavored to prove Nature obedient to laws
so founded.

Hence the incongruous, elementary, atomical systems of succeeding Sects --
hence the conceits of an Helmont -- the whimsicalities of a Paracelsus -- hence
a variety of chemical chimaeras, and all the inconsistencies of hydraulic, and
mechanic subtlety; and hence fell medicine into shameful disrepute, it becoming
more the pride of cavilling skepticism, and scholastic vanity, to build
ingenious, though fallacious doctrines, than after detecting error, laboring
to pursue Nature through her plain and humble paths.

And it appears astonishing to a reflecting mind, that notions so ridiculous,
practices so absurd, should be countenanced in later times; when it is known,
that all the labors of the ancients, as well as moderns, are chiefly valuable
for the simple recitals they contain, founded on observation, collected from
appearances, and delivered with candor: hence the praeeminence of an
Hippocrates, Aretaeus, Trallian, Aurelianus, Celsus, Tulpius, Lommius,
Morgagni, Sydenham, and some others of more modern date; whom to mention, might
be considered as indelicate, and the result of adulation.

And indeed this simplicity, the more it is pursued, the more strongly it
convinces us of its utility; affording the most certain, perhaps the only
proper, method of acquiring, and communicating medical information. For the
theories of the present day, though fraught with no small degree of
plausibility, will not stand the test of critical inquiry; they all appear to
be too generally applied, in fevers particularly. -- Can we suppose, that in
such, as from their commencement to their termination are attended with profuse
sweating, or a moist soft skin, a constriction of the cuticular pores takes
place? -- In those, where the circulation is languid -- the action of the
vascular system torpid -- the prostration of strength sudden and extreme, that
an active stimulus is the cause? -- Or, in those where no oppression, load,
nausea, sickness at the stomach, or uneasiness in the intestines -- no
catarrhal or pulmonic affections manifest themselves, that they deduce their
origin from too copious and morbid secretion of the mucus in those organs?
Surely not. Yet, these, by different classes of practitioners, are considered
as the proximate cause of febrile affections, and applied in common to all.

But within these mansions, such a theoretic cacoethes appears not to be
nurtured. If we examine the nature of the proceedings within these walls
adopted, what is the roof, by which we are sheltered, but that of an AEDES
AESCULAPIANA? If we advert to the public product of your application, what are
your memoirs, so justly enumerated amongst the most valuable labors of the
medic art, but the TABULAE AENEAE TEMPLORUM, ornamented by simplicity, and
supported by truth. It must be observed, that, at this period, the Author had
not sent any papers on medical subjects to the Society.


Nor need we take up much time in furnishing proofs of the superiority of such
a scheme over every other, which has been produced by the fertility of human
invention.

View but our English Hippocrates, SYDENHAM; he, by recalling this mode, not
only contended with, but conquered, a theoretic world, notwithstanding the
powerful opposition he met with, invidious, as violent; and we find his
descriptions stand at this hour unshaken, nor can be overthrown but by the hand
of Heaven, when medicine shall be no more. So firmly supported are they by
unerring truth; so simply, yet so justly, are they delivered; that they are to
all intelligible -- by all valued -- by all quoted: even those, who, wild with
hypothesis, leave nothing behind them but relics similar to these, which can
attract our attention, or merit our observation.

Still, notwithstanding we are convinced of the decaptive notions by which some
of our early predecessors were governed -- notwithstanding we can view the
efforts of our cotemporaries not perfectly consistent in the application of
their speculative opinions -- notwithstanding the advantages, unknown to former
ages, which daily are presented in every branch of medical philosophy; which
are discoverable by slight observation, and may be truly arranged with the
causae evidentes. We avail not ourselves of these advantages, or apply them
sufficiently, to render our modus medendi as perfect as it might be.

There is too great, too general a solicitude in searching after SPECIFICS, and
inquiring into the nature of the semina morbi, as if the former did exist -- or
the latter were within the reach of human investigation. We seem to be more
anxious about the AGENTIA MIRIFICA, than the AGENDA, as if the latter were
completely understood; that they were is devoutly to be wished; for they come
more materially under our consideration; at least it appears to me a truth
irrefragable, that were we to pay the strictest attention to the constitution,
study more minutely its parts, dependencies, moving powers and peculiarities,
practice would be divested of many errors, with which it too unfortunately at
present abounds.

However, that we may be enabled to prove the validity of this assertion, we
shall attempt to show THE FALLACY OF THE FIRST OF THESE PURSUITS -- THE
IMPOSSIBILITY OF DEMONSTRATING THE NATURE OF THE SECOND, IN GENERAL -- and, THE
REAL UTILITY OF ATTENDING CLOSELY TO THE THIRD, AND ITS MODE OF BEING APPLIED,
in order to add to the improvement of the Art.

And, FIRST,

No idea, perhaps, has done more real injury, than that of Medicines acting
specifically in conquering Diseases -- Of this truth, a very superficial
examination will convince us: for it retards our researches in investigating
their full and true powers -- it prevents us, consequently, from extending
those powers so as to be as diffusively useful as they might -- it lays the
foundation for a thousand deceptions; causing us to attribute particular
consequences to materials, which do not from thence, in reality, originate, and
keeping their true source hid from our observation -- nor is this all; it does
worse -- it often, by occasioning delay, increases the malady, remedies thus
considered, are pretended to subdue, nay frequently generating disorders of a
more deleterious nature; overturning that first and salutary caution, which
directs us in all our efforts, if we fail to do good, to do no harm. -- "Is
artis medicae scopus est; ut hominem a tot gravibus malis liberet; ideoque
Medicus nullo modo nocere, nedum Vitam destruere, aut Sanitatem laedere debet,
utpote quum Medicina non nocendi, sed juvandi, sit Scientia." HOFFMANNUS.

Indeed the mischief ceases not here; it proves detrimental in another view;
for it places the credulous Philosopher, and Physician, on a footing with the
impudent and ignorant Empiric, and too often throws such an odium on the Art
itself, that Professors of the first eminence are frequently held in contempt,
and treated with ridicule, by the injudicious and illiterate, who fly with
confidence to the cabinet, and depend upon the presuming arrogance of every
plundering impostor.

Still, strange as may be the appearance, painful the reflection to an informed
mind, why should it be matter of surprise? Do not the Physician and Medicaster
too often assign the same reason for their success, THE SPECIFIC POWER OF THEIR
APPLIED ANTIDOTE, and build on the same fortuitous exhibition? And under such
circumstances, the modest diffidence of the one can never, with the million,
stand against the bold bustling ignorance of the other -- for men of weak
discriminating powers, of which nine tenths of mankind consist, at least if we
confine them to medical understanding, will give credit to the opinions of
creatures of their own level, and place, as Indians with their painted pagods,
confidence in, and pay large tribute to, things their folly and superstition
have set up.

But notwithstanding the credulity in this point of many professors of the art,
Men held in the highest estimation adopting such ideas, handing them down to
posterity, and having them received by succeeding generations -- is it not
singular, that not one specific has ever yet been discovered, out of the number
which have acquired the appellation?

It has been, and is now, by some, thought due to the Bark in an intermittent
fever -- to Quicksilver and its preparations in the Syphilis; but in reality,
even these merit no such distinction: for let us ask, Do they in all cases, as
if possessed of specific power they would, become infallible? Or, will they by
any means prevent the accession of these distempers? Practice proves the
contrary; for they will not alone always cure these complaints -- and men have
been seized with intermittents whilst under a course of Bark -- and the lues
venerea with a mercuriated habit.

As well might modesty and judgment be united to the names of M*******,
G******, or any other empirical depredators with which this metropolis is
loaded; as well might infallibility be added to every nostrummonger, as
specific powers in curing diseases, in all constitutions, to any medicine.

Indeed, if we search into the practice of men highly elevated in their
profession, who retain such a species of absurd faith, we shall find such
glaring contradictions -- circumstances militating so diametrically against,
and so totally subversive of these opinions, that we must be convinced of the
fallibility of such a dogma.

For it is not uncommon to have accounts published by some of the efficacy of a
medicine in certain complaints, which cures, they tell us, SPECIFICALLY, to
which are tacked a long catalogue of cases in proof; whilst at the same time,
in the hands of others of equal eminence, tried under similar circumstances, no
such surprising effects are manifested. Need I, to what I have already
mentioned, add the accounts of arsenic, hemlock, deadly nightshade, henbane,
flores cardamines, flores zinci, fossile alkali, and some others, which have
been foisted upon the world under such a pretense? All having worked miracles
under the direction of some, whilst others have failed in the administration.

To what are we to attribute this diversification? Can we dispute the abilities
of the authors? It would be considered presumptuous. -- Can we doubt their
veracity? It would be thought illiberal. -- Dare we think they are attempting
to acquire same from false principles? It would be construed invidious.

What are we to conjecture? Certainly that no such specifics exist; and that
those who were favorers of such an opinion, unwilling, or unable to pursue
their researches, were happy in having so easy a support to rest upon; or,
uninclined to lessen their consequence, by receding from sentiments once
adopted, and publicly sanctioned by their fiat, condescended to suffer science
to be clothed in an unintelligible jargon, and lead men, credulous as
themselves, to believe it was impossible to proceed farther, pleased as well
with the phantom, as the reality of knowledge. Hence was a check given to
particular inquiries, by implicit confidence being paid to hoary-headed
obstinacy, I had almost said, cunning, creeping under the cloak of false
experience: hence was the healing art impeded in its progress by such a belief;
and hence a few characters called great, made thousands appear little, and live
in the shade of indolence and obscurity.

Examine but the works of Galen, Diascorides, Oribasius, Messue, Boerhaave, and
almost all the writers of the Materia Medica of former ages, and compare them,
with what has been written by some of the latest authors, who have made real
experience the test of their opinions, you will find, that a multiplicity of
errors, from time to time, have been transmitted from one to another, forming a
contemptible farrago of specific absurdities. -- View but the imaginary powers
bestowed on BEZOAR and SAFFRON, two out of the numberless instances, which
might be produced. What mighty virtues have not been attributed to the former,
by men renowned for medical sagacity? So multifarious, so efficacious, that
almost all powerful medicines, or, those imagined such, were called Bezoardics;
and what from faithful experiment is it now proved? one of our most imperfect
absorbents.

What has not been said of Saffron? Receiving for its supposed amazing specific
powers, the pompous names, Aroma Philosophorum -- sanguis Herculis -- Rex
vegetabilium -- Panacea vegetabilis -- hortus Laetitiae -- medicina Tristitiae
-- and many more, given in small quantities. Indeed the great BOERHAAVE
considers a few drops of the extract of Saffron, inspissated only to the
consistence of oil, and taken in a glass of rich wine, as highly exhilarant and
cordial. How different from the experience of this day! for except in very
large doses, saffron is not known to produce any effects, and of these accounts
are very rare and doubtful.

But as an apology for this credulity, might it not be called fanaticism? It
has been asserted, that the means, by which medicines produced their effects,
at least those to which were attributed a specific power, were impossible to be
detected and accounted for; and indeed the same notion is too prevalent at this
day, in many cases. To such a height is it carried, that an arcanum
scrophulosum has been proposed even to the members of this Society; so flagrant
is folly in her attempts, yet meets, nevertheless, with such enormous
encouragement; and, though associated with ignorance, and supported by
presumption, is so successful, it is no wonder that crude inexperience should
be led to conclude he might palm his nostrum on this Institution; for great
medic characters, so called at this time, we have seen swell the catalogues,
and enrich the lists of great Impostors.

However, to prove the fallacy of this opinion, let us examine one medicine,
which has long been held replete with specific power, and which claims more the
title, could such be allowed, than any other medicine with which we are
acquainted, if we except Quicksilver; we shall by that means detect the errors
accruing from such an idea, and perceive the benefits arising from the
discovery of its true action -- Benefits, which should stimulate us in all
cases to similar inquiries: I mean the BARK.

This was long considered to cure Intermittents specifically -- that is, we
know not how -- by some latent inexplicable power; and indeed such was the
confidence placed in this miraculous drug, so thought, incomprehensible as
astonishing, that in cases of this kind, it was indiscriminately exhibited --
though very often productive of great mischief -- till from long continued, and
often repeated trials, some of the more judicious observers found, that this
specific power was not always in Intermittents an inoffensive, much less a
certain curative agent, not even of the same complaint at different times in
the same person: hence it became necessary to inquire, from whence this
deviation arose, and in which state of the complaint it might be productive of
the greatest success; and it appeared to be when the constitution had been
harrassed, and the vascular system so far oppressed, as to be debilitated by
the preceding malady, or was, ab initio, in that state -- For given at first,
when the constitution was in full vigor, it produced very dangerous effects,
converting quotidians, and tertians, into continued Fevers, aggravating,
instead of alleviating the febrile symptoms, and forming a variety of other
distressing consequences.

On considering these phenomenon, it was manifest, that what was thought its
specific power, depended upon some exertion which occasioned the system to act,
under some circumstances, with too much force, by increasing the vascular tone.
-- Hence men, imbibing this idea, labored to abate the activity of the
constitution, by bleeding, purging, etc. -- or suffered it to be weakened by
delay, before they exhibited this medicine, which was then almost always
successful, unless prevented by some constitutional defect, that at the same
time required for its alleviation or subduction some attention.

It appears therefore obvious, that the virtue of this medicine lay not in its
correcting or destroying the miasma, or virus, producing the Intermittent, but
in the exertion of its tonic power; hence a peculiar state of the constitution
was necessary, -- and hence the necessity of knowing that state before we can
promise success.

Thus we see the particular power of this universally allowed specific was
developed, by observation and experience; and there remains no doubt of the
Bark producing generally, I might have said always, the disagreeable, and
sometimes dangerous effects above specified, if given too early, or persisted
in -- without it brings on some debility at first, as it sometimes does, by
becoming purgative: and it may be laid down as an invariable rule in practice,
that where there is in the habit strong vascular action, and an inflammatory
diathesis of the blood, which are, I take it, generally conjoined, Bark
universally does harm, -- where the contrary constitution is prevalent,
universally good, if no topical defect impedes, or counteracts its action: nor
does the Bark being successful in some local inflammatory complaints, at all
invalidate the force of the argument; for in those cases, the disorder itself
is not an active, but a passive inflammation.

Similar arguments might be adduced to the same purpose, proving the known
action of Quicksilver, and its saline compounds, capable of producing its good
effects, instead of its imaginary specific powers, and of some others. But what
I have advanced will, I hope, prove sufficiently satisfactory to show, that by
this idea of medicines acting specifically, no small impediment has been thrown
in the way of medical improvement: for men, satisfied with this LUSUS, this
LARVA RATIONIS, practiced from principles falsely founded, nay, very often,
without any principles at all -- occasioning great loss of time, and not only
doing mischief by injudicious application, but keeping the extensive powers of
many active medicines immersed in obscurity. Hence, those formerly administered
in one malady only, to which their specific power was supposed to be singularly
adapted, we now find, their modes of action being brought to light, in a
variety of others extremely useful and inestimable.

Yet it is very extraordinary, that men flying from inquiries after properties
it may be in their power to discover, should rush forward in pursuit of what
lies far beyond their reach, the NATURE OF THE SEMINA MORBI, the second point
appropriated for discussion.

That such an attempt should be made in the early periods of an art, while the
professors were almost totally ignorant of the nature of the human machine,
with regard to its moving powers, and sympathic affections -- knew little of
the animal economy -- of what different parts the body was formed; how they
were actuated by each other, and by what laws they were governed -- at a time
when philosophy was searching after the Principia Rerum, is not to be wondered
at.

But, considering this inquiry has been set on foot ever since the prevalence
of Hippocrates' idea of the " Calidum and salsum; -- Calidum and acidum; --
Calidum and amarum, and alia innumerabilia:" a period of above two thousand
years, and has ever continued in the same point of uncertainty. Is it not
surprising then, that men should for ages perplex themselves in the attempt to
make discoveries, so much above the power of human understanding? -- that they
should vainly dissipate their time in endeavoring to detect the component
parts of materials, which are in general too minute to be collected -- in all,
too subtle to come within the limits of man's scrutinizing abilities?

Knowing these things, is it not still more astonishing to hear men talk of the
acidity and alkalescency of the materies morbi; and otherwise specifying the
particular nature of the acrimony, productive of eruptive complaints? to assert
positively, that the venereal virus is an alkali, and propose to cure disorders
from that cause with muriatic acid, traversing through all the diversified
mazes of the human body, and there making neutral salts by the specific
combinations?

Yet, ridiculous as is this attempt; fantastic this enthusiasm, some modern
anatomists hold up the certainty of such discoveries, and form from thence
schemes of practice, curable and infallible, implanting in young inexperienced
minds, an IGNIS FATUUS, unprofitable as visionary.

Let Philosophers of such a description go in quest of atoms, and the
diversified modification of matter, mount air balloons, seek medical knowledge
in the clouds -- Astra petant, quomodo formentur, -- be it ours to inquire how
the effects produced by matter, in its combined and morbid state, are to be
remedied, and to such heated imaginations be the advice of CELSUS recommended.
-- "Rationalem quidem puto medicinam esse debere; instrui vero ab evidentibus
causis; obscuris omnibus, non a cogitatione artificis, sed ab ipsa art
rejectis." -- Advice, so pregnant with unerring truth; -- fraught with such
strong conviction, that on this point it is needless to dwell any longer -- the
futility of such inquiries -- the impossibility of attaining the quid
desideratum, are so conspicuously evident to the eye of common sense, prima
facie, that they need no arguments to be adduced in proof. For what understand
we more of the particular nature of the virus creative of the Plague -- Small
Pox -- Pemphigus -- Cancer -- than the first observers of these diseases? --
Virus, which might be examined, if any could, from the copiousness of the
matter produced: but we, like them, form our judgment only from the effects.

It will be more to our purpose to examine how much greater benefit will be
derived to mankind, by paying attention to that, upon which, to be of any
service, our applications must act; for certainly the human machine itself is
the grand object of the Physician's consideration; and the moving powers of
that instrument, with what I shall, for the present, call their appendiculae,
the things which require his attention, and which being too much neglected in
our descriptions of cases, has retarded, and still retards the progress of the
healing art.

By THE MOVING POWERS, I mean the muscular Fibers and vascular System possessed
of Irritability -- the nervous System of Incitability -- and the sanguinary
mass of Fluids, of the Vis animans and servans Naturam.

By the APPENDICULAE, the Lungs, Stomach, Intestines, Uterus, Kidneys, etc.
parts which, affected, have some influence on the moving powers, with respect
to their action. The Brain, and Heart I include in the nervous and vascular
system.

By the incitability, as applied to the nerves, I would be understood that
power which is capable of being put into action by immateriality, such as
mental affection -- sympathy; though it may be put into motion by material
stimulus; to which Irritability, itself abstractedly considered, is only
obedient; though that may be also rouzed by the connection of parts, wherein it
resides, with the nervous system, and by means of the nerves thus put into
action, and supported.

But, in order to form a proper idea of what I mean for your consideration, I
must beg leave to take a survey of the machine, according to my division, in
the enjoyment of perfect health.

Now in this case, the principles of which it is formed, must be in a state
exactly, or pretty nearly proportioned to each other; so that one may assist in
promoting and supporting the vigor of the other, and producing those effects
with ease, and constancy for which they were ordained.

The moving solids of the human machine must have such firmness, pliability,
and elasticity, as to enable them to answer to the impulse of the given
Irritability.

The Irritability of such a nature as to be kept in action by the nervous
incitability.

The nerves to be so formed, as perpetually to supply their power, when and
where wanted, with regularity.

The blood and fluids in such quantity, and of such consistency, as to receive
the vis animans, retain and transfuse it through the whole system in an
invariable current -- and so bland, that they may produce no defect in the
secretory or excretory organs, so as to impede them in their duty.

And the Appendiculae, so complete in their powers, that they may perform their
actions to which they are allotted, with constancy and freedom.

While matters are thus conducted, the machine remains in perfect health; but
if a defect arises in one or more of these particulars, diseases succeed in
proportion to the magnitude of the defect -- and of different natures,
agreeable to the parts affected, and their connections, and the changes brought
on in them, which may be either partial or general, or idiopathic or
symptomatic; and the cause of such defect will arise from the imperfections, in
some of the sources, from whence the active powers deduce their origin,
immediately or secondarily. And as we conclude, that the sources of all
activity, are either the brain, medulla spinalis, heart, or blood -- so in some
of these we shall find something contrary to a state of nature, in its most
perfect form; or a derangement in some of the appendiculae, by which these
sources are disordered.

But that I may be more perfectly understood, I shall trespass only a very
little on your patience, to supply two or three short, though common, cases, by
way of elucidation.

Suppose a man of strong stamina -- great vascular irritability -- strong
equable nervous incitability, abounding with blood, copious and tenacious, has
perspiration obstructed by what is called CATCHING COLD. We are all acquainted
with the general result. The matter which ought to pass off by the perspirable
pores, is retained in the habit; the vascular system experiences a plenitude --
a quick circulation is produced -- Irritability increased -- and febrile
symptoms succeed: here the immediate source lies in the heart, and vascular
system, excited by a stimulus from the occasional cause, constriction of the
cuticular pores; and that by the more remote, the application of cold; -- and
if there should be in such a constitution, any defect in the brain, lungs, etc.
or any other internal organ, or part, a topical affection will be the
consequence of the inflammatory kind, which will increase and support the
fever; or should any of the organs be affected in the first instance, that
affection will occasion the same effect; and this arises also from the source
above specified.

But should the remote cause operate on one, of a weak -- relaxed habit --
possessed of quick nervous incitability, but a small portion of vascular
irritability, and a thin sat of fluids, with a paucity of blood; the
consequences will not be so violent -- The febrile affections will be of the
slow kind, attended with more nervous symptoms, the pulse will be quick, but
languid; the heat in a small degree increased, but not so permanent,
accompanied by spasms of various parts; depression or sinking of the spirits,
and seldom any topical inflammation -- here then the nervous system will be
more affected, discovered by the languor of the moving powers, load, and
heaviness of the head, coldness of the extremities, and such other symptoms, as
indicate THE SOURCE OF MOTION, the nervous System, the part oppressed.

But suppose, lastly, a Man of good stamina, with a weak vascular Irritability,
though steady, nervous Incitability, and Blood of a tolerable density, and in
moderate quantity, under the present circumstances -- what will from thence
occur?

The circulation of the Blood will not be so greatly accelerated, as in the
first instance -- the extremities will be cold -- the perspiration obstructed,
though not in so great a degree -- uneasy sensations of coldness, and heaviness
of the head -- disturbed and restless nights -- oppressions on the praecordia
-- chillness, and flushings of heat not continued, or regular -- dejection of
spirits -- and affections, somewhat approaching to delirium.

Thus we find, from the same immediate cause, different effects will be
produced; and they may be varied, as the different combinations in the
constitution happen -- and we must to this add, as the blood and fluids are in
such a particular state to receive the vis animans more or less copiously, or
to transfuse it more or less freely, the effects may be increased or diminished
in a proportionate degree -- or as it may be, more or less acrimonious, for
acrimony always adds a stimulus, particularly to the vascular system. Though
some may exert at the same time as a sedative power on the nerves, and
therefore the additional stimulus not be so perceptible.

Besides, we know that the intestines, lungs, liver, kidneys, bladder, uterus,
etc. have such universal connections with the whole machine, particularly the
two former, that they can in many instances transmit their affections
sympathetically to the whole, or some parts of the body which lie at a
distance; hence then, as they are more or less affected, so will be the moving
powers in adequate proportions: instances of which are observable in some
symptomatic, inflammatory, catarrhal, hectic, remittent, verminose fevers, etc.

Now, as is the nature of the moving powers; as are the different combinations;
as is the state of the fluids, with respect to their acrimony or blandness,
texture, and capability of receiving and transfusing the vis animans; as is the
state of the appendiculae and muscular stamina, so do constitutions vary, and
so are different effects produced by similar causes; which we see often occur
in epidemic, and other complaints, where, though the leading symptoms may be
similar in a great degree, the concomitants will be different, and put on
various appearances, as we find in the recitals of the same complaints by
different authors: hence arise many of the species and varieties of different
genera of diseases; hence a deviation in our modus medendi, and hence the good
effects of one medicine in some instances at one time, which produce no such
benefit at another, in complaints considered as similar: and hence, perhaps,
also arise the good or bad effects of the same medicine given in different
doses, and likewise the necessity of forming different combinations to make it
act with certainty and success in different constitutions.

Let us, therefore, take a survey of the effects of medicines in different
doses, or differently combined, and see what conclusions we may from thence
deduce.

Opium, in full doses, instead of proving anti-spasmodic, anodyne, or narcotic,
has often created other distressing symptoms; and so far from taking off
spasms, alleviating pain, or procuring sleep, occasioned nausea, vertigo, and
restlessness, whilst in smaller doses it has procured every desired purpose.

Mercury also, given in a similar manner with respect to the dose, has also
occasioned disagreeable consequences, instead of affecting the salivary system,
its chief scene of action, producing nausea, gripings, and bloody stools,
whilst in smaller doses, it has readily been absorbed into the habit, and
gradually brought on a ptyalism, nay often cured without any perceptible effect.

Under the same circumstances, Bark has been the cause of sickness, purging,
and constantly rejected by vomiting; producing not any of its salutary effects,
either by prolonging the apyrexy, or taking off the febrile affections, which
have been accomplished by cold or hot infusions of this medicine.

On the contrary, small doses of these very active materials have been
productive of no sensible or curative effect sometimes, whilst administered in
larger doses, their good consequences have been made manifest.

And again: It is indisputably true, that these medicines given in any quantity
or form, they may, the most perfectly agreeable to the constitution, and
without having any painful concomitant circumstances attendant, have by ho
means answered the desired purpose; but being joined with other remedies, have
proved successful.

What then can be the cause of these deviations? Is it in the medical
ingredient itself? Impossible -- For every medicine considered in itself,
ceteris paribus, must always be alike; its action must be invariably the same;
and in similar constitutions, or in the same constitutions under similar
circumstances must universally produce the same effects.

Though I am well aware it may be urged, that the same medicine in the same
person has appeared to act, as if it varied its mode of action; this will be
readily granted -- but then it has been owing to some change brought upon the
habits by illness, indiscretion, or some other cause.

For medicines producing in a state of full health one effect, will create
others in a state of illness, with respect to the constitution; though the
action of the medicine must be the same. -- For the constitution laboring
under an indisposition, its powers are altered, they act not under a state of
healthful nature, but require something to relieve and regulate them -- Now the
same medicine which relieves, and regulates them, during the illness, would,
when the illness was conquered, and the powers of the constitution returned to
their natural order, or standard, produce bad effects if continued, inasmuch as
the same action of a medicine in illness, producing the same effect on the
habit, brings that habit into a state of health by that very action; which
action, the body being in an healthful state, is too powerful; for it then
needing no such aid, would have its powers too much increased, and by that
means distress from that very source would be occasioned. -- The same argument
may be made use of, where debilitating means have been applied, in order to
reduce the too active powers of the habit, morbidly affected.

From what has been advanced I conclude, therefore, that the cause of these
deviations depend solely on the state of the constitution, and by no means on
the nature of the medicine.

Now, as I consider the action of medicines, and the semina morbi, to be
exactly under the same point of view, regarding their respective operations on
the machine, and effects produced -- I say, these depend totally on the nature
of the constitution operated upon -- for instance,

If a Man of strong stamina, great vascular irritability, steady, regular,
nervous incitability, firm texture of the blood, was to be seized with an
intermittent fever, of the quotidian or tertian type, from marsh miasma -- in
order to form his cure, the vascular irritability must be abated, the too
strong tone of the solids, and muscular fibers in some degree debilitated, and
the cohesive power of the blood weakened -- by bleeding, purging, cooling,
saline medicines, antimonial diaphoretics; -- which done, the Bark might
afterward be administered. And if a man of a similar constitution takes so
large a quantity of heating stimulants as to produce the same febrile
appearances, without intermission -- the treatment would be the same. -- Not
from the miasmata, or stimulants, having produced these effects -- but from the
same constitutional causes.

But was the marsh miasma to affect a man of debilitated habit, weak nervous
incitability, and enfeebled vascular irritability, with a loose texture of the
sanguinary mass -- cordial, nervous medicines with the use of blisters might be
added to the use of the Bark; and these would be required from constitutional
causes also, -- that the constitution itself might be rouzed to feel the tonic
power of that remedy, and experience its good effects.

A variety of other instances might be offered in proof of the same positions
-- and this mode of reasoning will be found applicable to almost all cases;
particularly, all such as are general in the habit, or are owing to general
affections: and the more it is examined into, the more the propriety and
necessity of paying particular attention to what has been specified will
appear; but what has been said will, I hope, be sufficient to supply the
proposed hints, and lead me to my last proposition.

" That one present source of retarding the progress of the medic art, is the
loose and neglectful manner in which cases and their modes of cure, or want of
success, are described."

It has, I flatter myself, been clearly proved, as far as the time allotted
upon this occasion will permit, that the constitution, with its different
divisions, require the first attention of the Physician; and it will readily
occur, that in practice it is to be considered not only collectively, but
abstractedly; that it should be found out in what part the constitution is most
defective, whether respecting its nervous Incitability -- vascular Irritability
-- muscular Strength -- texture or composition of the Blood -- and Fluids --
and the Appendiculae.

For as all the parts act in combination with each other, as they transmit to
each other the principle of their power, yet may experience separate affections
inherent in themselves, which may be generally or partially communicated,
creative of general or partial disturbance -- they should always be
particularly attended to: inasmuch as the neglect of some, may occasion too
often our endeavors to become abortive.

But we find commonly too little said on the prevalent peculiarities of the
constitution, upon which different medicines have been tried in similar
diseases, wherein they have sometimes proved successful, sometimes otherwise.

Now, as medicines act differently in different quantities -- with different
combinations -- in different constitutions -- in the same constitutions at
different periods -- in the same disease at the different times of the malady,
with regard to the good or bad effects they produce -- and as this apparent
difference of action depends upon the different states of the moving powers,
and what I call their appendiculae, the constitutional peculiarities should
always be nicely discriminated.

This mode would often enable us to discover, on what account various remedies
had been successful; wherein they had failed, and direct us to the best method
of selecting and combining medicines, and of curing diseases, such as fall
immediately under the Physician's care; and assist, in most, to which the
Surgeon lays claim, as little, very little is to be done with the semina morbi,
and the specific power of our remedies is merely ideal. For as is the state of
the moving powers and fluids, with their combinations, so will be the action of
our medicines, and consequently so will be the indications in our applications.

Permit me, before I conclude, to offer a case, by way of exemplification,
which will afford, I presume, no weak proof of what has been advanced.

Mr. *****, a person of middle age, had been some time afflicted with a
disease, similar to what is termed GONORRHAEA LIBIDINOSA.

His muscular stamina were tolerably good; he had a great deal of nervous
incitability; weak vascular irritability; the texture of the blood not firm,
nor could be called broken; his digestion, though his appetite was tolerable,
defective; he had now and then chilliness, succeeded by flushing heats, which
came on irregularly; his pulse in general was slow, and undulating; and when
quickened, as it would now and then be, on some extraordinary occasions, weak;
his viscera all appeared found; Though delicacy prevents the insertion of the
Name, still any medical Gentleman, desirous of further information, may acquire
it by application to the author, who, for the sake of accuracy, read this
account three times to the patient, and he, at that time, perfectly coincided
with the exactitude of the description.
his bowels very irregular, sometimes extremely costive, at others as much the
reverse -- always in one extreme or the other; his urine pale, and limpid for
the most part, but now and then depositing a whitish, furfuraceous,
mucilaginous sediment -- he was petulant, and irascible when trifles perplexed
him; when not, timid and despairing -- his fluids were acrimonious; his memory
weak, and his recollection painful; creative of much uneasiness, when he could
not bring to his mind that of which he was in quest -- his whole frame was in
general so languid, that slight motion greatly fatigued him; his extremities
were in general cold -- in easterly or south-west winds he always complained of
being worse, and was perceptibly so -- his nights were constantly restless --
he had sometimes two or three emissions in the night; complained of partial
heat at the lower part of the back, which he said, now and then, transfused
itself all over him, and made him extremely faint -- he was never thirsty.

In this state he had continued for ten months, though now visibly growing
worse, and had been under the care of two physicians of eminence: they had put
him under a course of restringent medicines -- bark, white vitriol, ginseng,
etc. and ordered him the cold bath; but all proved ineffectual.

At this period, his constitution was considered in general after the mode
above recommended; taking in also the topical affection -- a weakness of the
seminal vessels, and determination of the fluids to those parts creating heat,
and causing emissions.

The INDICATIONS OF CURE were,

To determine the Fluids externally, by increasing Perspiration -- to
strengthen the digestive Organs -- increase the Irritability of the vascular
system -- abate the nervous Incitability -- and give tone and firmness to the
habit in general, which were accomplished by cordial saline diaphoretics, warm
tonics, camphorated and ethereal anti-spasmodics, and stomachic bitters --
keeping the body moderately and gently open by mild aperients.

Under this method, his extremities first lost their coldness, in a great
degree, and when warm, he always found himself relieved; at which time there
was a great itching in his skin, which was distended, appearing like an
universal essera, the matter by a general stimulus under the skin, elevating
the whole surface regularly, not showing any eruptions, except here and there,
one now and then, on his breast, or on the lower part of the head, just above
the neck, at the roots of the hair. He began now to recover every day, and when
his system showed it was in some degree invigorated, bathing in the Thames and
riding exercise established his cure.

The reason why the former Gentlemen had been so long unsuccessful, appears
very obvious: they had not paid any attention to the torpid state of the
vascular system, on which account the fluids were always crowding upon the
internal parts, having their acrimony increased; and the astringent medicines,
not being capable of exerting their action, from a defect of vascular
irritability, the vessels being in such a state of torpor, as not to feel the
effects.

Hence the seminal vessels, being before in a weakened state, suffered a
partial irritation, by the fluids there collected, occasioning stimulus, and
increased heat -- emissions succeeded emissions -- the machine became more and
more debilitated -- the nervous incitability increased; the consequence of
which would soon have been a hectic fever with a tabes.

Would time permit, a variety of cases might be adduced, in which similar
success from similar reasons have confirmed the validity of a practice so
founded -- and I am fully persuaded, that in all our recitals of cases, whether
successfully or unsuccessfully treated, were we to advert to what, perhaps, by
some may be considered as minutiae too trifling in the present scale of physic,
we should find, as well from one as the other, much useful matter proceeding --
And I have no doubt but we should discover, in very many, if not in all, the
reasons why accounts so similar in their descriptions, so dissimilar in their
consequences, have, and do present themselves daily to our view.

But I flatter myself, what has been already advanced will be sufficient to
afford hints, that may induce some more capable to attempt the investigation,
and give still clearer views than lies within the compass of my very limited
knowledge: I shall, therefore, conclude in the words of a favorite author, as
they are expressive of my wishes -- "Non dicam, quod ad commodiorem and
certiorem medendi methodum nihil exinde inveniri possit. Doctrinam itaque,
quemadmodum cum praxi cohaereat, and quae utilitas in certam and compendiosam
medendi methodum inde redundet, non hominum ad judicandum ineptorum, non
juvenum etc in praxi plane inexercitatorum, non sectariorum, and qui veras
demonstrandi, and logicas regulas ignorant; sed vestro, VIRI SOLIDISSIMA
PERITIA ET ERUDITIONE INSTRUCTI, judicio, candori, atque integritati, nec non
attentiori meditationi atque experientiae etiam atque etiam commendo."

FINIS.

