A PARTICULAR NARRATIVE OF WHAT HAS HAPPENED Relative to a Paper published in
the 51st Vol. of the PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS, ENTITLED, An Account of a
Remarkable Operation on a broken Arm, etc.

In which the PRINCIPAL FACTS ARE PROVED by EVIDENCE.

(Price One Shilling.)

A PARTICULAR NARRATIVE OF WHAT HAS HAPPENED Relative to a Paper published in
the 51st Vol. of the PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS, ENTITLED, An Account of a
Remarkable Operation on a broken Arm, etc.

In which the Principal Facts are proved by Evidence.

By CHARLES WHITE, F. R. S.

Member of the Corporation of Surgeons in London, And Surgeon to the MANCHESTER
INFIRMARY.

LONDON: Printed for and sold by Mess. HITCH and HAWES, Booksellers in
Paternoster Row: And T. ANDERTON, Bookseller and Printer, in Manchester.

MDCCLXII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THAT this dispute may be the better understood, the reader will find prefixed
the case of Robert Elliot, as it was published in the 51st vol. of the
Philosophical Transactions; Mr. J. F's Letter, enclosing Mr. Burchall's first
printed account of this affair, extracted from the British Chronicle of Sept.
7, 1761; my reply, taken from the same paper of the 25th of that month; and his
rejoinder, dated October 24, 1761, but not inserted in the Chronicle till the
10th of March 1762.

An Account of a remarkable Operation on a broken Arm; by Mr. Charles White,
Surgeon at Manchester, communicated by George Lloyd, Esquire; F. R. S.
Read March 27, 1760.
ROBERT ELLIOT, of Eyam, in Derbyshire, a very healthful boy of nine years old,
had the misfortune, about Midsummer, in the year 1759, by a fall, to fracture
the humerus, near the middle of the bone. He was immediately taken to a
bone-setter in that neighborhood, who applied a bandage and splints to his
arm, and treated him as properly, as, I suppose, he was capable of, for two or
three months. His endeavors, however, were by no means productive of the
desired effect, the bones not being at all united. A surgeon of eminence, in
Bakewell, was afterward called in; but, as soon as he found he could be of no
service to him, and as the case was very curious, he advised the lad's friends
to send him to the infirmary at Manchester: He was accordingly brought thither
the Christmas following, and admitted an inpatient. Upon examination, we found
it to have been a simple oblique fracture, and that the ends of the bone rode
over each other. His arm was become not only entirely useless, but even a
burden to him, and not likely to be otherwise, as there was little probability
that it would ever unite, it being now near six months since the accident
happened.

Amputation was therefore proposed as the only method of relief; but I could
not give my consent to that; for, as the boy was young, and had a good
constitution, it was hardly possible that it could be owing to any fault in the
solids or fluids, but that either nature was disappointed in her work by
frequent friction, while the callus was forming; or rather, that the oblique
ends of the bone, being sharp, had divided a part of a muscle, and some portion
of it had probably insinuated itself betwixt the two ends of the bone,
preventing their union: Which ever of these might be the case, I was of
opinion, that he might be relieved by the following operation, viz. to make a
longitudinal incision down to the bone, to bring out one of the ends of it
(which might be done with great ease, as the arm was very flexible) and cut off
the oblique end, either by the saw or cutting-pincers; then to bring out the
other end of the bone, and cut off that likewise; afterward to re-place them
end to end, and then treat it entirely as a compound fracture.

The objections made, by the other gentlemen concerned, to this proposal, were,
1st, The danger of wounding the humeral artery by the knife; 2dly, the
laceration of the artery by bringing out the ends of the bones; and, 3dly, that
we had no authority for such an operation. As to the first, that was easily
obviated, by making the incision on the side of the arm opposite to the humeral
artery: The place of election appeared to me to be at the external and lower
edge of the deltoid muscle, as the fracture was very near to the insertion of
that muscle into the humerus; the danger of wounding the vessel not only being
by that means avoided, but after the operation, while the patient was confined
to his bed, the matter would be prevented from lodging, and the wound be easily
come at, to renew the dressings. The second objection will not appear to be
very great, when we consider, that in compound fractures, the bone is
frequently thrust with great violence through the integuments, and seldom
attended with the laceration of any considerable artery; and, as this would be
done with great care and caution, that danger would appear very trifling. The
third and last objection is no more than a general one to all improvements.

This method, which I have been proposing, was at last resolved upon, and I
assisted in the operation, which was performed by a gentleman of great
abilities in his profession, on the 3d of January, in the present year. The
patient did not lose above a spoonful of blood in the operation, though the
tourniquet was not made use of. When the operation and dressings were finished,
the limb was placed in a fracture-box contrived on purpose, the lad confined to
his bed, and the rest of the treatment nothing different from that of a
compound fracture.

The wound was nearly healed in a fortnight's time, when an erisipelas came on,
and spread itself all over the arm, attended with some degree of swelling;
this, by fomentations, and the antiphlogistic method, soon went off, and the
cure proceeded happily, without any other interruption. In about six weeks
after the operation, the callus began to form, and is now grown quite firm:
That arm is as long as the other, but somewhat smaller, by such long-continued
bandage; he daily acquires strength in it, and will soon be fit to be
discharged.

MANCHESTER, March 17, 1760. C. WHITE.

To the EDITOR of LLOYD'S EVENING POST.
-- Tulit alter honorem. SIR,
IN your Evening Chronicle of the the 5th of August last, you have republished
from the Philosophical Transactions, vol. 51.

Account of a remarkable operation on a broken arm, by Charles White, surgeon
at Manchester, communicated by G. Lloyd, Esquire; F. R. S. Read before the Royal
Society.

On seeing this title of the case, could any man doubt, but that Mr. Charles
White, surgeon, had performed the operation? -- whereas the contrary is well
known here, and I would have the truth publicly known, that the said operation
and cure were performed and perfected, only, by James Burchall, surgeon to the
Manchester Infirmary, and, that Mr. White had no more to do in it, than any
other of the surgeons, who attended, as is usual, at such operations.

It is true, Mr. White does acknowledge the operation was not performed by
himself, but in a manner no less assuming to himself all the merit. Had his
narration been continued in the style of the first paragraph, I should not have
taken the least notice; but in his following paragraphs there is so much of the
Egotism, and his proposals, objections, and his answers, etc. that I could not
forbear to request my friend Mr. Burchall to send me his account of the case;
and to desire your impartial favor in giving it a place in your Chronicle,
which will oblige

Manchester, Sept. 2, 1761. Your constant Reader, J. F.


AS the case of Robert Elliot, so artfully written by Mr. Charles White, and
sent to George Lloyd, Esquire; without my knowledge or consent, to be communicated
to the Royal Society, has met with a place in the Philosophical Transactions,
and since been published in the Monthly and Critical Reviews, and in Lloyd's
Chronicle, wherein Mr. White has taken the sole merit of the cure to himself, I
think, without apology, I may be allowed to declare the truth, that Robert
Elliot was my patient, and was admitted as such into the Infirmary at
Manchester on the 24th of December, 1759, when, after a previous consultation
(agreeable to the printed rules) it was agreed to try the method, as related by
Mr. White in his paper; and accordingly I performed the operation on the 3d of
January, 1760, in presence of him and several of the faculty (who, as is usual
in capital operations, give their assistance) by making an incision through the
integuments, in the Interstice of the muscles on the external part of the
humerus, and sorcing the extremities of the fractured bone, out of the wound,
which were afterward cut off with the cutting forceps: I then reduced the
bones as near as could be in point of contact, and placed the arm in a
fracture-box, afterward I treated it as a compound fracture. I duly attended
him till the cure was completed, which was about the beginning of April; but
for fear of any accident affecting the arm, as the boy was of a very lively and
heedless disposition, and at a considerable distance from the place of his
abode, he was not discharged from the Infirmary till the 5th of May, 1760.

JAMES BURCHALL.
Published in Lloyd's Evening Chronicle, Sept. 7th, 1761.

To the EDITOR of LLOYD'S EVENING POST.
SIR,
A Letter from Mr. James Burchall, introduced by another, pretended to be
written by a friend of his (both of them published in your Chronicle of the 7th
of this month) oblige me, in common justice to myself, to give you this
trouble. The intention of them was to insinuate to the public, that I had
misrepresented a case, published in the 51st vol. of the Philosophical
Transactions, entitled,

An account of a remarkable operation on a broken arm; by Mr. CHARLES WHITE,
Surgeon, at Manchester: Communicated by GEORGE LLOYD, Esquire; F. R. S.

I shall make no remarks upon the inaccuracy with which Mr. J. F. has caused
you to print this title, in which, by the alteration of a point, the sense was
entirely subverted. I am ready to attribute it rather to his heedlessness, than
to any wilful design of misrepresentation. In these letters I am charged with
assuming to myself the sole merit of the cure. How far I did this, must be left
to every impartial reader of the transaction. The merit I assumed to myself was
only that of the invention; and, if the invention be of any service to the
public, that merit I believe neither Mr. Burchall nor his friend will deny me.
The operation I no where called my own; I only asserted, that "I assisted in
it;" and I said, that it "was performed by a gentleman of great "abilities in
his profession." Had I thought that the share which Mr. Burchall had in the
operation could possibly have redounded to his credit, I should have had no
objection to entering into particulars and to the insertion of his name,
especially as I have always looked upon him as a man of honor and knowledge in
his profession, and have constantly entertained a great regard for him; but I
am now publicly called upon, and I think myself enjoined to an explanation of
the account I have given, lest the public should imagine that I have any way
misled a society, which has for a long time been one of the principal ornaments
of this nation.

Previous to any consultation, I proposed to Dr. Mainwaring and Dr. Brown, at
their own houses, the mode of operation which was afterward pursued: And I
must here do them the justice to declare, that I verily believe it never would
have taken place, if they had not seconded me in my proposal. Mr. Burchall was
for amputation. It was he that principally made the objections mentioned in the
Transaction; and though my method was agreed upon, he declared both before,
during the time of, and for some weeks after the operation, that he was very
apprehensive it could never answer. The patient was Mr. Burchall's. He made the
incision in the place which I had pointed out. I brought out one of the ends of
the bone, which he attempted to saw off, but hesitated upon finding it to be
attended with some difficulty, the incision having been made too small. Upon
this, I cut off the end with the forceps, replaced it, and brought out the
other end, which I also cut off. The dressings and bandage were applied by Mr.
Burchall. It was I that contrived the fracture-box; and the first being made
too large, a second, which was made under my direction, was used as long as the
patient was confined to his bed. I very frequently attended at the dressings;
for though the patient did not fall under my immediate care, I was anxious for
the success of my proposal, and knew that if it did not succeed, I was to bear
the blame, as the inventor of the operation.

For the truth of these particulars I appeal to every disinterested gentleman
present at the consultation and operation, and (if I have represented any thing
wrong) I publicly call upon them to a denial of any of the facts I have
related.

Manchester, Sept. 18, 1761. I am, sir, yours, etc. CHARLES WHITE.

To the EDITOR of LLOYD'S EVENING POST.
SIR,
THAT the public may be better able to judge of the dispute betwixt Mr.
Charles White and myself, concerning the invention, method of operation, and
cure, performed on the arm of Robert Elliott, late a patient of mine in the
Infirmary at Manchester; I think it necessary to send you the following history
of the case, which I hope you will be kind enough to publish in your next
evening paper, with my observations and remarks on Mr. Charles White's
disingenuous Letter, published in your Chronicle of the 25th of September last.
About the latter end of the year 1759, I received a letter from John Wright,
Esquire; of Eyam, in Derbyshire, acquainting me with the unhappy circumstance of a
poor boy, in the said town, who had the misfortune to break his arm several
months before (which, notwithstanding all the endeavors that had been used to
unite the bone, still remained as loose as on the first day of the accident)
and desiring my opinion, that, if I thought any thing could be done to save his
arm, he should be glad to send him to Manchester to be admitted under my care
in the Infirmary; in answer to which, I told his son-in-law, Mr. Ashwood, who
then lived here, in what manner I thought his arm might be cured, but that,
till I saw the boy, I could not so properly judge of it; accordingly he was
brought to Manchester on the 23d of December, 1759, and the same evening I
examined his arm at Mr. Ashwood's, when I gave my opinion that it might be
cured without amputation. The day following he was admitted my patient in the
Infirmary, where I again examined his arm, and called on the gentlemen then
present to do the same, who gave their opinions for amputation only; to this I
did not assent, and the boy's master strongly remonstrated against it, saying,
he could have had that done at home, and desired I would try all possible
means, rather than cut it off; upon which I told him to leave the boy, and I
would consider further of the method I had before proposed, which was the same
that was afterward put in execution; to corroborate the truth of which, I beg
leave to appeal to two certificates, of which I have given copies at the end of
this letter, which are dated the 21st of October instant, and are signed by
John Wright, Esquire; and the said Mr. Thomas Ashwood. Whether or no Mr. White
might have heard of my design I cannot positively determine, but I am the more
inclined to believe that was the case, from his asking, upon first seeing the
boy, which was the day after his admission, what method had been proposed for
his relief; on being told none bat amputation, only that I had said I would
take him in and consider of it; he, upon examining the arm a little,
immediately replied, that he thought there was a method by which it might be
saved without amputation, and then described the method which I had before
spoke of to Mr. Ashwood, which was afterward pursued. Mr. White, in his
account published in the 51st volume of the Philosophical Transactions, allows
the operation to be performed by a gentleman of great abilities in his
profession, but at the fame time assumes to himself the sole merit of the
invention, and mode of operation; and, in his letter of the 25th ult. in an
explanation (as he calls it) of his former account, he not only lays claim to
the invention, but likewise to the operation and cure, by telling you that I
was for amputation, and that "I principally made the objections mentioned in
the Transactions;" that I was not for amputation, I think I have sufficiently
proved, besides, in the present case, that could only be the dernier resource.
The only objection which I made was that of lacerating the humeral artery, by
forcing out the ends of the bone, and, as I was to perform the operation, the
starting any objection at the consultation could not be construed otherwise
than a desire to have their opinions on such operations. He further asserts,
that though his method was agreed on, "I declared, both before, during the
time, and for some weeks after the operation, that I was apprehensive it would
never answer;" in contradiction to this, I can prove, that I frequently
declared it was the only method, both before and after the operation was
concluded on, and the method I had proposed on the receipt of Mr. Wright's
letter. He next says, "I made the incision in the place he had pointed out;"
Pray what occasion for his pointing out? when, several days before the
operation, he cannot but remember, that as I was showing a young gentleman
where I intended to make the incision, upon his coming into the room I repeated
the same to him. He then says, "he brought out one of the ends of the bone,
which I attempted to saw off, but hesitated, upon finding it to be attended
with some difficulty, the incision having been made too small;" I allow that he
turned out one of the ends of the bone, but not both, as he has asserted; that
upon my attempting to saw off one end, which was his proposal, on finding it
impracticable, I immediately called for the cutting forceps, which he very
officiously laid hold of, and cut off a small portion of the bone; I then took
the forceps from him, and cut off some more from that end, and afterward cut
off the other end, etc. As the incision was found large enough to answer my
intention in performing the operation, and was not then or afterward enlarged,
how comes he now to say, it was too small? Upon opening the arm I proposed its
being placed in a fracture-box, which I thought necessary, for the more
immediate convenience of dressing, etc. and Mr. White, with his usual
officiousness (whilst I was otherwise employed) said, on his going out of the
room, if I pleased, he would give orders for one: I thinking this a matter of
small consequence, told him he might; accordingly one was brought, which
proving considerably too large, a second was made less, and that not answering
the purpose so well as I could wish, was altered by my direction, and used as
long as I thought necessary.

From what has been said, I think it appears clearly, that the assistance which
Mr. White boasts to have given in the operation, was an act of
over-officiousness, as the patient was mine, and under my directions. It would
be tedious to analize the whole of his letter, and I should not have mentioned
these particulars, but to show that the manner of representing facts is very
different, for different purposes: I must remark, that if Mr. White's opinion
of my abilities, or his esteem of me as a man of honor and knowledge in my
profession, was consistent with his declarations, that he would have conferred
with me upon, or at least have informed me of his design of communicating that
remarkable operation; in which case, if I had acquiesced in his relation, he
would have been justly entitled to the merit he has assumed; but as he did not,
I, surely, cannot be condemned in saying, that be has been endeavoring to
raise a character and reputation to himself, on account of that operations,
without acknowledging that I was the person who had the conduct and management
of it.

Manchester, Oct. 24, 1761. I am, sir, yours, etc. JAMES BURCHALL.


I REMEMBER very well, upon the return of Edmund Marsden, from Manchester (the
master of Robert Elliott) to Eyam, he told me, that Mr. Burchall was the only
one who was against amputation.

Oct. 21, 1761. J. WRIGHT.


I WAS present when Robert Elliott was admitted into the Infirmary, and
remember that amputation was the only method proposed by the gentlemen there,
except Mr. Burchall, who said he could propose a method to save the arm, which
he had before told me of more than once at my house.

Oct. 21, 1761. THOMAS ASHWOOD.


A Particular Narrative, etc.
A Public dispute is a task of so disagreeable a nature, that nothing but the
vindication of my character from the undeserved assaults it has received, could
have induced me to appear in the light of a paper warrior.

When an invention has been crowned with success, it has been no uncommon thing
to see others attempting to bear away the honor from it is author. But in the
case of Robert Elliot, Mr. Burchall did not only defer his claim till the
success of the method proposed was evident, but even till the operation had, by
repeated publications, received the approbation of the public. The following
narrative will make it evident, that I have done every thing I could,
consistently with truth, to prevent a quarrel. That the proposal of the mode
pursued was entirely my own, and that no one particular has been by me
injuriously misrepresented. Mr. Burchall himself confesses, that I performed a
part, and that a principal part too, of the operation, by bringing out, and
cutting off, that end of the bone which was first attempted. Had I performed
even the whole, I should not have assumed to myself any merit upon that
account; the practice was so easy after the method had been laid down, that any
Pupil might have readily succeeded. I have frequently seen Mr. Burchall
successfully perform much more difficult operations, and cannot therefore help
attributing his hesitation in the midst of this, to his having no good opinion
of the contrivance, and to his going about it therefore with a less degree of
confidence than if he himself had been the inventor.

Mr. Lloyd went to London in the beginning of the year 1760; before he set out
upon his journey I had shown him (in the infirmary) Robert Elliot's arm, and
described to him the mode of operation which had been pursued. Mr. Lloyd was
pleased with the invention; and, after his arrival in town, accidentally
mentioned it, at one of the meetings of the Royal Society, to some of the
members, who begged he would write down into the country for a more particular
relation. He accordingly wrote to his son, Dr. John Lloyd, to get him an
account of the case from me; and, as he was then upon the point of leaving
London, he desired it might be sent by the return of the post, that he might
have an opportunity of showing it to his friends at the next meeting of the
Society.

Dr. John Lloyd called upon me with his father's message on Sunday the 16th of
March, 1760, about noon. I was that day so much engaged, that I could not begin
to write out the case till eleven o'clock at night, but finished it, before I
went to bed, from notes which I had kept by me since the time of the operation.
The doctor came to me for it as soon as I was up the next morning: As I had
wrote in haste, I desired he would read it over, and correct any grammatical
mistakes, if any such had escaped me. It was then dated; he enclosed it in a
letter (which he had brought along with him) to his father; and, as it was near
the time of the post's going out, it was dispatched to the office immediately;
I had no opportunity of showing it to any person out of my own house, not even
to my father, who was then at home, but three doors from me, and who never saw
it (as I had not time to take a copy) till it was honored with a publication
in the Philosophical Transactions. Mr. Lloyd gave it to Dr. Birch, one of the
secretaries, upon the 20th of March, who read it before the society upon the
27th of the same month, but not till after Mr. Lloyd had left London.

I now mentioned to some few persons what had been done, and, amongst the rest,
to Mr. Burchall in the surgeon's room in the Infirmary. I did not, however,
tell it him in the manner of asking his leave; for I did not think it necessary
to ask any man for liberty to publish my own inventions. As to my letting him
know the case would be published, it was not in my power; I did not know it
would, till I saw it had received a place in the Transactions: Every paper
carried to the society is not favored with a reading, nor is every reading
followed by a publication. In the year 1752 an order, which is still in force,
was made, that a committee of the members should be appointed to re-consider
the papers read before them, and select out of them such, as they should think
most proper for their future publications. The volume of the Transactions,
which contains the case of Robert Elliot was published in May 1761. It was
immediately sent down, not only to the Public Library, but to several
gentlemen in Manchester, and an abstract of the case was printed in the
Critical Review for the Month of June, and in the Monthly Review for July, and
the whole case was re-published in the Universal Magazine for the month of
July, and in the British Chronicle of the 5th of August; yet Mr. Burchall never
so much as hinted (though I saw him every week in the Infirmary) nor had I any
reason to imagine, that the publication had given him umbrage, till we
accidentally met in the passage leading to the Old Coffee-House in the last
week of August. I then told him, I was extremely sorry he had taken any thing I
had done amiss, but that I thought I had mentioned him with as much respect as
possible. He replied, his name was no where mentioned. I answered, if I had
either seen him to have asked his leave, or had known that the mention of his
name would have been agreeable, I should willingly have inserted it. I
represented the hasty manner in which the paper went out of my hands, that the
omission of his name was only owing to my over caution not to disoblige; that I
had given away the merit of the operation from myself, and was desirous he
should retain it; that the case was generally known in Manchester, and that I
had taken every opportunity, wherever I had heard it mentioned, of declaring
him to be the operator. He then asked me, if I was willing to do the same in
any of the public papers? I told him, I was willing to do it in any, in which
the case had appeared. He said, he should be satisfied, if I would do it in
Lloyd's Evening Chronicle; desired that I would draw up a paper in a proper
form for insertion, and told me, he would call upon me for it, to send it to
the Printer: Immediately, upon leaving him, I wrote what follows.

To the PUBLISHER of the BRITISH CHRONICLE.
"Sir,
"THE Royal Society did me the honor to publish, in the 51st vol. part II. of
the Philosophical Transactions, An Account of a remarkable Operation on a
broken Arm, (which account you have copied in your Chronicle of the 5th of this
month.) In it, it is said, that I assisted in the operation, which was
performed by a gentleman of great abilities in his profession. I take the
liberty of declaring, by the channel of your paper, that the gentleman there
meant was Mr. James Burchall."

Yours, etc. C. WHITE.
MANCHESTER, August 27, 1761.

About three days afterward I accidentally met him in the Smithy-Door A Street
in Manchester.
; I told him, I had done what he desired; hoped I had put the paper into such a
form as would be agreeable; had left it upon the desk in my study, to be ready
when he should call, and that, whenever he pleased, he might insert it
according to his proposal. I understood him that he would call, and left him,
as I thought, in perfect friendship. Notwithstanding this, he never called,
never sent any message, nor made any apology for his omission; but, without
acquainting me, wrote the letter of the 2d of September; which, along with one
subscribed J. F. was printed in Lloyd's paper of the 7th of the same month. I
must here appeal to the public, whether my behavior to Mr. Burchall, whom I
had been striving to oblige to the utmost of my power, was such as merited the
return it met with.

Notwithstanding this treatment, I was still so averse to an open rupture, that
after I had drawn up my answer to his and his friend's letter, I desired Dr.
Brown would show it to him before I dispatched it to the printer. I told the
Doctor I was so far from having any design of distressing Mr. Burchall, that I
should be glad to do him any service I could, consistently with my own
reputation; that I did not wish him either to contradict himself, or submit to
any meanness; but that my veracity had been called in question by his anonymous
friend; and, as his own letter had been printed with his friend's, I could not
help thinking him in some measure accountable for it; that therefore, except he
chose to publish something to clear up my character, I should be obliged to
print the answer which I had sent him; and that, as his friend's name was no
where mentioned, I thought he might with honor subscribe the following.

To the EDITOR of the BRITISH CHRONICLE.
NOtwithstanding what has been said by my friend J. F. in your Chronicle of the
7th of this month, this is to satisfy the public, that a Case entitled, An
Account of a remarkable Operation on a broken Arm; by Mr. Charles White,
Surgeon, at Manchester; communicated by George Lloyd, Esquire; F. R. S. read before
the Royal Society March 27th, 1760, and published in the Philosophical
Transactions, vol. 51. part 2d, is a true account, Mr. Charles White being the
sole inventor and proposer of that operation."

MANCHESTER, Sept. 17, 1761.

Dr. Brown showed my answer to Mr. Burchall in die Infirmary, and at the same
time told him the publication of it would be dropped, if it was either agreeable
to him to sign the above paper, which I had sent, or any thing else to the same
purpose. Mr. Burchall made two objections; one was, that it contained an
accusation of his friend, and the other, that I had laid claim to the sole
invention; for he added, that though I had had the fortune to make the first
mention of it, yet that he himself had thought of it as well as I. After this,
Dr. Brown told me, that if I would erase the words -- His Friend, and the sole
Inventor, he was in hopes he could prevail with him to sign the paper, and that
he had promised to see him again the next morning. I replied, I should be glad
to comply with anything the Doctor thought proper, and made the proposed
alterations; but, upon Dr. Brown's offering the paper again to Mr. Burchall,
the latter absolutely refused to sign it.

The reasons why I gave Dr. Brown this trouble were these; I knew he was
perfectly agreeable to Mr. Burchall; that he was thoroughly acquainted with the
case upon his own knowledge; and that, from his known humanity, I did not doubt
but he would do his utmost to bring about a reconciliation.

Upon Mr. Burchall's refusal, my answer was published in the British Chronicle
of the 25th of September, 1761. On its arrival at Manchester, I was sharply
attacked by him at the weekly board of the Infirmary, and there publicly
charged with having asserted falsities. I told him, I was certain I had
strictly adhered to truth, but that, if he thought otherwise, I was willing to
abide by the following proposal.

That he and I should join in a petition to all the gentlemen present at the
consultation and operation, to desire them to depose, before a magistrate,
whatever they knew concerning the affair; that if he would consent to this, the
depositions should be put into his own hands, he should be at liberty to
publish, or suppress them, as he thought most conducive to his own interest,
and that this should terminate the dispute betwixt us. I repeated this proposal
to him three several times before the board, but he did not accept my offer.
There does but one reason occur to me why Mr. Burchall should decline this
offer, the persons present, both at the consultation and operation, are
gentlemen of probity, and I have good reason to believe would at that time have
complied with our request, if Mr. Burchall had accepted of my proposal, as they
all of them seemed to show a disposition to repair the breach between us.

Mr. Burchall's reply to mine of the 25th of September, dated October 24th,
1761, was published in the Chronicle of the 10th of March, 1762: In it he seems
much disposed to play with words; and, indeed, the whole performance must
appear of a very extraordinary nature to those, who, by their attendance at the
Infirmary, can be the only evidences in regard to the case, from which the
present dispute has arisen; and, to use his own words, must have effectually
convinced them, that "The manner of representing Facts, is very different for
different purposes."

He says, "Whether or no Mr. White might have heard of my design, I cannot
positively determine, but I am the more inclined to believe that was the case,
from his asking, upon first seeing the lad, which was the day after his
admission, what method had been proposed for his relief, etc." an inference as
absurd as it is false, and such a one as was perhaps never drawn from such a
question! He goes on with pretty round assertions, and appeals, for the truth
of them, to two certificates, which by no means come up to the point in
dispute: The first is from Mr. Wright, of Eyam, containing no more than a
remembrance of what he had heard from Mr. Edmund Marsden; but as Mr. Marsden
has favored me with his own evidence, this testimony of Mr. Wright's will, I
imagine, be esteemed of little consequence. The second is from Mr. Ashwood, who
recollects that amputation was the only method proposed by any of the gentlemen
of the Infirmary, except by Mr. Burchall, who said, he could propose a method
to save the arm. The minutes of the board will testify I did not attend it upon
the day Mr. Ashwood mentions, and therefore he cannot include me amongst the
number of those who were for amputation; and I shall be able to prove, that if
Mr. Burchall did not propose amputation in Mr. Ashwood's hearing, he did it,
however, at another time. Mr. Ashwood does not say what was Mr. Burchall's
method; and certainly, if he ever had any method except amputation to propose,
he must himself, upon reflection, have been convinced of its insufficiency;
else why did not he mention it to the boy's master, Mr. Marsden, when he was
pressed to think of some method to save the arm, and told, that if it had been
imagined amputation must have taken place, the operation might have been
performed without the trouble of so long a journey? Why did not he propose it
to some of the faculty, rather than to Mr. Ashwood, who could not be supposed
to be a competent judge in surgical cases? Why did not he propose it at the
consultation held in the Infirmary upon the Thursday after the boy's admission?
(the only one in reality held upon this occasion:) there it was absolutely
necessary The printed rules and orders of the Public Infirmary at Manchester
enjoin, RULE 51. That the physicians and surgeons do meet at the Infirmary ever
Thursday at eleven o'clock, to visit their in-patients, and to consult upon
difficult cases, etc.

R^^^ 53. That no amputation, or other great operation, except an urgent
occasion require it, be performed without a previous consultation of the
physicians and surgeons; and that no one shall be admitted to see the practice
of the house without their consent.


Had not I at that time proposed, and been powerfully seconded in, the method
which was afterward pursued, there is the greatest reason to imagine
amputation would have taken place, as Mr. Burchall then proposed that method
alone. And I never heard, except from Mr. Ashwood, that Mr. Burchall ever
proposed any other method.

What danger might be apprehended from the operation I cannot pretend to say; I
was always clear in my opinion, and often asserted, that if the plan which I
had laid down was strictly adhered to, there was no more danger to be feared
from this, than from any other capital operation in surgery.

In my letter of the 18 th of September, 1761, it is said, that I brought out
one of the ends of the bone, which he (Mr. Burchall) attempted to saw off, but
hesitated upon finding it to be attended with some difficulty, the incision
having been made too small. The following is Mr. Burchall's remark, "As the
incision was found large enough to answer my intention in performing the
operation, and was not then, or afterward, enlarged, how comes he now to say
it was too small?"

When I asserted that the incision had been made too small, I did not do it in
order to throw dirt; for I should be sorry to have said any thing in this
dispute, to which the case did not necessarily lead me; I thought my meaning
had been sufficiently clear, but, as it does not seem to have been understood
by Mr. Burchall, I shall endeavor to explain myself in a more ample manner.

My meaning was, that if the incision had been made larger, Mr. Burchall would
have had no occasion to have hesitated when he attempted to saw off the end of
the bone; and here he allows (though he denies me the rest of the invention)
that the proposal for sawing off the end was my own, apparently because this
proposal did not meet with success.

To law off the end of a bone is no new practice in compound fractures; it has
been performed by others as well as by myself; and I believe it will be allowed
by every intelligent surgeon, that the saw, where it can be used, is for many,
and very obvious reasons, superior to any other instrument.

The Disengenuous letter -- officiously -- usual officionsness -- boasts --
raising a character, etc.
warmth of some of the expressions made use of by Mr. Burchall, in his last
letter, will not, I hope, ever tempt me to retaliation.

I have, in a great measure, confined myself to facts; and, as Mr. Burchall has
friends in the Infirmary, if I have misrepresented any thing, there can be no
doubt made but I shall be sufficiently refuted.

In the beginning of October 1761, Mr. Bent, who resides in the Infirmary, gave
Mr. Burchall and me each of us a copy of his account, with leave to publish it;
Mr. Burchall asked Mr. Bent for liberty to print a part of it, which Mr. Bent
refused, but again repeated, that he was welcome to publish the whole.

As Mr. Burchall did not think proper to annex this account to his last letter,
I shall now myself give it to the public. Whoever carefully considers his
relation will, I imagine, easily perceive what part of it Mr. Burchall has been
pleased to borrow, and at the same time too discern, that he has wrested the
facts he has thought proper to give in such a manner as to make them suitable
to his purpose. I am the more induced to believe that this was the real case,
because Mr. Burchall himself told me, he had not kept any minutes of the affair
Is it not therefore probable this case would have been lost to the public, if
I had not committed it to paper?
. Mr. Bent confirms many things I have advanced, and does not contradict me in
a single article. He says, indeed, that Mr. Burchall one morning marked out the
place he thought the most eligible for the incision, but at the same time tells
you, that this was in the interim betwixt the consultation and operation. I had
proposed the mode, and pointed out the place, at the consultation held upon the
Thursday.

Mr. Burchall, though he was sensible at the same time there was no other
method of saving the limb, did not come into my scheme till some days after: it
was upon his giving his consent that he marked out the place, agreeable to Mr.
Bent's relation, and, upon my coming into the room, he applied to me (if I
understood his meaning) to know if we agreed in regard to the incision, to
which he received my answer in the affirmative. Mr. Bent says that, "Mr. White
took the forceps and cut off the end, that Mr. Burchall took the forceps out of
his hands, either to cut off the other, or to cut off more from that which was
cut, but cannot possibly determine which."

Upon my asking Mr. Bent very particularly to recollect what he could, relating
to the cutting off the extremities of the broken bone, he told me, he perfectly
well remembered, that the first end was taken off by myself, but that he could
not possibly recollect who it was that amputated the second; that he remembered
Mr. Burchall took hold of the forceps, but could not determine with what view
he did it, whether it was to cut off the other end, or to take something more
from one of those upon which I had performed the operation. But I must here
again repeat it; I don't pretend to any merit from an operation which is not a
difficult one, and therefore I shall not produce any more evidences upon that
head. I only mention these circumstances to show that Mr. Bent has no where
contradicted any thing I have asserted.

Though Mr. Marsden does not positively say Mr. Burchall declared for
amputation, yet he affirms, that Mr. Burchall said, He did not know what could
be done; and, when amputation was mentioned, made no objection to the
operation. Mr. Burchall, though he was pressed to think of some other method,
gave him no encouragement to hope for more favorable treatment, and had he had
any other method to propose, is it not to be imagined that common humanity
would have prompted him, either to have declared his method before Mr. Marsden
had left the town, or at least to have given him reason to expect the
prosecution of a milder practice.

I shall not now detain my reader by any more of my own remarks, but shall lay
before him the evidences I have to produce, and leave him to judge not only who
has the best right to the invention, but who has taken most pains to preserve
that amity which I could heartily have wished to have subsisted, and which
ought always to be maintained between gentlemen of the same profession.

"Being desired by Mr. Burchall and Mr. White to give an account of the
particulars I remembered relating to the case of Robert Elliott, I have wrote
the following with the greatest impartiality and strictest truth, according to
the best of my remembrance."

"I Remember that on December 24th, 1759 (the day of Robert Elliott's admission
into the Infirmary) that Mr. White was not there, and that Mr. Burchall desired
Dr. Brown (who was then taking in for Dr. Kay, he being at that time ill of a
fever) and Mr. Hall to see the boy; and I don't remember that I heard any
method proposed, besides amputation, but that Mr. Burchall said, he would take
the boy in for a week or two, in order to call a consultation, and see if there
might not be some other method proposed. That Mr. White came the next morning;
and, being showed the patient, he asked what method had been proposed? I
answered, I had not heard any, except amputation; and that, after examining the
parts a little, he said, he thought there was a method by which the boy might
be relieved without cutting off ^h^ arm, and accordingly described that which
was afterward pursued, and desired it might be told Mr. Burchall, which was
accordingly done. I don't remember exactly the answer Mr. Burchall made upon
his first being told this; but I well remember him often repeating, that there
could be no other method for saving the limb, but that he had an objection
which he thought of great weight against it, viz. the danger of lacerating the
artery, by turning out the ends of the bone. The consultation, I think, was
held about a week before the operation was performed, but don't remember any
thing particularly that was there said or proposed: I remember in the interim
betwixt the consultation and operation, that one morning Mr. Burchall marked
out the place he thought most eligible to make the incision in, by pointing
with his finger upon the lower edge of the deltoid muscle, on the external part
of the humerus to me, and that Mr. White coming into the room immediately
after, he repeated the same to him, who answered in the affirmative, that that
must be the place. I don't remember the particular parts performed by either
gentlemen in the operation, but that Mr. Burchall made the incision, and
attempted to saw off one end of the bone, but made a stand, upon finding it
impracticable, in which interim Mr. White took the forceps, and cut off the
end; that Mr. Burchall took the forceps out of his hands, either to cut off the
other, or to try to cut off more from that which was cut, but cannot possibly
determine which. Mr. Burchall was the person who had the chief management of
the patient; Mr. White frequently attended the dressings; and one morning I
remember Mr. Burchall mentioned the placing the arm in a fracture-box in a
direct line, but Mr. White thinking the ends of the bone did not come so well
into contact in a straight line, as when the cubitus lay at a right angle with
the humerus, said, he could contrive one in which it might lie in that
position, and accordingly gave orders for the joiner to be sent to his house,
which was done, and a box brought the next morning, which proved greatly too
large, upon which he ordered a second, which was likewise obliged to be
altered, the board that went on the inside of the arm, from the shoulder to the
elbow, being made too long, and with two hinges, one of which being took off
and the board cut shorter, the same was used as long as the patient was
confined to his bed. As witness my hand,"

JAMES BENT.


"WHEN Mr. Barker, of Bakewell, found he could be of no service to my
apprentice Robert Elliot, he desired I would get him into the Infirmary at
Manchester, under Mr. Charles White's care. Mr. Ashwood, of Manchester,
afterward undertaking to get him a recommendation, contrived to have him
admitted under Mr. Burchall, saying, he was a person he had an opinion of. I
brought him to Mr. Ashwood's house on the Sunday night; Mr. Burchall saw him
there that night, and said he could not tell what could be done for him, but
that he should have the opinion of all the other gentlemen at the Infirmary. I
took him to the Infirmary the next day to be admitted, and heard the gentleman
that was in the chair ask what could be done for the poor lad? And a person
that I took to be one of the physicians, or surgeons, replied, that nothing
could be done but taking off his arm. I never heard any other method proposed,
nor had I any encouragement to hope for any thing else, though I desired that
Mr. Burchall would think of some other method."

EDMUND MARSDEN.
FORD, September 25, 1761. Signed in my presence, and to which he said he would
give his affidavit, if necessary. Witness SAMUEL BAGSHAW^, One of his majesty's
justices of the peace for the county of Derty.


"IN December 1759, being an apprentice to Mr. White, I attended at the
Infirmary in Manchester at a consultation held upon the case of Robert Elliott,
the Thursday aster his admission into the Infirmary, where Dr. Brown, Mr.
Burchall, and Mr. White, were present. As the boy was a patient under Mr.
Burchall's care, he showed him to the other gentlemen, and told them what he
knew concerning the accident; and, at the same time, gave it as his opinion (to
the best of my recollection) that nothing but amputation could be of service,
or words to that effect. Mr. White, upon examining the arm, proposed that mode
of operation which was afterward pursued. Some objections being started, Mr.
White replied, that if the plan he proposed did not succeed, amputation might
be had recourse to at the last. During the course of this consultation, Mr.
Burchall never gave any reason to believe, nor did it appear to me that he
himself had the least thought of this method of treatment, nor did he propose
any other than amputation. And the week following, whilst the operation was
performing, Mr. Burchall said it will never answer; which words he some days
afterward spoke again in my hearing."

WILLIAM STARKIE.
MANCHESTER, April 29, 1762.

Mr. Poole, the apothecary to the Infirmary, has often said, the boy owed the
preservation of his arm to me. I imagine the principal facts I have advanced
have been very sufficiently proved by the evidences I have produced; and I hope
the reasons I have given why I did not show the paper to Mr. Burchall previous
to its publication, as well as why I omitted the mention of his name, will be
esteemed satisfactory: But if any of my readers should be of a different
opinion, I desire they will do me the justice to remember, that so soon as Mr.
Burchall made any remonstrances to me, I readily offered to set the affair in a
clear light, either in the British Chronicle, or in any other paper in which
the case had appeared. This was certainly doing as much as man could do; and he
himself expressed his satisfaction at my proposal. Yet, in a few days after
this, he wrote the letter printed in the British Chronicle of the 7th of
September, 1761, without so much as mentioning to me that he had altered his
opinion. I appeal to the public whether this was genteel treatment. If the
paper I had drawn up had not been satisfactory to him, I should willingly have
altered it, as far as a strict adherence to truth would have allowed me.

I had an opportunity of seeing Robert Elliott, and of examining his arm, about
Michaelmas last. His master informed me, that after his discharge from the
Infirmary, in May 1760, he went to work as usual; that he kept well the
remainder of the year; but that, in the beginning of 1761, he had the
misfortune, by a fall, to break his arm again at, or near, the place of the
former fracture; a callus formed, and the lad returned to his business shortly
after; but (for want of a due observance of the surgeon's directions) the boy
being of a restless playful disposition, the arm became crooked, and
consequently shorter than the other. I have only related this circumstance,
that I may not be accused of concealing any thing from the public relative to
the case in question.

I am not ignorant of the arts, which some low emissaries have made use of, to
depreciate me amongst my friends, of the threats which have been thrown out to
deter me from publishing my defense, nor of the methods which have been made
use of to prevent my getting evidence, in order to clear myself, and maintain
my right to the invention: Such artifices I despise! and such menaces I defy!

A contest of this nature no way tends to the advantage of mankind, nor is the
public interested in the event. The profession has but too often suffered by
differences made public, whilst the self-interested combatants have only
afforded subject for the entertainment and ridicule of the standers-by. In
cases like this, an Apology to the Public is absolutely necessary; but my
pardon I hope I shall be able to obtain, as it must be evident from this
Narrative, I have done every thing in my power to prevent an open rupture.

I must likewise beg leave to make an apology to those gentlemen whose names I
have taken the liberty of making public, as no other means were left me of
setting matters in a proper light.

MANCHESTER, June 2, 1762.

FINIS.

