SEVENTY FOUR SELECT CASES, WITH THE MANNER OF CURE, AND THE PREPARATION of the
REMEDIES, IN THE FOLLOWING DISEASES.

I. The Schirrus, Cancer, and Ulcers of the BREAST and WOMB. II. Scrophulous
Swellings and Ulcers about the Neck and other Parts; commonly called the King's
evil. III. The Specks and Opacity of the Cornea of the EYE; in which Sight has
been restored, by internal Medicines only. IV. Old ULCERS of the LEGS, cured in
Persons much advanced in Years.
THE WHOLE BEING An APPENDIX to the TREATISES already published on these
SUBJECTS.

BY WILLIAM ROWLEY, M. D.

Morbi non eloquentia, sed remediis curantur.

CELSUS. LONDON: Printed for F. NEWBERY, at the Corner of St. Paul's
Churchyard, in Ludgate Street.

MDCCLXXIX.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

THE PREFACE.
THE following collection of Cases is the practical part of a considerable work
written on glandular affections in general; in which their causes will be
explained, and a new theory drawn from the latest anatomical discoveries in the
lymphatic system. As numbers are daily suffering under these ravaging
complaints; humanity dictated to me the necessity of the present publication,
and it is hoped this attempt to alleviate human misery, will be received with
candor.

THE names of the generality of patients have not been introduced; but several
of distinction may be referred to, should it be esteemed necessary.

IT would be highly unbecoming the dignity of the profession, not to have a
tender concern for the reputation of others: the candid, therefore, will
perfectly conceive my motive for concealing the practitioners, who,
unsuccessfully, attended the subsequent cases, previous to my being consulted.

Harley Street, Cavendish Square, May 10, 1779.
INTRODUCTION.
THE uncertainty of curing ulcerated legs by rest, salivation, etc. and the
frequent relapses of patients discharged from hospitals, induced me, near
twenty years ago, to search for remedies more adequate to the nature of the
complaint. The cause of ulcers I conceived to be owing to some scorbutic or
other taint in the habit; in which the lymphatic system was principally
affected; an internal alterative treatment was adopted, success in many
instances was the consequence, and the improvements were made public in the
year 1767 A Treatise on the method of curing ulcerated legs without rest,
proved by a variety of Cases.
The doctrines See Sharp's Surgery.
that old ulcers were difficult of cure; that it would be dangerous to attempt
the healing them, as it might endanger the patient's life, or produce a
diarrhoea, fever, or asthma, were refuted by undeniable facts.

The seat of the ulcer is commonly in the adipose membrane, which is sometimes
thickened and very frequently callous. I discovered in the cure, that these
hardened parts became soft and pliant; and from hence some hopes were
entertained that a similar practice might remove glandular complaints. A trial
proved the conjecture not ill founded; for a considerable number of indurated
breasts, which an extensive employment in midwifery furnished, were in general
cured by gentle alteratives. Numbers of patients in disorders of this nature
presented themselves, as advice and remedies were given for many years without
any gratuity. Afterward an hospital was opened, to which the poor might daily
apply, with no other recommendations than distress and sickness. There were
seldom less than four or five hundred patients under cure in diseases of the
eyes, schrophulous, cancerous, ulcerous and other indispositions The experience
obtained from this great variety of cases, enabled me to comprehend a more
beneficial treatment than the common, which was acknowledged defective, by that
excellent surgeon, the late Mr. Samuel Sharp. Improvements were gradually made
from a more minute knowledge of the complaints, and some dreadful affections
formerly thought incurable, were conquered by the gentlest means. The disorders
incident to the breasts, after delivery, could in general be prevented chiefly
by a partial abstinence from liquids; or, if tumors or inflammation happened,
remedies more efficacious than shaking the breasts, embrocations of oil,
brandy, and vinegar, plasters of diachilon, or treacle on brown paper, etc.
could be administered with a certainty of advantage in every case. A treatise
has been written on these subjects, and the curative intentions fully
explained. A treatise on the diseases of the breasts, and methods of managing
women during childbed, etc. etc.
The confidence of several persons of rank, the public protection, and the
pleasure which reiterated success produced, excited fresh ardor in the pursuit
of new enquiries.

The usual methods of managing distempers of the eyes seemed to be exceedingly
defective, and in many instances cruel. These subjects next engaged my
attention; the ancient and modern treatment was examined, and in a publication
censured, or praised, in proportion as it experimentally appeared to have had
merits or defects A Treatise on the ancient and modern methods of curing
diseases of the Eyes, with new improvements.
. External applications to the eyes, particularly poultices, were in general
condemned, with the reasons assigned; the inflammatory indispositions were
reduced under four heads; St. Ives makes a number of useless distinctions.
new methods of cure were recommended, and illustrated by proofs of persons
relieved. The manner of extracting the cataract was successfully improved, and
many patients were restored to sight.

To demonstrate that it is on facts alone that these assertions are made, the
following collection of cases now make their appearance as an addition to the
former Upwards of sixty cases have already been published in the treatises.
; in order to extend and confirm the utility of the improvements, and render
them more beneficially useful to society.

The principal remedies used in the cures were, Cinnabar antimonii. Cinnabar
factitium. Aethiops mineralis. Sulphur antominii precipitatum. Aquila alba.
Nitrum purissimum. Aethiops antimonialis. Camphora. Spt. Salis ammoniac. Ether
nitri. The Caput mortuum, of spirits of nitre. Calx antimonii. Unguentum
saturninum.
The Aethiops mineralis should be prepared by rubbing a considerable time
without any heat.

The aquila alba is the calomel ten or twelve times sublimed, by which its
purgative and drastic qualities are destroyed; a quarter, or half a grain
joined with an equal quantity of sulphur antimonii precipitatum, when well
rubbed for a long time together, and formed into a pill, with confectio
damocrat. is called Pilula rubra.

The nitre should be rendered perfectly pure, by fusing in a crucible, and
rechristallisation. When mixed with equal parts of aethiops min. and a small
portion of cinnabar antimon. by a long trituration; the composition is called
Pulvis mineralis.

Camphorated julap has been often prescribed, with the other remedies, as a
resolvent and corrector.

The aquila alba, is given in the dose of a quarter or half a grain, formed
into a pill, with sugar, and a mucilage of gum arabic; this is named pilula
alba.

The calx antimonii, and the aethiops antimonialis, are given in general to
persons who have a dry skin.

The spiritus salis ammoniaci is sometimes added to the solutions of simple
nitre, and is called mistura nitrosa volatilis. The ether nitri is given to
patients exceedingly nervous, or who have hectical symptoms; it acts by
allaying irritation, without producing the ill qualities of opiates, and is
prepared from one part of pure strong spirit of nitre, and two of alcohol,
without heat, in a long necked cucurbit, with a head, tubes and receivers
proper for conveying the white fumes; and is called Essentia volatilis,

The caput mortuum of spirits of nitre, is what remains after the distillation,
according to the method of Glauber, and is called Sal neutralis The difference
is very considerable between this salt and that prepared in the common manner.
.

The success in the cures will greatly depend on the purity of the remedies. An
unadulterated nitre is rarely to be obtained; as what is sold, commonly
contains a portion of sea salt, and is united sometimes with a worse ingredient.

Crude antimony is often impure. The argentum vivum, even when it passes
through leather, is frequently adulterated with poisonous ingredients;
therefore that used in the following cases, has always been revived from
cinnabar. The aqulla alba at present is not commonly prepared; the calomel,
however, which it is hoped will not be substituted for it, will not answer the
purposes intended.

The sal neutralis is seldom to be had genuine. The medicine in the shops
nearest to it is the sal popolychrestum. The goodness of the calx antimonii,
and the aethiops antimonialis, will greatly depend on the purity of the
articles which compose them. The factitious and the antimonial cinnabar is
frequently adulterated with red lead, and if taken inwardly, or received as a
fumigation, must do infinite mischief.

Every one accustomed to the study and practice of chemistry, will see the
necessity of insisting on exactness to be observed in the preparations A number
of experiments on these preparations, with the manner of detection if they
should be sophisticated, may be the subject of a future essay.
, which when properly administered, produce little, or no sensible operation.
At first small doses should be prescribed, which may be gradually increased, as
the constitution becomes more habituated to them.

A COLLECTION OF CASES IN THE SCHIRRUS, CANCEROUS ULCER, AND OTHER DISORDERS OF
THE BREASTS.
CASE I.
MRS. A --, at Lady T --, aged between 40 and 50, had been afflicted with a
hardness of the breast, which drew in the nipple; the pains had been exquisite
on change of weather for between four or five years; at no time was the breast
easy, and the motion of the arm was impaired. Application had been made to
several practitioners; some of the first eminence were consulted; but not the
least advantage obtained, and the patient became exceedingly reduced, from the
tortures and anxiety of mind; not having the least prospect of being cured, or
even relieved. She was recommended to me by an Apothecary near Grosvenor
Square, and took the pilula rubra, and the pulvis mineralis. In about six
months the cure was perfectly accomplished. It is now three years since; the
patient enjoys a good state of health, and has had no return of the disorder.
This cure is known to several persons of rank.

CASE II.
MRS., formerly servant to -- M, Esquire. aged 40, had three large stony hardnesses
in the left breast, which had been very painful between four and five years, so
as often to prevent her rest; she had repeatedly consulted a skilful court
surgeon, had taken several remedies without relief. She was ordered the pilula
rubra, and the solutio nitri three times a day. In nine months, during which
time the pains decreased and the swellings gradually resolved, she was cured
and remains well.

CASE III.
MRS. M., well known to several families of fashion, aged betweeen 40 and 50,
had been for above two years laboring under great pains in the breast, the
veins of which were tumid and tortuous, and there were several hardened
swellings detached from each other. The patient was of a remarkable delicate
constitution, exceedingly nervous and irritable, and had undergone repeated
bleedings, by the advice of an eminent city surgeon, without any benefit. She
took the pilula rubra three times a day, and a solution of nitre, and in about
six weeks all the swellings were resolved, and the veins of the breasts reduced
to their natural size. This patient, contrary to my advice, neglected taking
her remedies, and was attacked with a disorder in the womb, and afterward the
breast became painful, the veins swelled again; but on returning to the
medicines, a cure has been obtained.

CASE IV.
MRS. C, aged 44, Old Street, had a schirrus or hard swelling of the whole
breast for six years, and for above two years before she applied, had been in
constant and violent pains. There were four foul livid ulcers, which discharged
a very offensive acrimonious humor; the veins of the breast were enlarged, and
she was in such tortures, as to be deprived of rest night and day. An eminent
hospital surgeon had advised her to have her breast cut off; and declared it to
be impossible to cure her. She took the pilula rubra ter de die, and solutio
nitri. The hardened parts gradually resolved; the breast which was before fixed
became moveable, the ulcers healed, and the cure was accomplished in between
two and three months. This person has remained ever since in good health, and
has not had the least symptom of a complaint in the breast, though it is
between six and seven years.

CASE V.
A Very respectable Baronet recommended Mrs. E --, of Hertfordshire, for advice
in a large hard swelling in the whole breast, which was greatly distended,
immovable, and as hard as a stone; besides this, there were five large ulcers
discharging an exceedingly offensive matter, excrescences were likewise forming
and sloughing away continually. This disorder had been bad nine months. The
pains were acute, and the matter discharged was so corrosive, as to erode the
adjacent parts. Neither ease nor rest could be obtained even by the use of
opiates. The arm on the diseased side was with difficulty moved, especially in
elevating it toward the head. The pilula rubra, and the pulvis mineralis, were
given, to which was added sal neutralis; the external parts were anointed with
oleum camphoratum, and the cure was effected in a few months; above a year and
a half has elapsed since, without any return of the complaint.

CASE VI.
MRS. D --, aged 64, formerly belonging to the household of her late Royal
Highness the Princess Dowager of Wales, had a swelling and hardness in her
right breast for twelve years, from a blow, which not increasing was not much
attended too. About two years ago an ulcer was formed, surrounding the nipple;
which discharged a great quantity of acrimonious serum; the hardness much
increased in size, was very painful, and it was with difficulty her right arm
could be lifted toward the head. By bleeding occasionally, the use of the
pulvis mineralis and pilula rubra, the swelling has been considerably reduced,
the use of the arm recovered; the ulcer has not become larger; and though the
perfect cure of this case cannot be expected; yet life may be rendered
tolerably comfortable for a number of years, in a disorder that rough methods
might have put a period to.

I sincerely believe, that if these remedies of the alterative kind were always
used on the first appearance of any hardness, or swelling in the breasts or
womb, that either their increase would be prevented, or a perfect cure would
commonly be effected. Complaints in the breast are evident; but those of the
womb are often misunderstood by physicians, and treated very improperly, owing
to a want of practical skill in midwifery. The bark and acids frequently do
irreparable mischief, if given in the schirrus or ulcer, as likewise the use of
hemlock, opiates, salt water, baths, injections, etc. etc. Many melancholy
instances of this nature have happened, which, were they published, would
strike minds, susceptible of feeling, with horror.

CASE VII.
A LADY, near 40 years of age, had for a considerable time a large hardened
swelling in the right breast, supposed originally to have arisen from an
accidental blow; it had not been much noticed for some years, as it had not
occasioned pain. About the time the menses were partially suppressed, a pain
was felt, the swelling gradually increased, and soon occupied and hardened the
whole breast: the nipple was drawn in, and an ulcer formed, with a large
excrescence like a mulberry near it. This case was cured by the pilul. rub. and
pulv. mineralis in less than four months. The breast became soft, the
excrescence dropped off, and the ulcer healed; the external application used
was the ung. saturninum to the sore Half a pound of a well prepared white lead,
boiled gently for an hour in one pound and a half of hog's lard.
, and the oleum camphoratum, where the skin was not broken. This lady has
remained perfectly well since the cure, which is now above five years, and has
been advised to take the remedies one month, or six weeks in spring and autumn
by way of prevention, because there has been an hereditary cancerous and
schrophulous complaint in the family.

CASE VIII.
MRS. B --, in Oxford-road, had suffered under a painful hardness of the left
breast for above five years, which extended toward the axilla, and greatly
incommoded the use of her arm. The pilula rubra and the solutio nitrosa were
taken internally four times in the day, and the oleum camphoratum was used
externally. This case was cured in between three and four months.

CASE IX.
MRS. F --, Milbank Westminster, had her whole breast exceedingly swelled, and
indurated adhering so firmly to the pectoral muscle, as to be immovable; there
were likewise some glandular swellings in the armpit. The patient was of a
delicate constitution, very nervous, and her apprehensions had been so greatly
alarmed, from the misery she had undergone, and the fruitless endeavors that
had been used to relieve her, that her anxiety of mind joined with the
disorder, had brought on a universal relaxation of the habit. She looked pale
and hectical, was afflicted with a cough and shortness of breath, fever, and
night sweats. She took the pilula rubra ter de die, and the pulvis mineralis,
mixed in water, immediately after each pill. A light diet was recommended, and
an abstinence from all acids; which last circumstance should be observed always
when alteratives are given In one month the constitution was considerably
amended; though little impression had been made on the tumor, except that it
was not so painful. By a perseverance in the remedies, and gradually increasing
the doses, in two months after the breast was perfectly cured. The medicines
were directed to be continued for six weeks more, good health was restored, and
no return of any of the symptoms have since appeared. Six years have elapsed
since this cure.

CASE X.
MRS. D --, High Holborn, had a violent inflammation and hardened tumor of the
breast; her child in sucking had torn off the nipple; the pains were exquisite,
the hardnesses were numerous, small and detached from each other. This case was
not of the cancerous kind A distinction should be made between indurations,
arising in childbed, and those of the cancerous kind; these last seldom make
their appearance before the age of 36, and (...) scarce happen to breeding
women.
, but equally distressing to the patient, who had no rest. The pilula rubra was
given, and the solutio nitrosa. In one month the cure was accomplished; the
patient suckled her infant during the cure with the other breast; the diseased
part became as soft as ever, and a flow of good milk continued till she weaned
her child.

CASE XI.
MRS. H --, near Charlotte Street, Bloomsbury, 1770, had a large induration of
the left breast, extending to the axilla, attended with violent pain and
inflammation. Bleeding was ordered; the pilula rubra, the camphorated julap,
with solutio nitrosa, were taken; externally, a poultice was applied, with the
oleum camphoratum. This case was cured in less than a fortnight, and the infant
sucked without any disadvantage during the taking of the medicines.

CASE XII.
MRS. S --, West Street, St. Anns, had been laboring under a diseased breast
between two and three months. Abscesses had repeatedly formed and broken; the
matter was discharged, but still they were succeeded by other tumors. Several
hard swellings were in different parts of the breast, and the exquisite pains
had greatly emaciated and relaxed the whole habit. The pilula rubra, the
solutio nitrosa, with the camphorated julap, cured this case in the course of
three weeks.

CASE XIII.
MRS. F --, in King Street, St. Anns, had been delivered between two and three
months; on receiving cold the left breast swelled, became hard and scarce
moveable through excessive distension; the shooting acute pains attending it
were intolerable. Shaking the parts, fomentations, poultices of lilly root,
ointments and diachilon plasters, had been administered; but the complaint
increased, and the patient was truly miserable, not having the least ease night
or day. Bleeding was at first prescribed; the pilula rubra, and the solutio
nitrosa were given in large doses. The inflammation soon subsided, the hardness
dispersed, and the breast became perfectly soft in about four weeks.

CASE XIV.
MRS. G --, Paternoster Row, between 30 and 40, had a diseased breast near two
years; there were at least eight or nine different swellings, hard, painful,
and the surface of the breast was inflamed in several parts. Swellings which
had formed matter, had broken into many fistulous ulcers, discharging an
acrimonious serum; some of these had healed and formed fissures. The pains, and
the constant misery of the patient, were almost inexpressible. Various remedies
in the forms of poultices, plasters, liniments, etc. etc. had been used,
without success. Bleeding was ordered, the pilula rubra and solutio nitrosa. In
about fourteen days the patient was considerably relieved; the breast was much
relaxed, and the cure was finished in about ten weeks after.

CASE XV.
MRS. C --, Woodstock Street, Marybone, had suffered great misery for near two
years, from a disease of the right breast. At first there were several
hardnesses which broke into ulcers, and being deep seated, were very tedious in
coming to suppuration. The swellings in different parts had broken and
discharged matter thirteen or fourteen times, occasioning the most exquisite
tortures, which greatly reduced the patient; she could not lift her arm to her
head. Application had been made to a physician of eminence, and a surgeon, for
relief; the common poultices were directed, and laxative physic; but neither
ease, nor the prevention of fresh formations of matter succeeded their use. The
pilula rubra, with the calx antimonii, and the solutio nitrosa were prescribed;
ease was soon obtained, the hardnesses seemed to be resolving, and in nine
weeks this case, which had been so truly distressing, was cured.

CASE XVI.
MRS. W. recommended by Lady H --, near Berkley Square, being in the sixth
month of her pregnancy, was attacked with a violent inflammation and sharp pain
of the breast; succeeded by a hardness, which resisted pressure; an abscess
near the nipple had also been formed, and discharged a great quantity of
matter. The hardness, however, still remaining, attended with exquisite pain;
notwithstanding the patient's situation, I prescribed the pilula rubra quater
de die, with the solutio nitrosa, and in about three weeks a perfect cure was
effected. She has since had two children, and the breast remains well. This
case* amongst many others, might be adduced as proofs of the safety of these
alterative remedies, and the mildness of their operation.

CASE XVII.
I was recommended by Her Grace the Duchess of --, to Mrs. P --, who had a
cancerous complaint in her breast. She had been for near two years under the
care of a surgeon, who asserted, with confidence, that she would certainly be
cured. He applied caustics to some hardened tumors under the arm, as likewise
to the breast; and it was reported, that he had given some preparations of
arsenic; this last circumstance, however, can scarce be credited, we should
hope it not true. The ulcer where the caustics had been applied was at least an
inch and half deep, and four or five inches long, discharging a most offensive
matter. She was in exquisite tortures day and night. At first sight of the
case, I pronounced it incurable, to the noble friends of the patient; and all
that could be attempted, was a mitigation of the symptoms. The ulcerated parts
were dressed with the ung. saturninum with camphor. The pulvis mineralis was
given in small doses, and considerable ease was procured. The putridity of the
discharge, however, and the other miserable circumstances of the cases brought
on hectical symptoms; a difficulty of breathing every day increased, and the
patient died, most probably a victim to the pretended knowledge and cruel
practices of her surgeon.

CASE XVIII.
MRS. M --, in the year 1767, perceived a drawing in of the nipple, without any
hardness of the right breast. An eminent surgeon in town advised an issue;
afterward was prescribed the aethiop. vegetabil. and mercurial pills. The
disorder, after this, did not increase till toward the year 1771, hemlock was
then ordered by a very learned physician. The breast swelled and was hard;
under the arm were likewise tumors. In May 1772 a caustic was applied, under
the specious name of a plaster, to draw the cancer out. The caustic was
continued weekly, and a poultice used, till the whole schirrus was sphacelated
and removed, which happened July the 6th. It was afterward dressed with
Turner's cerate, healed, and continued well for two years, though little
indurations, about the size of pease, appeared on the remaining part of the
breast. From the latter end of 1774, until the spring of 1775, the patient had
considerable pains. The part where the caustic had been fixed, broke out again;
the swelling in the axilla was enlarged, and pressing on the great vessels,
occasioned a considerable swelling in the arm. The surgeon, mentioned in the
last case, was consulted, who promised confidently a cure, and boldly applied
caustics to the tumors in the axilla; this produced a large ulcer, brought on
great pain in the parts, accompanied with a cough. Afterward, by his utmost
efforts, the sore could not be healed. On June the 12th I first inspected the
diseased parts, and acquainted a relation of the patient's, that little success
could be expected, as violent methods had been used. An attempt, however, was
made, the pilula rubra and the pulvis mineralis, with the calx antimonii, and a
pectoral mixture, were given with great success; for in about three months the
ulcers, both in the axilla and breast, were nearly healed; and the lady went
into the country happy beyond expression. In lest than a twelvemonth, however,
the ulcers broke out again, and the patient languished for two or three months
and died. Perhaps if no remedies whatever had been used, the advice of the
first surgeon consulted, attended to, this lady might probably have been living
now.

CASE XIX.
LADY (...), had for one year and a half a tumor in the left breast, which was
not very painful, but a great part was indurated. This lady was advised to
apply to a gentleman, who endeavors to persuade the world, that he can safely
extract cancerous tumors with a plaster. Though in the present case there was
no sore, nor any pressing symptoms, the operator rashly applied his caustics,
with the most confi^^nt promises of success, and repeated them for four or five
months, the patient suffering the whole time the most shocking tortures. The
malady increased; which is most commonly the case where violent methods are
adopted; a large cancerous ulcer, surrounded with considerable spongy
excrescences, appeared, which, from time to time, were destroyed by the
caustics, but returned soon again. The disease extended itself to the other
breast. Hemlock, opiates, powdered corns of a horse, carrot poultices, had been
administered without success. Upon my being consulted, an opinion was
delivered, that the cure could not, under such circumstances, be expected, and
mitigating the symptoms would be doubtful. This judgment was pronounced from
experience in a multiplicity of cases, where such barbarous treatment had
precluded every hope of relief. The patient, however, wished for some trial to
be made; the pilula rubra, and the pulvis mineralis, were given, and the
inflammation, which had chiefly arisen from the caustic salts, subsided, the
progress of the disorder was prevented from ^^^^^ing its dreadful ravages on
the other breast; but no other advantage was obtained, except that the pain was
in some measure abated. Sloughs succeeded sloughs, and occasioned a most
offensive stench; the acrid discharge was considerable; the patient became
hectical; opiates could not produce relief, and thus lingering under the most
distressing and accumulated miseries, shocking indeed to the spectators, but
inexpressibly so to the worthy lady who languished under them; she died about
two months after.

From experience it may be asserted, from the circumstances of the foregoing
case, the lady might have lived years, and even though she might not have been
cured; by bleeding, the alterative remedies occasionally, a proper diet, and
mild applications to the part, the complaint might have occasioned little
trouble, and perhaps not increased. Many, too many similar examples have
occurred, of life being shortened, and the most inexpressible miseries created,
by the cruel application of caustics, as well as an unfeeling use of the knife.
There are many instances of cancers, in which it would be fruitless to attempt
the cure; the physician is then the true friend, who advises the patient to do
little or nothing, and submits the case chiefly to nature.

CASE XX.
A MAIDEN lady aged 47, about eight years ago, applied for advice in an
induration of the right breast; the nipple was inverted, and discharged an
acrimonious serum, attended with considerable pain; there were likewise
glandular swellings in the axilla. The hardness was of such a nature, that
there were not the least hopes of resolving it; the amputation of the breast
had been recommended by a surgeon, which, had it been performed, would have
been exceedingly cruel, and probably fatal, as no prospects of success could
have been entertained, owing to the axillary affection. The pulvis mineralis
alone was ordered ter de die; and was continued for six weeks at a time, spring
and autumn; a regular diet was observed, wine, acids, and salt meats were
abstained from, a quarter of a pint of warm water was taken every day before
meat. The disorder by this means did not increase for three years, about which
time the part excoriated, afterward became ulcerous, and a considerable slough
was thrown off. An ulcer has continued ever since, which is not painful, except
at changes of weather in the winter season; the pilula rubra was used for one
month, but as no advantage was obtained, it was discontinued. This lady visits
her friends, and suffers little or no inconvenience from her cancerous
complaint, nor is she even suspected by any of her most intimate acquaintances,
to labor under any such indisposition. Many similar cases to this have come
under my inspection.

CASE XXI.
MRS. P --, aged 42, had been mother of six children. After the delivery of the
two last she had each time a fever from cold, which occasioned a great hardness
of the left breast, that continued nearly in one state for nine years. In the
year 1771, the breast was painful, and rather increated in size for above three
months. This alteration succeeded a violent inflammatory fever. From this time,
until Jan. 1773, there were shooting pains: when, the menses ceasing to appear,
some eruptions, discharging a sharp watery humor, were discovered; the advice of
an eminent physician was taken; salts and manna tinctura senae and hemlock
pills were ordered, and persisted in for seven months: but the disease grew
considerably worse. In the latter end of July and all August, the salt water
was drank; which greatly relaxed the stomach and intestines, and answered no
good purpose. On October 3, 1773, she applied to me for relief; the breast was
then as large as a child's head two years old, excessive hard, inflamed, uneven
in its surface, extending to the axilla, where likewise were some indurations,
and the arm on that side was considerably swelled. On the lower part of the
breast was a cancerous ulcer, some part of which was soft and fungous; there
were many fissures, from which issued a very acrid discharge. The pains were so
acute and distressing, that no rest could be obtained; a continual crying was
heard, like to a person in labor. Bleeding was first prescribed; the pilula
rubra, the pulvis mineralis, and the solution of camphor, with the essentia
volatilis, were administered. To the wound was applied the ^ng. saturninum; to
the surrounding, enlarged, and distended parts, the oleum camphoratum. In
fourteen days the breast was greatly relaxed, the pains were considerably
diminished, and rest at night was attained, before the remedies had been taken
four days. The plan was persevered in; about three months after the ulcer was
healed; and the indurated parts were perfectly resolved. The remedies however
were continued ten weeks more, when the cure was accomplished.

CASE XXII.
A lady of rank, between 70 and 80, had a large hardness of the cancerous kind
in the left breast; a great part of the induration was extremely hard, and on
the lower part was a very livid appearance with little fissures. The whole
breast was diseased, inflamed and extended, so as to affect the edge of the
right breast, and there was a large tumor toward the axilla; the pains had
become exceedingly troublesome, the swellings had increased rapidly, and were
very alarming. This was a case in which no cure could be expected; an
alleviation of the misery alone could be attempted. The opinion I gave to
several ladies of quality, friends to the afflicted patient, and the noble Lord
her sons was, that a cure was impossible; but that some hopes were entertained,
that the inflammation, swellings and pains, in a great measure, could be
removed. The pilula rubra was administered, with the pulvis mineralis ter de
die. In about three weeks the inflammation entirely subsided, and all the
swelling, except that very hardened part, in a great degree resolved, the
breast was relaxed, and the pains nearly abated. The pill was then inreased in
its dose, and the powder. This course was continued for between two and three
months, and the patient was very easy. The livid part at this time, as had been
prognosticated, broke and formed an ulcer; this was succeeded by a sphacelus of
the stony induration, which was thrown off gradually, and with proper
assistance gently removed. The discharge was now exceedingly offensive, from
the putridity of the parts sloughing away; the carrot poultice was applied, but
answered no good purpose whatever. In this manner the whole of the diseased
part came away, and there was an ulcer, in which me hand might be buried. The
remedies were continued, the ulcer became clean and not offensive, and little
or no pain was experienced. The discharge from this large ulcer was very
considerable, which would have been much larger, had not the medicines
fortunately resolved a very considerable part of the tumor: the patient
gradually became weaker, and the medicines were then discontinued Oedematous
swellings of the legs afterward made their appearance, probably owing to the
universal relaxation of the habit, and with very little or no pain the patient
languished for same time, and died.

CASE XXIII.
MRS. B --, aged 50, was recommended for relief by a lady of fashion, having
several hardened swellings in her left breast. The right breast had been taken
off by the knife, about one year and a half before at St. George's Hospital;
the wound afterward healed; but the disorder being transferred to the other
sound breast, which is no uncommon thing where the amputation is performed,
caused great pain and inflammation. The pilula rubra was given four times in
the day, and the pulvis mineralis, with the sal neutralis. In about two months
the swellings considerably diminished, the stony hardnesses, detached from each
other, were much softened, and the pains entirely abated. The remedies, during
between three or four months in the summer, whilst I went to France and
Holland, were persisted in, and on my return I found the whole of the swellings
dispersed, and the breast appeared quite sound. This person then went and
officiated as cook in a family, which was her former employment, and remained
well for above a year; but on receiving a violent cold, the swellings in the
breast appeared again without any ulcer; she neglected applying for some time;
and from appearances, there was no reason to hope, that the remedies could
again succeed. The trial confirmed the opinion; for no impression whatever
could be made afterward on the disease. The patient became hectical, suffered
very little pain indeed, and in about ten months after died.

CASE XXIV.
A noble lady recommended a poor woman, aged 43, mother of eleven children; who
had suffered considerable time from an ulcer and schirrus of the breast. The
pains were exceedingly distressing, and the discharge so acrid, as to corrode
the adjacent parts. The saturnine ointment was applied externally, and the
pilula rubra, with the pulvis mineralis were taken. In a little more than three
months the ulcer was healed, and the schirrus part perfectly softened. The
remedies were continued longer to confirm the cure, and there has been no
return since, which is near two years.

CASES in Complaints of the WOMB, RECTUM, etc.
CASE XXV.
Mrs. S --, Fleet Street, had an ulcer of the womb, with a considerabla large
schirrus; of nine years duration; the discharge was purulent and offensive; the
pains at times excruciating, similar to those of hard labor. The os uteri
Uterine complaints cannot be comprehended, but by those who are skilfully
versed in the theory and practice of midwifery.
was rough, uneven, and rather open; the ascertaining this fact occasioned the
most; inexpressible uneasiness. The pilula rubra, and the pulvis mineralis,
were prescribed; the essentia vol. with the camphorated julap, were given to
alleviate the pain, as well as to promote the resolution of the schirrus. These
medicines were continued near four months, during which time the schirrus part
was softened, and the ulcer healed. The patient, soon after proved pregnant,
went her full time, was safely delivered, and recovered, contrary to my
expectation, in the usual time Whoever considers the structure of the uterus,
and the consequences of the least injury in delivering preternatural births,
will not be surprised at the doubts I entertained on this occasion.
. This patient has had one child since, and remains in perfect good health. It
may be remarked, that though a schirrus of that part rarely happens to persons
between twenty and thirty, yet many cases have occurred of this nature.

CASE XXV.
THE following case has made its appearance before, though with great
reluctance of the author, in a letter addressed to Dr. Hunter, on the dangerous
tendency of medical vanity, occasioned by the death of the late lady Holland.
The republication was never intended; but a report having been for some years
industriously circulated, that the lady, mentioned in that epistle, died
miserably of the disorder, pronounced by me to be perfectly cured: in
vindication of the truth, and lest such a story should preclude all hopes of
relief to patients in similar circumstances, it may be necessary to declare,
that the lady who is now living in the neighborhood of Missenden, Bucks, has
enjoyed the most perfect health since the cure.

CASE XXVI.
IN the year 1767, M. S. a lady in the country, perceived some small eruptions
in several parts of the skin. Dr. Bates, a physician esteemed in the
neighborhood, prescribed a lotion. Afterward, by the advice of Mr. Edmonds, a
skilful surgeon, at Wendover, a quicksilver girdle was worn a considerable
time, and the eruptions disappeared.

In the year 1768, an acrimony in the skin was again very troublesome on using
any considerable exercise. Various medicines were administered, but without any
benefit; and the lady was advised to go to Brighthelmstone, to use the warm
bath, and drink sea water. These methods produced a great relaxation without
curing the eruptions, and probably laid the foundation of these complaints,
which afterward became so dangerous and alarming: for a pain was soon felt
near the neck of the bladder, succeeded by a swelling, which frequently
suppressed the urine.

From this time the symptoms became more violent, the pain in the tumor was so
exquisite, that the lady was frequently deprived of rest. Dr. Bates prescribed
the common uterine remedies, thinking (as I have been informed by the family)
the case to be an ulcer of the bladder, or a schirrus of the uterus.

These complaints gradually increased for two or three years, and the lady
finding no relief from any remedy which was prescribed by the medical gentlemen
of the county in which she resided, it was thought necessary to consult another
physician. Dr. Smith, a gentleman of distinguished reputation, and one of the
professors of the university of Oxford, was accordingly consulted.

At this time the lady was incapable of using any exercise without pain. The
urine was sometimes suppressed; at others, it issued involuntarily, commonly
occasioning great uneasiness. There was a sanious discharge, which was
considerable. Dr. Smith prescribed as follows.

. Emuls. commun. sine sacch. ppt. iss.

Sperm. Caet. in muc. g. Arab. solut.

Terr. rub. bristol. subtiliss. laevigat.

Bals. Canadens. solut. aa i

Tinct. Stypt. Eaton. ver.

-- Cinnam.

Sir. alth. aa i m. f. Haust. sumend. 6ta quaq. hora. Bibat aq. pyrmont. rec.
cyath temp. inter. Haust. med. addendo primo chalyb. solut. in succ. cydon.
rec. coch. i. vel minim.

For M. S.
J. S. Oxford.
Oct. 26, 1772.
These remedies not in the least alleviating the symptoms, the same Gentleman
was again consulted, The following is an authentic copy of his letter, on this
occasion, to Mr. Edmonds, surgeon, at Wendover, the original of which I have in
my possession.

SIR,
I am sorry for the account you give of our patient; it is not improbable, but
the steel may be a little too rough an astringent for her. I was desirous of
attempting something more than barely to palliate, and still am unwilling to
give up the attempt; at the same time I wish, most sincerely, that M. S. could
be conveyed to town, in order to have a consultation of the most eminent
physicians and surgeons upon her case. They probably may be able to find out,
by examining carefully the urinary passages with a leaden or wax candle, or
bougie, exactly the seat of the complaint, which is a circumstance of great
importance; mean while she may take as follows.

Pulv. e Tragacanth. comp.

Sperm. Caet. pulv.

G. Olib. pulv.

Terr. rub. Bristol. subtiliss. laevigat aa ii cum Syrup. alth. q. s. f.
Electar. cujus. capiat, Q. N. M. mane. meridie. et nocte.

Superbib. Decoct. seq. iij vel iiij.

. Decoct. pectoral q. s. coquend.

Addendo Fol Tussilag.

Heder. Terrestr. aa ij. Rad Helen ss colat lbss.

Elect. Lenitiv. i.

Magnes. Alb.

Flor. sulph. lot. aa ij m. et cum Sir. Ros. solut. f. Electar. cujus capiat i
vel ij in alvus nimia astrictione.

Asses milk, fresh whey, and milk diet in general, are certainly proper. The
Pyrmont water may be drank ad libitum, provided it does not occasion the
curdling of milk in the stomach.

I have been looking into Boerhaave, Hoffman, Sauvage, and others, for some
light in this very troublesome case, but can find nothing greatly to my
satisfaction. Milk diet, soft mucilages, Balsam Capaiba, sulphurous waters
These are the principal things recommended; I cannot conclude without wishing
again, that a consultation may be had, and the sooner the better: I am, Sir,
with best wishes for our patient's recovery, and compliments to the family,
Sir, your most obedient servant.

November 6, 1772. J. Smith, Oxford.


After the patient had persisted about fourteen days in this plan, without any
relief, the family, according to the candid advice of Dr. Smith, carefully
removed the lady to London, to Mrs. Bilton's in Tavistock Street. The great
reputation, which Dr. Hunter had acquired from his extensive practice in
feminine diseases, induced her friends to consult him, in a case which had such
affinity with that branch of practice, for which he had been so distinguished.

When consulted, he declared the case to be a schirrus of the uterus, and
prescribed the following,

For M. S.
. Aq. Menth. pip. simp. iss.

G. Arab. ij.

Tinct. Thebaic, gutt xxv. m Haust h. S. Sumend.

Nov. 23, 1772. W. H. the initials for William Hunter.

This first prescription, it is evident, was only intended as a palliative, to
act by its opiate qualities, and was, by no means, calculated to remove such an
inveterate distemper.

From perceiving the case very dangerous, a consultation was recommended with
Dr. Fothergill; and, after a deliberate examination of the case with Dr.
Fothergill, the following prescription was written.

. Aq. Menth pip. Simp. iss.

G. Arab. ij

Tinct. Thebaic gutt. xxv. m. f. haust, hac nocte sumend. et crastina repetend.

. Aq. Purae

-- Cinnam. ten. aa i.

Ol. Ricini iij

G. Arab. ss Sir. Simp. q. S. f. haust cras primo mane sumend. et post horas iv
repetend. si opus fuerit

. Aq. Menth. pip, simp. vj

-- Spirit ss

Sir Croci jj

Tinct. Thebaic gutt xij m. capiat coch ij urgente nausea.

W. H. J. F. the initials of William Hunter, John Fothergill.
24/11 1772.
From these prescriptions, it seems that nothing more was intended, than to
palliate the symptoms.

The opiates were prescribed to ease pain, the ol. Ricini, to keep the
intestines gently lax, and to counteract the astringent qualities of the opium;
for a costiveness immediately had followed the first prescription. The mixture,
with the mint water, was ordered for a sickness of the stomach and vomiting,
which the pains had occasioned; at this time, then, no method was attempted to
cure the disease.

On the 26th of November, Doctors Fothergill and Hunter met, consulted again,
and prescribed,

. Aq. Menth. pip. simp iss

Tinct. Thebaic gutt xx.

G. Arab ij f. haust. omni nocte sumend

Cras mane capiat haust. cu ol. Ricini

Praescript. et diebus alternis repet.

Addendo ol. Ricini i vel ij si opus crit.

Pergat in usu Julepi praescripti pro re nata.

W. H. J. F. the initials for William Hunter, John Fothergill.
26/xi 1772
The same plan we find was persisted in, though not the least relief had been
obtained. On the 26th, there was another consultation. And the prescription was
as follows.

Repet. Haust. anodyn. novissime praescript. omni nocte sumend.

. Extract. Cicutae ij f. pil. xxx (non deaurand.) capiat aegra. ij. meridie ij
vesperi, et iij h. s.

. Rad. Sarsaparel. iss coq. in aq. pur. lbiss ad lbi colatur: add aq. nuc.
mosch i capt. coch viij post pil. praescript meridie et vesperi. H. S. capiat
haust anodyn. post easdem pilulas.

. aq purae x

-- nuc mosch i

Magnes. Alb.

Troch. de sulph. aa ss. f. haust

Sumend. mane, quotidie addendo Tinct. Jalap gutt. XXX vel XL loco aq. nuc.
mosch. si alvus quotidie non responderit.

W. H. J. F. the initials for William Hunter, John Fothergill.
29/xi 1772
We now find that the hemlock, that fashionable and destructive drug is
administered, but without the least advantage. It however enables us to draw
this conclusion, that the case was treated as a cancer. Soon after the lady had
taken the hemlock, a giddiness of the head was complained of, and a loss of
memory was the consequence, which continued a considerable time.

These last prescriptions were persisted in till the 7th of December, during
which time the symptoms became more violent; the lady continued in extreme
misery, and her memory became so much impaired, that she could scarce recollect
any transaction one minute past. This last complaint I must attribute to the
hemlock; because I have known several instances where this noxious drug has
produced similar effects; and one in particular, where it brought on comatose
symptoms, and incontestibly proved fatal. I could here animadvert on the
impropriety of the foregoing prescriptions; but it is sufficient at this time
to observe, that they were not successful.

On the 7th of December, in consultation with Dr. Fothergill, was prescribed,

. Julep, e. Creta cu. dimid: sacch iss Amyl vulg. ss

Aq. cin. ten. i

Tinct. Theb. gutt. ij. f. haust. 8 va quaq. hora sumend. H. S. repetatur
haust. anodyn. praescript.

W. H. J. F. the initials of W. Hunter, J. Fothergill.
7/12 1772.
On the 10th, Dr. Fothergill visited the patient, and ordered

. Julep, e Creta x

Aq. Cin. Spirit. iss

Pulv. Rhei gr. vij. f. haust quamprimum sumendus. Deinde pergat in usu Haust.
e Creta praescript. horis octavis. addend. singul. P. nuc. mosch tor. gr. vij
H. S. Capt. Haust. anodyn. praescript.

J. F. the initials of John Fothergill.
10/xii 1772
These cretaceous preparations, joined with gentle cardiacs, were intended to
relieve a diarrhoea, that probably arose from an irritation in the rectum,
which was afterward productive of an ulcer in that intestine.

On the 14th of December a fifth consultation was appointed; the ill success of
the prescriptions, joined with some additional symptoms, which were concluded
very dangerous, induced the physicians heartily to acknowledge the
impossibility of relieving the lady; Dr. Hunter declared to Capt. S. the
brother of the patient, in the presence of many other friends and relations,
that the disorder was absolutely incurable. On being questioned by a Lady
present, who had a sincere affection for the patient, How long it was thought
M. S. would live? it was answered that it would be impossible to determine; but
Dr. Hunter expressed in a pathetic manner, that he was sensibly affected on the
reflection, that she would suffer extreme misery before her departure. It was
then advised, that M. S. should be removed with all possible care into the
country.

The last prescription is as follows.

Persistat in usu haust. anodyn, praescript. si alvus adstricta fuerit, mane
capt. aq. purg. (Jessopens dict.) vj vel viij. vel q. S. ad alvum semel
quotidie submovendum.

W. H. J. F. the initials of William Hunter, John Fothergill.
14/12 1772
The foregoing prescriptions were certainly inadequate to the cure of such an
obstinate disease: but, as it is the common mode of practice, a deviation from
it perhaps would have been considered erroneous, as being contrary to the rules
of art. Established maxims, however unsuccessful, are seldom relinquished,
though the preservation of life is frequently dependant on it.

The lady had a schirrus of the uterus, which produced an inexpressible and
constant pain. There was a continual sanious discharge of that complexion and
fetor, which characterise a cancerous ulcer; the patient was under the
disagreeable necessity of lying in bed, for the evacuation of the urine and
feces, and both were attended with great pain, and a considerable quantity of
purulent matter, consequently there was an ulcer in the rectum. These symptoms,
after the administration of the opiates and cretaceous medicines, were
accompanied with costiveness, the most excruciating pains, cold shiverings,
nausea, and sometimes vomitings, loss of memory, and a countenance, which
seemed to foretell a total dissolution. So emaciated and exhausted was the
patient, that nature seemed too weak to assist the operation of any medicine. A
great part of the surface of the body was covered with scorbutic eruptions; and
the least motion, even from the bed to a sopha, occasioned the most painful
sensations. At this time Lord le Despenser did me the honor to recommend me,
in consequence of my success, in a case which his Lordship was acquainted with.
At the request of the brother, Captain S. I visited the Lady on the 15th of
December, 1772. I examined minutely every circumstance, and endeavored to gain
a clear information of what had been already attempted by the gentlemen who had
been consulted, and committed the whole immediately to paper, which was just as
I have related it.

A consideration of this complicated case, disposed me, however, to believe,
there yet remained some hopes of effecting a cure. I resolved, therefore, to
administer some remedies, which experience gave me reason to think were more
adequate to the cure of such inveterate complaints, than those which had been
already prescribed. I began with the pilula rubra and pulvis mineralis, in very
small doses, and forbad the use of opiates, as their bad effects in weakening,
greatly overbalance the little temporary relief they give.

These remedies produced such excellent effects, that the costiveness was
removed, and all the symptoms were alleviated in a fortnight. The patient was
then removed into the country, and recovered daily. In about one month she
could sit up three or four hours, though in the most inclement part of the
winter. In about four months more by continuing the remedies, the Lady
recovered her memory perfectly, and every discharge had a more favorable
appearance. The eruptions entirely disappeared. She recovered her appetite and
natural rest, which for some years before she had been deprived of. By a
perseverance in the same medicines, and by gradually increasing their doses, a
perfect cure was at last accomplished.

The Lady continues in perfect health, and rides on horseback, without the
least inconvenience. In complaints of the breast and womb all rough astringents
are commonly injurious, especially if they be of the schirrus kind. The giving
bark, elixir of vitriol, tincture of roses, etc. etc. which is a common
practice, frequently does irreparable mischief in those floodings that are the
forerunners of cancerous complaints, and happen between the ages of 35 and 50.
Some observations will hereafter appear in a regular treatise on these
subjects, as proofs of what is now advanced.


CASE XXVII.
MRS. B --, was recommended by a surgeon, who had a large induration, ulcer and
distension of the womb. Violent floodings had repeatedly distressed the
patient; great pains and bearing down had rendered her truly miserable. Various
medicines, amongst the rest injections, had been prescribed by practitioners of
eminence Nothing, certainly; can be more irrational than the use of injections
in uterine complaints; though the most approved authors and practitioners
recommended them. The os uteri, or mouth of the womb, when the uterus is in an
unimpregnated state, will scarce admit a hog's bristle; how then is the pipe of
a syringe to be introduced? or, supposing the introduction of a pipe possible,
what vac^ity is there in the uterus capable of receiving an injection? If the
parts should be cancerous and ulcerated, an aperture is sometimes discoverable,
and in that case every hard substance would irritate; therefore could the pipe
be conducted through the aperture, which every man-midwife knows to be next to
impracticable, such a substance would only injure the parts, and increase the
patient's misery; and if any sharp or corrosive matter is injected, it bids
fair to hasten death. Hence may be seen the necessity of examining into the
merits and defects of the common modes of practice, and to depart from them,
when they are demonstrably proved to have their origin in ignorance; for every
one who has a precise idea of the anatomy of the uterus, must be struck with
conviction of the impropriety of administering injections in the schirrus or
ulcers of the womb, unless merely for cleansing the vagina.
, both as physicians and men-midwives; but no relief whatever had been
obtained; hemlock had likewise been administered. The pilula rubra and the
pulvis mineralis were prescribed; the enlarged uterus, which was distended
above the os pubis, was reduced within the pelvis in the course of three
months; the os tincae, which was uneven and ulcerated, and the surrounding
parts enlarged, so as to prevent the free discharge of urine, were perfectly
cured in less than five months. The patient has had not the least return, it
being now near three years since the cure.

CASE XXVIII.
MRS. K --, Castle Street, Leicester Fields, received a hurt in lying-in, which
occasioned an ulcer of the uterus, the os tincea; was opened considerably,
rugged at its edge, the discharge was great, offensive, and when dried on the
linen had a darkish hue toward the edges of the stains. The patient was palid,
and nearly exhausted by the violence of the pain she suffered. The pulvis
mineralis and the essentia volatilis, joined with camphor, were given, and the
cure was effected in a, few weeks. The patient is now living, and has had no
return of the complaint since the cure, which is about four years and a half.

CASE XXIX.
MRS. B --, Berwick Street, aged 43, had been afflicted with great pains in her
back, loins, thighs, with a bearing down, a suppression of urine, and
contractions of the uterus, for near one year. Various medicines had been
given, according to the opinions of the different practitioners to whom she
applied. Remedies for the stone, gravel, lumbago, had been recommended; burnt
sponge, millepedes, cathartics, soap pills, spiritus nitri dulcis, etc. etc.
opiates and hemlock had been administered without any advantage. This last
remedy nearly deprived her of her senses. Whoever would wish to know the
direful effects of hemlock may read the second letter to Dr. Hunter, where
reasons are given, why this destructive poisonous drug should never be
administered. See likewise De Haen's Epistle De Cicuta, where it is proved that
Storck had been guilty of the most flagrant impositions in recommending that
deleterious remedy; for out of the 36 persons said to be cured by hemlock, 30
died miserably, and the remaining six were incurable.
On examination it was found, that the case had been misunderstood; for all the
symptoms had arisen from a schirrus of the womb, which pressed on the neck of
the bladder; there was likewise an ulcer; the discharge issuing being extremely
offensive, thin, and such as ever comes from cancerous ulcers of these parts,
easier to be conceived by the experienced in midwifery, than described. The
patient was exceedingly exhausted, palid, and scarce able to take food. The
pilula rubra was given in the dose of a quarter of a grain, and eight grains of
the pulvis mineralis, with the essentia volatilis occasionally. These agreeing,
in a week the doses were increased, and the patient was rather easier. The
continuance of the remedies, with occasionally a few grains of the sal
neutralis, effected the cure in about five months.

CASE XXX.
A lady of fashion, naturally of a delicate constitution, above 40, who
formerly had several hard labors, and particularly with her last child in 1761,
had been suffering for near fourteen years with a complaint in the rectum. In
the early months of pregnancy the piles were continually troublesome, and for
fourteen years after the last delivery, on every evacuation of the feces, was a
quantity of blood discharged. When the disorder was first discovered, a very
eminent surgeon and a man-midwife injudiciously advised turpentine glisters to
be injected Certainly no practitioner who understood the anatomical structure
of the intestines, or who reflected on their irritability, would have advised
such a violent heating remedy to such nervous parts, already in a state of
inflammation.
; which greatly irritated the inflamed part, and after this, a purulent matter
as well as blood was discharged, which proved exceedingly relaxing. The
practitioners consulted, finding the rectum ulcerated, and after exerting their
utmost efforts to remove the complaint, persuaded the patient, as is too
common, that the discharge was healthful, and carried off other bodily
disorders. Upon examination afterward, it was declared, by a very eminent
surgeon, that there was a large fungus in the intestine, but that no operation
could prove useful. Depending on the opinions given, and the reputation of the
practitioners consulted, the misery was bore with the greatest fortitude, there
not appearing the least hopes of relief. Having seen the successful treatment
of M. S. mentioned Case XXVI, this lady was induced to apply to me, Sept. 8,
1774. The countenance was very pale, the whole body was exceedingly relaxed,
with a great languor of spirits, and a hectical look; twice in a day was
discharged a cupful of blood and fetid matter. The opinion I gave to the
friends, was, that the rectum was ulcerated, that it would be impossible to
determine whether relief could be obtained; upon the whole, that any success
was doubtful. A trial was made. Ten grains of the pulvis mineralis were at
first given, which agreed perfectly well, and every week the dose was
increased, until twenty-five grains were taken four times a day, for six weeks.
Nourishing diet, rather of the animal gelatinous kind was recommended. In about
two months the discharge had considerably diminished; the patient continued the
powders, with one grain of the calx antimonii, and had the inexpressible
pleasure of finding the ulcer healed, both discharges had ceased in nine
months. This lady has remained perfectly well ever since, which is now above
four years; but has taken occasionally the sal neutralis and the pulvis
mineralis since the cure, by her own desire.

CASE XXXI.
MRS. C. had, for above one year and a half, suffered extreme misery, from a
schirrus and ulcer of the uterus. The first practitioners in London had been
consulted, and after trying various remedies, as opiates, laxatives, hemlock,
etc. gave up the case as lost. The pains were acute, and deprived the patient
of rest; the schirrus was large, pressing both on the rectum and neck of the
bladder, occasioning a difficulty in the expulsion of urine and the feces; a
fetid, purulent and acrimonious matter was discharged in great quantities, very
offensive, and evidently of the cancerous kind. Sometimes the pains were equal
to the strongest labor pains; the whole body was greatly emaciated, and the
patient had not been able to sit up for many months. The pilula rubra and the
pulvis mineralis, with one grain of the calx. antimonia, were given three times
in the day, and the use of opiates entirely left off. In the course of six
weeks, during which time the symptoms daily decreased, the patient could sit
up; the remedies were continued for about three months more, and all the
complaints were nearly removed. About this time I went abroad, was gone for
near three months, and on my return found that no one complaint remained,
except some little discharge and weakness. The medicines were still continued,
with the julep. e camphor. and there was every reason to conclude the patient
nearly cured. Some time after, however, came on a violent diarrhoea, which
proved fatal.

When an ulcer accompanies a swelling and hardness of the womb, the prospects
of cure are doubtful; in many such instances the remedies, however, have
afforded a very comfortable relief for years, and kept the patients from those
intolerable pains, which must strike every humane spectator with horror, when
the common modes of treatment are alone pursued.

It is reasonable to conclude, that, what gives such extraordinary relief in
desperate cases, and which in some instances has proved a positive cure, would
in general prevent these complaints at a certain time of life; or when the
disorders first make their appearance.

Practitioners in general, and all authors, either ancient or modern, have
considered these uterine complaints incurable; upon this principle, when the
disorder is discovered, they often persuade the suffering patient, that nothing
more than the administration of palliatives can be done. I have often been
called in, after much mischief has been done by improper practices; where there
remained not the least probability of affording relief; nay, sometimes but a
few hours before death, and then it has been with exultation reported, but with
what degree of candor or humanity let the world judge, that the patient has
died under my care.

CASE XXXII.
MR. C --, at St. James's Palace, had been a long time afflicted with a large
spongy excrescence, almost surrounding the sphincter any; a very considerable
discharge issued from the rectum, exceedingly acrimonious, which inflamed the
skin wherever it came in contact; several parts were likewise coroded, and
formed a number of small ulcers, not only in the perineum, but likewise in the
posterior part above the anus, causing most exquisite torture night and day.
When the faeces were evacuated, a prolapsus, or falling down of the intestine
happened. He had applied for relief to the most able practitioners, laxatives
had been administered, lotions, unguents, etc. without any advantage. The
misery he experienced was inexpressible. He took a solution of pure nitre,
joined with the mercurius corrosivus sublimatus, in very small doses. The sal
neutralis was likewise occasionally given, with the aethiops mineralis.
Externally as a palliative was applied with a feather,. Litharg. aur. ij aceti
distillati, olei amygdalini aa j m. f. liniraentum. By these means ease was
soon procured; in the course of six weeks the excrescences had dropped off, the
ulcers were healed, the discharge from the rectum ceased, and the absolute cure
was effected. Many instances have occurred, where the excrescences about the
anus, the fistula, etc. have been cured by the above means.

CASE XXXIII.
H. F --, Esquire; a married gentleman, had an obstruction in the urethra, arising
from excrescences, and a schirrus of the prostrate gland. Bougies had been used
a considerable time without removing the complaint. The patient was frequently
under the necessity of having the urine drawn off by means of a catheter; the
most exquisite pain accompanied the discharge of urine, which issued in drops,
and from the contracting and expulsive efforts of the bladder, joined with the
resistance near its neck, the most inexpressible misery was experienced; and
this happened very often; for there seemed, almost, a constant irritation of
the parts. All diuretics and emollients had exasperated the symptoms; by
promoting the secretion of urine in a disorder which resisted powerfully its
evacuation. A costiveness prevailed, and most cathartics irritated. Solid meat
was sure to cause pain; a milk diet had been persisted in by the advice of a
physician, and the solvent medicines had been administered under the care of a
reputable surgeon, but without success. On passing a small bougie, I perceived
a slight resistance, as nigh as could be conjectured, within half an inch of
the prostrate grand; on pushing on the bougie, another powerful resistance was
felt near the last mentioned part. Concluding that the first opposition was
from an excrescence, and the last from an induration, and enlargment of the
prostrate gland; Whoever perfectly comprehends the anatomical situation of the
parts affected, it is hoped will not condemn this conclusion; it must be
confessed the case did not admit of demonstration.
some hopes were suggested that what had so effectually removed other glandular
complaints, might prove beneficial in this. The pilula rubra was given, at
first, in the dose of half a grain, four times in the day, and persisted in for
near three weeks, without any advantage, except that the urine was discharged
with rather more ease, and the inclination to evacuate it was more distant in
point of time. A solution of camphor, with the essentia volatilis, and the
eighth of a grain of a well prepared mercurius corr^sivus sublimatus were
administered after each pill, which last was given in the dose of a grain; a
mercurial ointment, charged with camphor, was rubbed into the perineum, and a
fumigation of cinnabar was used every night previous to anointing. The effects
were beyond expectation; for in three weeks after the urine was discharged with
ease, small sloughs passed daily through the urethra, rather fibrous, putrid,
and scarce more tenacious than coagulated blood. The remedies, except the
ointment, were continued for three months, and a perfect cure was the
consequence.

CASE XXXIV.
The Lady of a Member of the House of Commons, aged 43, had an enlargement and
induration of the womb, with a discharge which indicated an ulceration of the
part. This complaint had been of two years standing, and the patient previous
to that time had been attacked with frequent and immoderate floodings. A court
physician, not a practiser in midwifery, ordered the most astringent remedies,
as the bark, elixir of vitriol, tincture of roses, etc. These injudicious
methods of treatment, by checking the efforts of nature to relieve herself,
most probably produced the schirrus of the womb Light cooling regimen and
remedies will often effect a cure, when astringents are ineffectual and
injurious. In some instances it is best to leave such cases to nature.
, for great pain succeeded.

After the patient had suffered inexpressible tortures, and was in the last
stage of the disorder, pale, emaciated, feeble and hectical, I was consulted,
and declared the case to be incurable. I attempted an alleviation of the
symptoms, and, in great measure, succeeded, by giving the essentia volatilis
and the pulvis mineralis in small doses ter de die. In a few weeks, however,
pains came on, with contractions of the womb, similar to those of labor: great
quantities of coagulated masses of the polypous kind were expelled, which had
most probably been detained in the uterus ever since the floodings, when those
very powerful astringents had been used; for vitriolic acids have frequently
this property. In a few days the discharge became exceedingly putrid, and the
disorder put a period to the patient's existence.

SCHROPHULOUS CASES, commonly called the KING's EVIL.
CASE XXXV.
MISS D --, Chancery Lane, about the age of 14, had many swellings, and some of
them ulcerated, about the neck, of the schrophulous kind, which threatened
suffocation, accompanied with a cough. Several skilful practitioners had been
consulted, and the cutting them out had been advised; but this proposal alarmed
the friends and the patient to such a degree, that it was determined rather
life should be lost than such a disagreeable operation should be performed in a
part always exposed to the view. This case was perfectly cured by the pilula
rubra, and the pulvis mineralis, with the aethiop. antimon. in about four
months; an oleous mixture being taken at first to allay the cough. The patient
has had no return of the complaint; it is now above six years since the cure.

CASE XXXVI.
MR. S --, aged 18, had perceived swellings and an induration first under the
chin for above ten years; three years after the first tumors appeared, both the
maxillary glands tumified and became hard. Harrowgate water was prescribed
without any effect. Fresh swellings arose, till at last the whole throat
toward the chin and ears was one continued swelling, so as to disfigure the
face exceedingly, the wind pipe and oesophagus were greatly compressed, daily
threatening suffocation. In this situation of the patient I undertook the cure,
and commenced with bleeding, a gentle cathartic, and ordered the pilula rubra
and the pulvis mineralis four times in the day. The swellings in a few months
were greatly diminished, and by a continuance of the remedies, and increasing
the dose of the pill to two grains, in about fifteen months the cure was
effected.

This patient has been cured three years, and not the least return of the
disorder has happened. Such complaints in general prove fatal, instances of
which must have occured in all our hospitals. One remarkable case of this
nature I remember happened, which proved fatal in the year 1764 to a young man,
a patient to Mr. Cowell, Surgeon of St. Thomas's Hospital, whose morbid parts
were publicly inspected afterward in the theater; and it appeared that, besides
the compression of the asperia arteria, the oesophagus was entirely obstructed,
so that no food whatever could pass.

CASE XXXVII.
MRS. I --, Harley Street, had for between four and five years been afflicted
with a swelling and stiffness of the knee, in which there were five or six foul
ulcers. On inspection, the case evidently appeared schrophulous. The pilula
rubra was given, and this obstinate disease was cured in about four months. The
patient now remains in perfect health.

CASE XXXVIII.
MR. F --, had been afflicted with a disorder many years about the fingers and
metacarpal bones, many parts were ulcerated, and could not be healed. A skilful
surgeon had advised the cutting off of the hand; for, various remedies had been
used without advantage, as the millepedes, burnt sponge, hemlock, etc. etc.

This patient took the pilula rubra and the pulvis mineralis, and was perfectly
cured in about ten months, by which means the hand was saved.

CASE XXXIX.
MRS. T --, at Lady F --, aged 23, after a cold, in her 19th year, a swelling
appeared under the lower jaw, about the size of a hazle nut; this was succeeded
by several tumors about the neck, some suppurated and discharged matter, others
were opened. The disorder increasing, and the patient having had, what is
called, the best advice from a celebrated court surgeon, without any advantage,
despaired of ever receiving relief. The swellings increased, and at last seemed
to unite, forming one hard stony tumor, from the chin toward the ear; the tip
of which it pressed out considerably; the patient's mouth was drawn aside, and
occasioned a disagreeable and distressing appearance to the face. Bleeding was
first prescribed, the pilula rubra, and the pulvis mineralis, with the aethiop.
antim. were taken four times in the day. In fourteen months, during which time
the tumor had been gradually diminishing, the cure was effected, and the face,
which before was greatly disfigured, was reduced to its natural form. One of
the salivary glands remained a little swelled, but as many similar instances
have happened where it has been of no consequence, any farther attempts were
thought unnecessary.

CASE XL.
A YOUNG gentleman, aged 10, son to an officer in the army, came under my care
August 1774. He had been inoculated about five years before for the small pox I
have seen several instances where inoculation has produced the king's evil;
therefore we should be very cautious what subject we take the matter from.
, under the care of a reputable surgeon; soon after, there appeared several
glandular swellings about the neck and throat, some came to suppuration, and
were opened by a skilful court surgeon, who advised the use of salt water. This
was complied with for a considerable time, but fresh swellings came before
those which were opened, or had broken, healed. The neck was covered with
scars, and swellings were continually succeeding each other; in both eyes there
were specks in the cornea, in one, sight was greatly impeded, in the other,
except a glimmering, it was lost. The eyes were likewise inflamed. Bleeding was
first prescribed, the pilula rubra, and the pulvis mineralis, with the aethiop.
ant. and the decoctum nitrosum, were given. By these means the specks and
blindness were removed, fresh swellings were prevented, those, whether hard or
ulcerated, were cured in the course of about eighteen months, and the patient,
who is now at a public school in town, remains perfectly well.

CASE XLI.
MR. H --, St. Martin's Lane, in December, 1774, applied for advice in a noli
me tangere, which had been bad about two years. He had caught cold, and a
soreness was perceived on the lower part and side of the nose, with
inflammation and a dark red appearance; it was first washed with a solution of
nitre. Afterward a surgeon recommended some mercurial pills, but no success
attending the use of the remedies, he applied to a physician of an hospital,
who ordered the hemlock in pills, gradually increasing the dose, till sixteen
were taken in twenty four hours for a length of time, by which his memory was
affected. Two consultations of physicians and surgeons were had, and it was
concluded on, to give him a solution of mercury, with the sarsaparella
decoction. This was persevered in for near five months; but the disorder grew
worse, and had spread itself all over the internal surface of the nose; a part
of the cheek near the left ala of the nose was likewise hardened in several
little swellings, about the size of gray pease, of a very dark red color,
which afterward became ulcerous. Despairing of obtaining any relief from the
regular practitioners, he unhappily was induced to apply to one of those
pretenders to the cure of cancers, who uses causticts under the name of
plaster. This person boldly applied a caustic twice, and destroyed the left
ala and some part of the nose, and would have repeated it, but the patient had
already suffered so much by this cruel treatment, that no persuasion could
prevail on him to undergo a third trial. In this situation he applied to me; he
was ordered a simple soliation of pure nitre, with camphor, in which was
dissolved some mercurius corrosivus sublimatus, so that he took the eighth of a
grain three times in the day of this last mentioned preparation, preceded by a
red pill of one grain. A fumigation of cinnab. fact. and aethiop. min. p. e.
was used to the parts every other evening, for three weeks, and then omitted.
By these means, in about nine months, the ulcer in the nose was healed, and all
the parts which had been saved from the ravages of the caustics became sound:
the ulcers in the cheek likewise were cicatrised; and, considering the
circumstances, the face did not appear much disfigured.

CASE XLII.
J -- B --, servant to a Baronet, had for a long time labored under a complaint
in the lower and external part of the thigh; a very large, painful swelling and
stiffness in the knee. The tumor of the first suppurated and broke; the matter
was very deep, lying between the muscles of the thigh: there was a considerable
sinus, and the external opening being small, might have been properly termed a
fistula: hectical symptoms were likewise evident. This patient had been for
relief at an hospital, but obtained none. The pilula rubra was given, and the
pulvis mineralis. The opening was enlarged, and by a long continuance in the
remedies, the stiffness and swelling in the knee were removed. The ulcer in the
thigh, by compress and common dressings, was entirely healed. This patient is
at this time in perfect health.

CASE XLIII.
MR. T. Wych Street, had lost the use of his leg, by a large swelling in the
middle and outward part of the thigh; he could not, without great torture put
his foot to the ground. He had rather swelled lips, and other evident marks of
a schrophulous habit. The swelling increased; suppurated, and was opened;
discharging a great quantity of matter. He was ordered the pilula rubra and the
pulvis mineralis; the abscess was treated in the common manner. After it had
been open some time, a considerable exfoliation of the thigh bone worked its
way through to the mouth of the wound, which was carefully extracted. The
remedies were continued; and in a few weeks after the perfect use of the leg
was restored, and the scrophulous swellings in the lips subsided.

CASE XLIV.
A CHILD, in a family of fashion, between three and four years old, had several
eruptions in the face, at first red and inflamed, then a serum was discharged,
and the skin scaled off. The lips were swelled, and the glands about the neck
were in a tumified state. The aethiops mineralis, and the sal nitr. had been
given for some time; when this disagreeable disorder appearing so disgusting in
parts most exposed to view, was in a few months entirely removed. Some time
after the child lost the use of one leg: there was an exquisite pain in the
hip, thigh, and inner part of the loins. On inspection, from all the
circumstances, I was persuaded that it was the commencement of that shocking
disorder, well known by surgeons under the name of a psoas case In this disease
abscesses, deeply seated, repeatedly form about the upper part of the thigh in
various parts; push out their matter externally; and in a number of years,
after giving th patient inexpressible misery, prove fatal, in general.
. Something decisive was necessary: bleeding was first prescribed, the pilula
alba ad gr. ss. was given every night; a solution of the nitre, with the sal
neutralis, was taken four times in the day, and a pediluvium every night was
used. The effects were excellent: for in about three weeks the child was
restored to a perfect and free use of the limb, and has remained well ever
since.

CASE XLV.
MR. Townley, aged 26, at No. 34, Suffolk Mews, Middlesex Hospital, had been
afflicted three years with a disorder in his knee. He had applied to a public
charity for above seven months without any relief, and had been deprived of
getting his livelihood by his business. There was a very large swelling and
contraction of the part, so that he could not bring his heel to the ground. He
took the pilula alba every other night, and was perfectly restored to the use
of his limb in less than two months. In this case I must confess I had not the
least prospect of success; and had even told the patient as much: when, on his
just going out of my house, almost in a state of despondency, I came to a
sudden determination of trying the pilula alba, having formerly experienced its
use in small doses in a diseased ankle joint.

CASE XLVI.
A GENTLEWOMAN, in the early part of life, had accidentally let a small pin
drop into her ear, from which issued a few drops of blood: little or no pain
succeeded; but some time after a discharge of a very fetid matter was
perceived, and a deafness on that side. There was no secretion of wax. She was
advised, very properly, by an eminent surgeon, not to suffer the use of
injections, or any other applications; as in so delicate an organ, that fine
membrane, the tympanum, might be probably destroyed, as likewise the little
bones Malleus, incus and stapes.
, which form part of the mechanical structure of this curious organ. Satisfied
with this opinion, nothing was attempted for years; but the discharge
continued, and was at times very offensive. This lady had a fever in August
1774, of the putrid kind, with ulcerations in the throat, for which I was
consulted. It terminated happily by the use of the common anteseptic remedies;
as bark, elixir of vitriol, vinegar drinks, etc. etc. After recovery, the
discharge from the ear was remarkably more offensive than before. This
circumstance was communicated to me. A fumigation of cinnabar factitium and
aethiops mineralis p. e. was used, by means of a proper tube every other
evening to the part. Internally twice in the day was taken the pulvis
mineralis, to which was added a larger portion of the aethiops, and some
aethiop. antim This plan was continued for near three months, during which time
the discharge gradually decreased, and entirely lost its offensive smell. The
powders were then directed without the fumigation; the ulcer was soon after
entirely healed; the wax was secreted; and the hearing perfectly restored. No
return of this complaint has since happened.

Some other instances of the same sort have occurred, where the fumigation has
been very efficacious, as it commonly is in foul ulcers, unattended with
inflammation.

CASES IN SPECKS AND BLINDNESS, CURED BY INTERNAL MEDICINES ONLY.
CASE XLVII.
MR. Whittaker, No. 2, Mercer Street, Long Acre, was seized on August 1, 1773,
with a violent inflammation and pain of the left eye. Conserve of roses was
applied at first, and a purge taken; then a lotion was used of the vitriolic
kind until the 10th; when the pain and inflammation continuing, he was advised
to apply alum powdered, with the yolk of an egg; and on the following day he
found he had totally lost his sight. What made his misfortune truly melancholy
was, he had lost his other eye in his infancy. On the 15th in the morning he
was led to me: the cornea was opake, and of a pale bluish color; nor could he
perceive the least glimmering of light. Bleeding was first ordered to twenty
ounces. The pilula alba was given every night, ad gr. ss. and a cupful of the
solutio nitrosa Half an ounce of pure nitre to a quart of water.
was taken every hour in the daytime. In three days there appeared to the
patient some little light; and though the cornea did not seem to have the least
transparentcy in any part, yet the remedies were continued; but as the
inflammation had subsided, the doses of nitre were only given every three
hours. No application whatever was used outwardly For the objections to
external applications see the Treatise on the principal Diseases of the Eyes.
Numbers have been blinded by poultices, etc. etc.
, and the patient, who is now living, had the inexpressible pleasure of being
perfectly restored to sight in three weeks.

CASE XLVIII.
MISS G --, Richmond, applied the 29th of April, 1774, for relief in a disorder
of the eyes. The case was the cataracts in both eyes; one confirmed, the other
incipient. The sight was greatly impeded; and threatened a total loss of
vision. The pulvis mineralis was given, and the pilula rubra for between three
and four months: the sight was restored, and has remained well ever since.

CASE XLIX.
A child of Mr. Crouch Another child in this family was formerly cured of the
same disorder. Vide Treatise on the Diseases of the eyes.
St. Ann's, Soho, had been blind for above 4 months, occasioned by a number of
irregular specks on the transparent cornea, which prevented the rays of light
forming a point in the chrystalline lens, as likewise an inflammation so
violent, that the lids were enlarged; thickened; and had almost lost their
muscular motion. The lips of the child were swelled and puffed up: the certain
marks of a scrophulous affection. This child was restored to sight, and the
scrophulous symptoms were entirely removed, in less than four months, by the
pulvis mineralis.

CASE L.
A CHILD four years old, daughter of Mrs. Williams, recommended by the
overseers of St. Giles's in the year 1773, had lost her sight one year, from an
inflammation in cutting her teeth. When the child was but eighteen months old,
an inflammation of the eyes proved very troublesome; for which a physician,
reputedly skilful in the cure of childrens diseases, was consulted; but no
benefit was received from his prescription. A very eminent practitioner was
consulted in the present instance; who ordered a fomentation of white rose
leaves, to be used two hours in the day, and a powder to be blowed into the
eyes. This plan was continued three months, and a lotion was used. Six leeches
were applied to the inner angles of the eye, and repeated twice; but no relief
was obtained. Application was then made to a celebrated foreigner; who ordered
an issue in the arm, and an ounce of magnesia to be taken in a week. A
physician at an hospital ordered a blister and an emetic. Finding no good
effects from his prescription, he declared the disorder to be the king's evil,
and that no relief could be expected until the girl reached her fourteenth
year. When I first saw the child, she had been blind above nine months; the
cornea of both eyes was opake, but there was no discharge. The pulvis mineralis
was given for six weeks every two hours in the daytime, without any apparent
benefit. On the 9th week the cornea seemed to be nearly transparent; but the
child could not bear any light without exquisite tortures: the same remedies
were continued one week longer. Perceiving then that nothing could impede the
rays of light, in passing through the cornea; and that the chrystalline lens
was perfectly clear, I concluded that extreme relaxation alone prevented the
patient from being susceptible of external objects. The bark in substance was
prescribed, which had excellent effects: for in nine days the sight of both
eyes was perfectly restored.

CASE LI.
MRS. P --, a lady from Guernsey, aged between 40 and 50, had been long
afflicted with an inflammation of the eyes, with specks on the cornea; which
greatly impeded vision, and was the cause of the eyes being covered, to prevent
the agonies which the light produced. This case was cured in about three weeks
by the pulvis mineralis; though it had been troublesome many years,

CASE LII.
MISS W. in the city, aged four years and a half, had scrophulous swellings on
the lips, with a violent inflammation of both eyes, and specks on the cornea.
The rays of light were broken, so that they could not form in the chrystalline
lens, and strike on the retina any figure of the external objects which
presented themselves. The light always caused misery, if strong. There were
crusty eruptions behind the ears; about the upper lip and nose. This child was
restored to perfect sight; the swellings in the lips were perfectly resolved;
and the eruptions removed in the course of three months by the pilula alb. ad
gr. ss. twice in the week, and the pulvis mineralis four times in the day.

CASE LIII.
MISS R --, at -- W --, Esquire. Wimpole Street, had suffered for a long time under
a complaint in the eyes. One eye was blind from an opacity of the cornea, in
the other the sight was imperfect, owing to two small specks in the immediate
direction of the pupil. The light occasioned great distress, therefore the eyes
had been long covered by a green shade. The pilula alba was given in the dose
of gr. ss. every night, and the pulvis mineralis ad ss. quater de die. In six
weeks this young lady was perfectly restored to sight, and has continued
without the least indisposition of the eyes ever since.

CASE LIVE.
A child of J. Egleton, servant to a merchant in the city, had been deprived of
sight by an opacity of the cornea and specks; they were entirely removed by the
pulvis mineralis taken four times in the day.

CASE LV.
MRS. P --, Argyle Street, in 1772, had an incipient cataract of both eyes,
which occasioned a great defect in vision, every thing appeared in a cloud.
There was evidently an affection of the christalline humor. This patient was
perfectly restored in a few weeks, by the pilula alba and solutio nitrosa.

CASE LVI.
MR. Roberts, St. James's Street, was suddenly struck blind on Easter-eve,
1772, and went under the care of an eminent oculist for some time, but received
no benefit. The case was the gutta serena, for the coats and humors of the eye
were perfectly sound. There was a palsy of the retina, the contraction and
dilatation of the pupil was destroyed. The pilula alba and the solutio nitrosa
perfectly restored this patient to sight in about two months. He is well known
to several inhabitants in Holborn; and some years after the cure, I was present
when he read in a book with a very small print.

CASE LVII.
THE servant of a foreign ambassador in 1774, applied with a disease in the
cornea and inflammation, which greatly impeded his sight. Various methods had
been used to remove the complaint without any advantage. The pilula alba ad gr.
ss. omne nocte, and the solutio nitrosa taken six times in the day, perfectly
restored the sight, and radically cured the inflammation.

CASE LVIII.
A child about three years old had an inflammation of the eye for above nine
months, which prevented her bearing the light. Several practitioners had been
consulted; lotions, purges, and various remedies had been administered. The
last person consulted had bound up the eye for six weeks, after applying some
liquid daily. After this, the inflammation became very violent, and according
to description was what is known by the name chemosis; the lid was affected,
and the cheek swelled. The eye was then poulticed with white bread and milk,
and the sight was entirely lost; the part was in the greatest agony. When I
first saw the case, the distention was so great, that I expected nothing but
the bursting of the eye, with the loss of the humors. No time was to be lost;
and though it was evening, at least eight ounces of blood were immediately
taken away from the arm: this saved the eye. The pulvis mineralis was given to
gr. xv. every two hours, the sal neutralis was likewise occasionally united
with it, and the methods succeeded; for in about three weeks the inflammation
was perfectly cured, the opake cornea of a bluish color when first I saw it,
had become quite transparent, sight was restored, and in one week after, no
shade whatever was necessary to enable the eye to bear the strongest light.

CASE LIX.
MR. L --, in the City, had been many months afflicted with a disorder in the
eyes; the sight of one was entirely destroyed by a large opacity, so confirmed
as to be incurable. A large speck covered the other in the direction of the
pupil, with the inflammation called chemosis. A very eminent surgeon had
attended him, and had ordered the calomel in the dose of two or three grains
every night, a powerful cathartic every other morning, and a poultice had been
applied No ill success can induce some to depart from this practice; there
methods are too violent for parts already irritated. See the objections in the
Treatise on the Disorders of the Eyes.
This common rough treatment greatly relaxed the patient, but produced no good
effects in the cure of the disease. I ordered him, after bleeding, ten grains
of the aethiops mineralis, joined with some camphor and confect. damocr. three
times in the day, and a solution of nitre with the sal neutralis after each
bolus. In one week the inflammation had subsided, and in a fortnight after he
was restored to the sight of the left eye. He was afterward directed to
continue these remedies for a few weeks longer; with the addition of the pilula
rubra.

CASE LX.
A YOUNG gentleman had been two years and half suffering great misery, from a
violent disorder in the left eye. The whole cornea was opake, and of a bluish
color, the conjunctive membrane exceedingly inflamed and thickened; the lid of
the eye and the lips were considerably swelled; there were likewise several
little ulcerations behind the ear. A surgeon of great merit, high in the public
estimation, had attended the case for a long time, he had ordered calomel. in
the dose of two grains at night, cathartics, and a poultice of linseed, and
fomentations. Sometimes the disorder was better, but on any slight cold broke
out again. The pilula alba ad gr. ss. was given twice in the week; the nitre
was ordered in the dose of twenty-five grains four times in the day. The
inflammation soon subsided, and the eye was restored to sight in about six
weeks. On leaving off the remedies too soon, a slight relapse happened two or
three times within the year, but by having recourse to the nitrous medicine,
joined with the sal polychrestum, the cloudy appearance has been removed.

CASE LXI.
A GIRL at Battersea, sent by the Lady at Richmond, mentioned in case XLVI, had
been many years distressed with scrophulous tumors and inflammation and specks
in both eyes, so as to deprive her of sight; some of the swellings had broken,
and discharged an acrimonious matter, but could not be healed. The pilula rubra
and the solutio nitrosa, with a laxative occasionally, removed both these
complaints in the course of foul months.

CASE LXII.
A YOUND gentleman of fashion, had been many years troubled with an
inflammation in the eyes, occasioning a sharp discharge, and such irritation,
that any strong light of the chandeliers in the night, excited the most
disagreeable sensations, and could scarce be endured. This was caused by an
affection of the conjunctive membrane which lines the lid, but it communicated
its effects to that part of the membrane, which forms what is called, though
improperly, tunica albuginea, or, vulgarly, the white of the eye This white
appearance arises from the cornea opaca, for the conjunctive membrane itself is
almost transparent.
The vessels in this last part destined in a natural and healthful state to
carry lymph, were all filled with red particles, and consequently in a state of
distension. On examination it appeared, that several of the eye-lashes which
were inverted, long and bristly, occasioned all these symptoms. These were
carefully extracted by forceps with a very small point, and the symptoms were
in a few days removed; a lotion, with a small portion of the saccharum saturni
was ordered. This operation was four times repeated, and there has not appeared
the least complaint in the eyes since *.

CASE LXIII.
A YOUNG Lady had an excrescence, which was ulcerated in the cornea of the
right eye; the vessels of the conjunctiva were much distended and red. The
whole of the transparent cornea was covered, There are many instances of
inflammations of the eyelids happening from the eye-lashes growing in an
improper direction.
and the patient suffered extreme pain, owing entirely to inflammation; the
removal of which was the only object in view, for the restoration of sight was
impossible. The pulvis mineralis was given in considerable doses four times in
the day. In fourteen days the inflammation subsided, and the excrescence, which
made a very disagreeable appearance, in the form of a cone, pushing itself
beyond the lids, gradually wasted. In about four weeks after it was removed,
without any external application.

CASE LXIV.
A WATCHMAN in Westminster, in the depth of winter, caught a violent cold,
which produced an inflammation and opacity of the cornea; the sight of the
other eye had been lost many years before; and from the present misfortune he
was quite blind. He took, after bleeding, the solutio nitrosa four times in the
day, and the pilula alba every other night. He was restored to sight in less
than a month. The inhabitants during his cure humanely contributed to his
support.

CASE LXV.
A CHILD of Mr. C --, Spital Fields, had inflammatory eruptions on the face;
scrophulous swellings in the neck; and both eyes were blinded by specks and
inflammation in the cornea. The eyelids and lips were much tumified; the pain
was inexpressible. Bleeding was first prescribed, and the pulvis mineralis was
taken four times a day, in the dose of gr. xxv. The pilula alba gr. ss. was
given every other night, and a nitrous decoction was used as common drink. In
six weeks the child was restored to sight, and the swellings reduced.

CASES OF OLD ULCERS IN THE LEGS, CURED IN PERSONS ADVANCED IN YEARS.
CASE LXVI.
MRS. B --, Marybone, aged 78, had been for between thirty and forty years,
experiencing great misery from an ulcer of the leg, situated a little above the
ancle. It was not large, but the surrounding parts were callous, itched
intolerably, the discharge was acrimonious; there were several scorbutic
eruptions in different parts; the pains were acute, and almost constant.
Various had been the means used to cure, or to relieve this complaint.
Sometimes by rest and medicine it had been healed; but, as is common, on
exercise soon broke out again. For several years the patient had been advised
to bear patiently the painful disorder, under the specious pretense of its
being necessary, as a drain for all bad humors. To cure a person so far
advanced in years, might make the disorder fly to the head, and destroy the
senses; or bring on a fever, or a cough, which would prove fatal. By such
artifices, which are too commonly practiced, when surgeons cannot cure an
ulcer, was the patient persuaded to suffer inexpressible misery for so many
years. The pulvis mineralis was given three times in the day: to the wound was
applied the saturnine ointment, and proper dressings. In six weeks an evident
alteration for the better was produced, the itching being allayed, and the
eruptions cured. The pilula rubra was then taken, as the callosity was
stubborn, The ulcer still discharging an acrid matter, a fumigation was used
every other night. By these means the cure was effected, and the patient
remains in perfect health, using as much exercise as that advanced age will
admit.

CASE LXVIII.
THE Lady of -- L --, Esquire. aged 64, had been lame for fifteen years, from a
number of ulcers in her leg; sometimes they were rather better, at other times
worse, according to the changes of the seasons. Different practitioners had
been consulted, rest, purges, and various means had been prescribed by some of
the first practitioners in town. After many fruitless attempts, agreeable to
the common modes of practice, to cure this case, it was gravely asserted, that
it would be the lady's death, if the wounds were healed. When first I inspected
the case, there were at least forty ulcers in different parts of the leg, foul,
offensive to the smell, discharging a very acrid matter. There were swellings
and inflammation, and the pain was exquisite, constantly depriving the patient
of rest. At first the pulvis mineralis was given three times in the day, and
proper dressings were applied; which, in the course of a few weeks, produced
very favorable appearances. The plan was continued, but the disorder seemed to
be at a stand, neither growing better or worse. The pulvis mineralis was then
omitted, and the pilula rubra three times in the day given; and in about three
months all the ulcers were healed. When this cure was accomplished, it was
maliciously insinuated, that perhaps sudden death would be the consequence. It
is now four years since the cure has been confirmed; no relapse has happened;
neither diarrhoea, fever or asthma have attacked the patient; but, on the
contrary, she has better health than had been experienced for years. If these
methods had been discovered, and applied at first, fifteen years of
inexpressible torture most probably might have been prevented.

CASE LXIX.
Mr. N --, aged 64, formerly in the service of her late Royal Highness the
Princess Dowager of Wales, had been a long time suffering from a disease in his
leg. He was of a remarkable full habit, very corpulent, and his leg, which was
swelled to an enormous size, was almost one continued ulcer; livid in color,
and resembling the bark of an elm tree; being full of innumerable fissures,
from which issued a very great quantity of acrid serum. Continual acute pains,
itching and irritation made him extremely miserable; for no rest could be
procured. He had been treated in the usual manner The common modes of treating
ulcers may be seen in the Treatise on that subject, with the objections.
, by a very eminent court surgeon for nine months; but received no alleviation
from his misery. When I first saw him he was exactly in the situation
described. He was ordered the solutio nitrosa, with the vinum antimoniale and
the pilula rubra, three times in the day. The disorder proved obstinate; but
the cure was effected by a perseverance in the above remedies, with proper
dressings, in eight months. It is now near four years since the cure; the
patient remains in perfect health, walks many miles every day, and has better
spirits than he had experienced before for many years.

CASE LXX.
A LADY of rank recommended a poor woman who had ulcers, about the eighth of an
inch in diameter, in her leg, from the knee to the foot; the limb was
exceedingly swelled, had a livid appearance in many parts. The smell was
extremely offensive; there were scaly scorbutic eruptions all over her body;
and the misery she suffered from pain was inexpressible. She had applied to an
hospital, and no relief had been obtained; but a proposition had been made to
amputate the limb, as the only means of a cure. The solutio nitrosa, with merc.
corros. sublimat. were given in this case after a gentle laxative. The sal
neutralis was administered occasionally, and the medicines were continued for
two months; during which time the disease had been mending, and the cure was
accomplished. The ulcers were all healed, the leg was reduced to its natural
size, and the scaly eruptions had entirely disappeared.

CASE LXXI.
MRS. B --, aged 40, for near twenty years had been tormented with an ulcer,
which had been often healed, and as often became bad again. It was situated
above the ancle on the inside; was not large but exceedingly painful, as is
often the case in very small deep ulcers. A great hardness surrounded the sore,
for a considerable space; there were likewise several scorbutic eruptions,
which itched much, and were very troublesome. The pulvis mineralis was given,
and for about two months seemed to have excellent effects; for the eruptions
and irritation were cured, and the callosity greatly resolved; but the ulcer
did not heal. The bark and elix. vitriol. acid. was taken for some time. At
first the ulcer seemed to be forming granulations, and in a disposition to
incarn, but a second disappointment happened. The pilula rubra was then given
without any other medicine four times in the day, and a perfect cure was in
about nine weeks after effected. This lady remained well for four years, but
having a scarlet fever, a superficial sore was produced. The pilula rubra was
given, and a cure was soon the consequence.

CASE LXXII.
Mr. B --, St. Paul's Churchyard, who had suffered much misery from the gout
above twenty years, had the additional mortification to be afflicted with a
small ulcer near the ancle. I was consulted, and was dubious, whether it would
be proper in a gouty patient to attempt any method of cure, and only then
recommended a palliative dressing. In about six months the ulcer had so spread
itself, as to cover half the foot, and surrounded the greatest part of the
ancle. Half a pint of a very sharp humor at least was discharged in a day; the
pain was exquisite, had reduced the patient exceedingly, and he seemed to be in
an alarming situation. I ordered the pilula alba to be taken every other night
ad gr. ss. and the part was dressed with ung. album. The ulcer was better; a
sit of the gout came on, the discharge and irritation increased. The gout
seemed to have no connection with the ulcerous indisposition, nor the ulcer
with the gout; for the discharge, though considerably increased, did not in the
least alleviate the pain. The stomach was attacked with the gout, a draught was
prescribed of the camphor, tinctura stomach. and tinct. sacra. which removed it
to the extremities. The knee, ancles and hands were affected. When the fit was
over, the pill, which had been omitted during the paroxysm was returned to, and
the sore parts were soon perfectly healed There has been discovered a safe and
agreeable external application for the gout, which with certainty gives
immediate ease in the most violent pains, and draws the disorder from the
nobler parts toward the extremities. The gouty matter is attracted, destroyed,
and carried off by gentle perspiration and urine in a few days. Some
extraordinary facts of this sort will be made public. This last patient, who is
near 60, is one, who has experienced the happy effects, and can now walk better
than he has been able to do for ten years.
. A spirituous tincture of hiera picra, in the dose of a tea spoonful in a
little water every day, one hour before dinner, has been recommended, and
fifteen grains of the aethiops mineral. every other night. By this simple
method, and a proper diet, has the gout, and rheumatism, in some instances,
though inveterate, and even in the stomach, been radically cured. A striking
proof of this sort has happened to a member of the house of commons; who has
had no return of this disorder for above three years, and has enjoyed a perfect
and uninterrupted state of good health.

CASE LXXII.
MRS. C --, aged between 40 and 50, of very full corpulent habit, had been many
years distressed with an ulcer of the leg near the ancle. No advice or remedies
had cured the case; and the old story of the danger attending a cure, when it
was found impossible by the common means, was strongly inculcated. The patient,
under these apprehensions, raised by a practitioner, in whom she had the utmost
confidence, supported with great fortitude a miserable life for such a length
of time. Every dishonorable artifice was used to prevent my being consulted;
but the lady mentioned, Case LXVIII. having been cured, was the means of my
being called. The cure was undertaken; the pilula rubra, and the pulvis
mineralis, removed this disorder in about ten weeks. The lady remains in
perfect health since the cure, which is now above three years.

CASE LXXIII.
MRS. G --, Doctors Commons, of a full habit, had seven ulcers in her leg; four
were situated immediately below the knee, the others about the ancle, and a
little below the calf. This lady had been at different times under the care of
seven surgeons, and some of great eminence in the city; but no relief was the
consequence; every method proved fruitless. The pilula rubra and the pulvis
mineralis perfectly cured this case in about nine weeks; after it had been
declared by many practitioners incurable. This lady has been cured above a year
and half, and remains perfectly well.

CASE LXXIV.
MR. B --, had for ten years a foul ulcer on the inside of the right leg, the
veins of which were all enlarged; he had been under the care of several eminent
surgeons, and had, at different times, by rest, etc. received a temporary cure;
but on using exercise it broke out again. The pilula alba and the solutio
nitrosa, cured this case in four months, during which time the patient used
exercise, and has remained well ever since, which is now near five years.

Amongst the variety of cases which have occurred, I have found two instances,
which I could not cure, of persons, whose customary drink had been cider.

IT is now sincerely hoped, that mankind will be no longer persuaded, that it
would be injurious to cure old ulcers; so erroneously considered a drain for
peccant humors. It is highly probable, in these complaints, that some part of
a scorbutic, or putrid acrimony, issuing from the sore, is daily absorbed and
conveyed to the blood and other juices by the lymphatic vessels, and the whole
habit is, by these means, contaminated. A bad constitution is the general cause
of the ulcer, this afterward becomes the cause of a worse constitution; and
while this reciprocal action is in force, the ulcer will be in no disposition
to heal. Whatever can gradually and imperceptibly restore the fluids to a mild
balsamic state, and regulate the secretions and excretions, will be found
beneficial in removing these scorbutic distempers, so predominant in this
country. It may be a matter, perhaps, worthy the consideration of the surgeons
of hospitals, whether such rational methods of cure should not be embraced,
which would save those public charities a large annual expense. Experience
confirms, that ninety five at least out of a hundred may be radically cured as
out-patients, at the same time obtain their livelihood by industry. A moderate
exercise is so far from retarding the cure, that it facilitates it, and renders
the afflicted less liable to a relapse.

THE CONCLUSION.
SOME may possibly imagine, that the common unsuccessful modes of treatment
have been too freely censured; but, let it be considered, that until erroneous
systems are exploded, no new discoveries, however important, can be established.

It gives me inexpressible pleasure to find, that several eminent
practitioners, and some at the public hospitals, have adopted these new modes
of treatment, and have heartily acknowledged, that considerable success has
attended their endeavors. The opposition the modes have experienced from
others, may have arisen from their being strongly prepossessed in favor of the
practice they have been accustomed to. The facts here produced, it is presumed,
will convince them of their errors, and be the best answer to whatever may have
been advanced against the doctrines.

Though the hasty adoption of novelties has frequently been productive of evils
in the healing art; yet, an inflexible adherence to erroneous maxims, has
proved a check to philosophical enquiry; a bar to every useful improvement. The
cases here related, the result of many years application, are respectfully
submitted to the public consideration, and particularly to the unprejudiced and
learned practitioners in medicine; who will best determine, whether they merit
attention. The curative methods are, still, it is presumed, capable of much
improvement, and the same disposition which gave rise to the discoveries, shall
not be wanting to prosecute so desirable a purpose.

The ulcerated legs, the opacity of the cornea, partially, or totally impeding
vision, scorbutic, and schrophulous cases, are proved, in general, to be
curable. It could be ardently wished, that the same might be asserted, with
equal confidence, in confirmed cancerous diseases. These ravaging complaints,
however, if not too far advanced, can frequently be removed. When poisonous
remedies have been administered, or other violent practices adopted, little
success can be expected; and often the cure is as impossible, as in the
aneurism of the aorta. The barbarous use of escharotics, and the unfeeling and
improper use of the knife, have been condemned, in all ages, by every physician
of integrity and experience; as they have hastened the progress of the cancer,
and the dissolution of the patient.

FINIS.

