THE DISSENTERS ANSWER TO THE High-Church Challenge.

London, Printed in the Year 1704.

THE Dissenters Answer TO THE High-Church Challenge.
AS it is the Character of the Devil to bring a Railing Accusation, so no Man
of Sense or Manners cares to imitate him; all Men of Learning, that ever I met
with, will allow that People may Differ, Debate and Dispute, without
Billingsgate Language; that Invidious Names, and Indecent Reproaches, serve to
gratify the Spleen, and flow from a Redundancy of Gall in the Author, but add
no manner of Force to his Argument; good Words are as strenuous as bad; and the
Satyr lies in the Truth, not the ill Language, of the Book.

From this Principle, the Author of a late Pamphlet, with a Title as long as a
Book, and called, The Wolf Stripped, must not expect a Return of Dirt for Dirt;
and while he calls every Man by his Name, and yet is ashamed of his own, calls
most Men out of their Names, and fills his Book with the Exuberance of his
Hypochondriack Vapors, he ought to be looked upon as an Author not worth while
to meddle with; if a Gentleman should fight with a Chimney-sweeper, he may beat
the Man, but he will daub himself so much, will stink of the Soot, and foul his
Clothes, that the Victory is not worth the Disorder 'twill put him into.

In like manner, he that will deal with this Author in his own Way, must foul
his Mouth with so much Bear-Garden Language, such rude, unmannerly, and
unscholar-like, Behavior, that he must be tainted with the ungrateful Savor
of his Enemy's Malignancy, and look like the Man he meddles with as not worth
any Man's while.

Upon this Account I shall not meddle with his Voluminous Tract it self; but as
he has made a fair Challenge in the Eighth Page of his Book to all the
Dissenters, I am willing to enter a little in the Case; not so much expecting
to silence a Tongue pointed with Raillery, but to let the World know that the
Dissenters are not unprovided with strong Arguments to defend a just Cause.

The Challenge that this Gentleman has made to the World, and of which he seems
so very confident, is as follows.

The Dissenters make a Heavy Noise, That the Church will not Purchase a
Reconciliation, with the giving up only of a few Indifferent Things, which
Offend their Tender Consciences.

And the Low-Church lay the Blame upon the High-Church, (with very severe
Reflections) That they are Obstructers of this Blessed Union.

Now let none of these be Judges in their own Cause. Therefore let the
Dissenters give in to the Present Convocation a List of such Indifferent
Things, which, if Granted, they will Promise to Conform, and Heal the Schism.
The Scruples are Theirs. Therefore they must make the Proposal. None others can
tell what will Satisfy them.

If they will not do this, Let them stop their Clamours, and Never more say,
That nothing will be Granted them! And that the Church of England has no mind
to Heal the Schism!

But if they will do this, then it will appear, Whether the High or the
Low-Church will go Farthest to Purchase this Desired Reconciliation; and which
of them do, in good Earnest, Wish it, and not rather to keep open the Breach,
to serve other Designs!

Next, let those of the Convocation, who were formerly Employed in this Grand
Project of Reconciliation, (of which they have made such Boasts) lay before the
House the Grounds and the Terms of it; that it may appear they were none but
Indifferent Things, which were to be Given up to the Dissenters! Otherwise, let
Them too Cease their Railing at the High-Church, as Men of Violent Spirits,
etc. for Obstructing their Designs! Or, for Suspecting what-they were!

The High-Church Desire, That they, and the Low-Church, and the Dissenters too,
may be Tried by their Actions, and not by the Clamours on either Side. And that
they may be Heard Publicly, in the Face of the World, by the Method Proposed.

And Whoever Refuse this, and cannot Propose a more Rational and Convincing
Way, for the Clearing of Themselves, let Them be Guilty.

Had this been a new Challenge, this Author might have had some Reason to have
expected it should have been accepted and replied to.

But since I find his Reading as short as his Censure is hasty, I think the
properest Method is to revise what of this Kind has been already done, and to
put him in Mind that all he has said only ends in this Absurdity of arguing,
viz. The Dissenters have already been challenged to this, have accepted the
Challenge, undertaken the Defense of their Doctrine, and of their Dissenting,
have effectually vindicated themselves from the Charge of Schism, given Reasons
for their Scruples, and made Proposals for Conformity; they have challenged the
Church to Union and Peace, they have defended themselves from the Charge of
Disloyalty and Rebellion, and offered the Church to bring their Loyalty to the
Test with them; and none of these things have ever been Answered, or some of
them not so much as Replied to.

Now as this Gentleman supplies Matter of Fact with Indecency and Railery, I
shall not need to follow him there; he begins the very first Page of his Book
with Three positive Falsities, neither of which he can in the least tolerable
manner make out.

First, That they have a Society of Writers.

Secondly, That the Dissenters find themselves worsted in Argument.

In the same Page he tells us, It Is the Method of the Dissenters not to mind any
Answer, but to repeat and repeat their own Objections IN INFINITUM.

It Is far from my Design to Reply to a Book as full of Absurdities and
Contradictions as it is Verbose and Malignant, and therefore I shall content my
self with these Three Instances.

1. As to the Dissenters having a Society of Writers, I am so well satisfied of
its being a Forgery of his own, that I Challenge him to make appear that there
is so much as a Correspondence among them of any Two together that have ever
Wrote in the Behalf of the Dissenters; and as he is mighty forward to print
Names, and to abuse them by Name too, he is welcome to set down their Names if
he can: In which, if he pursue his usual Method of presuming things are so, and
then affirming it as positively as if he could prove it, he will certainly
Ensnare and Expose himself as much in the Particulars as he has done now in the
General.

Had the Dissenters so much Unanimity among themselves, as he pretends they
have, they would have too great a share in the Public Regard, to let such a
hard-mouthed Author Treat them in so Scurrilous a Manner as he does; the
Government would suppress the Spirit of Railery in the Mouths of these
Enflamers, that they should not have such a full Liberty of Traducing and
Abusing their Brethren, in order to keep open the Breach, which it is every
True English Protestant's Desire and Interest to see healed.

No, Sir, the Dissenters have no such Societies; the Spirit of Union, the more
Unhappy for them, is not so much among them; they are all forward enough to
have any Body serve them, but it must be at their own Hazard, and at their own
Expense, which a late unhappy Author of theirs very lately had Experience of
enough to warn any Man from venturing to serve them again.

But therefore, Sir, is it plain that this Book is far from being Wrote as a
Design of the Party, but with the Sense of Truth, which every Honest Man has a
Right to Vindicate.

At the same time, Sir, I affirm your Party has, and ever had, a Society of
Writers; and whenever you desire it, I am ready to gratify you with some of
their Names; though I am not forward of printing Names, as a piece of Rudeness
unbecoming an Author: But a certain Weekly Paper now in Course is Publicly
owned to be so wrote; and I know Personally, that the wretched Performance has
occasioned some Considerations among People of greater Capacities, to provide a
Set of Men to do it better, and to gratify them for the Service.

But, Sir, I shall not enter upon the tedious Work of Recrimination, as a thing
in which there is so much room for launching out, that the compass of this
small Tract would be too straight for it.

2. You tell us, The Faction, which is your Civil Term for the Dissenters, find
themselves worsted in Argument.

It had been time enough to have boasted thus when you had put your Armor off,
and when the many Tracts wrote by the Dissenters in their own just Vindication
have been Answered.

But this Gentleman has the Misfortune so to be blinded by his Passion, as to
cry Victoria before the Battle is ended; and not to trouble you, Sir, with many
Negatives, I wish you would let us see one Time whenever by any thing but
Railery you worsted the Dissenters.

We confess, Sir, that at ill Language you have the better of us; whether you
have any Professors of the Scolding Talent among your Students we know not, for
you will not suffer us to be Taught in your Universities; but we assure you,
that in those Schools where we are fain to bring up our Youth, we Teach no such
Science.

But as if all you had laid down on that Head were true, and you were very
certain that you had worsted the Dissenters in Argument, you give them a home
Charge.

3. That it is their Method not to mind Answers, but to Repeat and Repeat their
own Objections In Infinitum.

Now, Sir, This may or may not be true, according as you can or cannot give a
Genuine Answer to the following Account of Answers given, and Books written; by
Dissenters in their own Vindication, which you, nor any of your Church, have
ever yet thought fit to venture an Answer to, and when you can you may defend
your Church from unfair Treatment of the Dissenters in point of Argument on
this Head.

And not to go too far beyond the Memory of those we are talking to, I think
there stands Two Books of the Learned Mr. Clarkson yet unanswered, the one
Entitled, No Scripture Evidence for Diocesian Bishops; and the other, A
Discourse of Liturgies. It Is true, there is a long and learned Discourse of Dr.
Comber's then Precentor of York, wherein with some of our Author's Spirit,
Treating the Memory of Mr. Clarkson neither like a Gentleman nor a Scholar,
though all Men know he was as much of both as ever the Nation bred; and though a
Dissenter, had the Honor to be Tutor to the Learned and most Excellent Dr.
Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury.

After this Author has pleased himself with sufficiently reproaching his
Deceased Antagonist, he goes on to rummage Antiquity to prove that Liturgies
were in use in the Primitive Church. This was no part of the Dispute; and had
not the Doctor overlooked it in his haste, Mr. Clarkson had Anticipated his
whole Discourse in p. ^. 'Whether Liturgies, or Forms of Worship and
Administration, were in use in the Primitive Church or not, is no part of the
present Dispute.'

'But whether these Liturgies were prescribed and Imposed as Terms of Communion
this is the Question.'

Now to this Question the Dr. is not pleased to say one Word, as I can observe,
in his whole Book, but goes on to prove that to be true which Mr. Clarkson
granted, and lets that alone which he denied.

Nay, so Ridiculous was this Answerer in the Management of himself, both in the
Search of Antiquity, and in rendering those Authors he Quotes, that a Learned
Minister of the Church of England, merely with a respect to Justice and
Learning, Replied to him, and made it appear that the Doctor did not so much as
understand the Language of the Quotations. This was Mr. Samuel Bold, Rector of
Steeples in Dorsetshire.

This, I suppose, is some Peoples Way of Answering the Dissenters; and if this
may pass for Answering, they are Answered indeed: But I must take the Freedom
to say, It has yet remained unprov'd, that ever a strict Literal Compliance to
any Prescribed Form of Worship and Administration of Sacraments was Imposed as
the Term or Condition of Communion in any Branch of the Christian Church, for
above 400 Years after our Savior's time; nay, 'twould be hard to prove it ever
done in any Church in the World but ours to this Day; and they are still
welcome to make it out if they can; and till they do, the World may judge
whether the Dissenters are worsted in Argument, or no.

That there were Bishops in the Primitive Church has also been defended with a
great deal of Skill; but as to their Diocesan Royalty and Juridiction, they
have always, in Prudence, thought fit to let the Dispute of it alone; and I
would advise them to do so still, for they must find some other Book to defend
it from than the Scripture, and some other Ages of the World to search for the
Practice in than that of the Primitive Church

But I must confess the Dissenters were worsted another Way, in the Case of Dr.
Calamy and Mr. Delaun; of which remarkable Story this is the short Abstract.

Dr. Calamy preaching a Sermon at Aldermanbury Church, Entitled, A Discourse
about Scrupulous Consciences, makes the Dissenters this fair Challenge, as by
his printed Sermon, P. ^. appears in these Words: Could we but prevail with the
People diligently to examine the Merits of the Cause our Church would every Day
gain Ground amongst all wise Men; for we care not how much Knowledge and
Understanding our People have, so they be but Humble and Modest with it: Nor do
we desire Men to become our Proselites any farther than we give them Scripture
for it. And in another Place he goes on; All we desire of the Dissenters is,
that they would equally hear both Sides; that they would weigh and consider the
Arguments that may be propounded to them; and being indifferent to either Part
of the Question, would think it no Shame to change their Mind when they see
good Reason for it.

Mr. Delaun, a Man whose Learning and Temper were Conspicuous to all the
Learned World, and particularly in the Book he wrote, accepts this Challenge,
and writes down his Reasons for Nonconformity; and as the Doctor had printed
his Sermon, and thereby appealed to the World, all Peoples Mouths were filled
with the Fairness of the Proposal, and every Body cried out, the Dissenters
were worsted, Mr. Delaun therefore thought himself obliged to print his Reply.

But as the Victory consisted, as it does still, in Boasts and Rhodomontades,
so they were as loath to be overcome, as sensible that they should be so, and
took immediate Care to suppress the Book, by seizing the Copy at the Printer's;
and this was followed, by seizing the Author for writing a Seditious Libel, put
him in Prison, fined him Vltra Tenementum, and were hardly prevailed upon to
vouchsafe him the Favor to excuse him the Pillory, which they at last told him
in Court was only remitted in respect to his Learning.

Here was a true Church-Conquest; and this Gentleman was persecuted with so
much true Church Zeal, that he lay in Newgate for his Fine, till he, his Wife
and Children, died there, to the Eternal Scandal both of the Churchman and the
Dissenters; the one, that he should first challenge a Dispute, and then so
basely Treat the Man that accepted it; and the other, that they should not
contribute 75 l. to save a Life sacrificed for their Defense; and such a Life,
as, for real Merit, deserved infinitely more Regard in a Nation of Humanity and
Religion, as we fancy our selves to be.

The Book for which this Gentleman was thus handled remains to this Day
unanswered by these People, that boast so much of worsting the Dissenters, and
they would do well to look back upon that Book, and make some rational Reply to
it before they tell us we can show no Reasons for our Dissenting.

In like manner they proceed still with the Dissenters upon other Points of
arguing, as particularly by Repealing and Repeating In Infinitum the Charge of
Rebellion and Faction, whereas they have been over and over Challenged make out
their own Loyalty of Principles or Practice to exceed the Loyalty of the
Dissenters.

And De Foe's Test of the Church of England's Loyalty has received yet no other
Answer than his Shortest Way, by a Fine Vltra Tenement^m, and the reproachful
Answer of the Pillory. If this be your Way of answering Arguments, Gentlemen,
it is no wonder you can worst the Dissenters.

To proceed in their usual Method, a worthy Member of the House of Commons has
published a Book to vindicate the Occasional Bill; and, like those who take
Things upon Trust, has affirmed, that all wise Nations in the World have
thought it necessary to entrust the Administration of Public Affairs in the
Hands of such Persons only as are of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of
Religion.

A very handsome Way of calling all the Christian World Fools: For I defy him
to show me one of those wise Nations, and to prove it by one Instance, unless
where there has not been any Toleration of other Persuasions, the Turks only
Excepted.

Thus, Gentlemen, we are worsted by Forgeries and Falsities, not by Arguments;
we are challenged to Dispute, and then ruined for Disputing; asked Questions,
and then fetched up for Answering them. But since this Gentleman has found an
Adversary capable to deal with him, Power and P -- ts excepted, I leave him to
say the Dissenters are worsted, when he proves it by a sufficient Reply.

We are now challenged to prove that we dissent from the Church in Points so
far from being essential, as that the Chnrch cannot be justified in Refusing to
abate them; and we are desired to give in the Objections to the Convocation.

What Authority their Author has from the Convocation to make this Offer, I
know not, and do not see how I shall know it; or whether the Convocation will
receive such a List of the indifferent things, or no; but since this bold
Challenger would be answered, and will not be satisfied with a General Reply,
but this must be spoken to by it self, I crave leave to accept his Challenge as
far as the following Particulars reach.

First, I do affirm this has been done already by the whole Body of the
Dissenting Ministers in such a Manner, and with such modest Reasons, as several
of the Episcopal Clergy were so satisfied with, and did so represent to King
Charles the Second, that their Concessions were a sufficient Ground of a Union:
What, and who, hindered a Union when the Dissenters made such Concessions, I
leave to this Gentleman to tell us, if he cares to expose his Friends so much.

Secondly, I do affirm, that if the Church of England would think fit so far to
stoop to their Dissenting Brethren, as to abate such things only, and all such,
as are acknowledged by themselves to be Indifferent; if it would not reduce us
all to such a perfect Union as to Comprehend all Parties, it would yet Embrace
so many in the Arms of the Church: 'Twould cause so many to return to the
Church among the Dissenters, as would render the Remainder less considerable.

I am to suppose the Challenger in this Matter does not expect I should give in
such a List of Alterations as would Reconcile the Quakers, or perhaps not all
other Societies; or to tell him what Sorts would Conform, and what would not:
But I answer him in Reason, if I say for my self, that upon such Concessions I
would Conform with all my Heart, and Thousands more, I believe, would do the
like.

Since then he has made such an Offer, let us Examine what it is we desire of
the Church, what are the Indifferent Things we differ about, and I join Issue
with him if the Convocation thinks fit to make these Abatements and Amendments,
and we refuse to Conform, then I am content we shall pass for a People who are
willing to keep open the Breach to serve other Designs.

Before I descend to the Particulars, it is necessary to make some Enquiry into
what I call Indifferent.

1. I call those Things Indifferent which are not Essential Points of Doctrine,
without the Belief or Practice whereof a Man cannot obtain Salvation.

2. All things introduced into the Church of England, either in Worship or in
Discipline, by Humane Institution, which are not to be found either by Command
or by President in the Holy Scriptures, which are the Rule of our Faith.

On this Head of Indifferent Things therefore I join Issue with our Author; and
if he thinks fit to present our Humble Address to the Convocation, that they
will be pleased to make such Abatement in the Indifferent Things following, I
am persuaded such Multitudes of Dissenters will come into the Church as may
very well deserve the Name of a Union, though not of an Universal Conformity, and
the Number of Remaining Discenters would be much the smaller.

First of all as to Liturgies, we desire, since it is all Originally Humane,
and made by Men Fallible, and of like Passions with our selves, they may suffer
such Amendment as are Reasonable and Justifiable from Scripture, and the
Practice of the Primitive Church.

Secondly, We desire that after such Amendment, the Minister may not in all
Cases be Ti'd up and Prescribed by the Letter of the Book, but may have Liberty
to Express himself at large in Prayer, as the present Exigence of the Case may
require, and his own Abilities may supply.

Thirdly, We desire the Ordination of Ministers by Presbyters may be allowed,
being Justifiable by Scripture; and that our Ministers may be admitted into
Holy Orders without the Reordination, and Imposing of Unreasonable Oaths.

Fourthly, We desire the Kneeling at the Sacrament, Bowing at the Name of
Jesus, the Cross in Baptism, the Use of the Surplice, and all those Things
owned by the Greatest Masters of the Dispute to be Indifferent, may either be
wholly left out, or so left at the Discretion of the People, as that they may
not be imposed upon them without their Consent.

Fifthly, We desire the Episcopal Hierarchy to be Reduced to such a Pitch of
Authority as may be justified by the Scripture, and to no other; and we are
ready to enter into an Examination with them, what that Particular of Power
amounts to, and how far it extends.

I do not say these are all the Heads which I suppose the Dissenters require,
but I say these are some of them, and the most Considerable; and if the Church
would give such Concessions as were Reasonable on these Heads, the Controversy
would soon be decided, Whether the Dissenters Separated from the Established
Church on frivolous Grounds, or no.

First, As to Alterations in the Liturgy, it is the Avowed Opinion of the Church
of England, that no Church in the World is infallible; and above all, our
Church does not pretend to the Title. If then we are not Infallible, but
subject to Err and Mistake, why should she refuse to Enter into the Cause,
whether it is convenient to make any farther or more perfect Reformation or no;
but though the Consideration were not on a farther Reformation, yet if it were
only giving up some smaller Matter for the sake of Christian Peace, it were not
Commendable only, but a Due Requisite Temper in a Christian Church.

As to them that blame the Dissenters for Separating, let us enquire of them if
they are incapable of greater Light, and consequently of knowing better what
they ought to do, than they did before? If then they will suppress this Light,
and refuse to Amend Things, though the Light of their own Conscience directs them
to it, where lies the Charge of Schism? Surely not at their Door, who would
only pursue a perfect Reformation, and think it their Duty to serve God in the
Way most agreeable to his Revealed Will in the Scriptures; but at theirs, who
would oblige them to worship him according to the Inventions of Men, by Forms
and Methods, for which they have neither Warrant, Command, of Example, either
in the Scripture, or the Primitive Practice of the Church; I Appeal to all the
World, that as well now as before it is not our Faults that they bring the
Liturgy upon the Stage of Dispute, but the bold Challengers of Men that can
never make good their Arguments: And they ought first to have Answered what has
been said already, before they had Challenged us to show New Reasons.

Wherefore in the Sense first of the Irresistible Force of what has been said
already, and secondly of my Incapacity of saying more to the Purpose, at least
in so short a time, I make the Proposers this fair Offer, and they are at
Liberty to carry it to the Convocation, for it is their Business, not ours.

1. When they will please to Answer Mr. De Laun's Plea for the Non-conformists,
and the Substantial, yet Unanswerable, Reasons there given for our Dissenting.

2. When they will please to Reply to the Concessions of the Dissenters in the
Conference at the Savoy, and prove they were not sufficient Grounds of an Union.

3. When they will Confute the Scriptural Authority of Bishop Usher's Model of
Church Government, which was much the same with the Scheme the Dissenters
presented to King Charles the Second, and give the Reasons why the Bishops
refused it, Baxt. Life, cap. 8.

4. If they please to Reply ( a little more to the Purpose than Mr. Osfley and
Mr. Hoadly has done) to the Grounds and Reasons of Nonconformity in the 10th
Chapter of Baxter's Life, Abridg'd by Mr. Calamy, and to some yet Unanswered
Things in Mr. Calamy's Reply to Mr. Hoadly.

5. If they please to give a Rational Answer to the first, Second and Third,
Vol. of the Conformists Plea for the Non-conformists, wrote by a Member of
their own Church, and to Gillespy's View of English Popish Ceremonies.

Whenever these things are Soberly and Judiciously Answered, and as Dr. Calamy
proposed good Scripture and Reason brought for it, assure your self, Sir, when
these Things are Answered, there shall be no manner of need to bring an
Occasional Bill to prevent the Alternate Conformity of Dissenters; it is most
certain, that the far greater Number of them will come in, and become your
Christian United Brethren; and till you do these Things, Gentlemen, we Appeal
to all the World, who are the Causers of the Schism you speak of, those that
all along offered to come in upon Reasonable Conditions, or those that have
persecuted us for not complying with Humane Institutions, which are no where to
be found in Scripture, which is the only Rule of Faith.

And thus now the World may see with what Truth these Gentlemen blacken the
Dissenters with their Repeating Objections, but taking no notice of Answers,
which I here fairly return upon them, and assure them, that whenever they will
Answer the Objections in Mr. De Laun's Book against the Liturgy and Canon of
the Church of England, and prove the same to be necessary from Scripture and
Reason, I will certainly Conform, for I believe and own it my Duty to Conform
to them if I can, and I can never resist Conforming to any thing which is
proved to be my Duty from Reason and Scripture.

I think it is needless to say much of my own, after such Men as these have
appeared and gone off the Stage with no Reply; neither can I satisfy my self
to attempt any thing by way of Addition to Men of such exalted Learning, till I
can see something New offered upon these Heads, and unless these Gentlemen have
something to say more than has been said before them by Men superior in
Learning to themselves: What they now advance savours of an Arrogance peculiar
to themselves, and which I like so ill, that I care not to imitate.

I shall therefore think it more than sufficient thus to tell them what has
been said already; and if they have any thing to say by way of Reply, that
demands an Answer, they may not want what is needful to justify the Practice
and Principles of the Dissenters, to be such as neither the Charge of Faction
or Rebellion can be laid at their Doors, and it seems by this Challenge he
would let the World believe that the Church of England would not stand with the
Dissenters for small Matters; and I cannot but wonder with what Face he can
Publish to the World these following Words, which I am persuaded he has no
Authority for from his Superiors.

We should have little Quarrel with the Dissenters about all the Objections
they make as to Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgy, and even the Grand Point of
Ordination by Presbyters in Cases of Necessity; if it were not for that Fulsome
Word Schism, if they did not gather Separate Congregations, and set them up in
Opposition to the Church, and so form a Schism, they would be no Dissenters,
notwithstanding their different Sentiments as to the Points before mentioned.
All these are his own Words, P. 3.

Thou Hypocrite, out of thine own Mouth shall thou be condemned; If you had not
Quarreled with us about Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgy, and Ordination, there had
been no Schism; no Separate Congregations gathered, no breaking off from the
Church, no such thing as Dissenters, at least but few among us; and to impose
this upon the World after such plain Evidence as has been given to the
contrary, deserves a courser Title than I care to foul my Paper with, and
evidently shows the Method of the Party who run down the Dissenters by
Falsities and Forgeries.

And that I may do what these People seldom concern themselves about; I lay it
down as a Truth, that when King Charles the Second was Restored to the Crown,
the present Dissenters being then desired to Conform to the Church of England,
and their Ministers having very good Inducement so to do, viz. the Possession
of their Livings and Benefices, they were Commanded by the King to give in
their Proposals upon which they would Conform.

And it is needful to give a short Abstract of the Proceedings in that Case, in
Order to let the World see what occasioned the Schism these People cry so much
out of, and to place the Guilt of it where it really lies; for as the Morality,
so the Immorality, of every Action consists in the Principle from whence it
proceeds, and the End to which it is designed.

At the Restoration of King Charles II. to put the Dissenters in Hopes that a
Reconciliation was intended, Ten or Twelve of the Principal of them were made
His Majesty's Chaplains; and these designing to improve that Opportunity,
waited upon him, introduced by the Earl of Manchester, and humbly recommended
to His Majesty the Happiness, and the Opportunity of a Union among his
Protestant Subjects in Matters of Religion, and begging of him that ONLY
NECESSARY THINGS might be the Terms of Union.

The King declared himself very favorably on this Head, professed that the
Proposal was exceeding agreeable to him, and promised them to do his utmost to
bring it to pass. Telling them withal, That this Agreement could not be
expected but by abating something on both Sides, and meeting one another in the
Midway; and that if they were willing to do their Parts, if it was not
effected, it should be their own Faults, and not his.

Here it may very well be observed that the Schism lies directly at the Door of
the Church, if the King's Words are true. For the Dissenters did make Offers of
meeting half Way, and more than half Way, as shall presently be made out; and
if our Brethren of the Church can make out one Step offered by them in the most
indifferent Circumstance, then ours is the Schism, and not theirs. If not, Vae
vobis Hypocritae. Job 15. 6. Thine own Mouth condemns thee, and not I; yea,
thine own Lips testify against thee.

The King after this directed, That they should bring in Proposals of the
utmost they could yield to; and they in return besought His Majesty, That at
the same time that they offered their Concession to His Majesty, the Brethren
on the other side might also bring in theirs, containing the utmost they would
abate and yield to in order to Concord; and the King promised them it should be
so. Call. Ab. Baxter's Life, p. 144

According to this Direction of the King they met and agreed upon a Paper, with
a most Humble Address to His Majesty, they make Four Preliminary Requests to
the King, and then offered their Proposals, an Abstract of which you have in
Mr. Calamy's Abridgment aforesaid, p. 145. and for the Faithfulness of the
Quotation the Reader is referred to the Original, which is to be seen in Print.

First, They request, That serious Godliness might be countenanced; a Learned
and Pious Minister in each Parish encouraged; that a Personal, Public, owning
the Baptismal Covenant might precede an Admission to the Lord's Table; and that
the Lord's Day might be strictly sanctified. They offer to allow of the true,
ancient, Primitive Precedence in the Church, with a due Mixture of Presbyters,
in order to the avoiding the Corruptions, Partiality, Tyranny, and other Evils,
which are incident to the Administration of a single Person; the Things which
they principally blamed in the English Frame were the great Extent of the
Bishops Diocese: Their deputing Commissaries, Chancellors, and Officials, to
act in their Stead: Their assuming their sole Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, and acting so arbitrarily in Visitation Articles; bringing in new
Ceremonies, and suspending Ministers at Pleasure: And for reforming these
Evils, they proposed, that Bishop Usher's Reduction of Episcopacy unto the Form
of Synodical Government received in the ancient Church should be the
Groundwork of an Accommodation; and that Suffragans should be chosen by the
respective Synods: The Associations be of a moderate Extent; the Ministers to
be under no Oaths, or Promises of Obedience to the Bishops, as being
responsible for any Transgression of the Law; and that the Bishops govern not
by Will and Pleasure, but according to Rules, Canons and Constitutions, that
should be ratified and established by Act of Parliament. As to the Liturgy,
they owned the Lawfulness of a prescribed Form of Public Worship, but desired
that some Learned, and Pious, and Moderate Divines of both sorts might be
employed either to compile a new Liturgy, or to reform the old, adding some
other varying Forms in Scripture Phrase, to be used at the Minister's Choice.
As to the Ceremonies they humbly represented, that the Worship of God was
perfect without them; that God has declared himself in Matters of Worship a
jealous God; that the Reformed Churches abroad, most of them rejected the
Ceremonies that were reclaimed here; that here in England they had ever since
the Reformation been Matters of Contention and Dispute; that they had
occasioned the silencing of many Pious and Useful Ministers, and given Rise to
many Separations from the Church: That they were at best but indifferent, and
in there own Nature mutable; and therefore they begged that kneeling at the
Sacrament might not be imposed, and that the Surplice and the Cross in Baptism,
and the bowing at the Name of Jesus, rather than Christ, or Emanuel, might be
abolished, and that Care might be taken to prevent future Innovations, contrary
to Law; that so the Public Worship might be free, not only from Blame, but
Suspicion.

Does this look like a Proposal from Men that did not dissent, but upon
Factious and Politic Principles? It Is hard there should be any Occasion to
revive the Discourse of these Things at a Time when we wish for that Peace and
Union which Her Majesty has so earnestly invited us to. But these Men of Storms
and Heat, who are wilfully ignorant themselves, are willing other Men should be
blindly so; and therefore it is necessary a little to refresh their Memory, and
to show to the World that this Schism and Separation of the Dissenters was
wholly occasioned by the Church refusing to give up indifferent Things, and
imposing those indifferent Things as Terms of Communion upon the Consciences of
all the People.

The King upon the Ministers delivering in the Proposals and Address Treated
them very respectfully, says the same Author, renewed his Professions of his
earnest Desires of an Accommodation of the Differences; told them he was well
pleased that they agreed to a Liturgy, and yielded to the Essence of Episcopacy.

Here is an Acknowledgment from the Head of the Church, that the Dissenters
were for an Accommodation, agreed to a Liturgy, and to the Essence of
Episcopacy, and yet our Modern Men of Peace will throw all the Breach upon the
Dissenters.

Now, Gentlemen, let us examine your Christian High-Church Temper these
yielding, complying, Dissenters met with, that we may see whether they were
out, or were driven out from the Church.

The Dissenters that were to be for Yet they were not so expected, according to
their Request, and His Majesty's Promise, to be met with by the Divines on the
other Side, and to see their Proposals, but none appeared; and after long
expecting their Condescentions and Compliances, at last they received a
Satirical Answer by way of Reflection to their Proposals, but not one Word of
Condescension and Compliance.

'As to Church-Covernment, they declare for the former Hierarchy without any
Alteration; and inviduously insinuate, that their Reflections on the
Consequences of a single Person's Administration in the Church, was as
applicable to the Civil State. The Extent of Diocesses they declare suitable
enough to the Bishops Office; and the Administration of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction by Chancellors, etc. Regular in the Main. Bishop Usher's Reduction
they reject as inconsistent with Two other of his Discourses, as being at best
but a heap of Private Conceptions The Liturgy they applaud as unexceptionable,
and think it cannot be said to be too Rigorously imposed, when Ministers are not
denied the Exercise of their Gifts, in Praying before and after Sermon; which
Sort of Praying, they declare however, is but the continuance of a Custom of no
great Authority, and grown into Common use by Sufferance only, without any
other Foundation in the Laws and Canons. The Revising the Liturgy nevertheless
they yield to, if his Majesty thinks fit. As for the Ceremonies, they could not
part with one; not being able to think that the Satisfaction of some Private
Persons was to be laid in Balance against the Public Peace, and Uniformity of
the Church. Nay, were any Abatements made, they are satisfied unquiet Spirits
would be thereby encouraged to make further Demands.'

Ecce signum, here is the Foundation of the Dissenters Schism in Three Heads.

Episcopal Hierarchy without Alteration.

Liturgy Vnexceptionable, and impossible to be too Rigorously Imposed.

Ceremonies, not one to be parted with.

Pray, Gentlemen, how long have ye altered your Minds, that you can now say you
will not quarrel with us for Habits, Ceremonies, or Ordination; and when we
offered to agree with you in every thing else, you would have your Ordination
without Alteration, you would not part with one of the Ceremonies; and thought
your Liturgy Vnexceptionable, and that it could not be too Rigorously Imposed?
How long is it since these Gentlemen have been of a better Opinion? And when
all is done, how shall we be sure their Proposal is Genuine, while we have
experienced so much Falsity and ill-grounded Passion, as before?

Here now is the Picture of a High-Church Challenge, to which we may very well
Answer, we are the same that we were when we made the Proposals to King Charles
the Second, and we have a great deal of Reason to believe you are the same too.
Ill Nature seldom turns Changling. It Is true, you did promise us fine things,
you promised to come to a Temper with the Dissenters, and declared 'twas your
Principle to give an Ease to Consciences truly Scrupulous; and upon this Foot
you obtained upon us to join with you in the Revolution: Now you talk of
Honesty, pray, Gentlemen, do us the Favor to let us know in what you ever
performed that Promise, and when we are to expect it?

Now you shall be put to Trial of your Honesty and Justice, what Commission you
had from the Convocation to tell us you would not Differ about Habits,
Ceremonies, Liturgy and Ordination, I know not, and believe you will be puzzled
to produce it: But I venture to say to you from abundance of the Dissenters,
that then you shall differ with us for nothing; Remit us these and we will
Conform to you, and be all One Church and One People.

It Is about these Things Chiefly you Differ with us; you have no Pretenses but
these upon us: The Articles of Rebellion Forty One; the Rye-House Plot,
Castares's Evidences, and more: We can allow you all these, and many more than
is true, and yet prove that your Principles are as Disloyal, and your Practices
have been as full of Rebellion, as ours; you have made as many Insurrections
against the Established Governors of the Nation as we; you have made as many
Factions against the Princes and the Laws, took up Arms as often, killed as
many Kings, or endeavored it, as we; and how often have you been Challenged to
come to a Test of your Loyalty with us? But you are Proof against Argument; and
without taking notice of these things, or of any thing else that stands against
you, you Repeat and Repeat your Railings, and suffer your Tongues to Launch out
in a senseless and insignificant manner, In Insinitum.

And to help load the Dissenters with Infamy, you Charge them with all that has
been done in Scotland, where the Arbitrary Tyranny of State Ministers
oftentimes made the People Desperate: No wonder if from such Principles you can
Charge them with Burning the City of London. One would think these Gentlemen's
Passions should not make them forget their Reason so much as to expose their
Proceedings to their own Friends.

Did not the Committee of Parliament fix the Firing of the City upon the Roman
Catholics, by the irresistible Testimony of the Persons concerned; and why
must the Dissenters do it? Had you brought them by Persecution to such
desperate Fortunes, to such Despair, as to set Fire to their own Houses? Were
there not almost as many of them Burnt out as of the Church?

The ridiculous Fury of these Men is an Answer to themselves; and upon the
whole, I offer to make out, That the Dissenters have, on all Occasions, behaved
themselves with as much Zeal for the Government, as much Sincerity to the
Sovereign, and as much Loyalty, as the Church has done, let them begin the
Debate when they please.

On the other Hand, I Will prove, That the High Church Party has tyrannized over
them by all the Illegal, Unchristian, Methods possible, endeavoring to drive
them to the Extremities of Despair and Rebellion.

I Will prove by the Preachings, Printings, and declared Judgment, of several of
the most zealous, High, Party, that however the Practice was disowned by the
Party, upon the unseasonable exposing it, by the Book, called, The Shortest
Way; yet that it has all along been their Desire, and very often in their
Design; and I appeal for the Truth of it, among many Instances, to a Letter of
a known Churchman, whose Original I have by me, being wrote to a Person who
sent him the Book for a Present.

SIR,

I Received yours, and enclosed the Book, called, The Shortest Way with the
Dissenters, for which I thank you; and, next to the Holy Bible, and Sacred
Comments, I place it as the most Valuable Thing I can have. I look upon it as
the only Method, and I pray God to put it into the Heart of our most Gracious
Queen to put what is there proposed in Execution.

Here is the Character of a High-Churchman drawn to the Life; but when in a
Post or Two this Gentleman understood it was wrote by a Dissenter, in his next
he sends up an Invidious Character of a Whig, and what in his Opinion such a
one deserved.

And now, Gentlemen, would Reason and Arguments serve for a Reply to you, I
should go on with your voluminous Rapsody of Scandal; but really it is so full
of Rudeness, and Want of Manners, as well as Want of Truth, that I choose to let
it go, and return to your Challenge about our Conformity; and this you direct
us to lay before the Convocation, which I cannot but make some just Exceptions
to.

1. I see no Reason to believe the Convocation has given you any Authority to
make the Proposal; I cannot but believe that the Convocation knows too well
what, and how often, the Dissenters have offered the very Thing these Gentlemen
propose; the Convocation cannot be ignorant that all Proposals of Amendment and
Abatement are Ungrateful and Disagreeable to the Temper of these
High-Churchmen; and the Convocation could not be guilty of so much Imprudence
to offer that to us now, which we have so often offered them to no Purpose.

2. I see no Reason to believe the Convocation will perform the Conditions
these Gentlemen propose, viz. to abate the Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgies, and
Ordination; and therefore, Gentlemen, you are desired to take back your own
Words with this fair Proposal.

Whenever the Church of England ceases to quarrel with us about Habits,
Ceremonies, Liturgies, and Ordination, we are content that those Dissenters
which shall after that refuse to Conform, may be taxed with being unwilling to
have the Breach healed, with being obstinate Dissenters, or what you please.

It Is an unaccountable Assurance in any Author to advance such a Notion to the
World; in which, had they Power but of Reflection on themselves, they must of
Necessity see they were in the Wrong.

Pray, Gentlemen, what do you think we differ with you for? We hope you are
Protestants; we have owned you a true Church, and that we differ from you in
nothing Doctrinal, or absolutely Necessary for Salvation? Will ye keep your
Words with us? Then here is your Challenge answered.

Get the Convocation to pass it into an Act, that the Church will not quarrel
with us about Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgies and Ordination, the Schism be upon
us if we do not Conform.

If you cannot do this, then make us no more Challenges, never write to us to
tell you upon what Terms we will Conform; we are ready to Conform upon your own
Terms; we take you at your own Words; do but perform what you have voluntarily
proposed, we are your own.

Not but that we have great Reason to say, we know very well that this Offer is
neither in your Power, nor in your Nature; not in your Power, as private Men;
not in the Nature of your High Church, as a Party.

Nor is it any Breach of Charity to say so, because we have had so much
Experience of your Temper on all Occasions in this Matter; and in particular,
in the Conferences at the Savoy, where the Dissenters made all the Concessions
of Charity and Obedience that they were able to do with any Safety to their
Consciences; they went through the Common Prayer Book, and proposed only such
Amendment as they found absolutely necessary to make it tolerable to them and
their Hearers; they offered to dispute upon the Amendments they had made, and
to justify all their Objections by the Scriptures.

In a Word, they offered to Conform so far as they were able to answer it to
God, their Consciences, and the World; and he that requires Men to offer more,
or else rejects them, and shuts them out of their Communion, would do well to
tell us who are the Authors of the Schism.

But after all, these Gentlemen, by what I can perceive, are as ignorant in the
thing they call Schism, as they seem to be in other Things; and we have the
Testimony of the House of Lords, in which there concurred most of the Bishops
of the Church of England, that the Dissenters are not Schismatics. See the
Reasons of the Lords against the Bill to prevent Occasional Conformity.

And had these Gentlemen bethought themselves when they charge us with this
Schism, for separating from the Church, they would have reflected a little on
Mr. Hales, of Eaton, a Sober and Judicious Divine of the Church of England, who
in his Treatise of Schism lets them know, that separating in Communion from any
Particular Church is not a Schism, if the Persons are not separated from the
whole Body of Christians; but he that holds the Head, holds fast the Faith, and
does not divide in Faith and Doctrine, cannot be said to be guilty of Schism
for his refusing to join in Communion with this or that Particular Church. The
Church of Christ is that whole Body of Christians, however dispersed all over
the World, who are united to him by Faith, and are the Members composing and
joined to his Mystical Body, professing the same Doctrine and Faith, though
divided into never so many several Communities, Societies, and other Parts.

If this be to be Schismatics, it is plain the Dissenters are not no
Schismatics; and thus we have the Testimony of the Church Ministers, we have
the Vote of the Church of England Bishops, and a Majority of the House of
Peers, that the Dissenters are no Schismatics.

What shall we say now? If the Dissenters are allowed by the Church not to be
Schismatics; and if the House of Lords concur in the Vote; and if you will not
will not quarrel with us for Habit, Ceremonies, Liturgy or Ordination; Pray let
these Authors tell us what is the Difference among us? The People may soon be
united, for here is little left to dispute of.

What then is it we are treated for in such a Scandalous Manner? For what is it
we are called by Sir H. M. a People unsafe to be trusted with any Part of the
Administration? In what are we dangerous to the Government? In what is it
unsafe to trust us? Why, Ye are Enemies to Monarchy, and always plotting
against the Government, says these Learned and Passionate Authors.

Say you so, Sirs? We will come to an Account of Plots against Monarchy and
Government when you will; and whenever we do, you will be found guilty of more
than we.

But you have given us a long List of Dissenters Plots, as you call them, and
of People executed for them. First of all, I believe 'twould be hard to prove
the Dissenters were in a Plot every time some of them were hanged for it: And
we have seen some Church of England Parliaments Vnhang them again, as far as
they could, to do Justice to their Posterity: But I shall not ravel into the
List of Dissenters Plots at this time; only I cannot avoid telling this Author
that he has not given a fair Account of them; the Dissenters, Sir, have been
guilty of more Plots against the Government than you charge them with, and more
have been executed for it than you tell us of; for I assure you the Author of
this wears a Mourning Ring on his Finger, given at the Funeral of Mr.
Christopher Love, a Presbyterian Minister, Beheaded Anno 1653. for the horrid
Phanatick Plot, contrived for the bringing in, as they then called him, Charles
Stuart, and the restoring of Monarchy.

And now we come to examine a little this Author's preposterous Motion, that we
should give in our Grievances to the Convocation. Why truly, Gentlemen, we have
Grievances which the Convocation might redress, but we don't expect they will;
and some of them are as follow.

I. It Is our Grievance to be falsely accused, as Mismanagers of the late Reign,
when we had little or nothing to do in it; as unsafe to the Government, when we
have all along endeavored to uphold it; as Enemies to Peace, when we challenge
all our Enemies to testify who has the greatest Zeal for the Public Concord,
the Dissenters, or the Church.

2. It Is our Grievance to be challenged to show on what Terms we can Conform,
and large Concessions offered us in the Name of the Convocation by Men who are
so far from having any Authority from the Convocation, that the Gentlemen of
that Assembly do not think it worth while to own what they say, or perform what
they promise, in their Names, as it certainly is in this Case.

3. It is a Grievance to us, and to the whole Nation, that we should at first,
to gratify a Party, and to fortify the State Policy of Tricking and Designing
Men, be driven out, and cast off, from the Church Communion, and the Society of
Fellow Christians, for Trifles, and Things Indifferent.

Perhaps I am not of so free an Opinion as to the Indifferency of all the
Things in which we Differ as the Church themselves; but they are allowed by the
Church themselves to be Indifferent, and they are particularly Indifferent in
the Sense of Indifferency explained as before; and therefore, ad hominem, they
are really Indifferent: Even the whole of Church Discipline is so far
Indifferent, that whether this or that Model be settled, either Party are
allowed to be capable of Salvation without prejudice to their Belief in that
Head; or to speak plain, a Man may go to heaven in the Practice of either of
them, but yet as Conscience directs, ought to have Liberty to Choose for himself.

But to be cast out of Christian Communion for Trifles, for such are all the
Indifferent Things compared to the more Essential Points of Religion, this is a
Grievance; and this is indeed the Original Grievance, and the first Cause of
all their Speparation, which our Author calls Schism, to impose what they own
the Scripture does not impose.

It Is my Opinion, generally speaking, that no Church can justify keeping out
any Person from their Communion for any thing that will not in its own Nature
and Circumstances keep him out of Heaven: To keep us out of the Communion of
the Church for things which you own we may be saved without, will find but
slender Authority in the Scripture to Justify.

But after all, suppose our Grievances were laid before the Convocation, will
this Author assure us of Relief this Way? Will he undertake to tell us any
thing the Convocation has done that Way for any Body? Nay, will he be pleased
to tell us, whether that Body, who have now Set above Fifteen Years Annually,
have done one Act or Thing for the Benefit of the Church they Represent? Will
he please to give the World a History of their Actions, and engage to make out
they have done any thing but Wrangle among themselves for so long time? These
Men of Uniformity, have they had any Uniform Proceedings? Have they, in short,
done any thing worthy of themselves, or the Church they Represent? If they
have, we would be glad to hear it; if they have not, to what Purpose should we
apply to them for the Healing our Breaches.

Besides this, let us ask him another Question, Do the Convocation agree among
themselves? Have not some Gentlemen filled the World with Volumes and learned
Tracts on little Matters, relating to Adjournings and Recesses of that
Assembly; and that one Difficulty seems not yet Mastered, and how can we expect
that Spirit of Candor, that Temper and Peaceable Mind, which is absolutely
necessary to bring to pass so great a Blessing as this of a Protestant Union?
How can we look for it from an Assembly that cannot Decide their own
Controversies, nor Heal their own Breaches.

Upon the whole, it seems to me this Man of Gall has overshot himself, has gone
beyond his Commission, and has made a Proposal he had no Authority for, and
promised for People that will not perform for him.

Wherefore upon the whole Matter, as we have small Reason to hope for a
Reconciliation of Principles, I think the present Business of the Nation is to
arrive at a Reconciliation of Parties, a Conjunction of Interests, a General
Union of Affection, where there cannot be a Union of Opinions; that the Strife
of Parties and Factions may cease, and that Clamor and Contention may be at an
end.

Could this be brought to pass, it would really be the greatest Step toward
Conjunction in Religious Matters.

First, This would make our Charity extensive, and we should not make it our
constant business to Accuse, but Excuse, One Another; Reproachful Terms and
Marks of Distinction would die of course; Protestant would be the Common Name
of all Opinions.

God be praised, we are all of One Religion in England, though we Differ about
Methods: We pretend to be all Traveling to Heaven, though we fall out by the
Way; and we fall out about the Way too: But if every man disturbed himself less
about the Course his Neighbor Steers, and concerned himself more about his
own, there would more find the right Way thither, as far as Humane Conduct is
concerned in the Voyage to Heaven.

As to the Dissenters in England, they are Misrepresented to the Nation, that
they are for Tumults and Rebellions, Insurrections, and pulling down Monarchy,
and Governments; enough has been said here and elsewhere to Invite the Accusers
to a fair Debate; but the present Case chiefly respects their Interest. They
are not a Small, nor a Poor Sort in the Nation: The old Proverb of, Intrest
will not lie, is on their side; Men of Estates are never for pulling down Houses,
Burning Towns, and Ruining Nations; it is Natural for Trading Men to be Wise for
themselves; it is Men of Desperate Fortunes are for Embroiling Kingdoms, and
setting States and Governments into a Flame.

The Dissenters in England, generally speaking, are the Men of Trade and
Industry; and what Estates they have, lie principally in Stock of Goods,
Houses, and Credit. No Public Disaster can befall the Nation, but what affects
their Estates more than other Men's; Banks Stocks, Trade Foreign and Domestic,
These are the first Things that suffer on any Public Disorder; and none of
those People who are thus Embarked in Trade, can be properly thought to desire
Disasters and Revolutions, because they are generally the first that feel it.

There may indeed be some Men among them that want Principles, and may Act ill,
but these are few, and not Remarkable; the generality of the Dissenters must be
blind to their own Interests, as well as Enemies to the Government and their
Neighbors, when they promote Factions and Divisions in the State.

It may not be amiss to observe in this Case what I Appeal to any Man's
Judgment in, besides my own, in the particular Article of Stocks in the City,
when the People are uneasy at any Public Matters, and the Prospect of Affairs
looks with an ill Aspect, the Stocks fall; again, on the contrary, when they
are easy, the Stocks rise, and the Stock-Jobbers frequently Manage such
Occasions; and on this Head it is observed, That in the Case of a certain Bill
depending in the House, when the People thought it would be passed, Stocks
fell; again, when the talk of it began to be laid aside, as it really was for
some time, all Stocks rose in Price; and when it came to a Period, they still
advanced again.

Not that I Argue from hence that the Dissenters are the Chief Parties
Interessed in the Stocks, for it is plain they are not; but from hence may be
seen by any Man who does not put out his own Eyes, the great Benefit of Peace
and Union, the Effect it has on Trade, Credit, and the Value of Estates.

Besides, the Author of this Book discovers a Spirit of too much Rancor and
Malice, to make it fit to talk with him. I am told he is not an Englishman;
and indeed he seems not to be an Englishman, by his furious way of Treating
the English Nation at a time when they are all inclined to peace with one
another; the least thing can be said of him in this Case is, that he discovers
Impotent Rage at a People, who, God be praised, are out of his Reach; and the
Remnant of his Railing Talent may lie either against the Lords who have
rejected the Occasional Bill, on whom, without doubt, he will plentifully
bestow the usual Titles of a Faction, a Party, Low-Church Men, and the like.

Or else he may give himself a Loose at the Queen, who several of his Habit,
for we understand he is a Brother of the Gown, have left off to pray for,
except at Church, where they cannot help it; and as Mr. -- of High-Wickham has
entirely left Her Majesty out of his Grace after Meat, ever since Her Speech to
the Houses of Parliament for Peace and Union; so these Gentlemen may be
expected with him to give Her Majesty a Cast of their Foul Language as soon as
they dare do it.

But one Word with this Gentleman, and then I conclude, and that is about
Plotting, for the Dissenters have been his Plotters and his Rebels all along,
and have on all Occasions been very roughly handled by him, as to Associations,
Treasons, Rebellions, and the like.

Now I would fain desire this Gentleman to tell us a little News about a Plot
in Scotland; Her Majesty has given Her Parliament an Account that She has
Unquestioned Information of a Plot in Scotland; for our parts we expected it
from the Malignancy of the Party there; but now a Declaration of its
Unquestioned reality from the Throne, has put the Matter of Fact out of
Question.

Now as this Gentleman keeps a very good Correspondence there, which appears by
his own Writing, I could most earnestly recommend to him to inform the World
how many Dissenters, or Presbyterians, there are concerned in it.

Without doubt he can make it appear there are no High-Churchmen in it; for
they, Good Men, are of such untainted Principles, as to Loyalty, they are so
true to the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, that it is
impossible they can ever be concerned in any such thing; no, no, it must all go
upon the poor Papists; those Roman Catholics are sad Fellows; they are always
plotting, and these Whigs and Dissenters they must have a Hand in it; just as
this Author says they had in the Fire of London; the Dissenters were indeed
very eager to set the Nation in a Flame, when they set Fire to their own Houses
to begin it.

But alas for us! What shall we say now, if it may be proved that here are a
great many High-flying Churchmen in this Plot? Then the Wolf will be stripped
indeed. What if here should be Deposed Bishops, Non-Jurant Parsons, and
High-Church Episcoparian Scots-men, in this Plot against the Queen and Her
Government? What shall we say then? Why, I Will tell you what they will say;
they will say that Presbyterian Tyranny has drove them to such Extremities, that
Flesh and Blood could bear no longer. To which I shall answer, Not at all,
granting the Truth of Fact, that just as much had the Rebels at -- and
Bothwell-Bridge, to say, That Episcopal, Prelatick, Tyranny drove them to such
Extremities, that Flesh and Blood could bear no longer.

From whence I draw this short Inference, That whether they are Churchmen or
Dissenters, one Religion or another; when Men think themselves oppressed, let
their Principles and Pretense be what they will, they will always forget those
Pretenses; Nature will prevail; they will attempt their Freedom, and seek by
Force to resist Force.

Church of England, Church of Rome, Church of Scotland, Church of France, any
Church in the World, Whenever they are Oppressed, they will Rebel.

But one thing, we must tell these Gentlemen, they differ from their Brother
Rebels in; that they have plotted and rebelled with half the Oppressions and
Tyranny as others have done before them.

And if ever these Gentlemen please to compare the Sad and Doleful Sufferings
of the Episcopal Dissenters in Scotland, of which they have made so much Noise,
with the Miseries, Murders, Plunders, and Barbarous Usage of the Dissenters in
Scotland for 30 Years before, it will be easily seen which had the most Cause
to cry out of, Flesh and Blood being able to bear no longer; and whenever they
please to enter into the Detail of these Things, we are ready to join Issue
with them on this Head.

The Author or Authors of this Wolfish Book would have done well to have taken
Advice from a Gentleman of their own Party, and who writes on the same Subject,
who has said much more to the Purpose, and in Language much more suitable to
common Civility, and good Manners; I mean the Author of a Book, Entitled,
Union to the Church of England Freely Offered, and Earnestly Recommended, to
the Dissenters from it, of all Persuasions; but particularly to the Occasional
Conformists.

Now though I am of the Opinion that the Arguments that Gentleman makes use of
may be answered, yet I must acknowledge to his Honor, that while on the one
Hand he discovers himself to be of High-Church Principles, yet he show himself
a Man of Temper, a Scholar, and a Gentleman; and if ever he is replied to,
ought to be treated accordingly; the Candor with which he treats the Party he
writes against, at least deserves this Acknowledgment, that he is the first of
that Side that has used them civilly, and is thereby just so much the harder to
be confuted, for railing is much larger answered than Argument.

I leave Dr. Davenant and to answer those Parts of the Scurrilous Invectives
relating to them, which it is not so much a Question whether they can, as
whether it is worth while for them, or any Body else, to reply to so much
Railery.

Nor indeed had this been wrote, but to repeat to the World how willing the
Dissenters are at all times to enter into the Merits of the Cause, to let the
World see the Reasons of their Dissent, and how willing they are upon such
Concessions as Reason and Conscience calls for to come to a general Union with
their Protestant Brethren, notwithstanding all the Misrepresentation of
High-Church Malice to the contrary.

FINIS.

