A DISCOURSE UPON SOME LATE IMPROVEMENTS Of the MEANS for Preserving the Health
of Mariners.

DELIVERED AT THE Anniversary Meeting of the ROYAL SOCIETY, November 30, 1776.

By Sir JOHN PRINGLE, Baronet, PRESIDENT.

PUBLISHED BY THEIR ORDER.

LONDON, PRINTED FOR THE ROYAL SOCIETY. MDCCLXXVI.

GENTLEMEN,
BEFORE we proceed farther in the business of this day, permit me to acquaint
you with the judgment of your Council, in the disposal of Sir GODFREY COPLEY'S
medal; an office I have undertaken at their request, and with the greater
satisfaction, as I am confident you will be no less unanimous in giving your
approbation, than they have been in addressing you for it upon this occasion.
For though they were not insensible of the just title that several of the
Papers, composing the present volume of your Transactions, had to your
particular notice, yet they did not hesitate in preferring that which I
presented to you from Captain COOK, giving An account of the method he had
taken to preserve the health of the crew of his Majesty's ship the Resolution
during her late voyage round the world The Paper itself, read at the Society in
March last, with an Extract of a letter from Captain COOK to the President,
dated Plymouth, the 7th of July following, are both subjoined to this discourse.
. Indeed I imagine that the name alone of so worthy a member of this Society
would have inclined you to depart from the strictness of your rules, by
conferring upon him that honor, though you had received no direct
communication from him; considering how meritorious in your eyes that person
must appear, who has not only made the most extensive, but the most
instructive voyages, who has not only discovered, but surveyed, vast tracts of
new coasts, who has dispelled the illusion of a terra australis incognita, and
fixed the bounds of the habitable earth, as well as those of the navigable
ocean, in the Southern Hemisphere.

I shall not, however, expatiate on that ample field of praise, but confine my
discourse to what was the intention of this honorary premium, namely, to crown
that Paper of the year which should contain the most useful and most successful
experimental inquiry. Now what inquiry can be so useful as that which has for
its object the saving the lives of men? and when shall we find one more
successful than that before us? Here are no vain boastings of the empiric, nor
ingenious and delusive theories of the dogmatist; but a concise, an artless,
and an incontested relation of the means, by which, Under the divine favor,
Captain COOK, with a company of a hundred and eighteen men, performed a voyage
of three years and eighteen days, throughout all the climates from fifty-two
degrees North to seventy-one degrees South, with the loss of only one man by a
disease This was a phthisis pulmonalis terminating in a dropsy. Mr. PATTEN,
surgeon to the Resolution, who mentioned to me this case, observed that this
man began so early to complain of a cough and other consumptive symptoms, which
had never left him, that his lungs must have been affected before he came on
board.
. What must enhance to us the value of these salutary observations, is to see
the practice has been no less simple than efficacious.

I would now inquire of the most conversant in the study of Bills of Mortality,
whether in the most healthful climate, and in the best condition of life, they
have ever found so small a number of deaths in such a number of men, within
that period of time? How great and agreeable then must our surprise be, after
perusing the histories of long navigations in former days, when so many
perished by marine diseases, to find the air of the sea acquitted of all
malignity, and in fine that a voyage round the world may be undertaken with
less danger to health than a common tour in Europe!

But the better to see the contrast between the old and the present times,
allow me to recall to your memory what you have read of the first voyage for
the establishment of the East India Company. The equipment consisting of four
ships, with four hundred and eighty men, three of those vessels were so
weakened by the scurvy, by the time they had got only three degrees beyond the
Line, that the merchants, who had embarked on this adventure, were obliged to
do duty as common sailors; and there died in all, at sea, and on shore at
Soldania (a place of refreshment on this side of the Cape of Good-Hope) one
hundred and five men, which was near a fourth part of their complement. And
has not Sir RICHARD HAWKINS, an intelligent as well as brave officer, who
lived in that age, recorded, that in twenty years, during which he had used the
sea, he could give an account of ten thousand mariners who had been consumed by
the scurvy alone? Yet so far was this author from mistaking the disease, that I
have perused few who have so well described it. If then in those early times,
the infancy I may call them of the commerce and naval power of England, so many
were carried off by that bane of seafaring people, what must have been the
destruction afterward, upon the great augmentation of the fleet, and the
opening of so many new ports to the trade of Great Britain, whilst so little
advancement was made in the nautical part of medicine?

But passing from those old dates to one within the remembrance of many here
present, when it might have been expected that whatever tended to aggrandize
the naval power of Britain, and to extend her commerce, would have received the
highest improvement; yet we shall find, that even at this late period few
measures had been taken to preserve the health of seamen, more than had been
known to our uninstructed ancestors. Of this assertion the victorious, but
mournful, expedition of Commodore ANSON affords too convincing a proof. It is
well known, that soon after passing the Streights of Le Maire, the scurvy began
to appear in his squadron; that by the time the Centurion had advanced but a
little way into the South Sea, forty-seven had died of it in this ship; and
that there were few on board who had not, in some degree, been affected with
the distemper, though they had not been then eight months from England. That in
the ninth month, when standing for the island of Juan Fernandez, she lost
double that number; and that the mortality went on at so great a rate (I still
speak of the Commodore's ship) that, before she arrived there, she had buried
two hundred; and at last could muster no more than six of the common men in a
watch capable of doing duty. This was the condition of one of the three ships
which reached that island; the other two suffered in proportion.

Nor did the tragedy end here; for after a few months respite, the same fatal
sickness broke out afresh and made such havoc, that before the Centurion
(which now contained the whole surviving crews of the three ships) had got to
the island of Tinian, there died sometimes eight or ten in a day; insomuch that
when they had been two years on the voyage, they had lost a larger proportion
than that of four in five of their original number; and, by the account of the
historian, all of them, after their entering the South Sea, of the scurvy. I
say by the account of the elegant writer of the voyage, for as he neither was
in the medical line himself, nor has authenticated this part of his narrative
by appealing to the surgeons of the ship or their journals, I should doubt that
this was not strictly the case; but rather, that in producing this great
mortality, that pestilential kind of distemper was combined with the scurvy,
which, from the places where it most frequently occurs, has been distinguished
by the name of the jail or hospital-fever Dr. MEAD, who had seen the original
observations of two of Commodore ANSON'S surgeons, says, that the scurvy at
that time was accompanied with putrid fevers, etc. See his Treatise on the
Scurvy, p. 98. and seq.
. But whether the scurvy alone, or this fever combined with it, were the cause,
it is not at present material to inquire, since both, arising from foul air and
other sources of putrefaction, may now in a great measure be obviated by the
various means fallen upon since Lord ANSON'S expedition. For in justice to that
prudent as well as brave Commander it must be observed, that the arrangements
preparatory to his voyage were not made by himself; that his ship was so deeply
laden as not to admit of opening the gun-ports, except in the calmest weather,
for the benefit of air; and that nothing appears to have been neglected by him,
for preserving the health of his men, that was then known and practiced in the
navy.

I should now proceed to enumerate the chief improvements made since that
period, and which have enabled our ships to make so many successful
circumnavigations as in a manner to efface the impression of former disasters;
but as I have mentioned the sickness most destructive to mariners, and against
the ravages of which those preservatives have been mainly contrived, it may be
proper briefly to explain its nature, and the rather as unless among mariners
it is little understood. First then I would observe, that the scurvy is not the
ailment which goes by that name on shore. The distemper commonly, but
erroneously in this place, called the scurvy belongs to a class of diseases
totally different from what we are now treating of; and so far is the
commonly-received opinion, that there are few constitutions altogether free
from a scorbutic taint, from being true, that unless among sailors and some
others circumstanced like them, more particularly with respect to those who use
a salt and putrid diet, or live in foul air and uncleanliness, I have reason to
believe there are few disorders less frequent. This opinion I submitted to the
judgment of the Society several years ago, and I have had no reason since to
alter it. I then said (contrary to what was generally believed) and seemingly
on the best authority, that the sea-air was never the cause of the scurvy,
since on board a ship, on the longest voyages, cleanliness, ventilation, and
fresh provisions, would preserve from it; and that upon a seacoast, free from
marshes, the inhabitants were not liable to that indisposition, though
frequently breathing the air from the sea Diseases of the Army, part I. chapter 1.
Append. Pap. 7.
. I concluded with joining in sentiments with those who ascribed the scurvy to
a septic resolution, or beginning corruption, of the whole habit, similar to
what every animal substance is more or less disposed to when deprived of life
Ibid. Pap. 7.
. This theory seemed to be sufficiently verified by the examination of the
symptoms in the scorbutic sick, and of the appearances in their bodies after
death WOODALL'S Surgeon's Mate, p. 163. POUPART, Mem. de l'Acad. R. des Sc. A.
1699. PETIT, Mal. des Os, t. II. p. 446. MEAD on the Scurvy, p. 104.
. On that occasion I remarked, that salted meats after some time become in
effect putrid, though they may continue long palatable by means of the salt;
and that common salt, supposed to be one of the stronged preservatives from
corruption, is at best but an indifferent one, even in a large quantity; and in
a small one, such as we use at table with fresh meats, or swallow in meats that
have been salted, so far from impeding putrefaction, it rather promotes that
process in the body.

This position concerning the putrefying quality of sea salt, in certain
proportions, has been since confirmed by the experiments of the late Mr.
CANTON, F. R. S. in his Paper on the Cause of the luminous Appearance of
Seawater Phil. Transact. vol. LIX. p. 446.
.

It has been said, that the scurvy is much owing to the coldness of the air,
which checks perspiration; and it is therefore the endemic distemper of the
Northern nations, and particularly of those around the Baltic BARTHOLIN. Med.
Danor. Domestic. p. 98.
. The fact is partly true, but I doubt not so the cause. In those regions, by
the long and severe winters, the cattle destitute of pasture can barely live,
and are therefore unfit for use; so that the people, for their provision during
that season, are obliged to slaughter them by the end of autumn, and to salt
them for half the year. This putrid diet then, on which they must subsist so
long, and to which the inhabitants of the South are not reduced, is the chief
cause of the disease. And if we reflect, that the lower people of the North
have few or no greens nor fruit in the winter, little fermented liquors, and
often live in damp, foul, and ill-aired houses, it is easy to conceive how they
should become liable to the same indisposition with seamen; whilst others of as
high a latitude, but who live in a different manner, keep free from it. Thus we
are informed by LINNAEUS, that the Laplanders, one of the most hyperborean
nations, know nothing of the scurvy LINNAEI Flora Lapponica, p. 8, 9.
; for which no other reason can be assigned than their never eating salted
meats, nor indeed salt with any thing, but their using all the winter the fresh
flesh of their rain-deer.

This exemption of the Laplanders from the general distemper of the North is
the more observable, as they seldom taste vegetables, bread never, as we
farther learn from that celebrated author. Yet in the very provinces which
border on Lapland, where they use bread, but scarcely any other vegetable, and
eat salted meats, they are as much troubled with the scurvy as in any other
country LINNAEUS in several parts of his work consirms what is here said of
salted meats, as one of the chief causes of the scurvy. See Amoenitat. Acad.
vol. V. p. 6. and seq. p. 42.
. But let us incidentally remark, that the late improvements in agriculture,
gardening, and the other arts of life, by extending their influence to the
remotest parts of Europe, and to the lowest people, begin sensibly to lessen
the frequency of that complaint, even in those climates that have been once the
most afflicted with it.

It has also been asserted, that men living on shore will be affected with the
scurvy, though they have never been accustomed to a salt-diet; but of this I
have never known an instance, except in those who breathed in an air that is
marshy, or otherwise putrid, and who wanted exercise, fruits and green
vegetables: under such circumstances it must be granted that the humors will
corrupt in the same manner, though not in the same degree, with those of
mariners. Thus, in the late war, when Sisinghurst Castle in Kent was filled
with French prisoners, the scurvy broke out among them, though they had never
been served with salted victuals in England; but had daily had an allowance of
fresh meat, and of bread in proportion, though without greens or any other
vegetable. The surgeon who attended them, and from whom I received this
information, having formerly been employed in the navy, was the betterable to
judge of the disorder, and to cure it. Besides the deficiency of greens, he
observed that the wards were foul and crowded, the house damp (from a moat that
surrounded it) and that the bounds allotted for taking the air were so small,
and in wet weather so sloughy, that the men seldom went out. He added, that a
representation having been made, he had been empowered to furnish the prisoners
with roots and greens for boiling in their soup, and to quarter the sick in a
neighboring village in a dry situation, with liberty to go out for air and
exercise; and that by these means they had all quickly recovered. It is
probable, that the scurvy sooner appeared among these strangers, from their
having all been taken at sea, and consequently being the more disposed to the
distemper. My informer farther acquainted me, that in the lower and wetter
parts of that county, where some of his practice lay, he had now and then met
with slighter cases of the scurvy among the common people; such, he said, as
lived the whole winter on salted bacon, without fermented liquors, greens, or
any fruit, a few apples excepted; but, he remarked, that in the winters
following a plentiful growth of that fruit, those peasants were visibly less
liable to that ailment.

I have dwelt the longer on this part of my subject, as I look upon the
knowledge of the nature and cause of the scurvy to be an essential step toward
improving the means of prevention and cure. And I am persuaded, after long
reflection, and the opportunities I have had of conversing with those who to
much sagacity had joined no small experience in nautical practice, that upon an
examination of the several articles, which have either been of old approven, or
have of late been introduced into the navy, it will appear, that though these
means may vary in form and in their mode of operating; yet they all some way
contribute toward preventing putrefaction; whether of the air in the closer
parts of a ship, of the meats, of the water, of the clothes and bedding, or of
the body itself. And if in this inquiry (which may be made by the way, whilst
we take a review of the principal articles of provision, and other means used
by Captain COOK to guard against sickness) I say, if in this inquiry it shall
appear, that the notion of a septic cause is not without foundation, it will be
no small encouragement to proceed on that principle, in order to improve this
important branch of medicine.

Captain COOK begins his list of stores with malt: Of this, he says, was made
sweet-wort, and given not only to those men who had manifest symptoms of the
scurvy, but to such also as were judged to be the most liable to it. Dr.
MACBRIDE, who first suggested this preparation, was led (as he says) to the
discovery by some experiments that had been laid before this Society; by which
it appeared, that the air produced by alimentary fermentation was endowed with
a power of correcting putrefaction. The fact he confirmed by numerous trials,
and finding this fluid to be fixed air, he justly concluded, that whatever
substance proper for food abounded with it, and which could be conveniently
carried to sea, would make one of the best provisions against the scurvy; which
he then considered as a putrid disease, and as such to be prevented or cured by
that powerful kind of antiseptic MACBRIDE's Experimental Essays, passim.
. Beer, for instance, has always been esteemed one of the best antiscorbutics;
but as that derived all its fixed air from the malt of which it is made, he
inferred, that malt itself was preferable in long voyages, as it took up less
room than the brewed liquor, and would keep longer sound. Experience has since
verisied this ingenious theory, and the malt has now gained so much credit in
the navy, that there only wanted so long, so healthful, and so celebrated a
voyage as this, to rank it among the most indispensable articles of provision.
For though Captain COOK remarks, that A proper attention to other things must
be joined, and that he is not altogether of opinion, that the wort will be able
to cure the scurvy in an advanced state at sea; yet he is persuaded, that it is
sufficient to prevent that distemper from making any great progress, for a
considerable time; and therefore he does not hesitate to pronounce it, one of
the best antiscorbutic medicines yet found out Having been savoured with a
sight of the medical journal of Mr. PATTEN, surgeon to the Resolution, I read
the following passage in it, not a little strengthening the above testimony. I
have found the wort of the utmost service in all scorbutic cases during the
voyage. As many took it by way of prevention, few cases occurred where it had a
fair trial; but these, however, I flatter myself, will be sufficient to
convince every impartial person, that it is the best remedy hitherto found out
for the cure of the sea-scurvy: and I am well convinced, from what I have seen
the wort perform, and from its mode of operation, that if aided by
portable-soup, sourkrout, sugar, sago, and courants, the scurvy, that maritime
pestilence, will seldom or never make its alarming appearance among a ship's
crew, on the longest voyages; proper care with regard to cleanliness and
provisions being observed.
.

This salutary gas (or sixed air) is contained more or less in all fermentable
liquors, and begins to oppose putrefaction as soon as the working or intestine
motion commences.

In wine it abounds, and perhaps no vegetable substance is more replete with it
than the fruit of the vine. If we join the grateful taste of wine, we must rank
it first in the list of antiscorbutic liquors. Cider is likewise good, with
other vinous productions from fruit, as also the various kinds of beer. It has
been a constant observation, that in long cruizes or distant voyages the scurvy
is never seen whilst the small-beer holds out at a full allowance; but that
when it is all expended, the disorder soon appears. It were therefore to be
wished, that this most wholesome beverage could be renewed at sea; but our
ships afford not sufficient convenience. The Russians however make a shift to
prepare at sea, as well as at land, a liquor of a middle quality between wort
and small-beer, in the following manner. They take ground malt and rye-meal in
a certain proportion, which they knead into small loaves, and bake in the oven.
These they occasionally infuse in a proper quantity of warm water, which begins
so soon to ferment, that in the space of twenty-four hours their brewage is
completed, in the production of a small, brisk, and acidulous liquor, which
they call quas, palatable to themselves and not disagreeable to the taste of
strangers. The late Dr. MOUNSEY, member of this Society, who had lived long in
Russia, and had been Archiater under two successive sovereigns, acquainted me
that the quas was the common and wholesome drink both of the fleets and armies
of that empire, and that it was particularly good against the scurvy. He added,
that happening to be at Moscow when he perused the Observations on the
Jail-Fever, published here, he had been induced to compare what he read in that
treatise with what he should see in the several prisons of that large city: but
to his surprise, after visiting them all, and finding them full of malefactors
(for the late Empress then suffered none of those who were convicted of capital
crimes to be put to death) yet he could discover no fever among them, nor learn
that any acute distemper peculiar to jails had ever been known there. He
observed that some of those places of confinement had a yard, into which the
prisoners were allowed to come for the air; but that there were others without
this advantage, yet not sickly: so that he could assign no other reason for the
healthful condition of those men than the kind of diet they used; which was the
same with that of the common people of the country, who not being able to
purchase flesh-meat live mostly on rye-bread (the most acescent of any bread)
and drink quas. He concluded with saying, that upon his return to St.
Petersburg he had made the same enquiry there, and with the same result.

Thus far my informer, from whose account it would appear, that the rye-meal
assisted both in quickening the fermentation and adding more sixed air; since
the malt alone could not so readily produce so acidulous and brisk a liquor.
And there is little doubt but that whenever the other grains can be brought to
a proper degree of fermentation, they will more or less in the same way become
useful. That oats will, I am satisfied, from what I have been told by one of
the intelligent friends of Captain COOK. This gentlemen being on a cruize in a
large ship The Essex, a seventy-gun ship.
, in the beginning of the late war, and the scurvy breaking out among his crew,
he bethought himself of a kind of food, he had seen used in some parts of the
country, as the most proper on this occasion. Some oatmeal is put into a wooden
vessel, hot water is poured upon it, and the infusion continues until the
liquor begins to taste sourish, that is, till a fermentation comes on, which in
a place moderately warm may be in the space of two days. The water is then
poured off from the grounds, and boiled down to the consistence of a jelly This
rural food, in the North, is called sooins.
. This he ordered to be made, and dealt out in messes, being first sweetened
with sugar, and seasoned with some prize-wine he had taken, which though turned
sour, yet improved the taste, and made this aliment no less palatable than
medicinal.

He assured me, that upon this diet chiefly, and by abstaining from salted
meats, his scorbutic sick quite recovered on board; and not in that voyage
only, but by the same means in his subsequent cruizes, during the war, without
his being once obliged to send one of them on shore because they could not get
well at sea. Yet oatmeal unfermented, like barley unmalted, has no sensible
effect in curing the scurvy; as if the fixed air, which is incorporated with
these grains, could mix with the chyle which they produce, enter the lacteals,
and make part of the nourishment of the body, without manifesting any elastic
or antiseptic quality, when not loosened by a previous fermentation.

Before the power of the fixed air in subduing putrefaction was known, the
efficacy of fruits, greens, and fermented liquors, was commonly ascribed to the
acid in their composition, and we have still reason to believe that the acid
concurs in operating the effect. If it be alleged that mineral acids, which
contain little or no fixed air, have been tried in the scurvy with little
success, I would answer, that I doubt that in those trials they have never been
sufficiently diluted; for it is easy to conceive, that in the small quantity of
water the elixir of vitriol, for instance, is given, that austere acid can
scarce get beyond the first passages, considering the delicate sensibility of
the mouths of the lacteals, which must force them to shut and exclude so
pungent a liquor. It were therefore a proper experiment to be made in a
deficiency of malt, or when that grain should happen to be spoilt by keeping
Captain COOK told me, that the malt held out sufficiently good for the two
first years; but that in the third, having lost much of its taste, he doubted
whether it retained any of its virtues. Mr. PATTEN however observed, that
though the malt at that time was sensibly decayed, yet nevertheless he had
still sound it useful, when he employed a larger proportion of it to make the
infusion.
, to use water acidulated with the spirit of sea salt, in the proportion of
only ten drops to a quart; or with the weak spirit of vitriol, thirteen drops
to the same measure In these proportions I found the water just acidulous and
pleasant.
; and to give to those that are threatened with the disease three quarts of
this liquor in the day, to be consumed as they shall think proper.

But if the fixed air and acids are such preservatives against the scurvy, why
should Captain COOK make so little account of the rob of lemons and of oranges
(for so they have called the extracts or inspissated juices of those fruits) in
treating that distemper? This I found was the reason. These preparations being
only sent out upon trial, the surgeon of the ship was told, at a conjecture,
how much he might give for a dose, but without strictly limiting it. The
experiment was made with the quantity specified, but with so little advantage,
that judging it not advisable to lose more time, he set about the cure with
the wort only, whereof the efficacy he was certain; whilst he reserved these
robs for other purposes, more particularly for colds, when to a large draught
of warm water, with some spirits and sugar, he added a spoonful of one of them,
and with this composition made a grateful sudorific which answered the
intention. No wonder then if Captain COOK, not knowing the proper dose of these
concentrated juices for the scurvy, but seeing them fail as they were given in
the trial, should entertain no great opinion of their antiscorbutic powers. It
may be also proper to take notice, that as they had been reduced to a small
proportion of their bulk by evaporation upon fire, it is probable, they were
much weakened by that process, and that with their aqueous parts they had lost
not a little of their aerial, on which so much of their antiseptic virtue
depended. If therefore a farther trial of these excellent fruits were to be
made, it would seem more advisable to send to sea the purified juices entire in
casks, agreeably to a proposal I find has been made to the Admiralty by an
ingenious and experienced navy-surgeon some years ago. For in truth, the
testimonies in favor of the salutary qualities of these acids are so numerous
and so strong, that I should look upon some failures, even in cases where their
want of success cannot so well be accounted for as in this voyage, not a
sufficient reason for striking them out of the list of the most powerful
preservatives against this consuming malady of sailors.

It may be observed, that Captain COOK says not more in praise of vinegar than
of the robs; yet I would not thence infer, that he made no account of that
acid; but only, that as he happened in this voyage to be sparingly provided
with it, and yet did well, he could not consider a large store of it to be so
material an article of provision as was commonly imagined. And though he
supplied its place in the messes of the men with the acid of the sour-krout,
and trusted chiefly to fire for purifying his decks, yet it is to be hoped that
future navigators will not therefore omit it. Vinegar will serve at least for a
wholesome variety in the seasoning of the salted meats, and may be sometimes
successfully used as a medicine, especially in the aspersions of the berths of
the sick. It is observable that though the smell be little grateful to a person
in health, yet it is commonly agreeable to those who are sick, and particularly
to such as are confined to a foul and crowded ward. There the physician will
smell to vinegar, as much for pleasure as for guarding against infection.

Now the wort and the acid juices were only dispensed as medicines, but the
next article was of more extensive use. This was the sour-krout (sour cabbage)
a dish of universal request in Germany. The acidity is acquired by its
spontaneous fermentation, and it was the sour taste which made it the more
acceptable to all who ate it. To its farther commendation we may add, that it
held out good to the last of the voyage.

It may seem strange, that though this herb has had such high encomiums
bestowed upon it by the ancients (witness what CATO the elder and PLINY the
naturalist say on the subject) and has had the sanction of the experience of
nations for ages in its favor, it should yet be disapproved of by some of the
most distinguished writers of our times. One finds it yield a rank smell in
decoction, which he confounds with that of putrefaction. Another analyzes it,
and discovers so much gross air in the composition as to render it
indigestible; yet this flatulence, so much decryed, must now be acknowledged to
be the fixed air, which makes the cabbage so wholesome when fermented. Nay it
has been traduced by one of the most celebrated physicians of our age, as
partaking of a poisonous nature: and little better founded was that position of
the same illustrious author, that cabbage being an alcalescent plant, and
therefore disposing to putrefaction, could never be used in the scurvy, except
when the disease proceeded from an acid. But the experiments which I formerly
laid before the Society evinced this vegetable, with the rest of the supposed
alcalescents, to be really acescent; and that the scurvy never is owing to
acidity, but, much otherwise, to a species of putrefaction, that very cause of
which the ill-grounded class of alcalescents was supposed to be a promoter See
this remark more at large, Dis. of the Army, App. Pap. 7.
.

Among other of the late improvements of the naval stores we have heard much of
the portable-soup, and accordingly we find that Captain Cook has not a little
availed himself of it in his voyage. This concentrated broth being freed from
all fat, and having by long boiling evaporated the most putrescent parts of the
meat, is reduced to the consistence of a glue, which in effect it is, and will
like other glues, in a dry place, keep sound for years together. It has been
said, that broths turn sour on keeping, though made without any vegetable La
seule matiere qui s'aigrisse dans le sang est la matiere gelatineuse, etc.
SENAC, Structure du Coeur, l. iii. chapter 4. 5.
. Now whether any real acid be thus formed may be a question: I incline at
least to believe, that the gelatinous parts of animal substances, such as
compose these cakes, are not of a nature much disposed to putrefy. But however
that may be, since Captain COOK observes, that this soup was the means of
making his people eat a greater quantity of greens than they would have done
otherwise, in so far we must allow it to have been virtually antiseptic.

So much for those articles that have of late been supplied to all the king's
ships on long voyages, and in which therefore our worthy brother claims no
other merit than the prudent dispensation of them; but what follows, being
regulations either wholly new, or improven hints from some of his experienced
friends, he may justly appropriate to himself.

First then, he put his people at three watches instead of two (which is the
general practice at sea) that is, he divided the whole crew into three
companies, and by putting each company upon the watch by turns, four hours at a
time, every man had eight hours free, for four of duty; whereas at watch and
watch the half of the men being upon duty at once, with returns of it every
four hours, they can have but broken sleeps, and when exposed to wet they have
not time to get dry before they lie down. When the service requires it, such
hardships must be endured; but when there is no pressing call, ought not a
mariner to be refreshed with as much uninterrupted rest as a common
day-labourer?

I am well informed that an officer distinguishes himself in nothing more than
in preserving his men from wet and the other injuries of the weather. These
were most essential points with this humane commander. In the torrid zone he
shaded his people from the scorching sun by an awning over his deck; and in his
course under the antarctic circle he had a coat provided for each man, of a
substantial woollen stuff, with the addition of a hood for covering their
heads. This garb (which the sailors called their Magellan jacket) they
occasionally wore, and found it a most comfortable one for working in rain and
snow, and among the broken ice in the high latitudes of the South.

Let us proceed to another article not less material; which is the care to keep
clean the persons, bedding, and clothes of the sailors. The Captain acquainted
me, that regularly one morning in the week he passed his ship's company in
review, and saw that every man had changed his linen, and was in other respects
as clean and neat as circumstances would permit. It is well known how much
cleanliness is conducive to health; but it is not so obvious how much it also
tends to good order and other virtues. That diligent officer was persuaded (nor
was perhaps the observation new) that such men as he could induce to be more
cleanly than they were disposed to be of themselves, became at the same time
more sober, more orderly, and more attentive to their duty. It must be
acknowledged that a seaman has but indifferent means to keep himself clean, had
he the greatest inclination to do it; for I have not heard that the commanders
of ships have yet availed themselves of the still for providing fresh water for
washing; and it is well known that seawater does not mix with soap, and that
linen wet with brine never thoroughly dries. But for Captain COOK, the frequent
opportunities he had of taking in water among the islands of the South Sea,
enabled him in that tract to dispense to his ship's company fresh water for
every use; and when he navigated in the high latitudes of the Southern Oceans,
he still more abundantly provided them with it, as I shall take notice in the
sequel of this discourse.

Of the hammocks and bedding I need say little, as all officers are now
sensible how much it concerns the health of their people to have this part of a
ship's furniture kept dry and well-aired; since by the perspiration of so many
men, every thing below, even in the space of twenty-four hours, is apt to
contract an offensive moisture. But Captain COOK was not satisfied with
ordering upon deck the hammocks and bedding every day that was fair (the common
method) but took care that each bundle should be unlashed, and so spread out
that every part of it might be exposed to the air.

His next concern was to see to the purity of the ship itself; without which
attention all the rest would have profited little. I shall not however detain
you with his orders about washing and scraping his decks, as I do not
understand that in that kind of cleansing he excelled others; but since he has
laid so great a stress upon fire as a purifier, I shall endeavor to explain
his way of using it, more fully than he has done in his Paper. Some wood being
put into a proper stove or grate is lighted, and carried successively to every
part below deck. Wherever fire is, the air nearest to it being heated becomes
specifically lighter, and by being lighter rises and passes through the
hatchways into the atmosphere. The vacant space is filled with the cold air
around, and that being heated in its turn, in like manner ascends and is
re-placed by other air as before. Thus by continuing the fire for some time in
any of the lower apartments, the foul air is in a measure driven out, and the
fresh admitted. This is not all: I apprehend that the acid steams of the wood,
in burning, act here as an antiseptic on the corrupted air that remains.

An officer of distinguished rank, another of Captain COOK'S experienced
friends, mentioned to me a common and just observation in the fleet; which was,
that all the old twenty-gun ships were remarkably less sickly than those of the
same size of a modern construction. This, he said, was a circumstance he could
not otherwise account for, than that, by the former having their galley [their
kitchen] in the forepart of the orlop, the chimney vented so ill, that it was
sure to fill every part with smoke whenever the wind was a-stern: this was a
nuisance for the time, but, as he thought, abundantly compensated by the
extraordinary good health of the several crews. Possibly the heat of those
fire-places was also beneficial, by drying and ventilating those ships more
when they were below, than they can do now they are placed upon the upper deck
under the fore-castle.

But the most obvious use of the portable fires was their drying up the
moisture, and especially in those places where there was the least circulation
of air. This humidity, composed of the perspirable matter of a multitude of
men, and often of animals (kept for a live-stock) and of the steams of the
bilge-water from the well, where the corruption is the greatest; this moisture,
I say, being one of the main sources of sea-diseases, was therefore more
particularly attended to, in order to its removal. The fires were the powerful
instrument for that purpose; and whilst they burnt, some men were employed in
rubbing hard, with can vass or oakum, every part of the inside of the ship that
was damp and accessible. But the advantage of fire appears no where so manifest
as in cleansing the well; for this being in the lowest part of the hold, the
whole leakage runs into it, whether of the ship itself, or of the casks of
spoilt meats or corrupted water. The mephitic vapors from this sink alone have
often been the cause of instantaneous death to those who have unwarily
approached to clean it; and not to one only, but to several successively, when
they have gone down to succor their unfortunate companions: yet this very
place has not only been rendered safe but sweet, by means of an iron pot filled
with fire and let down to burn in it.

When from the circumstances of the weather this salutary operation could not
take place, the ship was fumigated with gunpowder, as described in the Paper;
though that smoke could have no effect in drying, but only in correcting the
corruption of the air, by means of the acid spirits from the sulphur and nitre,
aided perhaps by some species of an aerial fluid, then disengaged from them, to
counteract putrefaction. But as these purifications by gunpowder, as well as
by burning tar and other resinous substances, are sufficiently known, I shall
not insist longer on them here.

Among the several means of sweetening or renewing the air, we should expect to
hear of Dr. HALES'S ventilator. I must confess it was my expectation; and
therefore, persuaded as I was of the excellence of the invention, it was not
without much regret that I saw so good an opportunity lost of giving the same
favorable impression of it to the public. If a degree of success, exceeding
our most sanguine hopes, is not sufficient for justifying the omission of a
measure, deemed to be one of the most essential for attaining an end, I would
plead in favor of our worthy brother, that by a humiliating fatality, so often
accompanying the most useful discoveries, the credit of this ventilator is yet
far from being firmly established in the navy. What wonder then if Captain
COOK, being so much otherwise taken up, should not have had time to examine it,
and therefore avoided the encumbering of his ship with an apparatus he had
possibly never seen used, and of which he had at best received but a doubtful
character? Nor was he altogether unprovided with a machine for ventilation. He
had the wind-sails, though he has not mentioned them in his Paper; and he told
me, that he had found them at times most serviceable, and particularly between
the Tropics. They have the merit of taking up little room, they require no
labor in working, and the contrivance is so simple that they can fail in no
hands: but their powers are small, in comparison with those of the ventilator;
they cannot be put up in hard gales of wind, and they are of no efficacy in
dead calms, when a refreshment of the air is most wanted. Should there be any
objection to the employing both?

Such were the measures taken by our sagacious navigator for procuring a purity
of air. It remains only to see in what manner he supplied pure water; another
article of so great moment, that the thirsty voyager, upon his salt and putrid
diet, with a short allowance of this element, and that in a corrupted state,
must account a plentiful provision of fresh and sweet water to be indeed the
best of things.

Captain COOK was not without an apparatus for distilling seawater; and though
he could not obtain nearly so much as was expected from the invention, yet he
sometimes availed himself of it; but for the most of his voyage he was
otherwise provided. Within the Southern Tropic, in the Pacific Ocean, he found
so many islands, and those so well stored with springs, that as I have hinted
before he never was without a sufficiency of water for every necessary purpose.
But not satisfied with plenty, he would have the sweetest; and therefore,
whenever an opportunity offered, he emptied what he had taken in but a few days
before, and filled his casks anew. But was he not above four months in his
passage from the Cape of Good-Hope to New-Zeeland, in the frozen zone of the
South, without once seeing land? and did he not actually complete his
circumnavigation, in that high latitude, without the benefit of a single
fountain? Here was indeed a wonder of the deep! I may call it the romance of
his voyage! Those very shoals, fields, and floating mountains of ice, among
which he steered his perilous course, and which presented such terrifying
prospects of destruction; those, I say, were the very means of his support, by
supplying him abundantly with what he most wanted. It had been said that those
stupendous masses of ice, called mountains, melted into fresh water; though
CRANTZ, the relator of that paradox, does not imagine they originate from the
sea; but that they are first formed in the great rivers of the North, and being
carried down into the occan are afterward increased to that enormous height by
the snow that falls upon them Hist. of Greenland, b. I. chapter ii. 11, 12.
. But that all frozen seawater would thaw into fresh, had either never been
asserted, or had met with little credit. This is certain, that Captain COOK
expected no such transmutation, and therefore was agreeably surprised to find
he had one difficulty less to encounter; that of preserving the health of his
men so long on salt provisions, with a scanty allowance of corrupted water, or
what he could procure by distillation. The melted ice of the sea was not only
sweet but soft, and so wholesome as to show, among numerous other instances,
the fallacy of human reason unsupported by experiments: an ancient of great
authority had assigned, from theory, bad qualities to melted snow; and from
that period to the present times, this prejudice had not been quite removed.

In this circumnavigation, amidst sleets and falls of snow, fogs, and much
moist weather, the Resolution enjoyed the same good state of health she had
done in the temperate and torrid zones. It appears only from the journal of the
surgeon, that toward the end of the first course Viz. the voyage between the
Cape of Good-Hope and New-Zeeland.
some of the crew began to complain of the scurvy; but the disease made little
progress, except in one who had become early an invalid from another cause. The
other disorders were likewise inconsiderable, such as common colds, slight
diarrhoeas, and intermittents, as they readily yielded to the bark: there were
also a few fevers of a continued form, but which by timely care never rose to
an alarming height. Much commendation is therefore due to the attention and
abilities of Mr. PATTEN, the surgeon of the Resolution, for having so well
seconded his Captain in the discharge of his duty. For it must be allowed, that
in despite of the best regulations and the best provisions, there will always
be among a numerous crew, during a long voyage, some casualties more or less
productive of sickness; and that unless there be an intelligent medical
assistant on board, many under the wisest commander will perish that otherwise
might have been saved.

THESE, GENTLEMEN, are the reflections I had to lay before you on this
interesting subject; and if I have encroached on your time, you will recollect
that much of my discourse has been employed in explaining some things but just
mentioned by Captain COOK, and in adding the materials which I had procured
partly from himself, and partly, since his departure, from those intelligent
friends he alludes to in his Paper. This was my plan; which if I have executed
to your satisfaction, your thanks are due to those gentlemen who, on your
account, so cheerfully communicated to me their observations.

As to your acknowledgments to Captain COOK, and your high opinion of his
deserts, you now testify them by the honorable distinction suggested to you by
your Council, in presenting him with this medal: for I need not gather your
suffrages, since the attention with which you have favored me has abundantly
expressed your approbation. My satisfaction therefore had been complete, had he
himself been present to receive the honors you now confer upon him. But you
are apprized that our brave and indefatigable Brother is at this instant far
distant from us; anticipating, I may say, your wonted request on these
occasions, by continuing his labors, for the advancement of Natural Knowledge,
and for the honor of this Society; since you may be assured, that the object
of his new enterprise is not less great; perhaps still greater than either of
the former.

Allow me then, GENTLEMEN, to deliver this medal, with his unperishing name
engraven upon it, into the hands of one who will be happy to receive that
trust, and to know that this respectable Body never more cordially nor more
meritoriously bestowed that faithful symbol of their esteem and affection. For
if Rome decreed the civic crown to him who saved the life of a single citizen;
what wreaths are due to that Man, who, having himself saved many, perpetuates
now in your Transactions the means by which Britain may henceforth preserve
numbers of her intrepid sons, her Mariners; who, braving every danger, have so
liberally contributed to the fame, to the opulence, and to the maritime empire,
of their Country!

A Copy of Captain COOK's Paper referred to in the foregoing Discourse.
The Method taken for preserving the Health of the Crew of His Majesty's Ship
the Resolution during her late Voyage round the World.
By Captain James Cook, Fellow of the Royal Society.
Read at the SOCIETY, March 7, 1776. TO SIR JOHN PRINGLE, BART. P. R. S.
SIR, Mile-end, March 5, 1776.
AS many gentlemen have expressed some surprise at the uncommon good state of
health which the crew of the Resolution, under my command, experienced during
her late voyage; I take the liberty to communicate to you the methods that were
taken to obtain that end. Much was owing to the extraordinary attention given
by the Admiralty, in causing such articles to be put on board, as either by
experience or conjecture were judged to tend most to preserve the health of
seamen. I shall not trespass upon your time in mentioning all those articles,
but consine myself to such as were found the most useful.

We had on board a large quantity of Malt, of which was made sweet-wort, and
given (not only to those men who had manifest symptoms of the scurvy, but to
such also as were, from circumstances, judged to be most liable to that
disorder) from one or two or three pints in the day to each man, or in such
proportion as the surgeon thought necessary; which sometimes amounted to three
quarts in the twenty-four hours. This is without doubt one of the best
antiscorbutic sea-medicines yet found out; and if given in time will, with
proper attention to other things, I am persuaded, prevent the scurvy from
making any great progress for a considerable time: but I am not altogether of
opinion, that it will cure it in an advanced state at sea.

Sour-Krout, of which we had also a large provision, is not only a wholesome
vegetable food, but, in my judgment, highly antiscorbutic, and spoils not by
keeping. A pound of it was served to each man, when at sea, twice a week, or
oftener when it was thought necessary.

Portable-Soup, or broth, was another essential article, of which we had
likewise a liberal supply. An ounce of this to each man, or such other
proportion as was thought necessary, was boiled with their pease three days in
the week; and when we were in places where fresh vegetables could be procured,
it was boiled, with them and with wheat or oatmeal, every morning for
breakfast, and also with dried pease and fresh vegetables for dinner. It
enabled us to make several nourishing and wholesome messes, and was the means
of making the people eat a greater quantity of greens than they would have done
otherwise.

Further, we were provided with Rob of lemons and oranges; which the surgeon
found useful in several cases.

Amongst other articles of victualling we were furnished with sugar in the room
of oil, and with wheat instead of much oatmeal, and were certainly gainers by
the exchange. Sugar, I imagine, is a very good antiscorbutic; whereas oil, such
at least as is usually given to the navy, I apprehend has the contrary effect.
But the introduction of the most salutary articles, either as provision or
medicines, will generally prove unsuccessful, unless supported by certain rules
of living.

On this principle, many years experience, together with some hints I had from
Sir HUGH PALLISER, the Captains CAMPBELL, WALLIS, and other intelligent
officers, enabled me to lay down a plan whereby all was to be conducted. The
crew were at three watches, except upon some extraordinary occasions. By this
means they were not so much exposed to the weather as if they had been at watch
and watch; and they had generally dry clothes to shift themselves when they
happened to get wet. Care was also taken to expose them as little as possible.
Proper methods were employed to keep their persons, hammocks, bedding, clothes,
etc. constantly clean and dry. Equal pains were taken to keep the ship clean
and dry between decks. Once or twice a week she was aired with fires; and when
this could not be done, she was smoaked with gunpowder moistened with vinegar
or water. I had also frequently a fire made in an iron pot at the bottom of the
well, which greatly purified the air in the lower parts of the ship. To this
and cleanliness, as well in the ship as amongst the people, too great attention
cannot be paid; the least neglect occasions a putrid offensive smell below,
which nothing but fires will remove; and if these be not used in time, those
smells will be attended with bad consequences. Proper care was taken of the
ship's coppers, so that they were kept constantly clean. The fat, which boiled
out of the salt beef and pork, I never suffered to be given to the people, as
is customary; being of opinion that it promotes the scurvy. I never failed to
take in water wherever it was to be procured, even when we did not seem to want
it; because I look upon fresh water from the shore to be much more wholesome
than that which has been kept some time on board. Of this essential article we
were never at an allowance, but had always abundance for every necessary
purpose. I am convinced that with plenty of fresh water, and a close attention
to cleanliness, a ship's company will seldom be much afflicted with the scurvy,
though they should not be provided with any of the antiscorbutics before
mentioned. We came to few places where either the art of man or nature did not
afford some sort of refreshment or other, either of the animal or vegetable
kind. It was my first care to procure what could be met with of either by every
means in my power, and to oblige our people to make use thereof, both by my
example and authority; but the benefits arising from such refreshments soon
became so obvious, that I had little occasion to employ either the one or the
other.

These, SIR, were the methods, under the care of Providence, by which the
Resolution performed a voyage of three years and eighteen days, through all the
climates from 52o North to 71o South, with the loss of one man only by disease,
and who died of a complicated and lingering illness, without any mixture of
scurvy. Two others were unfortunately drowned, and one killed by fall; so that
of the whole number with which I set o^ from England I lost only four.

I have the honor to be, SIR, etc.

Extract of a Letter from Captain COOK to Sir JOHN PRINGLE, Bart. dated
Plymouth Sound, July 7, 1776.
I entirely agree with you, that the dearness of the Rob of lemons and of
oranges will hinder them from being furnished in large quantities, but I do not
thin^ this so necessary; for though they may assist other things I have no
great opinion of them alone. Nor have I (...) higher opinion of vinegar: my
people had it very sparringly during the late voyage; and toward the latter
part, none at all; and yet we experienced no ill effect from the want of it.
The custom of washing the inside of the ship with vinegar I seldom observed,
thinking, th^^ fire and smoke answered the purpose much better.


